Human Development
Report 2009

Overcoming barriers:
Human mobility and development

Published for the  
United Nations 
Development  
Programme 
(UNDP)

Copyright © 2009
by the United Nations Development Programme
1 UN Plaza, New York, NY 10017, USA

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, 
recording or otherwise, without prior permission.

ISBN 978-0-230-23904-3

First published in 2009
by Palgrave Macmillan
Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire RG21 6XS and
175 Fifth Avenue, New York, NY 10010

Companies and representatives throughout the world
Palgrave Macmillan in the UK is an imprint of Macmillan Publishers Limited, 
registered in England, company number 785998, of Houndmills, Basingstoke, 
Hampshire  RG21 6XS.
Palgrave Macmillan in the US is a division of St Martin’s Press LLC, 
175 Fifth Avenue, New York, NY 10010.
Palgrave Macmillan is the global academic imprint of the above companies 
and has companies and representatives throughout the world.
Palgrave® and Macmillan® are registered trademarks in the United States, 
the United Kingdom, Europe and other countries.

A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library and the Library of Congress.

Printed in Canada by the Lowe–Martin Group. Cover is printed on FSC 10pt Kallima coated
one-side paper. Text pages are printed on FSC 60# Rolland Opaque30 smooth text that is 30%
post-consumer waste. FSC supports responsible forest management worldwide. Printed with
vegetable-based inks and produced by means of environmentally-compatible technology.

[FSC LOGO WILL BE INSERTED HERE]

Editing: Green Ink 
Design and Layout: ZAGO

For a list of any errors or omissions found subsequent to printing, please visit our
website at http://hdr.undp.org

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Team
Team

Team for the preparation of the 
Human Development Report 2009

Director
Jeni Klugman

Research
Led by Francisco R. Rodríguez, comprising Ginette Azcona, Matthew Cummins, Ricardo Fuentes 
Nieva, Mamaye Gebretsadik, Wei Ha, Marieke Kleemans, Emmanuel Letouzé, Roshni Menon, 
Daniel Ortega, Isabel Medalho Pereira, Mark Purser and Cecilia Ugaz (Deputy Director until 
October 2008).

Statistics
Led by Alison Kennedy, comprising Liliana Carvajal, Amie Gaye, Shreyasi Jha, Papa Seck 
and Andrew Thornton.

National HDR and network
Eva Jespersen (Deputy Director HDRO), Mary Ann Mwangi, Paola Pagliani and Timothy Scott.

Outreach and communications
Led by Marisol Sanjines, comprising Wynne Boelt, Jean-Yves Hamel, Melissa Hernandez,
Pedro Manuel Moreno and Yolanda Polo. 

Production, translation, budget and operations, administration
Carlotta Aiello (production coordinator), Sarantuya Mend (operations manager), 
Fe Juarez-Shanahan and Oscar Bernal.

iii
iii

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Foreword
Foreword

Foreword

Migration not infrequently gets a bad press. Negative stereotypes 
portraying migrants as ‘stealing our jobs’ or ‘scrounging off the 
taxpayer’ abound in sections of the media and public opinion, es-
pecially in times of recession. For others, the word ‘migrant’ may 
evoke images of people at their most vulnerable. This year’s Human 
Development Report, Overcoming Barriers: Human Mobility and 
Development, challenges such stereotypes. It seeks to broaden and 
rebalance perceptions of migration to reflect a more complex and 
highly variable reality.

This  report  breaks  new  ground  in  applying  a 
human development approach to the study of 
migration. It discusses who migrants are, where 
they come from and go to, and why they move. It 
looks at the multiple impacts of migration for all 
who are affected by it—not just those who move, 
but also those who stay. 

In so doing, the report’s findings cast new 
light on some common misconceptions. For ex-
ample, migration from developing to developed 
countries accounts for only a minor fraction of 
human movement. Migration from one develop-
ing economy to another is much more common. 
Most migrants do not go abroad at all, but in-
stead move within their own country. 

Next,  the  majority  of  migrants,  far  from 
being victims, tend to be successful, both before 
they  leave  their  original  home  and  on  arrival 
in  their  new  one.  Outcomes  in  all  aspects  of 
human development, not only income but also 
education and health, are for the most part posi-
tive—some immensely so, with people from the 
poorest places gaining the most. 

Reviewing an extensive literature, the report 
finds that fears about migrants taking the jobs 
or lowering the wages of local people, placing an 
unwelcome burden on local services, or costing 
the taxpayer money, are generally exaggerated. 
When migrants’ skills complement those of local 
people, both groups benefit. Societies as a whole 
may also benefit in many ways—ranging from ris-
ing levels of technical innovation to increasingly 
diverse cuisine to which migrants contribute.

The report suggests that the policy response 
to  migration  can  be  wanting.  Many  govern-
ments  institute  increasingly  repressive  entry 
regimes, turn a blind eye to health and safety 
violations by employers, or fail to take a lead 
in  educating  the  public  on  the  benefits  of 
immigration. 

By  examining  policies  with  a  view  to  ex-
panding  people’s  freedoms  rather  than  con-
trolling  or  restricting  human  movement,  this 
report proposes a bold set of reforms. It argues 
that, when tailored to country-specific contexts, 
these  changes  can  amplify  human  mobility’s 
already  substantial  contributions  to  human 
development. 

The  principal  reforms  proposed  centre 
around six areas, each of which has important 
and  complementary  contributions  to  make  to 
human development: opening up existing entry 
channels  so  that  more  workers  can  emigrate; 
ensuring basic rights for migrants; lowering the 
transaction costs of migration; finding solutions 
that benefit both destination communities and 
the migrants they receive; making it easier for 
people to move within their own countries; and 
mainstreaming migration into national develop-
ment strategies.

The report argues that while many of these 
reforms are more feasible than at first thought, 
they nonetheless require political courage. There 
may  also  be  limits  to  governments’  ability  to 
make swift policy changes while the recession 
persists. 

v
v

Foreword

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

This  is  the  first  Human  Development 
Report for which as Administrator I am writ-
ing the foreword. Like all such reports, this is 
an  independent  study  intended  to  stimulate 
debate and discussion on an important issue. It 
is not a statement of either United Nations or 
UNDP policy. 

At the same time, by highlighting human 
mobility  as  a  core  component  of  the  human 
development agenda, it is UNDP’s hope that 
the following insights will add value to ongoing 

discourse on migration and inform the work of 
development practitioners and policy makers 
around the world.

 

 

Helen Clark
Administrator
United Nations Development Programme

The analysis and policy recommendations of this report do not necessarily reflect the views of the United Nations Development 
Programme, its Executive Board or its Member States. 
The report is an independent publication commissioned by UNDP. It is the fruit of a collaborative effort by a team of eminent advisers 
and the Human Development Report team. 
Jeni Klugman, Director of the Human Development Report Office, led the effort.

vi

Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development Acknowledgements

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009

Acknowledgements

This report is the fruit of the efforts, contribu-
tions and support of many people and organiza-
tions. I would like to thank Kemal Derviş for 
the opportunity to take on the daunting task of 
Director of the Human Development Report, 
and  the  new  UNDP  Administrator,  Helen 
Clark, for advice and support. Coming back to 
the office after its 20 years of growth and success 
has been a tremendously rewarding experience, 
and  I  would  like  to  especially  thank  my  fam-
ily, Ema, Josh and Billy, for their patience and 
support  throughout.  The  dedication  and  hard 
work of the whole HDR team, listed earlier, was 
critical. Among those who provided important 
strategic advice and suggestions, which were es-
pecially critical in pulling the report together, 
were Oliver Bakewell, Martin Bell, Stephen Castles, 
Joseph Chamie, Samuel Choritz, Michael Clemens, 
Simon Commander, Sakiko Fukuda-Parr, Hein 
de Haas, Frank Laczko, Loren Landau,  Manjula 
Luthria, Gregory Maniatis, Philip Martin, Douglas 
Massey,  Saraswathi  Menon,  Frances  Stewart, 
Michael Walton and Kevin Watkins.

Background studies were commissioned on a 
range of thematic issues and published online in 
our Human Development Research Papers series, 
launched in April 2009, and are listed in the bib-
liography. A series of 27 seminars that were held 
between August 2008 and April 2009 likewise 
provided important stimulus to our thinking and 
the development of ideas, and we would again 
thank those presenters for sharing their research 
and insights. We would also like to acknowledge 
the contribution of the national experts who par-
ticipated in our migration policy assessment. 

The  data  and  statistics  used  in  this  report 
draw significantly upon the databases of other 
organizations to which we were allowed gener-
ous access: Andean Development Corporation; 
Development  Research  Centre  on  Migration, 
University  of  Sussex;  ECLAC;  International 
Migration Institute, Oxford; Inter-Parliamentary 
Union;  Internal  Displacement  Monitoring 
Centre;  the  Department  of  Statistics  and  the 
International  Migration  Programme  of  the 
ILO; IOM; Luxembourg Income Study; OECD; 
UNICEF;  UNDESA,  Statistics  Division  and 
Population  Division;  UNESCO  Institute  for 

Statistics;  UNHCR;  Treaty  Section,  United 
Nations Office of Legal Affairs; UNRWA; the 
World Bank; and WHO.

The  report  benefited  greatly  from  intel-
lectual  advice  and  guidance  provided  by  an 
academic advisory panel. The panel comprised 
Maruja Asis, Richard Black, Caroline Brettell, 
Stephen Castles, Simon Commander, Jeff Crisp, 
Priya Deshingkar, Cai Fang, Elizabeth Ferris, 
Bill  Frelick,  Sergei  Guriev,  Gordon  Hanson, 
Ricardo  Hausmann,  Michele  Klein-Solomon, 
Kishore  Mahbubani,  Andrew  Norman  Mold, 
Kathleen Newland, Yaw Nyarko, José Antonio 
Ocampo, Gustav Ranis, Bonaventure Rutinwa, 
Javier  Santiso, Maurice Schiff, Frances Stewart, 
Elizabeth  Thomas-Hope,  Jeffrey  Williamson, 
Ngaire Woods and Hania Zlotnik. 

From  the  outset,  the  process  involved  a 
range  of  participatory  consultations  designed 
to  draw  on  the  expertise  of  researchers,  civil 
society  advocates,  development  practitioners 
and policy makers from around the globe. This 
included 11 informal stakeholder consultations 
held  between  August  2008  and  April  2009 
in  Nairobi,  New  Delhi,  Amman,  Bratislava, 
Manila, Sydney, Dakar, Rio de Janeiro, Geneva, 
Turin and Johannesburg, involving almost 300 
experts and practitioners in total. The support 
of  UNDP  country  and  regional  offices  and 
local  partners  was  critical  in  enabling  these 
consultations.  Several  events  were  hosted  by 
key partners, including the IOM, the ILO and 
the Migration Policy Institute. Additional aca-
demic consultations took place in Washington 
D.C. and Princeton, and HDRO staff partici-
pated in various other regional and global fora, 
including the Global Forum on Migration and 
Development (GFMD) in Manila, preparatory 
meetings for the Athens GFMD, and many con-
ferences and seminars organized by other UN 
agencies (e.g. ILO, UNDESA and UNITAR), 
universities, think-tanks and non-governmental 
organizations. Participants in a series of Human 
Development  Network  discussions  provided 
wide-ranging insights and observations on the 
linkages between migration and human devel-
opment. More details on the process are avail-
able at http://hdr.undp.org/en/nhdr. 

vii

Acknowledgements

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Luc Gregoire, Madi Musa, Uladzimir Shcherbau 
and  Oscar  Yujnovsky.  Margaret  Chi  and 
 Solaiman Al-Rifai of the United Nations Office 
for Project Services provided critical administra-
tive support and management services.

The report also benefited from the dedicated 
work  of  a  number  of  interns,  namely  Shreya 
Basu, Vanessa Alicia Chee, Delphine De Quina, 
 Rebecca  Lee  Funk,  Chloe  Yuk  Ting  Heung, 
Abid Raza Khan, Alastair Mackay, Grace Parker, 
Clare Potter, Limon B. Rodriguez, Nicolas Roy, 
Kristina Shapiro and David Stubbs. 

We thank all of those involved directly or 
indirectly in guiding our efforts, while acknowl-
edging sole responsibility for errors of commis-
sion and omission.

Jeni Klugman
Director 
Human Development Report 2009

A UNDP Readers Group, comprising repre-
sentatives of all the regional and policy bureaux, 
provided many useful inputs and suggestions on 
the concept note and report drafts, as did a num-
ber of other colleagues who provided inputs and 
advice. We would especially thank Amat Alsoswa, 
Carolina  Azevedo,  Barbara 
 Barungi,  Tony 
Bislimi, Kim Bolduc, Winifred Byanyima, Ajay 
Chhibber,  Samuel  Choritz,  Pedro  Conceição, 
Awa Dabo, Georgina Fekete, Priya Gajraj, Enrique 
Ganuza, Tegegnework Gettu, Rebeca Grynspan, 
Sultan Hajiyev, Mona Hammam, Mette Bloch 
Hansen, Mari Huseby, Selim Jahan, Bruce Jenks, 
Arun  Kashyap,  Olav  Kjoren,  Paul  Ladd,  Luis 
Felipe  López-Calva,  Tanni  Mukhopadhyay,  B. 
Murali, Theodore Murphy, Mihail Peleah, Amin 
Sharkawi, Kori Udovicki, Mourad Wahba and 
Caitlin Wiesen for comments. 

A team at Green Ink, led by Simon Chater, 
provided editing services. The design work was 
carried out by Zago. Guoping Huang developed 
some of the maps. The production, translation, 
distribution and promotion of the report ben-
efited from the help and support of the UNDP 
Office of Communications, and particularly of 
Maureen Lynch. Translations were reviewed by 

viii

Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development Acronyms
Acronymes

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Acronyms

CEDAW

CMW

CRC 
ECD
ECLAC 

United Nations Convention on the Elimination of All 
Forms of Discrimination against Women
United Nations International Convention on the 
Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers  
and Members of their Families
United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child
Early childhood development
Economic Commission for Latin America and 
the Caribbean
Economic Community of West African States 
Economist Intelligence Unit
European Union
General Agreement on Trade in Services
Gross domestic product
Gulf Cooperation Council
Human Development Index
Human Development Report
Human Development Report Office
International Labour Organization
International Organization for Migration

ECOWAS 
EIU
EU 
GATS
GDP 
GCC
HDI 
HDR
HDRO 
ILO
IOM 
MERCOSUR Mercado Común del Sur 

MIPEX
NGO 
OECD

PRS
PRSP  
TMBs
UNDESA 

UNDP 
UNESCO
 
UNHCR

UNICEF
UNODC 
UNRWA

USSR
WHO 
WTO

(Southern Common Market)
Migrant Integration Policy Index
Non-governmental organization
Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development 
Poverty Reduction Strategy
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Treaty Monitoring Bodies
United Nations Department of Economic
and Social Affairs
United Nations Development Programme
United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner 
for Refugees 
United Nations Children’s Fund 
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for 
Palestine Refugees in the Near East
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 
World Health Organization
World Trade Organization 

ix
ix

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Contents
Contents

Contents

Foreword 
Acknowledgements 
Acronyms 

OVERVIEW 

How and why people move 
Barriers to movement 
The case for mobility 
Our proposal 
The way forward  

CHAPTER 1

Freedom and movement: how mobility can foster human development 
1.1  Mobility matters 
1.2  Choice and context: understanding why people move 
1.3  Development, freedom and human mobility 
1.4  What we bring to the table 

CHAPTER 2

People in motion: who moves where, when and why 
2.1  Human movement today 
2.2  Looking back 
  2.2.1  The long-term view  
  2.2.2  The 20th century 
2.3  Policies and movement 
2.4  Looking ahead: the crisis and beyond 
  2.4.1  The economic crisis and the prospects for recovery  
  2.4.2  Demographic trends 
  2.4.3  Environmental factors 
2.5  Conclusions  

CHAPTER 3

How movers fare 
3.1  Incomes and livelihoods  
  3.1.1  Impacts on gross income 
  3.1.2  Financial costs of moving 
3.2  Health  
3.3  Education  
3.4  Empowerment, civic rights and participation  
3.5  Understanding outcomes from negative drivers 
  3.5.1  When insecurity drives movement  
  3.5.2  Development-induced displacement  
  3.5.3  Human trafficking  
3.6  Overall impacts 
3.7  Conclusions 

v
vii
ix

1

1
2
3
3
5

9
9
11
14
16

21
21
28
28
30
33
40
41
43
45
46

49
49
50
53
55
57
60
62
62
64
65
67
68

CHAPTER 4

Impacts at origin and destination 
4.1  Impacts at places of origin 
  4.1.1  Household level effects 
  4.1.2  Community and national level economic effects 
  4.1.3  Social and cultural effects 
  4.1.4  Mobility and national development strategies  
4.2  Destination place effects  
  4.2.1  Aggregate economic impacts 
  4.2.2  Labour market impacts 
  4.2.3  Rapid urbanization  
  4.2.4  Fiscal impacts 
  4.2.5  Perceptions and concerns about migration  
4.3  Conclusions 

CHAPTER 5

71
71
71
76
79
82
83
84
85
86
87
89
92

95
Policies to enhance human development outcomes 
96
5.1  The core package  
96
  5.1.1  Liberalizing and simplifying regular channels 
99
  5.1.2  Ensuring basic rights for migrants 
102
  5.1.3  Reducing transaction costs associated with movement 
104
  5.1.4  Improving outcomes for migrants and destination communities 
  5.1.5  Enabling benefits from internal mobility  
106
  5.1.6  Making mobility an integral part of national development strategies  108
108
5.2  The political feasibility of reform 
5.3  Conclusions  
112

Notes 
Bibliography 

STATISTICAL ANNEX

Tables 
Reader’s guide 
Technical note 
Definition of statistical terms and indicators 
Country classification 

113
119

143
203
208
209
213

xi
xi

Contents

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

BOXES

12
1.1  Estimating the impact of movement 
14
1.2 How movement matters to the measurement of progress
15
1.3  Basic terms used in this report 
16
1.4 How do the poor view migration?
23
2.1  Counting irregular migrants 
26
2.2 Conflict-induced movement and trafficking
31
2.3  Migration trends in the former Soviet Union 
39
2.4 Global governance of mobility
52
3.1  China: Policies and outcomes associated with internal migration 
59
3.2 Independent child migrants
60
3.3  The next generation 
62
3.4 Enforcement mechanisms in Malaysia
74
4.1  How cell-phones can reduce money transfer costs: the case of Kenya 
75 
4.2 The 2009 crisis and remittances
77
4.3  Impacts of skills flows on human development 
4.4 Mobility and the development prospects of small states
80
4.5  Mobility and human development: some developing country perspectives  82 
97
5.1 Opening up regular channels—Sweden and New Zealand
5.2  Experience with regularization 
98
103
5.3 Reducing paperwork: a challenge for governments and partners
105
5.4  Recognition of credentials 
5.5 When skilled people emigrate: some policy options
109

FIGURES

2.1   Many more people move within borders than across them:  

Internal movement and emigration rates, 2000–2002

2.2   The poorest have the most to gain from moving…  

Differences between destination and origin country HDI, 2000–2002

2.3  … but they also move less: Emigration rates by HDI and income 
2.4 An increasing share of migrants come from developing countries: Share 

of migrants from developing countries in selected developed countries 

2.5 Sources and trends of migration into developing countries: Migrants as a 

share of total population in selected countries, 1960–2000s 

2.6 Internal migration rates have increased only slightly: Trends in lifetime 

internal migration intensity in selected countries, 1960–2000s 

2.7 Global income gaps have widened: Trends in real per capita GDP, 

1960–2007 

2.8 Welcome the high-skilled, rotate the low-skilled: Openness to legal 

immigration in developed versus developing countries, 2009 

2.9 Enforcement practices vary: Interventions and procedures regarding 

irregular migrants, 2009 

2.10 Cross-country evidence shows little support for the ‘numbers versus 

rights’ hypothesis: Correlations between access and treatment 

2.11 Unemployment is increasing in key migrant destinations: 

Unemployment rates in selected destinations, 2007–2010 

2.12 Migrants are in places hardest hit by the recession: Immigrants’ location 

and projected GDP growth rates, 2009 

22

23
25

32

33

34

35

36

37

38

41

42

xii

2.13   Working-age population will increase in developing regions:  
Projections of working-age population by region, 2010–2050

3.1   Movers have much higher incomes than stayers:  

Annual income of migrants in OECD destination countries and 
GDP per capita in origin countries, by origin country HDI category 

3.2 Huge salary gains for high-skilled movers: Gaps in average 
professional salaries for selected country pairs, 2002–2006 

3.3 Significant wage gains to internal movers in Bolivia, especially the 
less well educated: Ratio of destination to origin wages for internal  
migrants in Bolivia, 2000

3.4   Poverty is higher among migrant children, but social transfers can help: 

Effects of transfers on child poverty in selected countries, 1999–2001

3.5   Costs of moving are often high: Costs of intermediaries in selected  

corridors against income per capita, 2006–2008

3.6   Moving costs can be many times expected monthly earnings:  

Costs of movement against expected salary of low-skilled 
Indonesian workers in selected destinations, 2008 

3.7 The children of movers have a much greater chance of surviving: 

Child mortality at origin versus destination by origin country  
HDI category, 2000 census or latest round

3.8   Temporary and irregular migrants often lack access to health care  

services: Access to health care by migrant status in developed 
versus developing countries, 2009 

3.9 Gains in schooling are greatest for migrants from low-HDI countries:

Gross total enrolment ratio at origin versus destination by  
origin country HDI category, 2000 census or latest round

3.10   Migrants have better access to education in developed countries:  
Access to public schooling by migrant status in developed versus 
developing countries, 2009 

3.11 Voting rights are generally reserved for citizens: Voting rights in local 

elections by migrant status in developed versus developing countries,  
2009

3.12   School enrolment among refugees often exceeds that of host  

communities in developing countries: Gross primary enrolment ratios—
refugees, host populations and main countries of origin, 2007 

3.13 Significant human development gains to internal movers: 

Ratio of migrants’ to non-migrants’ estimated HDI in selected  
developing countries, 1995–2005

3.14   Migrants are generally as happy as locally-born people: Self-reported 
happiness among migrants and locally-born people around the world, 
2005/2006 

4.1  The global recession is expected to impact remittance flows: Projected 

trends in remittance flows to developing regions, 2006–2011 

4.2 Skilled workers move similarly across and within nations: Population 

and share of skilled workers who migrate internally and internationally 

4.3 Support for immigration is contingent on job availability: 

Attitudes towards immigration and availability of jobs, 2005/2006 

4.4 When jobs are limited, people favour the locally born: Public opinion 

about job preferences by destination country HDI category, 2005/2006 

4.5 Many people value ethnic diversity: Popular views about the value 
of ethnic diversity by destination country HDI category, 2005/2006 

44

50

50

51

53

54

54

55

57

58

58

61

64

67

68

75

78

90

91

92

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Contents

5.1   Ratification of migrants’ rights convention has been limited:  

 Ratification of selected agreements by HDI category, as of 2009

5.2   Support for opportunity to stay permanently:  

Preferences for temporary versus permanent migration, 2008

100

110

MAPS

1.1   Borders matter: HDI in United States and Mexican border localities, 2000   10
1.2  Migrants are moving to places with greater opportunities: Human 
 
2.1 Most movement occurs within regions: Origin and destination of 

development and inter-provincial migration flows in China, 1995–2000 

11

international migrants, circa 2000 

3.1 Conflict as a driver of movement in Africa: Conflict, instability and 

population movement in Africa 

4.1 Remittances flow primarily from developed to developing regions: 

Flows of international remittances, 2006–2007 

 
TABLES

2.1 Five decades of aggregate stability, with regional shifts: 

Regional distribution of international migrants, 1960–2010 

2.2 Policy makers say they are trying to maintain existing immigration levels: 

Views and policies towards immigration by HDI category, 2007 
2.3 Over a third of countries significantly restrict the right to move: 

Restrictions on internal movement and emigration by HDI category 

2.4 Dependency ratios to rise in developed countries and remain steady in 
developing countries: Dependency ratio forecasts of developed versus 
developing countries, 2010–2050

4.1   PRSs recognize the multiple impacts of migration:  

Policy measures aimed at international migration in PRSs, 2000–2008

24

63

73

30

34

40

45

83

STATISTICAL ANNEX TABLES

A  Human movement: snapshots and trends 
B International emigrants by area of residence
C   Education and employment of international migrants in OECD countries  

(aged 15 years and above)

D  Conflict and insecurity-induced movement 
E International financial flows: remittances, official development 

assistance and foreign direct investment 

F Selected conventions related to human rights and migration 

(by year of ratification) 

G Human development index trends
H  Human development index 2007 and its components 
I1 Human and income poverty
I2  Human and income poverty: OECD countries 
J Gender-related development index and its components
K  Gender empowerment measure and its components 
L Demographic trends
M  Economy and inequality 
N Health and education

143
147

151
155

159

163
167
171
176
180
181
186
191
195
199

xiii

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Overview
Overview

Overview

Consider Juan. Born into a poor family in rural Mexico, his family 
struggled to pay for his health care and education. At the age of 12, 
he dropped out of school to help support his family. Six years later, 
Juan followed his uncle to Canada in pursuit of higher wages and 
better opportunities.
Life expectancy in Canada is five years higher 
than  in  Mexico  and  incomes  are  three  times 
greater. Juan was selected to work temporarily 
in Canada, earned the right to stay and eventu-
ally became an entrepreneur whose business now 
employs native-born Canadians. This is just one 
case out of millions of people every year who find 
new opportunities and freedoms by migrating, 
benefiting themselves as well as their areas of ori-
gin and destination. 

When people move they embark on a journey 
of hope and uncertainty whether within or across 
international borders. Most people move in search 
of better opportunities, hoping to combine their 
own  talents  with  resources  in  the  destination 
country so as to benefit themselves and their im-
mediate family, who often accompany or follow 
them. If they succeed, their initiative and efforts 
can also benefit those left behind and the society 
in which they make their new home. But not all 
do succeed. Migrants who leave friends and family 
may face loneliness, may feel unwelcome among 
people who fear or resent newcomers, may lose 
their jobs or fall ill and thus be unable to access 
the support services they need in order to prosper. 
The 2009 HDR explores how better poli-
cies  towards  human  mobility  can  enhance 
human  development.  It  lays  out  the  case  for 
governments  to  reduce  restrictions  on  move-
ment within and across their borders, so as to 
expand human choices and freedoms. It argues 
for practical measures that can improve pros-
pects on arrival, which in turn will have large 
benefits both for destination communities and 
for places of origin.

How and why people move
Discussions about migration typically start from 
the perspective of flows from developing coun-
tries into the rich countries of Europe, North 
America and Australasia. Yet most movement in 
the world does not take place between develop-
ing and developed countries; it does not even take 
place between countries. The overwhelming ma-
jority of people who move do so inside their own 
country. Using a conservative definition, we esti-
mate that approximately 740 million people are 
internal migrants—almost four times as many as 
those who have moved internationally. Among 
people who have moved across national borders, 

1
1

Now  consider  Bhagyawati.  She  is  a  mem-
ber of a lower caste and lives in rural Andhra 
Pradesh,  India.  She  travels  to  Bangalore  city 
with  her  children  to  work  on  construction 
sites  for  six  months  each  year,  earning  Rs  60 
(US$1.20)  per  day.  While  away  from  home, 
her children do not attend school because it is 
too far from the construction site and they do 
not know the local language. Bhagyawati is not 
entitled to subsidized food or health care, nor 
does she vote, because she is living outside her 
registered district. Like millions of other inter-
nal migrants, she has few options for improving 
her life other than to move to a different city in 
search of better opportunities. 

Our world is very unequal. The huge differ-
ences in human development across and within 
countries  have  been  a  recurring  theme  of  the 
Human  Development  Report  (HDR)  since 
it was first published in 1990. In this year’s re-
port, we explore for the first time the topic of 
migration.  For  many  people  in  developing 
countries moving away from their home town 
or  village  can  be  the  best—sometimes  the 
only—option open to improve their life chances. 
Human mobility can be hugely effective in rais-
ing  a  person’s  income,  health  and  education 
 prospects. But its value is more than that: being 
able to decide where to live is a key element of 
human freedom. 

Overview

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Most migrants, internal 
and international, reap 
gains in the form of 
higher incomes, better 
access to education 
and health, and 
improved prospects for 
their children

2

just over a third moved from a developing to a de-
veloped country—fewer than 70 million people. 
Most of the world’s 200 million international 
migrants moved from one developing country to 
another or between developed countries.

Most migrants, internal and international, 
reap gains in the form of higher incomes, bet-
ter access to education and health, and improved 
prospects for their children. Surveys of migrants 
report that most are happy in their destination, 
despite the range of adjustments and obstacles 
typically involved in moving. Once established, 
migrants are often more likely than local resi-
dents  to  join  unions  or  religious  and  other 
groups.  Yet  there  are  trade-offs  and  the  gains 
from mobility are unequally distributed.

People  displaced  by  insecurity  and  conflict 
face  special  challenges.  There  are  an  estimated 
14 million refugees living outside their country 
of citizenship, representing about 7 percent of the 
world’s migrants. Most remain near the country 
they fled, typically living in camps until condi-
tions at home allow their return, but around half 
a million per year travel to developed countries 
and seek asylum there. A much larger number, 
some 26 million, have been internally displaced. 
They have crossed no frontiers, but may face spe-
cial difficulties away from home in a country riven 
by conflict or racked by natural disasters. Another 
vulnerable  group  consists  of  people—mainly 
young women—who have been trafficked. Often 
duped with promises of a better life, their move-
ment is not one of free will but of duress, some-
times accompanied by violence and sexual abuse. 
In  general,  however,  people  move  of  their 
own  volition,  to  better-off  places.  More  than 
three quarters of international migrants go to a 
country with a higher level of human develop-
ment than their country of origin. Yet they are 
significantly constrained, both by policies that 
impose  barriers  to  entry  and  by  the  resources 
they have available to enable their move. People 
in poor countries are the least mobile: for exam-
ple, fewer than 1 percent of Africans have moved 
to Europe. Indeed, history and contemporary 
evidence suggest that development and migra-
tion go hand in hand: the median emigration 
rate in a country with low human development 
is below 4 percent, compared to more than 8 per-
cent from countries with high levels of human 
development.

Barriers to movement
The  share  of  international  migrants  in  the 
world’s  population  has  remained  remark-
ably stable at around 3 percent over the past 
50 years, despite factors that could have been 
expected  to  increase  flows.  Demographic 
trends—an  aging  population  in  developed 
countries and young, still-rising populations in 
developing  countries—and  growing  employ-
ment  opportunities,  combined  with  cheaper 
communications and transport, have increased 
the  ‘demand’  for  migration.  However,  those 
wishing to migrate have increasingly come up 
against government-imposed barriers to move-
ment.  Over  the  past  century,  the  number  of 
nation  states  has  quadrupled  to  almost  200, 
creating  more  borders  to  cross,  while  policy 
changes have further limited the scale of mi-
gration even as barriers to trade fell.

Barriers to mobility are especially high for 
people with low skills, despite the demand for 
their  labour  in  many  rich  countries.  Policies 
generally  favour  the  admission  of  the  better 
educated, for instance by allowing students to 
stay after graduation and inviting professionals 
to settle with their families. But governments 
tend to be far more ambivalent with respect to 
low-skilled workers, whose status and treatment 
often leave much to be desired. In many coun-
tries, agriculture, construction, manufacturing 
and service sectors have jobs that are filled by 
such migrants. Yet governments often try to ro-
tate less educated people in and out of the coun-
try, sometimes treating temporary and irregular 
workers like water from a tap that can be turned 
on and off at will. An estimated 50 million peo-
ple today are living and working abroad with ir-
regular status. Some countries, such as Thailand 
and the United States, tolerate large numbers 
of unauthorized workers. This may allow those 
individuals to access better paying jobs than at 
home, but although they often do the same work 
and pay the same taxes as local residents, they 
may lack access to basic services and face the risk 
of being deported. Some governments, such as 
those of Italy and Spain, have recognized that 
unskilled migrants contribute to their societies 
and have regularized the status of those in work, 
while other countries, such as Canada and New 
Zealand, have well designed seasonal migrant 
programmes for sectors such as agriculture. 

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Overview

Large gains to 
human development 
can be achieved 
by lowering the 
barriers to movement 
and improving the 
treatment of movers

through flows of money, knowledge and ideas. 
Because migrants tend to come in large num-
bers from specific places—for example, Kerala 
in India or Fujian Province in China—commu-
nity-level effects can typically be larger than na-
tional ones. However, over the longer term, the 
flow of ideas from human movement can have 
far-reaching  effects  on  social  norms  and  class 
structures across a whole country. The outflow 
of skills is sometimes seen as negative, particu-
larly for the delivery of services such as educa-
tion or health. Yet, even when this is the case, the 
best response is policies that address underlying 
structural problems, such as low pay, inadequate 
financing  and  weak  institutions.  Blaming  the 
loss of skilled workers on the workers themselves 
largely misses the point, and restraints on their 
mobility are likely to be counter-productive—
not to mention the fact that they deny the basic 
human right to leave one’s own country.

However,  international  migration,  even  if 
well managed, does not amount to a national 
human development strategy. With few excep-
tions  (mainly  small  island  states  where  more 
than 40 percent of inhabitants move abroad), 
emigration is unlikely to shape the development 
prospects of an entire nation. Migration is at best 
an avenue that complements broader local and 
national efforts to reduce poverty and improve 
human  development.  These  efforts  remain  as 
critical as ever. 

At the time of writing, the world is undergo-
ing the most severe economic crisis in over half a 
century. Shrinking economies and layoffs are af-
fecting millions of workers, including migrants. 
We believe that the current downturn should 
be seized as an opportunity to institute a new 
deal for migrants—one that will benefit work-
ers at home and abroad while guarding against a 
protectionist backlash. With recovery, many of 
the same underlying trends that have been driv-
ing movement during the past half-century will 
resurface, attracting more people to move. It is 
vital that governments put in place the necessary 
measures to prepare for this. 

Our proposal
Large  gains  to  human  development  can  be 
achieved by lowering the barriers to movement 
and improving the treatment of movers. A bold 
vision  is  needed  to  realize  these  gains.  This 

3

While  there  is  broad  consensus  about  the 
value of skilled migration to destination coun-
tries, low-skilled migrant workers generate much 
controversy.  It  is  widely  believed  that,  while 
these migrants fill vacant jobs, they also displace 
local workers and reduce wages. Other concerns 
posed  by  migrant  inflows  include  heightened 
risk of crime, added burdens on local services 
and the fear of losing social and cultural cohe-
sion. But these concerns are often exaggerated. 
While research has found that migration can, in 
certain circumstances, have negative effects on 
locally born workers with comparable skills, the 
body of evidence suggests that these effects are 
generally small and may, in some contexts, be 
entirely absent.

The case for mobility
This  report  argues  that  migrants  boost  eco-
nomic  output,  at  little  or  no  cost  to  locals. 
Indeed, there may be broader positive effects, for 
instance when the availability of migrants for 
childcare allows resident mothers to work out-
side the home. As migrants acquire the language 
and other skills needed to move up the income 
ladder, many integrate quite naturally, making 
fears  about  inassimilable  foreigners—similar 
to those expressed early in the 20th century in 
America  about  the  Irish,  for  example—seem 
equally unwarranted with respect to newcom-
ers today. Yet it is also true that many migrants 
face systemic disadvantages, making it difficult 
or impossible for them to access local services on 
equal terms with local people. And these prob-
lems are especially severe for temporary and ir-
regular workers.

In migrants’ countries of origin, the impacts 
of  movement  are  felt  in  higher  incomes  and 
consumption,  better  education  and  improved 
health, as well as at a broader cultural and so-
cial level. Moving generally brings benefits, most 
directly in the form of remittances sent to im-
mediate family members. However, the benefits 
are also spread more broadly as remittances are 
spent—thereby generating jobs for local work-
ers—and as behaviour changes in response to 
ideas from abroad. Women, in particular, may 
be liberated from traditional roles. 

The nature and extent of these impacts de-
pend on who moves, how they fare abroad and 
whether  they  stay  connected  to  their  roots 

Overview

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

The two most 
important dimensions 
of the mobility agenda 
that offer scope for 
better policies are 
admissions and 
treatment

4

report sets out a case for a comprehensive set of 
reforms that can provide major benefits to mi-
grants, communities and countries. 

Our proposal addresses the two most im-
portant  dimensions  of  the  mobility  agenda 
that offer scope for better policies: admissions 
and  treatment.  The  reforms  laid  out  in  our 
proposed core package have medium- to long-
term pay-offs. They speak not only to destina-
tion governments but also to governments of 
origin, to other key actors—in particular the 
private sector, unions and non-governmental 
organizations—and  to  individual  migrants 
themselves. While policy makers face common 
challenges, they will of course need to design 
and  implement  different  migration  policies 
in their respective countries, according to na-
tional and local circumstances. Certain good 
practices  nevertheless  stand  out  and  can  be 
more widely adopted. 

We  highlight  six  major  directions  for  re-
form that can be adopted individually but that, 
if used together in an integrated approach, can 
magnify their positive effects on human devel-
opment. Opening up existing entry channels 
so that more workers can emigrate, ensuring 
basic rights for migrants, lowering the trans-
action  costs  of  migration,  finding  solutions 
that  benefit  both  destination  communities 
and the migrants they receive, making it easier 
for people to move within their own countries, 
and  mainstreaming  migration  into  national 
development  strategies—all  have  important 
and complementary contributions to make to 
human development. 

The core package highlights two avenues for 

opening up regular existing entry channels:
• We  recommend  expanding  schemes  for 
truly seasonal work in sectors such as agri-
culture and tourism. Such schemes have al-
ready proved successful in various countries. 
Good  practice  suggests  that  this  interven-
tion should involve unions and employers, 
together  with  the  destination  and  source 
country governments, particularly in design-
ing  and  implementing  basic  wage  guaran-
tees, health and safety standards and provi-
sions for repeat visits as in the case of New 
Zealand, for example.

• We also propose increasing the number of 
visas  for  low-skilled  people,  making  this 

conditional  on  local  demand.  Experience 
suggests that good practices here include: en-
suring immigrants have the right to change 
employers (known as employer portability), 
offering  immigrants  the  right  to  apply  to 
extend their stay and outlining pathways to 
eventual permanent residence, making pro-
visions that facilitate return trips during the 
visa period, and allowing the transfer of accu-
mulated social security benefits, as adopted 
in Sweden’s recent reform.
Destination countries should decide on the 
desired numbers of entrants through political 
processes that permit public discussion and the 
balancing  of  different  interests.  Transparent 
mechanisms  to  determine  the  number  of  en-
trants  should  be  based  on  employer  demand, 
with quotas according to economic conditions.
At destination, immigrants are often treated 
in  ways  that  infringe  on  their  basic  human 
rights. Even if governments do not ratify the 
international conventions that protect migrant 
workers, they should ensure that migrants have 
full rights in the workplace—to equal pay for 
equal  work,  decent  working  conditions  and 
collective organization, for example. They may 
need to act quickly to stamp out discrimina-
tion.  Governments  at  origin  and  destination 
can collaborate to ease the recognition of cre-
dentials earned abroad. 

The current recession has made migrants par-
ticularly vulnerable. Some destination country 
governments have stepped up the enforcement 
of migration laws in ways that can infringe on 
migrants’  rights.  Giving  laid-off  migrants  the 
opportunity  to  search  for  another  employer 
(or at least time to wrap up their affairs before 
departing), publicizing employment outlooks—
including downturns in source countries—are 
all measures that can mitigate the disproportion-
ate costs of the recession borne by both current 
and prospective migrants. 

For international movement, the transaction 
costs of acquiring the necessary papers and meet-
ing the administrative requirements to cross na-
tional borders are often high, tend to be regressive 
(proportionately higher for unskilled people and 
those on short-term contracts) and can also have 
the unintended effect of encouraging irregular 
movement and smuggling. One in ten countries 
have passport costs that exceed 10 percent of per 

capita income; not surprisingly, these costs are 
negatively correlated with emigration rates. Both 
origin and destination governments can simplify 
procedures  and  reduce  document  costs,  while 
the two sides can also work together to improve 
and regulate intermediation services.

It is vital to ensure that individual migrants 
settle in well on arrival, but it is also vital that 
the communities they join should not feel un-
fairly  burdened  by  the  additional  demands 
they  place  on  key  services.  Where  this  poses 
challenges to local authorities, additional fis-
cal  transfers  may  be  needed.  Ensuring  that 
migrant children have equal access to educa-
tion  and,  where  needed,  support  to  catch  up 
and integrate, can improve their prospects and 
avoid a future underclass. Language training is 
key—for children at schools, but also for adults, 
both through the workplace and through spe-
cial efforts to reach women who do not work 
outside  the  home.  Some  situations  will  need 
more active efforts than others to combat dis-
crimination, address social tensions and, where 
relevant, prevent outbreaks of violence against 
immigrants.  Civil  society  and  governments 
have  a  wide  range  of  positive  experience  in 
tackling discrimination through, for example, 
awareness-raising campaigns. 

Despite the demise of most centrally planned 
systems around the world, a surprising number 
of governments—around a third—maintain de 
facto barriers to internal movement. Restrictions 
typically take the form of reduced basic service 
provisions and entitlements for those not regis-
tered in the local area, thereby discriminating 
against internal migrants, as is still the case in 
China. Ensuring equity of basic service provi-
sion is a key recommendation of the report as 
regards  internal  migrants.  Equal  treatment  is 
important for temporary and seasonal workers 
and their families, for the regions where they go 
to work, and also to ensure decent service provi-
sion back home so that they are not compelled to 
move in order to access schools and health care.
While not a substitute for broader develop-
ment efforts, migration can be a vital strategy for 
households and families seeking to diversify and 
improve their livelihoods, especially in develop-
ing countries. Governments need to recognize 

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Overview

this potential and to integrate migration with 
other aspects of national development policy. A 
critical point that emerges from experience is the 
importance of national economic conditions and 
strong public-sector institutions in enabling the 
broader benefits of mobility to be reaped. 

The way forward 
Advancing  this  agenda  will  require  strong,  en-
lightened leadership coupled with a more deter-
mined effort to engage with the public and raise 
their awareness about the facts around migration. 
For origin countries, more systematic consid-
eration of the profile of migration and its ben-
efits, costs and risks would provide a better basis 
for integrating movement into national develop-
ment strategies. Emigration is not an alternative 
to accelerated development efforts at home, but 
mobility can facilitate access to ideas, knowledge 
and resources that can complement and in some 
cases enhance progress. 

For  destination  countries,  the  ‘how  and 
when’ of reforms will depend on a realistic look 
at economic and social conditions, taking into 
account public opinion and political constraints 
at local and national levels. 

International cooperation, especially through 
bilateral or regional agreements, can lead to bet-
ter migration management, improved protection 
of migrants’ rights and enhanced contributions 
of migrants to both origin and destination coun-
tries. Some regions are creating free-movement 
zones  to  promote  freer  trade  while  enhancing 
the benefits of migration—such as West Africa 
and the Southern Cone of Latin America. The 
expanded labour markets created in these regions 
can deliver substantial benefits to migrants, their 
families and their communities.

There are calls to create a new global regime to 
improve the management of migration: over 150 
countries now participate in the Global Forum 
on Migration and Development. Governments, 
faced  with  common  challenges,  develop  com-
mon responses—a trend we saw emerge while 
preparing this report. 

Overcoming  Barriers  fixes  human  develop-
ment firmly on the agenda of policy makers who 
seek the best outcomes from increasingly com-
plex patterns of human movement worldwide.

While not a 
substitute for broader 
development efforts, 
migration can be a vital 
strategy for households 
and families seeking to 
diversify and improve 
their livelihoods

5

Freedom and 
movement: 
how mobility 
can foster 
human development

1

The world distribution of opportunities is extremely 
unequal. This inequality is a key driver of human 
movement and thus implies that movement has a 
huge potential for improving human development. Yet 
movement is not a pure expression of choice—people 
often move under constraints that can be severe, while 
the gains they reap from moving are very unequally 
distributed. Our vision of development as promoting 
people’s freedom to lead the lives they choose 
recognizes mobility as an essential component of that 
freedom. However, movement involves trade-offs for 
both movers and stayers, and the understanding and 
analysis of those trade-offs is key to formulating  
appropriate policies.

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

1
1

Freedom and movement:  
how mobility can foster human 
development

Every year, more than 5 million people cross international borders to 
go and live in a developed country.1 The number of people who move 
to a developing nation or within their country is much greater, al-
though precise estimates are hard to come by.2 Even larger numbers 
of people in both destination and source places are affected by the 
movement of others through flows of money, knowledge and ideas.

For people who move, the journey almost always 
entails sacrifices and uncertainty. The possible 
costs range from the emotional cost of separa-
tion from families and friends to high monetary 
fees. The risks can include the physical dangers 
of working in dangerous occupations. In some 
cases, such as those of illegal border crossings, 
movers face a risk of death. Nevertheless, mil-
lions of people are willing to incur these costs or 
risks in order to improve their living standards 
and those of their families.

A person’s opportunities to lead a long and 
healthy life, to have access to education, health 
care and material goods, to enjoy political free-
doms and to be protected from violence are all 
strongly influenced by where they live. Someone 
born in Thailand can expect to live seven more 
years, to have almost three times as many years 
of education, and to spend and save eight times 
as  much  as  someone  born  in  neighbouring 
Myanmar.3  These  differences  in  opportunity 
create immense pressures to move. 

1.1  Mobility matters
Witness for example the way in which human 
development outcomes are distributed near na-
tional  boundaries.  Map  1.1  compares  human 
development on either side of the United States–
Mexico border. For this illustration, we use the 
Human  Development  Index  (HDI)—a  sum-
mary measure of development used throughout 
this report to rank and compare countries. A 
pattern that jumps out is the strong correlation 
between the side of the border that a place is on 

and its HDI. The lowest HDI in a United States 
border  county  (Starr  County,  Texas)  is  above 
even the highest on the Mexican side (Mexicali 
Municipality,  Baja  California).4  This  pattern 
suggests  that  moving  across  national  borders 
can greatly expand the opportunities available 
for improved well-being. Alternatively, consider 
the  direction  of  human  movements  when  re-
strictions on mobility are lifted. Between 1984 
and 1995, the People’s Republic of China pro-
gressively liberalized its strict regime of inter-
nal restrictions, allowing people to move from 
one region to another. Massive flows followed, 
largely  towards  regions  with  higher  levels  of 
human development. In this case the patterns 
again suggest that opportunities for improved 
well-being were a key driving factor (map 1.2).5
These  spatial  impressions  are  supported  by 
more  rigorous  research  that  has  estimated  the 
effect of changing one’s residence on well-being. 
These  comparisons  are  inherently  difficult  be-
cause  people  who  move  tend  to  have  different 
characteristics and circumstances from those who 
do not move (box 1.1). Recent academic studies 
that carefully disentangle these complex relations 
have nonetheless confirmed very large gains from 
moving across international borders. For example, 
individuals with only moderate levels of formal 
education who move from a typical developing 
country to the United States can reap an annual 
income  gain  of  approximately  US$10,000—
roughly  double  the  average  level  of  per  capita 
income  in  a  developing  country.6  Background 
research commissioned for this report found that 

9
9

1

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Map 1.1

Borders matter
HDI in United States and Mexican border localities, 2000

Mexicali: HDI = 0.757

Source:  Anderson and Gerber (2007a).

10

a family who migrates from Nicaragua to Costa 
Rica increases the probability that their child will 
be enrolled in primary school by 22 percent.7

These disparities do not explain all movement. 
An important part of movement occurs in response 
to armed conflict. Some people emigrate to avoid 
political repression by authoritarian states. Moving 
can provide opportunities for people to escape the 
traditional roles that they were expected to fulfil in 
their society of origin. Young people often move in 
search of education and broader horizons, intend-
ing to return home eventually. As we discuss in 
more detail in the next section, there are multiple 
drivers of, and constraints on, movement that ac-
count for vastly different motives and experiences 
among movers. Nevertheless, opportunity and as-
piration are frequently recurring themes. 

Movement  does  not  always  lead  to  better 
human development outcomes. A point that we 
emphasize throughout this report is that vast 
inequalities characterize not only the freedom 
to move but also the distribution of gains from 
movement.  When  the  poorest  migrate,  they 
often do so under conditions of vulnerability 
that reflect their limited resources and choices. 
The prior information they have may be limited 
or  misleading.  Abuse  of  migrant  female  do-
mestic workers occurs in many cities and coun-
tries around the world, from Washington and 
London to Singapore and the Gulf Cooperation 
Council  (GCC)  states.  Recent  research  in 
the  Arab  states  found  that  the  abusive  and 

HDI, 2000

 0.636 – 0.700
 0.701 – 0.765
 0.766 – 0.830
 0.831 – 0.895
 0.896 – 0.950

Starr: HDI = 0.766

exploitative working conditions sometimes as-
sociated with domestic work and the lack of re-
dress mechanisms can trap migrant women in a 
vicious circle of poverty and HIV vulnerability.8 
The same study found that many countries test 
migrants for HIV and deport those found to 
carry the virus; few source countries have re-in-
tegration programs for migrants who are forced 
to return as a result of their HIV status.9

Movement  across  national  borders  is  only 
part  of  the  story.  Movement  within  national 
borders is actually larger in magnitude and has 
enormous potential to enhance human devel-
opment. This is partly because relocating to an-
other country is costly. Moving abroad not only 
involves substantial monetary costs for fees and 
travel (which tend to be regressive—see chapter 
3), but may also mean living in a very different 
culture  and  leaving  behind  your  network  of 
friends and relations, which can impose a heavy 
if unquantifiable psychological burden. The lift-
ing of what were often severe barriers to internal 
movement in a number of countries (including 
but not limited to China) has benefited many 
of  the  world’s  poorest  people—an  impact  on 
human  development  that  would  be  missed  if 
we were to adopt an exclusive focus on interna-
tional migration. 

The potential of enhanced national and inter-
national mobility to increase human well-being 
leads us to expect that it should be a major focus 
of attention among development policy makers 

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

1

and researchers. This is not the case. The academic 
literature dealing with the effects of migration 
is dwarfed by research on the consequences of 
international  trade  and  macroeconomic  poli-
cies,  to  name  just  two  examples.10  While  the 
international community boasts an established 
institutional  architecture  for  governing  trade 
and  financial  relations  among  countries,  the 
governance of mobility has been well character-
ized as a non-regime (with the important excep-
tion of refugees).11 This report is part of ongoing 
efforts  to  redress  this  imbalance.  Building  on 
the  recent  work  of  organizations  such  as  the 
International  Organization  for  Migration 
(IOM), the International Labour Organization 
(ILO),  the  World  Bank  and  the  Office  of 
the  United  Nations  High  Commissioner  for 

Refugees (UNHCR), and on discussions in such 
arenas as the Global Forum on Migration and 
Development, we argue that migration deserves 
greater  attention  from  governments,  interna-
tional organizations and civil society.12 This is 
not only because of the large potential gains to 
the world as a whole from enhanced movement, 
but also because of the substantial risks faced by 
many  who  move—risks  that  could  be  at  least 
partly offset by better policies. 

1.2 Choice and context: 
understanding why people move
There is huge variation in the circumstances sur-
rounding human movement. Thousands of Chin 
have emigrated to Malaysia in recent years to es-
cape persecution by Myanmar’s security forces, 

Map 1.2

Migrants are moving to places with greater opportunities
Human development and inter-provincial migration flows in China, 1995–2000 

HDI, 1995

 0.000 – 0.600
 0.601 – 0.700
 0.701 – 0.800
 0.801 – 1

Number of migrants, 1995–2000

> 2,500,000

1,000,000– 2,500,000

150,000–1,000,000

Source: UNDP (2008a) and He (2004).

No data

11

1

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Box 1.1

Estimating the impact of movement

Key methodological considerations affect the measurement of both 
returns to individuals and effects on places reported in the exten-
sive literature on migration. Obtaining a precise measure of impacts 
requires a comparison between the well-being of someone who mi-
grates and their well-being had they stayed in their original place. 
The latter is an unknown counterfactual and may not be adequately 
proxied by the status of non-migrants. Those who move internation-
ally tend to be better educated and to have higher levels of initial 
income than those who do not, and so can be expected to be better 
off than those who stay behind. There is evidence that this phenom-
enon—known technically as migrant selectivity—is also present in 
internal migration (see chapter 2). Comparisons of groups with similar 
observable characteristics (gender, education, experience, etc.) can 
be more accurate but still omit potentially important characteristics, 
such as attitudes towards risk. 

There are a host of other methodological problems. Difficulties 
in identifying causality plague estimates of the impact of remittances 
on household consumption. Understanding how migration affects 
labour  markets  in  the  destination  place  is  also  problematic.  Most 
studies have tried to look at the impact on wages at the regional level 

Source: Clemens, Montenegro and Pritchett (2008), McKenzie, Gibson and Stillman (2006).

or on particular skill groups. These may still be subject to selection 
bias associated with individual choices of location. A key issue, dis-
cussed in chapter 4, is whether the migrants’ skills substitute for or 
complement those of local people; determining this requires accurate 
measures of these skills. 

One  increasingly  popular  approach  seeks  to  exploit  quasi-  or 
manufactured randomization to estimate impacts. For example, New 
Zealand’s Pacific Access Category allocated a set of visas randomly, 
allowing the impact of migration to be assessed by comparing lottery 
winners with unsuccessful applicants. 

There is also an important temporal dimension. Migration has 
high upfront costs and the gains may take time to accrue. For ex-
ample,  returns  in  the  labour  market  tend  to  improve  significantly 
over time as country-specific skills are learned and recognized. A 
migrant’s decision to return is an additional complication, affecting 
the period over which impacts should be measured.

Finally, as we discuss in more detail in the next chapter, migration 
analysis faces major data constraints. Even in the case of rich coun-
tries, comparisons are often difficult to make for very basic reasons, 
such as differences in the definition of migrants.

but live under constant fear of detection by civil-
ian paramilitary groups.13 More than 3,000 people 
are believed to have drowned between 1997 and 
2005 in the Straits of Gibraltar while trying to 
enter Europe illegally on makeshift boats.14 These 
experiences contrast with those of hundreds of 
poor Tongans who have won a lottery to settle in 
New Zealand, or of the hundreds of thousands of 
Poles who moved to better paid jobs in the United 
Kingdom under the free mobility regime of the 
European Union introduced in 2004.

Our report deals with various types of move-
ment, including internal and international, tem-
porary  and  permanent,  and  conflict-induced. 
The  usefulness  of  casting  a  broad  net  over  all 
of these cases might be questioned. Are we not 
talking about disparate phenomena, with widely 
different causes and inherently dissimilar out-
comes? Wouldn’t our purpose be better served 
if we limited our focus to one type of migration 
and  studied  in  detail  its  causes,  consequences 
and implications? 

We  don’t  think  so.  While  broad  types  of 
human movement do vary significantly in their 
drivers and outcomes, this is also true of more spe-
cific cases within each type. International labour 

12

migration, to take one example, covers cases rang-
ing from Tajik workers in the Russian Federation 
construction  industry,  impelled  to  migrate  by 
harsh economic conditions in a country where 
most people live on less than US$2 a day, to highly 
coveted East Asian computer engineers recruited 
by the likes of Motorola and Microsoft.

Conventional  approaches  to  migration 
tend  to  suffer  from  compartmentalization. 
Distinctions are commonly drawn between mi-
grants according to whether their movement is 
classed as forced or voluntary, internal or interna-
tional, temporary or permanent, or economic or 
non-economic. Categories originally designated 
to establish legal distinctions for the purpose of 
governing entry and treatment can end up play-
ing  a  dominant  role  in  conceptual  and  policy 
thinking. Over the past decade, scholars and pol-
icy makers have begun to question these distinc-
tions, and there is growing recognition that their 
proliferation obscures rather than illuminates the 
processes underlying the decision to move, with 
potentially harmful effects on policy-making.15

In nearly all instances of human movement 
we can see the interaction of two basic forces, 
which vary in the degree of their influence. On 

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

1

to conceptualize migration flows focused on dif-
ferences in living standards, in recent years there 
has been growing understanding that these differ-
ences only partly explain movement patterns.20 In 
particular, if movement responds only to income 
differentials, it is hard to explain why many suc-
cessful migrants choose to return to their country 
of origin after several years abroad. Furthermore, 
if migration were purely determined by wage dif-
ferences, then we would expect to see large move-
ments from poor to rich countries and very little 
movement among rich countries—but neither of 
these patterns holds in practice (chapter 2). 

These observed patterns led to several strands 
of  research.  Some  scholars  recognized  that  a 
focus on the individual distracts from what is 
typically a family decision and indeed strategy 
(as when some family members move while oth-
ers stay at home).21 The need to go beyond the 
assumption  of  perfectly  competitive  markets 
also  became  increasingly  evident.  In  particu-
lar, credit markets in developing countries are 
highly imperfect, while household livelihoods 
often  depend  on  such  volatile  sectors  as  agri-
culture.  Sending  a  family  member  elsewhere 
allows  the  family  to  diversify  against  the  risk 
of bad outcomes at home.22 Other researchers 
emphasized how structural characteristics and 
long-run trends in both origin and destination 
places—often labelled ‘push’ and ‘pull’ factors—
shape the context in which movement occurs. 
Movement, for example, can result from grow-
ing concentration in the ownership of assets such 
as land, making it difficult for people to subsist 
through their traditional modes of production.23
It  was  also  recognized  that  the  opportunities 
available to migrants are constrained by barriers 
to entry, as we discuss in chapters 2 and 3, and 
by the way in which labour markets function, as 
shown by the considerable evidence that both in-
ternational and internal migrants are channelled 
into lower-status and worse-paid occupations. 
Most  importantly,  theories  that  empha-
size purely economic factors fail to capture the 
broader social framework in which decisions are 
taken. For example, young men among the lower 
caste Kolas in the Central Gujarat region of India 
commonly seek factory jobs outside their village 
in order to break away from subordinate caste 
relations. This occurs despite the fact that fac-
tory wages are not higher, and in some cases are 

Theories that 
emphasize purely 
economic factors fail 
to capture the broader 
social framework in 
which decisions to 
migrate are taken

13

the one hand we have individuals, families and 
sometimes communities, who decide to move of 
their own free will in order to radically alter their 
circumstances. Indeed, even when people are im-
pelled to move by very adverse conditions, the 
choices they make almost always play a vital role. 
Research  among  Angolan  refugees  settling  in 
northwest Zambia, for example, has shown that 
many  were  motivated  by  the  same  aspirations 
that impel those who are commonly classified as 
economic migrants.16 Similarly, Afghans fleeing 
conflict go to Pakistan or Iran via the same routes 
and trading networks established decades ago for 
the purposes of seasonal labour migration.17

Recognition of the role of structural factors 
in determining human movement has had a deep 
impact on migration studies. While early attempts 

On the other hand, choices are rarely, if ever, 
unconstrained.  This  is  evident  for  those  who 
move to escape political persecution or economic 
deprivation, but it is also vital for understanding 
decisions where there is less compulsion. Major 
factors relating to the structure of the economy 
and of society, which are context-specific but also 
change over time, frame decisions to move as well 
as to stay. This dynamic interaction between indi-
vidual decisions and the socio-economic context 
in which they are taken—sometimes labelled in 
sociological parlance the ‘agency–structure inter-
action’—is vital for understanding what shapes 
human behaviour. The evolution over time of key 
structural factors is dealt with in chapter 2.

Consider the case of the tens of thousands of 
Indonesian immigrants who enter Malaysia every 
year. These flows are driven largely by the wide 
income differentials between these countries. But 
the scale of movement has also grown steadily 
since  the  1980s,  whereas  the  income  gap  be-
tween the two countries has alternately widened 
and  narrowed  over  the  same  period.18 Broader 
socio-economic processes have clearly played a 
part. Malaysian industrialization in the 1970s 
and  1980s  generated  a  massive  movement  of 
Malays from the countryside to the cities, creat-
ing acute labour scarcity in the agricultural sector 
at a time when the commercialization of farming 
and rapid population growth were producing a 
surplus of agricultural labour in Indonesia. The 
fact that most Indonesians are of similar ethnic, 
linguistic and religious backgrounds to Malays 
doubtless facilitated the flows.19

1

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

lower, than what they would earn as agricultural 
day labourers at home.24 Escaping traditional hi-
erarchies can be an important factor motivating 
migration (chapter 3). 

Moreover,  the  relationship  between  move-
ment and economics is far from unidirectional. 
Large-scale movements of people can have pro-
found  economic  consequences  for  origin  and 
destination places, as we will discuss in detail in 
chapter 4. Even the way in which we think about 
basic economic concepts is affected by the move-
ment of people, as can be illustrated by the issues 
raised for the measurement of per capita incomes 
and economic growth (box 1.2). 

1.3 Development, freedom and 
human mobility
Our attempt to understand the implications of 
human movement for human development be-
gins with an idea that is central to the approach 
of  this  report.  This  is  the  concept  of  human 

development as the expansion of people’s free-
doms to live their lives as they choose. This con-
cept—inspired  by  the  path-breaking  work  of 
Nobel laureate Amartya Sen and the leadership 
of Mahbub ul Haq and also known as the ‘ca-
pabilities approach’ because of its emphasis on 
freedom to achieve vital ‘beings and doings’—
has been at the core of our thinking since the 
first Human Development Report in 1990, and 
is as relevant as ever to the design of effective 
policies  to  combat  poverty  and  deprivation.25 
The capabilities approach has proved powerful 
in reshaping thinking about topics as diverse as 
gender, human security and climate change.

Using the expansion of human freedoms and 
capabilities as a lens has significant implications 
for how we think about human movement. This 
is because, even before we start asking whether 
the freedom to move has significant effects on in-
comes, education or health, for example, we rec-
ognize that movement is one of the basic actions 

Box 1.2

How movement matters to the measurement of progress

Attempts to measure the level of development of a country rely on 
various  indicators  designed  to  capture  the  average  level  of  well-
being. While a traditional approach uses per capita income as a proxy 
for economic development, this report has promoted a more com-
prehensive measure: the Human Development Index (HDI). However, 
both of these approaches are based on the idea of evaluating the 
well-being of those who reside in a given territory.

As  researchers  at  the  Center  for  Global  Development  and 
Harvard University have recently pointed out, these approaches to 
measuring development prioritize geographical location over people 
in the evaluation of a society’s progress. Thus, if a Fijian moves to 
New Zealand and her living standards improve as a result, traditional 
measures of development will not count that improvement as an in-
crease in the development of Fiji. Rather, that person’s well-being will 
now be counted in the calculation of New Zealand’s indicator. 

In background research carried out for this report, we dealt with 
this problem by proposing an alternative measure of human devel-
opment. We refer to this as the human development of peoples (as 
opposed to the human development of countries), as it captures the 
level of human development of all people born in a particular country. 
For instance, instead of measuring the average level of human devel-
opment of people who live in the Philippines, we measure the aver-
age level of human development of all individuals who were born in 

Source: Ortega (2009) and Clemens and Pritchett (2008).

the Philippines, regardless of where they now live. This new measure 
has a significant impact on our understanding of human well-being. 
In 13 of the 100 nations for which we can calculate this measure, the 
HDI of their people is at least 10 percent higher than the HDI of their 
country; for an additional nine populations, the difference is between 
5 and 10 percent. For 11 of the 90 populations for which we could 
calculate trends over time, the change in HDI during the 1990–2000 
period differed by more than 5 percentage points from the average 
change for their country. For example, the HDI of Ugandans went up 
by nearly three times as much as the HDI of Uganda.

Throughout  the  rest  of  this  report,  we  will  continue  to  adopt 
the conventional approach for reasons of analytical tractability and 
comparability with the existing literature. We also view these two 
measures  as  complements  rather  than  substitutes:  one  captures 
the living standards of people living in a particular place, the other 
of people born in a particular place. For example, when we anal-
yse  human  development  as  a  cause  of  human  movement,  as  we 
do throughout most of this report, then the country measure will be 
more appropriate because it will serve as an indicator of how living 
standards differ across places. For the purposes of evaluating the 
success of different policies and institutions in generating well-being 
for the members of a society, however, there is a strong case for 
adopting the new measure. 

14

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

1

live as well as the act of movement itself, we rec-
ognize the importance of the conditions under 
which people are, or are not, able to choose their 
place of residence. Much conventional analysis 
of migration centres on studying the effect of 
movement on well-being. Our concern, however, 
is not only with movement in itself but also with 
the freedom that people have to decide whether 
to move. Mobility is a freedom—movement is 
the exercise of that freedom.29

We understand human mobility as a posi-
tive and not only a negative freedom. In other 
words, the absence of formal restrictions on the 
movement of people across or within borders 
does not in itself make people free to move if 

Box 1.3

Basic terms used in this report

Human Development Index (HDI) A composite index measuring average 
achievement in three basic dimensions of human development: a long 
and healthy life, access to knowledge and a decent standard of living.

Developed/developing We call countries that have achieved an HDI of 0.9 
or higher developed, and those that have not developing.

Low/medium/high/very high HD A classification of countries based on 
the value of the HDI according to the most recent data. The ranges are 
0–0.499 for low HDI, 0.500–0.799 for medium HDI, 0.800–0.899 for high 
HDI and greater than 0.900 for very high HDI.

Internal migration Human movement within the borders of a country, 
usually measured across regional, district or municipal boundaries.

International migration Human movement across international borders, 
resulting in a change of country of residence.

Migrant An individual who has changed her place of residence either by 
crossing an international border or by moving within her country of origin 
to another region, district or municipality. An emigrant is a migrant viewed 
from the perspective of the origin country, while an immigrant is a migrant 
viewed from the perspective of the destination country. While sometimes 
the term ‘migrant’ (as opposed to ’immigrant’) has been reserved for 
temporary migration, we do not adopt such a distinction in this report.

Human mobility The ability of individuals, families or groups of people to 
choose their place of residence.

Human movement The act of changing one’s place of residence.

15

that individuals can choose to take in order to 
realize their life plans. In other words, the ability 
to move is a dimension of freedom that is part of 
development—with intrinsic as well as potential 
instrumental value.

The notion that the ability to change one’s 
place of residence is a fundamental component 
of human freedom has been traced back to clas-
sical philosophy in several intellectual traditions. 
Confucius wrote that “good government obtains 
when those who are near are made happy, and 
those who are far off are attracted to come,”26
while  Socrates  argued  that  “anyone  who  does 
not like us and the city, and who wants to em-
igrate to a colony or to any other city, may go 
where he likes, retaining his property.”27 In 1215, 
England’s Magna Carta guaranteed the freedom 
“to go out of our Kingdom, and to return safely 
and securely, by land or water.” More recently, 
American  philosopher  Martha  Nussbaum  ar-
gued that mobility is one of a set of basic human 
functional capabilities that can be used to assess 
the effective freedom that individuals have to 
carry out their life plans.28

The  distinction  between  freedoms  and 
actions is central to the capabilities approach. 
By referring to the capability to decide where to 

Yet world history is replete with the experi-
ences of societies that severely limited human 
development  by  restricting  movement.  Both 
feudalism  and  slavery  were  predicated  on  the 
physical  restriction  of  movement.  Several  re-
pressive regimes in the 20th century relied on 
the control of internal movement, including the 
Pass Laws of South African apartheid and the 
propiska system of internal passports in Soviet 
Russia. The subsequent demise of such restric-
tions contributed to dramatic expansions in the 
freedoms enjoyed by these countries’ peoples.

Our report seeks to capture and examine the 
full set of conditions that affect whether individu-
als, families or communities decide to stay or to 
move. These conditions include people’s resources 
or entitlements as well as the way in which dif-
ferent  constraints—including  those  associated 
with policies, markets, security, culture and val-
ues—determine whether movement is an option 
for them. People’s ability to choose the place they 
call home is a dimension of human freedom that 
we refer to as human mobility. Box 1.3 defines this 
and other basic terms used in this report. 

1

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

they lack the economic resources, security and 
networks necessary to enjoy a decent life in their 
new home, or if informal constraints such as dis-
crimination significantly impede the prospects 
of moving successfully. 

Let us illustrate the implications of this ap-
proach with a couple of examples. In the case of 
human  trafficking,  movement  comes  together 
with  brutal  and  degrading  types  of  exploita-
tion. By definition, trafficking is an instance of 
movement in which freedoms become restricted 
by  means  of  force,  deception  and/or  coercion. 
Commonly,  a  trafficked  individual  is  not  free 
to choose to abort the trip, to seek alternative 
employment once she gets to her destination, or 
to return home. A trafficked person is physically 
moving, but doing so as a result of a restriction on 
her ability to decide where to live. From a capa-
bilities perspective, she is less, not more, mobile.
Alternatively,  consider  the  case  of  some-
one who has to move because of the threat of 
political  persecution  or  because  of  degraded 
environmental conditions. In these cases exter-
nal circumstances have made it more difficult, 

perhaps impossible, for her to remain at home. 
These  circumstances  restrict  the  scope  of  her 
choices, reducing her freedom to choose where 
to live. The induced movement may very well 
coincide with a further deterioration in her liv-
ing conditions, but this does not mean that the 
movement is the cause of that deterioration. In 
fact, if she were not able to move, the outcome 
would probably be much worse. 

If it is tempting to view the distinction be-
tween  mobility  and  movement  as  somewhat 
academic, we should take this opportunity to 
emphasize that freedom to choose where to live 
emerged as an important theme in research to 
find out what poor people think about migration 
(box 1.4). In the end, their views matter more 
than those of the experts, since it is they who 
must take the difficult decision as to whether or 
not to risk a move. 

1.4  What we bring to the table
Putting people and their freedom at the centre 
of development has implications for the study of 
human movement. In the first place, it requires 

Box 1.4

  How do the poor view migration?

In recent years there has been growing interest in the use of qualita-
tive methods to understand how people living in poverty view their 
situation, as indicated by the landmark World Bank study Voices of 
the Poor, published in 2000. In preparing the current report we com-
missioned research to investigate relevant findings of Participatory 
Poverty Assessments—large-scale studies that combine qualitative 
and quantitative research methods to study poverty from the point of 
view of the poor. What emerged is that moving is commonly described 
by the poor as both a necessity—part of a coping strategy for families 
experiencing extreme hardship—and an opportunity—a means of ex-
panding a household’s livelihoods and ability to accumulate assets. 

In Niger, two thirds of respondents indicated that in order to cope 
with lack of food, clothing or income they had left their homes and 
looked for livelihoods elsewhere. Some households reported mem-
bers leaving in search of paid work, particularly to reduce pressures 
on dwindling food supplies in times of scarcity. In the villages of Ban 
Na Pieng and Ban Kaew Pad, Thailand, participants described mi-
gration as one of the ways in which a family’s socio-economic status 
could be enhanced. For these communities, remittances from abroad 
enabled those left behind to invest in commercial fishing and thus 
expand the family’s standing and influence.

Seasonal internal migration was the most common type of mi-
gration discussed in focus groups with the poor. When international 
migration was discussed, it was described as something for the bet-
ter off. For instance, participants in the Jamaica study said that the 
better off, unlike the poor, have influential contacts that help them 
acquire the necessary visas to travel and work abroad. Similarly, in 
Montserrat participants described how the more educated and finan-
cially better off were able to leave the country after the 1995 volcano 
eruption, while the less well off stayed on despite the devastation. 

Participatory  Poverty  Assessments  give  us  a  good  picture  of 
how poor people see movement but may be uninformative about 
how others have managed to move out of poverty, as these assess-
ments are by design limited to people who are still poor. A more re-
cent study of 15 countries carried out by the World Bank examines 
pathways out of poverty. In these studies, the ability to move evolved 
as a common theme in conversations about freedom. In Morocco, 
young women expressed frustration with traditional restrictions that 
limit women’s ability to travel without a male escort or search for 
employment outside the home. Men described the ability to migrate 
as both a freedom and a responsibility, because with the freedom to 
move comes the responsibility to remit.

Source:  Azcona (2009), Narayan, Pritchett, and Kapoor (2009), World Bank (2000), World Bank (2003), and ActionAid International (2004).

16

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

1

us to understand what makes people less or more 
mobile.  This  means  considering  why  people 
choose to move and what constraints encourage 
them or deter them from making that choice. In 
chapter 2, we look at both choices and constraints 
by studying the macro patterns of human move-
ment over space and time. We find that these 
patterns are broadly consistent with the idea that 
people move to enhance their opportunities, but 
that their movement is strongly constrained by 
policies—both  in  their  place  of  origin  and  at 
their destinations—and by the resources at their 
disposal.  Since  different  people  face  different 
constraints, the end result is a process character-
ized by significant inequalities in opportunities 
to move and returns from movement. 

We explore how these inequalities interact 
with  policies  in  chapter  3.  While,  as  we  have 
emphasized in this introductory chapter, there 
is  considerable  intrinsic  value  to  mobility,  its 
instrumental value for furthering other dimen-
sions of human development can also be of enor-
mous significance. But while people can and do 
expand other freedoms by moving, the extent 
to which they are able to do so depends greatly 
on the conditions under which they move. In 
chapter 3 we look at the outcomes of migration 
in different dimensions of human development, 
including incomes and livelihoods, health, edu-
cation and empowerment. We also review the 
cases in which people experience deteriorations 
in  their  well-being  during  movement—when 
this is induced by trafficking or conflict, for ex-
ample—and argue that these cases can often be 
traced back to constraints on the freedom of in-
dividuals to choose where they live. 

A key point that emerges in chapter 3 is that 
human movement can be associated with trade-
offs—people may gain in some and lose in other 
dimensions  of  freedom.  Millions  of  Asian  and 
Middle Eastern workers in the GCC states ac-
cept severe limitations on their rights as a condi-
tion for permission to work. They earn higher pay 
than at home, but cannot be with their families, 
obtain  permanent  residence  or  change  employ-
ers. Many cannot even leave, as their passports are 
confiscated on entry. For many people around the 
world the decision to move involves leaving their 
children behind. In India, seasonal workers are in 
practice excluded from voting in elections when 
these  are  scheduled  during  the  peak  period  of 

internal movements.30 People living and working 
with irregular status are often denied a whole host 
of basic entitlements and services and lead their 
lives in constant fear of arrest and deportation. 
Understanding the effects of movement requires 
the systematic analysis of these multiple dimen-
sions of human development in order to gain a 
better sense of the nature and extent of these trade-
offs, as well as the associated policy implications.
More complex trade-offs occur when mov-
ers  have  an  effect  on  the  well-being  of  non-
movers. Indeed, the perception that migration 
generates losses for those in destination coun-
tries has been the source of numerous debates 
among policy makers and academics. Chapter 
4  focuses  on  these  debates.  The  evidence  we 
present strongly suggests that fears about the 
negative effects of movement on stayers (both 
at source and destination) are frequently over-
stated. However, sometimes these concerns are 
real and this has significant implications for the 
design of policy. 

If movement is constrained by policies and 
resources,  yet  enhanced  mobility  can  signifi-
cantly increase the well-being of movers while 
often also having positive effects on stayers, what 
should policy towards human movement look 
like? In chapter 5, we argue that it should look 
very different from what we see today. In par-
ticular, it should be redesigned to open up more 
opportunities for movement among low-skilled 
workers and to improve the treatment of movers 
at their destinations.

We do not advocate wholesale liberalization 
of  international  mobility.  This  is  because  we 
recognize that people at destination places have 
a right to shape their societies, and that borders 
are one way in which people delimit the sphere of 
their obligations to those whom they see as mem-
bers of their community. But we also believe that 
people relate to each other in myriad ways and 
that their moral obligations can operate at differ-
ent levels. This is primarily because individuals 
don’t belong to just one society or group. Rather 
than being uniquely or solely defined by their re-
ligion, race, ethnicity or gender, individuals com-
monly see themselves through the multiple prisms 
of a set of identities. As Amartya Sen has power-
fully put it, “A Hutu labourer from Kigali… is not 
only a Hutu, but also a Kigalian, a Rwandan, an 
African, a labourer and a human being.”31 

While there is 
considerable intrinsic 
value to mobility, its 
instrumental value 
for furthering other 
dimensions of human 
development can 
also be of enormous 
significance

17

1

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

We see mobility  
as vital to human 
development and 
movement as a natural 
expression of people’s 
desire to choose how 
and where to lead  
their lives

18

The  responsibilities  of  distributive  justice 
are overlapping and naturally intersect national 
boundaries; as such, there is no contradiction 
between the idea that societies may design insti-
tutions with the primary purpose of generating 
just outcomes among their members, and the 
idea that the members of that same society will 
share an obligation to create a just world with 
and for their fellow humans outside that soci-
ety. There are many ways in which these obli-
gations are articulated: the creation of charities 
and foundations, the provision of development 
aid, assistance in building national institutions, 
and the reform of international institutions so 
as to make them more responsive to the needs of 
poor countries are just some of them. However, 
our analysis, which informs the recommenda-
tions in chapter 5, suggests that reducing restric-
tions on the entry of people—in particular of 
low-skilled  workers  and  their  families—into 
better-off developed and developing countries is 
one relatively effective way of discharging these 
obligations. 

Our report’s policy recommendations are not 
only based on our view of how the world should 
be. We recognize that the formulation of policies 
towards human movement must contend with 
what can at times look like formidable political 
opposition to greater openness. However, hav-
ing considered issues of political feasibility, we 
argue that a properly designed programme of lib-
eralization—designed so as to respond to labour 
market  needs  in  destination  places  while  also 
addressing issues of equity and non-discrimina-
tion—could generate significant support among 
voters and interest groups.

Our analysis builds on the contributions to 
thinking about human development that have 
been made since the concept was introduced in 
the 1990 HDR. That report devoted a full chap-
ter  to  urbanization  and  human  development, 
reviewing the failed experiences of policies de-
signed  to  reduce  internal  migration  and  con-
cluding: “[A]s long as differences exist between 
rural and urban areas, people will move to try 
to take advantage of better schools and social 
services, higher income opportunities, cultural 
amenities, new modes of living, technological in-
novations and links to the world.”32 Like other 
HDRs, this one begins with the observation that 

the distribution of opportunities in our world is 
highly unequal. We go on to argue that this fact 
has significant implications for understanding 
why and how people move and how we should 
reshape policies towards human movement. Our 
critique of existing policies towards migration is 
directed at the way in which they reinforce those 
inequalities. As noted in the 1997 HDR, it is 
precisely because “the principles of free global 
markets are applied selectively” that “the global 
market for unskilled labour is not as free as the 
market for industrial country exports or capi-
tal”.33 Our emphasis on how migration enhances 
cultural diversity and enriches people’s lives by 
moving  skills,  labour  and  ideas  builds  on  the 
analysis of the 2004 HDR, which dealt with the 
role of cultural liberty in today’s diverse world.34 
At the same time, the agenda of human de-
velopment  is  evolving,  so  it  is  natural  for  the 
treatment  of  particular  topics  to  change  over 
time. This report strongly contests the view—
held by some policy makers and at times echoed 
in past reports—that the movement of people 
should be seen as a problem requiring corrective 
action.35 In contrast, we see mobility as vital to 
human development and movement as a natural 
expression of people’s desire to choose how and 
where to lead their lives.

While the potential of increased mobility for 
increasing the well-being of millions of people 
around the world is the key theme of this re-
port, it is important to stress at the outset that 
enhanced mobility is only one component of a 
strategy for improving human development. We 
do not argue that it should be the central one, 
nor are we arguing that it should be placed at the 
same level in the hierarchy of capabilities as, say, 
adequate nourishment or shelter. Neither do we 
believe mobility to be a replacement for national 
development strategies directed toward invest-
ing in people and creating conditions for people 
to flourish at home. Indeed, the potential of mo-
bility to improve the well-being of disadvantaged 
groups is limited, because these groups are often 
least likely to move. Yet while human mobility is 
not a panacea, its largely positive effects both for 
movers and stayers suggest that it should be an 
important component of any strategy to generate 
sustained improvements in human development 
around the world. 

People in motion: 
who moves where, 
when and why

2

This chapter examines human movement across the 
world and over time. The patterns are consistent with 
the idea that people move to seek better opportunities, 
but also that their movement is strongly constrained by 
barriers—most importantly, by policies at home and at 
destination and by lack of resources. Overall, the share 
of people going to developed countries has increased 
markedly during the past 50 years, a trend associated 
with growing gaps in opportunities. Although these 
flows of people are likely to slow temporarily during 
the current economic crisis, underlying structural 
trends will persist once growth resumes and are likely 
to generate increased pressures for movement in the 
coming decades.

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

2
2

People in motion: who moves 
where, when and why

The aim of this chapter is to characterize human movement gen-
erally—to give an overview of who moves, how, why, where and 
when. The picture is complex and our broad brushstrokes will in-
evitably fail to capture specifics. Nevertheless, the similarities and 
commonalities that emerge are striking, and help us understand 
the forces that shape and constrain migration.

We start by examining the key features of 
movement—its  magnitude,  composition  and 
directions—in section 2.1. Section 2.2 considers 
how movement today resembles or differs from 
movement  in  the  past.  Our  examination  sug-
gests that movement is largely shaped by policy 
constraints, an issue that we discuss in detail in 
the third section (2.3). In the last section (2.4), 
we turn to the future and try to understand how 
movement will evolve in the medium to longer 
term, once the economic crisis that started in 
2008 is over.

2.1  Human movement today
Discussions  about  migration  commonly  start 
with a description of flows between developing 
and  developed  countries,  or  what  sometimes 
are loosely—and inaccurately—called ‘South–
North’ flows. However, most movement in the 
world does not take place between developing 
and developed countries. Indeed, it does not even 
take place between countries. The overwhelming 
majority of people who move do so within the 
borders of their own country.

One of the reasons why this basic reality of 
human movement is not better known lies in se-
vere data limitations. Background research con-
ducted for this report sought to overcome this 
knowledge gap by using national censuses to cal-
culate the number of internal migrants on a con-
sistent basis for 24 countries covering 57 percent 
of the world’s population (figure 2.1).1 Even with 
a conservative definition of internal migration, 
which counts movement across only the largest 
zonal demarcations in a country, the number of 
people who move internally in our sample is six 

times greater than those who emigrate.2 Using 
the  regional  patterns  found  in  these  data,  we 
estimate that there are about 740 million inter-
nal migrants in the world—almost four times as 
many as those who have moved internationally.
By comparison, the contemporary figure for 
international migrants (214 million, or 3.1 per-
cent of the world’s population) looks small. Of 
course this global estimate is dogged by a num-
ber of methodological and comparability issues, 
but there are good reasons to believe that the 
order of magnitude is right.3 Box 2.1 deals with 
one of the most frequently voiced concerns about 
the international data on migration, namely the 
extent to which they capture irregular migration 
is discussed below.

Even if we restrict attention to international 
movements, the bulk of these do not occur be-
tween countries with very different levels of devel-
opment. Only 37 percent of migration in the world 
is from developing to developed countries. Most 
migration  occurs  within  countries  in  the  same 
category of development: about 60 percent of mi-
grants move either between developing or between 
developed  countries  (the  remaining  3  percent 
move from developed to developing countries).4

This comparison relies on what is inevitably 
a somewhat arbitrary distinction between coun-
tries that have achieved higher levels of develop-
ment and those that have not. We have classified 
countries  that  have  attained  an  HDI  greater 
than or equal to 0.9 (on a scale of 0 to 1) as de-
veloped and those that have not as developing (see 
box 1.3). We use this demarcation throughout 
this report, without intending any judgement of 
the merits of any particular economic or political 

21
21

2

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Figure 2.1

Many more people move within borders than across them
Internal movement and emigration rates, 2000–2002

Ghana

Kenya

Rwanda

South Africa

Uganda

Argentina

Brazil

Chile

Colombia

Costa Rica

Ecuador

Mexico

Panama

United States

Venezuela

Cambodia

China

India

Indonesia

Malaysia

Philippines

Belarus

Portugal

Spain

A

f
r
i

c
a

A
m
e
r
i

c
a
s

A
s

i

a

E
u
r
o
p
e

| 
0 

| 
5 

| 
10 

| 
15 

| 
20 

|
25

  Lifetime internal migration intensity (%)

  Emigration rate (%)

Source:  Bell and Muhidin (2009) and HDR team estimates based on Migration DRC (2007) database. 
Note:  All emigration data are from the Migration DRC (2007) database and cover 2000–2002. The internal migration rates are based on census data from 2000 to 
2002, except for Belarus (1999), Cambodia (1998), Colombia (2005), Kenya (1999) and the Philippines (1990).

22

system or seeking to obscure the complex inter-
actions  involved  in  increasing  and  sustaining 
human well-being. The countries and territories 
thereby classified as developed feature many that 
would normally be included in such a list (all 
Western European countries, Australia, Canada, 
Japan, New Zealand and the United States), but 
also several that are less frequently labelled as de-
veloped (Hong Kong (China), Singapore and the 
Republic of Korea, in East Asia; Kuwait, Qatar 
and the United Arab Emirates, in the Gulf re-
gion). However, most Eastern European econo-
mies, with the exception of the Czech Republic 
and Slovenia, are not in the top HDI category 
(see Statistical Table H). 

One obvious reason why there is not more 
movement from developing to developed coun-
tries is that moving is costly, and moving long 
distances  is  costlier  than  undertaking  short 
journeys.  The  higher  expense  of  international 
movement comes not only from transport costs 
but also from the policy-based restrictions on 
crossing  international  borders,  which  can  be 
overcome  only  by  those  who  have  enough  re-
sources, possess skills that are sought after in the 
new host country, or are willing to run very high 
risks. Nearly half of all international migrants 
move within their region of origin and about 40 
percent  move  to  a  neighbouring  country.  The 
proximity between source and destination coun-
tries, however, is not solely geographical: nearly 
6 out of 10 migrants move to a country where 
the major religion is the same as in their country 
of birth, and 4 out of 10 to a country where the 
dominant language is the same.5

The pattern of these inter- and intra-regional 
movements is presented in map 2.1, where the 
absolute magnitudes are illustrated by the thick-
ness of the arrows, the size of each region has been 
represented in proportion to its population, and 
the colouring of each country represents its HDI 
category. Intra-regional movement dominates. To 
take one striking example, intra-Asian migration 
accounts for nearly 20 percent of all international 
migration  and  exceeds  the  sum  total  of  move-
ments that Europe receives from all other regions. 
The fact that flows from developing to de-
veloped  countries  account  for  only  a  minor-
ity of international movement does not mean 
that  differences  in  living  standards  are  unim-
portant. Quite the contrary: three quarters of 

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

2

Box 2.1

  Counting irregular migrants

The only comprehensive estimates of the number of foreign-born people 
in the world come from the United Nations Department of Economic and 
Social Affairs (UNDESA) and cover approximately 150 United Nations 
(UN) member states. These estimates are primarily based on national 
censuses, which attempt to count the number of people residing in a par-
ticular country at a given moment, where a resident is defined as a per-
son who “has a place to live where he or she normally spends the daily 
period of rest.” In other words, national censuses attempt to count all 
residents, regardless of whether they are regular or irregular.

However, there are good reasons to suspect that censuses sig-
nificantly undercount irregular migrants, who may avoid census inter-
viewers for fear that they will share information with other government 
authorities. House owners may conceal the fact that they have illegal 
units rented to irregular migrants. Migrants may also be more mobile 
and thus harder to count. 

Studies have used a variety of demographic and statistical meth-
ods to assess the magnitude of the undercount. In the United States, 
the Pew Hispanic Center has developed a set of assumptions con-
sistent with census-based studies and historical demographic data 
from Mexico that estimate the undercount to be approximately 12 

percent. Other researchers estimated under-coverage rates in Los 
Angeles during the 2000 Census at 10–15 percent. Thus it appears 
that the official count in the United States misses 1–1.5 million irregu-
lar migrants, or 0.5 percent of the country’s population.

Few studies of the undercount of migrants have been conducted 
in developing countries. One exception is Argentina, where a recent 
study found an underestimation of the migrant stock equivalent to 
1.3 percent  of the  total population. In  other developing countries, 
the undercount rates could be much higher. Estimates of the num-
ber of irregular migrants for a number of countries—including the 
Russian Federation, South Africa and Thailand—range from 25 to 55 
percent of the population. However, there is huge uncertainty about 
the true number. According to the migration experts surveyed by the 
HDR team, irregular migration was estimated to average around one 
third of all migration for developing countries. An upper bound for 
the number of migrants omitted from international statistics can be 
obtained by assuming that none of these migrants are captured by 
country censuses (that is, an undercount of 100 percent); in that case, 
the resulting underestimation in the global statistics for developing 
countries would be around 30 million migrants.

Source: UN (1998), Passel and Cohn (2008), Marcelli and Ong (2002), Comelatto, Lattes, and Levit (2003). See Andrienko and Guriev (2005) for the Russian Federation, and Sabates-Wheeler (2009) for South Africa and Martin (2009b) for Thailand.

international movers move to a country with a 
higher HDI than their country of origin; among 
those from developing countries, this share ex-
ceeds 80 percent. However, their destinations are 
often not developed countries but rather other 
developing  countries  with  higher  living  stan-
dards and/or more jobs. 

The difference between human development 
at  origin  and  destination  can  be  substantial. 
Figure 2.2 illustrates this difference—a magni-
tude that we loosely call the human development 
‘gains’ from migration—plotted against the ori-
gin country’s HDI.6 If migrants were on average 
emigrating to countries with the same level of 
human development as their origin countries, 
this magnitude would be zero. In contrast, the 
difference is positive and generally large for all 
but the most developed countries. The fact that 
the average gain diminishes as human develop-
ment increases shows that it is people from the 
poorest countries who, on average, gain the most 
from moving across borders.

That movers from low-HDI countries have 
the  most  to  gain  from  moving  internation-
ally  is  confirmed  by  more  systematic  studies. 
Background  research  commissioned  for  this 

report compared the HDI of migrants at home 
and destination and found that the differences—
in both relative and absolute terms—are inversely 
related  to  the  HDI  of  the  country  of  origin.7

Figure 2.2

The poorest have the most to gain from moving…
Differences between destination and origin country HDI, 
2000–2002

Latin America and  
the Caribbean

Asia

Africa

0.3

0.2

0.1

Europe

0
0

  | 
 0.2 

| 

0.4 

| 

0.6 

| 

0.8 

Origin country HDI

–0.1

North
America

i

 

n
o
g
e
r
 
y
b
n
o
i
t
a
n
i
t
s
e
d
 
t
a
 
e
c
n
e
r
e
f
f
i

d
 
e
g
a
r
e
v
A

Source:  HDR team estimates based on Migration DRC (2007) database. 
Note:  Averages estimated using Kernel density regressions.

|
1

Oceania

23

2

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Map 2.1

Most movement occurs within regions
Origin and destination of international migrants, circa 2000

8.22

9.57

0.53

8.53

0.84

North America

1.30

1.33

1.34

1.24

19.72

Latin America

and the Caribbean
3.54

0.06

3.13

0.30

0.75

0.08

0.13

15.69

1.07

3.1

Europe

31.52

7.25

13.18

Africa

1.65

0.25

0.35

0.02

2.44

0.35

Asia

0.22

35.49

0.31

Human Development Index, 2007

Very high
High
Medium
Low
The size of countries is proportional to 2007 population.

0.01

Regions
North America
Europe
Oceania
Latin America and the Caribbean
Asia
Africa

Source: HDR team estimates based on Migration DRC (2007) database.

1.29

0.14

0.73

Oceania

Number of migrants (in millions)

Intra-
regional
migration

Migrants from low-HDI countries had the most 
to gain—and indeed on average saw a 15-fold in-
crease in income (to US$15,000 per annum), a 
doubling in education enrolment rate (from 47 
to 95 percent) and a 16-fold reduction in child 
mortality (from 112 to 7 deaths per 1,000 live 
births). Using comparable surveys in a number of 
developing countries, the study also found that 
self-selection—the tendency for those who move 
to be better off and better educated—accounted 
for  only  a  fraction  of  these  gains.  Analysis  of 
bilateral migration flows across countries, pre-
pared  as  background  research  for  this  report, 
confirmed the positive effect on emigration of all 
components of human development at destina-
tion, while finding that income differences had 
the most explanatory power.8 These patterns are 
discussed in detail in the next chapter.

Paradoxically,  despite  the  fact  that  people 
moving out of poor countries have the most to 
gain  from  moving,  they  are  the  least  mobile. 
For example, despite the high levels of attention 
given to emigration from Africa to Europe, only 
3 percent of Africans live in a country different 

from where they were born and fewer than 1 per-
cent of Africans live in Europe. Several scholars 
have  observed  that  if  we  correlate  emigration 
rates with levels of development, the relation-
ship  resembles  a  ‘hump’,  whereby  emigration 
rates are lower in poor and rich countries than 
among countries with moderate levels of devel-
opment.9 This is illustrated in figure 2.3, which 
shows that the median emigration rate in coun-
tries with low levels of human development is 
only about one third the rate out of countries 
with high levels of human development.10 When 
we restrict the comparison to out-migration to 
developed  countries,  the  relationship  is  even 
stronger:  the  median  emigration  rate  among 
countries with low human development is less 
than 1 percent, compared to almost 5 percent 
out of countries with high levels of human de-
velopment. Analysis of bilateral migration flows 
prepared as background research for this report 
confirmed that this pattern holds, even when 
controlling for characteristics of origin and des-
tination countries such as life expectancy, years 
of schooling and demographic structure.11 

24

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

2

The aggregate facts just surveyed tell us where 
migrants come from and go to, but they do not 
tell us who moves. While severe data limitations 
impede presentation of a full global profile of mi-
grants, the existing data nonetheless reveal some 
interesting patterns.

Approximately  half  (48  percent)  of  all  in-
ternational migrants are women. This share has 
been quite stable during the past five decades: it 
stood at 47 percent in 1960. This pattern con-
trasts with that of the 19th century, when the 
majority  of  migrants  were  men.14  Yet  despite 
recent references to the ‘feminization’ of migra-
tion, it appears that numerical gender balance 
was largely reached some time ago. However, the 
aggregate stability hides trends at the regional 
level. While the share of women going to the 
European Union has increased slightly from 48 

Figure 2.3 … but they also move less

Emigration rates by HDI and income

Panel A: Median emigration rates by origin country HDI group

Low HDI

Medium HDI

High HDI

Very high HDI

| 
0 
Median emigration rate (%)

| 
4 

| 
2 

  To developing countries

To developed countries

| 
3 

| 
8 

|
10

Source: HDR team estimates based on Migration DRC (2007) and UN (2009e). 

Panel B: Probability of emigration by income level in Mexican households

1.6

1.4

1.2

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

)

%

(
 

n
o
i
t
a
r
g
m

i

 
f
o
 
y
t
i
l
i

b
a
b
o
r
P

| 
0 
Income per capita (US$ thousands)

| 
10 

| 
5 

Source:  Meza and Pederzini (2006).

| 
15 

|
20

25

Evidence that poverty is a constraint to emi-
gration has also been found in household-level 
analysis: a study of Mexican households, for ex-
ample, found that the probability of migration 
increased with higher income levels for house-
hold incomes lower than US$15,000 per annum 
(figure  2.3,  panel  B).  A  commissioned  study 
found that during the Monga or growing sea-
son in Bangladesh, when people’s cash resources 
are  lowest,  a  randomized  monetary  incentive 
significantly increased the likelihood of migrat-
ing.12 The magnitude of the effect was large: giv-
ing emigrants an amount equivalent to a week’s 
wages  at  destination  increased  the  propensity 
to migrate from 14 to 40 percent. These results 
shed strong doubts on the idea, often promoted 
in policy circles, that development in countries 
of origin will reduce migratory flows. 

While  many  migrant  families  do  improve 
their standard of living by moving, this is not al-
ways the case. As discussed in chapter 3, move-
ment  often  coincides  with  adverse  outcomes 
when  it  occurs  under  conditions  of  restricted 
choice. Conflict-induced migration and traffick-
ing are not a large proportion of overall human 
movement, but they affect many of the world’s 
poorest people and are thus a special source of 
concern (box 2.2). 

Another  key  fact  about  out-migration  pat-
terns  is  their  inverse  relation  to  the  size  of  a 
country’s  population.  For  the  48  states  with 
populations below 1.5 million—which include 
1 low-, 21 medium-, 12 high- and 11 very high-
HDI countries—the average emigration rate is 
18.4 percent, considerably higher than the world 
average of 3 percent. Indeed, the top 13 emigra-
tion countries in the world are all small states, 
with Antigua and Barbuda, Grenada, and Saint 
Kitts and Nevis having emigration rates above 40 
percent. The simple correlation between size and 
emigration rates is –0.61. In many cases, it is re-
moteness that leads people born in small states to 
move in order to take advantage of opportunities 
elsewhere—the same factor that drives much of 
the rural to urban migration seen within coun-
tries. Cross-country regression analysis confirms 
that the effect of population size on emigration is 
higher for countries that are far from world mar-
kets—the more remote a small country is, the 
more people decide to leave.13 The implications 
of these patterns are discussed in box 4.4. 

2

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

to 52 percent, that same share has dropped from 
47 to 45 percent in Asia. 

Of course, the relatively equal gender shares of 
the migrant population may hide significant dif-
ferences in the circumstances of movement and 
the opportunities available.15 At the same time, 
a growing literature has challenged conventional 
views  about  the  subordinate  role  of  women  in 
migration decisions.16 For example, a qualitative 
study of decisions taken by Peruvian couples mov-
ing to Argentina found that many of the women 
moved first by themselves, because they were able 
to secure jobs more rapidly than their partners, 
who would later follow with the children.17

The data also show very large temporary flows 
of people. In the countries of the Organisation 
for Economic Co-operation and Development 
(OECD),  temporary  migrants  typically  repre-
sent more than a third of arrivals in a given year. 
However, since most leave after a short period 
while  others  transit  towards  more  permanent 
arrangements, the number of people on tempo-
rary visas at any given moment is much smaller 
than the aggregate flows suggest. Indeed, 83 per-
cent of the foreign-born population in OECD 
countries has lived there for at least five years.18
Almost all temporary migrants come for work-
related  reasons.  Some  enter  into  ‘circular’  ar-
rangements, whereby they repeatedly enter and 
leave the destination country to carry out sea-
sonal or temporary work, effectively maintaining 
two places of residence.19

It is important not to overemphasize the dis-
tinction between categories of migrants, as many 
migrants shift between categories. Indeed, the mi-
gration regime in many countries can perhaps best 
be understood through the analogy of the multi-
ple doors of a house. Migrants can enter the house 
through the front door (permanent settlers), the 
side door (temporary visitors and workers) or the 
back  door  (irregular  migrants).  However,  once 
inside a country, these channels often merge, as 
when temporary visitors become immigrants or 
slip into unauthorized status, those with irregular 
status gain authorization to remain, and people 
with permanent status decide to return.

This  analogy  is  particularly  useful  for  un-
derstanding irregular migration. Overstaying is 
an important channel through which migrants 
become irregular, particularly in developed coun-
tries. In fact, the distinction between regular and 
irregular is much less clear-cut than is often as-
sumed. For example, it is common for people to 
enter a country legally, then work despite lacking 
a permit to do so.20 In some island states, such 
as Australia and Japan, overstaying is practically 
the only channel to irregular entry; even in many 
European countries, overstay appears to account 
for  about  two  thirds  of  unauthorized  migra-
tion. In OECD countries, people with irregular 
residence or work status tend to be workers with 
low levels of formal education.21 The best esti-
mates of the number of irregular migrants in the 
United States amount to about 4 percent of the 

Box 2.2

Conflict-induced movement and trafficking

People  affected  by  conflict  and  insecurity  can  suffer  some  of  the 
worst human development outcomes of all migrants. The number of 
people who move as a result of conflict is significant: at the begin-
ning of 2008, there were around 14 million refugees falling under the 
mandate of either UNHCR or the United Nations Relief and Works 
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), accounting 
for roughly 7 percent of all international migration. The vast majority 
of refugees originate in and relocate to the poorer countries of the 
world: in Asia and Africa refugees account respectively for 18 and 13 
percent of all international migrants. 

Even more individuals displaced by violence and conflict relo-
cate within the borders of their country. It is estimated that, in 2009, 
internally displaced persons number some 26 million, including 4.9 

Source:  IDMC (2009b), Carling (2006), Kutnick, Belser, and Danailova-Trainor (2007), de Haas (2007) and Lazcko (2009).

26

million in Sudan, 2.8 million in Iraq and 1.4 million in the Democratic 
Republic of the Congo. 

It is much harder to ascertain the magnitude of human traffick-
ing. In fact, there are no accurate estimates of the stocks and flows 
of people who have been trafficked. Among the reasons for this are 
the fact that trafficking data are commonly mixed with data on other 
forms of illegal migration or migrant exploitation, the inherent chal-
lenges in distinguishing between what is voluntary and forced, and 
the very nature of human trafficking as a clandestine and criminal 
activity. Many of the frequently cited figures are disputed by the coun-
tries concerned, and there is a significant gap between estimated 
numbers and identified cases.

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

2

facilitate  movement.  In  other  words,  poorer 
people may decide to take the risk of migrat-
ing  as  they  hear  news  of  others’  success  and 
become more confident that they will receive 
the support they need in order to succeed them-
selves. Other commissioned research generated 
education profiles for internal migrants across 
34 developing countries. This showed that mi-
grants were more likely than non-migrants to 
complete secondary school, reflecting both se-
lectivity and better outcomes among migrant 
children (chapter 3).28

What else do we know about the relation-
ship between internal and international migra-
tion? Internal migration, particularly from rural 
to urban areas, can be a first step towards inter-
national  migration,  as  found  by  some  studies 
in Mexico, Thailand and Turkey, but this is far 
from being a universal pattern.29 Rather, emigra-
tion may foster subsequent internal migration in 
the home country. In Albania, migration flows to 
Greece in the early 1990s generated remittances, 
which helped to finance internal migration to 
urban  centres;  in  India,  international  movers 
from the state of Kerala have freed up positions 
in  their  areas  of  origin  and  their  remittances 
spurred a construction boom that has attracted 
low-skilled migrants from surrounding areas.30
Comparisons between internal and interna-
tional migration can yield useful insights into 
the causes and implications of human movement. 
For example, background research for this report 
analysed the relationship between the size of the 
place of origin (as measured by its population) 
and skilled labour flows and found that the pat-
terns were broadly similar across countries as well 
as within them. In particular, emigration rates for 
skilled workers are higher in small localities than 
in large ones, just as they are higher in small coun-
tries than in large ones.31 These patterns reflect 
the importance of human interaction in driving 
movement. Movement both within and between 
nations is predominantly driven by the search for 
better opportunities, and in many cases—in par-
ticular  those  involving  skilled  labour—oppor-
tunities will be greater in places where there are 
other people with complementary skills. This is 
one of the reasons why people gravitate to urban 
centres, and why high-skilled professionals often 
move to cities and places where their profession is 
already well established.32  

Movement both within 
and between nations is 
predominantly driven 
by the search for better 
opportunities

27

population or 30 percent of total migrants.22 A 
recent research project funded by the European 
Commission  estimated  that  in  2005  irregular 
migrants accounted for 6–15 percent of the total 
stock of migrants, or about 1 percent of the popu-
lation of the European Union.23 Some of these 
migrants are counted in official estimates of mi-
gration, but many are not (box 2.1).

The over-representation of skilled, working-
age people in migrant populations is one aspect 
of migrant selectivity. Not only do migrants tend 
to  have  higher  income-earning  capacity  than 
non-migrants but they often also appear to be 
healthier and more productive than natives of 
the destination country with equivalent educa-
tional qualifications. Migrant selectivity usually 
reflects the effect of economic, geographical or 
policy-imposed barriers that make it harder for 
low-skilled people to move. This is most evident 
in terms of formal education. Tertiary graduates, 
for  example,  make  up  35  percent  of  working-
age immigrants to the OECD but only about 6 
percent of the working-age population in non-
OECD countries.24 Immigrants to the OECD 
from developing countries tend to be of working 
age: for example, over 80 percent of those from 
sub-Saharan Africa fall into this group.25

What do we know about migrant selectivity 
in developing countries? When the migration 
process is more selective, individuals of work-
ing age (who have higher earning capacity than 
those out of the labour force) form a large pro-
portion of movers. Using census data, we com-
pared the age profiles of migrants to people in 
their countries of origin in 21 developing and 30 
developed countries. We found a significant dif-
ference between the age profile of immigrants in 
developed countries and that of their countries 
of origin: 71 percent of migrants in developed 
countries are of working age, as opposed to 63 
percent of the population in their origin coun-
tries; in contrast, the difference is negligible in 
developing countries (63 versus 62 percent). 

New evidence on internal migration paints 
a more complex picture of migrant selectivity. 
In Kenya, for example, commissioned research 
found a positive relationship between measures 
of human capital and migration,26 which tends 
to diminish with successive cohorts of migrants 
over time,27 a result that is consistent with the 
development of social and other networks that 

2

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Unfortunately, 
migration data remain 
weak. It is much easier 
for policy makers to 
count the international 
movements of shoes 
and cell-phones 
than of nurses and 
construction workers

28

Despite our ability to establish these broad 
contours of movement, what we know is dwarfed 
by what we don’t know. Unfortunately, migra-
tion  data  remain  weak.  It  is  much  easier  for 
policy makers to count the international move-
ments of shoes and cell-phones than of nurses 
and construction workers. Most of our informa-
tion is based on censuses, but these do not pro-
vide time series of migration flows that would 
enable trends to be recognized nor key data for 
assessing the impact of migration, such as the 
income and other characteristics of migrants at 
the time of admission. Population registers can 
produce such time series, but very few countries 
have registers with that capacity. Policy makers 
typically  require  information  about  migrant 
admissions by type (e.g. contract workers, train-
ees, family members, skilled professionals, etc.), 
so administrative data reflecting the number of 
visas and permits granted to different types of 
migrants are important. Yet none of these data 
sources can answer questions about the social or 
economic impact of international migration.

Advances  have  been  made  in  recent  years. 
The OECD, the UN, the World Bank and other 
agencies have compiled and published census and 
administrative databases that shed new light on 
some aspects of global flows of people. But pub-
lic data still cannot answer basic questions, such 
as: how many Moroccans left France last year? 
What are the occupations of Latin Americans 
who took up United States residency in 2004? 
How  has  the  number  of  Zimbabweans  going 
to South Africa changed in recent years? How 
much return or circular migration occurs glob-
ally, and what are the characteristics of those mi-
grants? For the most part, migration data remain 
patchy, non-comparable and difficult to access. 
Data on trade and investment are vastly more de-
tailed. Many aspects of human movement simply 
remain a blind spot for policy makers. 

While some data limitations are difficult to 
overcome—including the problem of accurately 
estimating the number of irregular migrants—
others  should  be  surmountable.  A  logical  first 
step is to ensure that national statistics offices fol-
low international guidelines, such that every cen-
sus contains core migration questions.33 Existing 
surveys could be slightly expanded, or existing 
administrative data compiled and disseminated, 
to  increase  public  information  on  migration 

processes. Adding questions on country of birth 
or country of previous residence to the national 
census would be a low-cost way forward for many 
countries. Another would be the public release 
of  existing  labour  force  data,  including  coun-
try of birth, as Brazil, South Africa, the United 
States and some other countries already do. Yet 
another would be the inclusion of standard mi-
gration questions in household surveys in coun-
tries where migration has grown in importance. 
These improvements are worthy of government 
attention and increased development assistance.

2.2 Looking back
We  now  consider  how  human  movement  has 
shaped world history. Doing so sheds light on 
the extent to which earlier movements differed 
from or were similar to those of today. It will 
also reveal the role of migration in the structural 
transformation of societies, the forces that drive 
migration and the constraints that frustrate it. 
We then present a more detailed discussion of 
the evolution of internal and international move-
ments during the 20th century, with a focus on 
the post-World War II era. The analysis of trends 
during the past 50 years is key to understanding 
the factors causing recent changes in migration 
patterns and how we can expect these to con-
tinue evolving in the future.

2.2.1  The long-term view 
Despite  the  widespread  perception  that  inter-
national  migration  is  associated  with  the  rise 
of globalization and trade in the late 20th cen-
tury, large-scale long-distance movements were 
prevalent  in  the  past.  At  the  peak  of  Iberian 
rule in the Americas, more than half a million 
Spaniards and Portuguese and about 700,000 
British  subjects  went  to  the  colonies  in  the 
Americas.34  Through  the  brutal  use  of  force, 
11–12 million Africans were sent as slaves across 
the Atlantic between the 15th and late 19th cen-
turies. Between 1842 and 1900, some 2.3 mil-
lion Chinese and 1.3 million Indians travelled 
as contract labourers to South-East Asia, Africa 
and North America.35 At the close of the 19th 
century the fraction of foreign-born residents in 
many countries was higher than today.36

Going back further in time, we find human 
movement  has  been  a  pervasive  phenomenon 
throughout  history,  present  in  nearly  every 

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

2

emigrants over a decade accounted for 14 percent 
of the Irish population, 1 in 10 Norwegians, and 
7 percent of the populations of both Sweden and 
the United Kingdom. In contrast, the number 
of lifetime emigrants from developing countries 
today is less than 3 percent of the total popula-
tion of these countries. This historical episode 
was partly driven by falling travel costs: between 
the  early  1840s  and  the  late  1850s,  passenger 
fares from Britain to New York fell by 77 per-
cent in real terms.43 There were other determin-
ing factors in particular cases, such as the potato 
famine in Ireland. These population movements 
had sizeable effects on both source and destina-
tion countries. Workers moved from low-wage 
labour-abundant regions to high-wage labour-
scarce  regions.  This  contributed  to  significant 
economic convergence: between the 1850s and 
World War I, real wages in Sweden rose from 24 
to 58 percent of those of the United States, while, 
over the same period, Irish wages rose from 61 to 
92 percent of those in Great Britain. According 
to economic historians, more than two thirds of 
the wage convergence across countries that oc-
curred in the late 19th century can be traced to 
the equalizing effect of migration.44

Remittances and return migration were also 
very important in the past. Remittances were 
sent by courier and through transfers and notes 
via immigrant banks, mercantile houses, postal 
services and, after 1900, by telegraph wire. It is 
estimated  that  the  average  British  remitter  in 
the United States in 1910 sent up to a fifth of 
his income back home, and that about a quar-
ter of European migration to the United States 
around that time was financed through remit-
tances from those already there.45 Return migra-
tion was often the norm, with estimated rates of 
return from the United States ranging as high as 
69 percent for Bulgaria, Serbia and Montenegro 
and 58 percent for Italy.46 In Argentina, Italian 
immigrants were often referred to as golondrinas 
(swallows) because of their tendency to return, 
and  a  contemporary  observer  wrote  that  “the 
Italian in Argentina is no colonist; he has no 
house, he will not make a sustenance… his only 
hope is a modest saving.”47 

These  population  movements  were  enabled 
by a policy stance that was not only receptive to 
migration but in many cases actively encouraged 
it. This is as true of origin countries, which often 

Population movements 
have played a vital 
role in the structural 
transformation 
of economies 
throughout history

29

community  for  which  historical  or  archaeo-
logical evidence is available. Recent DNA tests 
support previous fossil evidence that all human 
beings evolved from a common ancestor from 
equatorial Africa, who crossed the Red Sea into 
Southern  Arabia  approximately  50,000  years 
ago.37 While encounters among different societ-
ies often led to conflict, the peaceful coexistence 
of immigrants in foreign lands is also recorded. 
An  ancient  Babylonian  tablet  from  the  18th 
century BCE, for example, talks about a com-
munity of migrants from Uruk who fled their 
homes when their city was raided and, in their 
new home, met little resistance to their cultural 
practices,  with  their  priests  being  allowed  to 
inhabit  the  same  quarters  as  those  venerating 
local gods.38 The idea that migrants should be 
treated according to basic norms of respect is 
found in many ancient religious texts. The Old 
Testament,  for  example,  states  that  “the  alien 
living with you must be treated as one of your 
native-born,”  whereas  the  Koran  requires  the 
faithful to move when their beliefs are in danger 
and to give aman (refuge) to non-Muslims, even 
if they are in conflict with Muslims.39

Population movements have played a vital role 
in  the  structural  transformation  of  economies 
throughout history, thereby contributing greatly 
to development. Genetic and archaeological evi-
dence  from  the  Neolithic  period  (9500–3500 
BCE) suggests that farming practices spread with 
the dispersal of communities after they had mas-
tered the techniques of cultivation.40 The British 
Industrial  Revolution  both  generated  and  was 
fuelled  by  rapid  urban  growth,  driven  mainly 
by movement from the countryside.41 The share 
of rural population has declined markedly in all 
economies that have become developed, falling 
in the United States from 79 percent in 1820 to 
below 4 percent by 1980, and even more rapidly 
in the Republic of Korea, from 63 percent in 1963 
to 7 percent in 2008.42

An interesting episode from the standpoint 
of our analysis was that of the large flows from 
Europe  to  the  New  World  during  the  second 
half of the 19th century. By 1900, more than a 
million people were moving out of Europe each 
year, spurred by the search for better conditions 
in the face of hunger and poverty at home. The 
size of these flows is staggering by contemporary 
standards. At its peak in the 19th century, total 

2

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

subsidized passage in order to reduce pressures at 
home, as it was of destination governments, which 
invited people to come in order to consolidate set-
tlements and take advantage of natural resources. 
For example, by the 1880s about half of migrants 
to Argentina received a travel subsidy, while a law 
passed in Brazil in 1850 allotted land to migrants 
free of charge.48 More generally, the late 19th cen-
tury was marked by the absence of the plethora 
of mechanisms to control international flows of 
people that subsequently emerged. Until the pas-
sage of restrictive legislation in 1924, for example, 
there was not even a visa requirement to settle per-
manently in the United States, and in 1905, only 
1 percent of the one million people who made the 
transatlantic journey to Ellis Island were denied 
entry into the country.49

One key distinction between the pre-World 
War I period and today lies in the attitudes of 
destination governments. While anti-immigrant 
sentiment could run high and often drove the 
erection of barriers to specific kinds of move-
ment, the prevailing view among governments 
was that movement was to be expected and was 
ultimately beneficial to both origin and destina-
tion societies.50 This is all the more remarkable 

Table 2.1

Five decades of aggregate stability, with regional shifts
Regional distribution of international migrants, 1960–2010

1960

Share 
of world 
migrants

Total 

migrants 
(millions)

Share of 
population

Total 

migrants 
(millions)

2010

Share 
of world 
migrants

Share of 
population

74.1 

 

2.7% 

188.0 

 

2.8%

12.4% 
18.4% 
8.3% 
38.4% 
0.3% 
19.6% 
2.9% 

41.9% 
37.0% 
14.2% 
38.1% 
5.8% 

3.2% 
6.7% 
2.8% 
1.7% 
4.6% 
3.5% 
13.5% 

4.6% 
4.2% 
3.2% 
1.7% 
3.8% 

19.3 
50.0 
7.5 
55.6 
15.1 
49.6 
6.0 

119.9 
104.6 
23.2 
35.9 
8.8 

10.2% 
26.6% 
4.0% 
29.6% 
8.0% 
26.4% 
3.2% 

63.8% 
55.6% 
12.3% 
19.1% 
4.7% 

1.9%
14.2%
1.3%
1.4%
38.6%
9.7%
16.8%

12.1%
10.9%
3.0%
0.8%
2.1%

World  
(excluding the former Soviet Union and 
former Czechoslovakia)

BY REGION

Africa 
Northern America 
Latin America and the Caribbean 
Asia 

GCC states 

Europe 
Oceania 

9.2 
13.6 
6.2 
28.5 
0.2 
14.5 
2.1 

BY HUMAN DEVELOPMENT CATEGORY

Very high HDI 

OECD 
High HDI 
Medium HDI 
Low HDI 

31.1 
27.4 
10.6 
28.2 
4.3 

Source:  HDR team estimates based on UN (2009d). 
Note:  Estimates exclude the former Soviet Union and former Czechoslovakia.

30

in societies where intolerance of minorities was 
prevalent  and  socially  accepted  to  a  far  larger 
extent than today.51 It is also a useful reminder 
that the barriers to migration that characterize 
many developed and developing countries today 
are much less an immutable reality than might 
at first be supposed. 

2.2.2  The 20th century
The  pro-migration  consensus  was  not  to  last. 
Towards the end of the 19th century, many coun-
tries  introduced  entry  restrictions.  The  causes 
were varied, from the depletion of unsettled land 
to  labour  market  pressures  and  popular  senti-
ment. In countries such as Argentina and Brazil 
the policy shift occurred through the phasing out 
of subsidies; in Australia and the United States it 
came through the imposition of entry barriers.52
Despite  the  introduction  of  these  restrictions, 
estimates from the early 20th century indicate 
that the share of international migrants in the 
world’s population was similar if not larger than 
it is today. This is especially striking given the 
relatively high transport costs at that time.53

There was nothing in the area of migration 
policy even remotely resembling the rapid mul-
tilateral  liberalization  of  trade  in  goods  and 
movements  of  capital  that  characterized  the 
post-World War II period.54 Some countries en-
tered bilateral or regional agreements to respond 
to specific labour shortages, such as the United 
States’  1942  Mexican  Farm  Labour  (Bracero) 
Program, which sponsored 4.6 million contracts 
for work in the United States over a 22-year pe-
riod,55  the  1947  United  Kingdom–Australia 
Assisted  Passage  Agreement,  or  the  flurry  of 
European  labour  movement  agreements  and 
guest-worker programmes.56 But early enthusi-
asm  for  guest-worker  programmes  had  fizzled 
out by the 1970s. The United States phased out 
its Bracero Program in 1964, and most Western 
European countries that had heavily relied on 
guest-worker  programmes  ceased  recruitment 
during the 1970s oil shock.57

This lack of liberalization is consistent with 
the observed stability in the global share of mi-
grants. As shown in table 2.1, this share (which 
excludes Czechoslovakia and the former Soviet 
Union  for  comparability  reasons—see  below) 
has inched up from 2.7 to 2.8 percent between 
1960 and 2010. The data nonetheless reveal a 

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

2

picture of bilateral flows over time, but figure 2.4 
displays the evolution of the share of people from 
developing countries in eight developed econo-
mies that have comparable information. In all 
but one case (the United Kingdom), there were 
double-digit increases in the share of migrants 
from developing countries.60 In many European 
countries,  this  shift  is  driven  by  the  increase 
in migrants from Eastern European countries 
classed as developing according to their HDI. 
For example, during the 1960s only 18 percent 
of developing country immigrants into Germany 
came from Eastern Europe; 40 years later that 
ratio was 53 percent.

In developing countries, the picture is more 
mixed, although data are limited. We can com-
pare the source of migrants today and several 
decades ago for a few countries, revealing some 
interesting contrasts (figure 2.5). In Argentina 
and Brazil, the decline in the share of foreign-
born people was driven by a fall in those com-
ing  from  the  poorer  countries  of  Europe,  as 
those  countries  experienced  dramatic  post-
war  growth  while  much  of  Latin  America 

remarkable shift in destination places. The share 
in  developed  countries  more  than  doubled, 
from 5 percent to more than 12 percent.58 An 
even larger increase—from 5 to 39 percent of the 
population—occurred  in  the  GCC  countries, 
which have experienced rapid oil-driven growth. 
In the rest of the world, however, the fraction of 
foreign-born people has been stable or declining. 
The declines are most marked in Latin America 
and the Caribbean, where international migra-
tion has more than halved, but are also evident 
in Africa and the rest of Asia.

An  important  caveat  is  that  these  trends 
exclude two sets of countries for which it is dif-
ficult  to  construct  comparable  time  series  on 
international migrants, namely the states of the 
former Soviet Union, and the two components 
of former Czechoslovakia. The independence of 
these new nations generated an artificial increase 
in the number of migrants, which should not be 
interpreted as a real increase in the prevalence of 
international movement (box 2.3).59

Where  are  recent  migrants  to  developed 
countries coming from? We do not have a full 

Box 2.3

  Migration trends in the former Soviet Union

When  the  Soviet  Union  broke  up  in  1991,  28  million  people  be-
came international migrants overnight—even if they hadn’t moved 
an inch. This is because statistics define an international migrant 
as a person who is living outside their country of birth. These peo-
ple had moved within the Soviet Union before 1991 and were now 
classified as foreign-born. Without their knowing it, they were now 
‘statistical migrants’.

At one level, the reclassification makes sense. A Russian in Minsk 
was living in the country of her birth in 1990; by the end of 1991, she 
was technically a foreigner. But interpreting the resulting increase in 
the number of migrants as an increase in international movement, 
as some authors have done, is mistaken. Hence we have excluded 
them, together with migrants in the former Czechoslovakia, from the 
calculation of trends in table 2.1.

Has human movement increased in the former Soviet Union since 
1991? On the one hand, the relaxation of propiska controls increased 
human mobility. On the other, the erection of national boundaries may 
have reduced the scope for movement. The picture is further com-
plicated by the fact that many movements after 1991 were returns to 
the region of origin: for example, people of Russian origin returning 
from central Asia.

Source:  Heleniak (2009), UN (2002), Zlotnik (1998), and Ivakhnyuk (2009).

Any  attempt  to  understand  trends  in  the  former  Soviet  Union 
should use comparable territorial entities. One way to do this is to 
consider inter-republic migration before and after the break-up. In this 
approach, anyone who moved between two republics that would later 
become independent nations would be considered an international 
migrant. Thus, a Latvian in St. Petersburg would be classified as an 
international migrant both before and after 1991. 

In background research for this report, Soviet census data were 
used to construct such a series. Thus defined, the share of foreign-born 
people in the republics of the USSR rose slightly from 10 percent in 1959 
to 10.6 percent in 1989. After 1990, there were divergent trends across 
the different states. In the Russian Federation, which became some-
thing of a magnet in the region, the migrant stock increased from 7.8 to 
9.3 percent of the population. For Ukraine and the three Baltic states, 
migrant shares declined, as large numbers of foreign-born people left. 
In all the other states of the former Soviet Union, the absolute number of 
migrants declined until 2000 and in most cases the migrant share of the 
population also declined. Thus, while 30.3 million foreign-born people 
lived in the territory of the Soviet Union at the time of its dissolution, the 
aggregate number fell to 27.4 million in 2000 and to 26.5 million in 2005, 
as many in the post-Soviet space chose to return home.

31

2

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Figure 2.4

An increasing share of migrants come from developing countries
Share of migrants from developing countries in selected 
developed countries

1960–1969

1990–2004

Australia

Belgium

Canada

Germany

New Zealand

Sweden

United Kingdom

United States

| 
10 

| 
0 
Share of all migrants (%)

| 
20 

Source: HDR team estimates based on UN (2006a).

32

| 
30 

| 
40 

| 
50 

| 
60 

| 
70 

|
80

stagnated. In contrast, the rise in the immigra-
tion rate in Costa Rica was driven by large flows 
of Nicaraguan migrants, while the reduction in 
Mali reflects significant declines in immigration 
from Burkina Faso, Guinea and Mauritania.

Many countries have experienced increases 
in internal migration, as shown in figure 2.6. 
However, this trend is far from uniform. For 
the 18 countries for which we have comparable 
information  over  time,  there  is  an  increasing 
trend  in  11  countries,  no  clear  trend  in  four, 
and a decline in two developed countries. The 
average rate of increase for this set of countries 
is around 7 percent over a decade. However, our 
research has also found that the share of recent 
migrants  (defined  as  those  who  have  moved 
between regions in the past five years) has not 
increased in most countries in our sample, indi-
cating a possible stabilization of internal migra-
tion patterns.

A levelling off or even a decline in internal 
migration flows is to be expected in developed 
and high-HDI countries, where past flows were 
associated  with  rapid  urbanization  that  has 
now abated. But in many developing countries 
urbanization has not slowed and is expected to 
continue. In fact, estimates from UNDESA sug-
gest that the urban share of the world’s popula-
tion will nearly double by 2050 and will increase 
from 40 percent to over 60 percent in Africa. 
Urbanization is spurred in part by natural popu-
lation growth in urban areas, alongside migration 
from rural areas and from abroad. Although it is 
difficult to determine the precise contributions of 
these different sources, it is clear that migration is 
an important factor in many countries.61

Urbanization can be associated with major 
challenges to city dwellers and the government 
authorities responsible for urban planning and 
service provision. The most visible of these chal-
lenges  is  the  2  billion  people—40  percent  of 
urban residents—who are expected to be living 
in slums by 2030.62 As is well known, living con-
ditions are often very poor in the slums, with in-
adequate access to safe water and sanitation and 
insecure land tenure. As we discuss in chapters 
4 and 5, it is important that urban local authori-
ties be accountable to residents and adequately 
financed to tackle these challenges, since local 
planning and programmes can play a critical role 
in improving matters. 

In  sum,  the  period  since  1960  has  been 
marked by a growing concentration of migrants 
in developed countries against a background of 
aggregate stability in overall migration. How do 
we explain these patterns? Our research shows 
that three key factors—trends in income, popu-
lation and transport costs—tended to increase 
movement, which simultaneously faced an in-
creasingly significant constraint: growing legal 
and administrative barriers. 

Divergence in incomes across regions, com-
bined with a general increase in incomes around 
most of the world, is a major part of the expla-
nation of movement patterns. The evolution of 
income  inequalities  shows  remarkable  diver-
gence between most developing and developed 
regions, even if the East Asia–Pacific and South 
Asia regions have seen a mild convergence (figure 
2.7, panel A).63 China presents an exception to 
the broad pattern of lack of convergence, with 

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

2

examination of the role that these barriers play 
in shaping and constraining movement today.

2.3 Policies and movement
Since the emergence of modern states in the 17th 
century, the international legal system has been 
built on the bedrock of two principles: sovereignty 
and  territorial  integrity.  Within  this  system, 
which includes a series of norms and constraints 
imposed by international law, governments police 
their country’s borders and enforce their right to 
restrict entry. This section discusses the different 
ways in which government policy determines how 
many people to admit, where these people come 
from, and what status is accorded to them. 

Figure 2.5

Sources and trends of migration into developing countries
Migrants as a share of total population in selected countries, 
1960–2000s

Argentina

Brazil

Costa Rica

India

Indonesia

Thailand

Turkey

Mali

Rwanda

1970
2001

1960
2000

1960
2000

1961
2001

1971
1990

1970
2000

1965
2000

1976
1998

1978
2002

 
 

| 
0 
Share of population (%)

| 
2 

 
 

| 
4 

 
 

| 
6 

 
 

|
8

From developing countries 

  From developed countries

Origin unknown

Source: HDR team estimates based on Minnesota Population Center (2008) and national census data for indicated years.

33

national per capita income rising from 3 to 14 
percent  of  the  developed  country  average  be-
tween 1960 and 2007.64 Overall, the data indi-
cate that income incentives to move from poor to 
rich countries have strongly increased.65

Attempts to account for this divergence have 
generated a vast literature, in which differences 
in labour and capital accumulation, technologi-
cal change, policies and institutions have all been 
investigated.66  Whatever  the  ultimate  driving 
forces, one of the key contributing factors has 
been  differing  population  growth  rates.  As  is 
well known, between 1960 and 2010 the spatial 
demographic composition of the world popula-
tion shifted: of the additional 2.8 billion work-
ing-aged people in the world, 9 out of 10 were 
in developing countries. Because labour became 
much more abundant in developing countries, 
wage  differentials  widened.  This  meant  that 
moving to developed countries became more at-
tractive and patterns of movement shifted as a 
result, despite—as we shall see—the raising of 
high barriers to admission. At the same time, 
average income levels in the world as a whole 
were increasing, as shown in panel B of figure 
2.7 (even if some developing regions also saw pe-
riods of decline). Since poverty is an important 
constraint on movement, higher average incomes 
made long-distance movement more feasible. In 
other words, as incomes rose, poorer countries 
moved  up  the  ‘migration  hump’,  broadening 
the  pool  of  potential  migrants  to  developed 
countries. 

Recent declines in transport and communi-
cation costs have also increased movement. The 
real price of air travel fell by three fifths between 
1970 and 2000, while the cost of communica-
tions fell massively.67 The real cost of a 3-minute 
telephone  call  from  Australia  to  the  United 
Kingdom fell from about US$350 in 1926 to 
US$0.65 in 2000—and, with the advent of in-
ternet telephony, has now effectively fallen to 
zero.68 Such trends have made it easier than ever 
before for people to reach and establish them-
selves in more distant destinations. 

Given these drivers, we would expect to see 
significant growth in international migration in 
recent decades. However, this potential has been 
constrained by increased policy barriers to move-
ment, especially against the entry of low-skilled 
applicants.  We  turn  now  to  a  more  in-depth 

2

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Figure 2.6

Internal migration rates have increased only slightly
Trends in lifetime internal migration intensity in selected 
countries, 1960–2000s

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

)

%

(
 
y
t
i

s
n
e
t
n
i
 
n
o
i
t
a
r
g
m
 
e
m

i

i
t
e
f
i
L

United States

Malaysia
Costa Rica
Mexico

Brazil

Kenya

Rwanda

India

| 

 
  1960 

| 

1970 

| 

1980 

| 

1990 

| 

2000 

|

2010

Source: Bell and Muhidin (2009).

Table 2.2

Policy makers say they are trying to maintain existing 
immigration levels
Views and policies towards immigration by HDI category, 2007

Government’s view on immigration

Policy on immigration

HDI 
categories

Too high

Satis-
factory

Too low

Total

Lower 
levels

Maintain 
levels

Raise 
levels

No inter-
vention

Total

7 
18 

6 
13 

17 
20 

4 
15 

34 
17 

26 
67 

40 
85 

62 
75 

22 
85 

6 
15 

1 
2 

4 
5 

0 
0 

150 
77 

11 
6 

39 
100 

47 
100 

83 
100 

26 
100 

195 
100 

7 
18 

9 
19 

18 
22 

4 
15 

38 
19 

24 
62 

37 
79 

47 
57 

6 
23 

7 
18 

1 
2 

3 
4 

0 
0 

114 
58 

11 
6 

1 
3 

0 
0 

15 
18 

16 
62 

32 
16 

39
100

47
100

83
100

26
100

195
100

VERY HIGH HDI

No. of Countries 
Percent (%) 

HIGH HDI

No. of Countries 
Percent (%) 

MEDIUM HDI

No. of Countries 
Percent (%) 

LOW HDI

No. of Countries 
Percent (%) 

TOTAL

No. of Countries 
Percent (%) 

Source:  UN (2008b).

34

While there is a wealth of qualitative coun-
try-level  analysis  of  policies—especially  for 
developed  countries—severe  data  limitations 
impede comparisons of policy across countries. 
Measurement is intrinsically difficult because the 
rules take many forms and are enforced in dif-
ferent ways and to varying degrees, with results 
that are generally not amenable to quantification. 
In contrast to most aspects of economic policy, 
for example, national statistical bureaux do not 
measure the effects of migration policy in ways 
that are consistent across countries. Most of the 
measures used in this report have been developed 
by international research and non-governmental 
organizations (NGOs), not by national public-
sector agencies.

The measure that covers the largest number of 
countries and the longest time span comes from 
a periodic survey of policy makers conducted by 
UNDESA, in which governments report their 
views  and  responses  to  migration.  The  survey 
covers  195  countries  and  reflects  the  views  of 
policy makers regarding the level of immigration 
and whether their policy is to lower, maintain or 
raise future levels. While it is a self-assessment, 
and official intentions rather than practice are in-
dicated, some interesting patterns emerge (table 
2.2).  In  2007,  some  78  percent  of  respondent 
governments viewed current immigration levels 
as satisfactory, while 17 percent felt them to be 
too high and 5 percent too low. A similar picture 
emerges when governments are asked to describe 
their  policies.  On  both  questions,  developed 
country governments appear to be more restric-
tive than those of developing countries.

These  patterns  indicate  a  significant  gap 
between the policies that the public appears to 
favour  in  most  countries—namely  greater  re-
strictions on immigration—and actual policies, 
which in fact allow for significant amounts of 
immigration.69 While explanations for this gap 
are complex, several factors likely come into play. 
The first is that opposition to immigration is 
not as monolithic as first appears, and voters often 
have mixed views. As we show below, in many 
countries, concerns about adverse employment or 
fiscal effects are mixed with the recognition that 
tolerance of others and ethnic diversity are posi-
tive values. Second, organized groups such as la-
bour unions, employer organizations and NGOs 
can have a significant effect on the formulation 

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

2

developing countries were much more likely to 
have temporary regimes for low-skilled workers.
Rules  concerning  changes  in  visa  status 
and family reunion differ widely across coun-
tries.74 Some temporary schemes offer a path to 

Figure 2.7

  Global income gaps have widened

Trends in real per capita GDP, 1960–2007

Panel A: Ratio of income of developing countries to income of developed countries

50

40

30

20

10

0

)

%

(
 

 

P
D
G
 
a
t
i
p
a
c
 
r
e
p
d
e
p
o
e
v
e
d
o
t
 
l
a
n
o
g
e
r
 
f
o
o
i
t
a
R

 

 

l

i

1960 1965 1970

1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005

Panel B: Real per capita income of developing countries by region

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

)
s
d
n
a
s
u
o
h
t
 

$
S
U

(
 
a
t
i
p
a
c
 
r
e
p
P
D
G

 

1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005

Source: HDR team estimates based on World Bank (2009b) and Heston, Summers, and Aten (2006).

Eastern Europe

Latin America 
and the Caribbean

China
Asia, excl. China
Africa
Oceania

Eastern Europe

Latin America 
and the Caribbean

China

Asia, excl. China

Africa
Oceania

35

of public policies; in many cases these groups do 
not advocate for tight restrictions to immigra-
tion. Third, many governments implicitly toler-
ate  irregular  migration,  suggesting  that  policy 
makers are aware of the high economic and social 
costs of a crackdown. For example, in the United 
States employers are not required to verify the 
authenticity  of  immigration  documents,  but 
must deduct federal payroll taxes from migrants’ 
pay: through this mechanism, illegal immigrant 
workers provide around US$7 billion annually to 
the US Treasury.70

For the purposes of this report, we sought to 
address existing gaps in knowledge by working 
with national migration experts and the IOM to 
conduct an assessment of migration policies in 28 
countries.71 The key value added of this exercise 
lies in the coverage of developing countries (half 
the sample), which have typically been excluded 
from such assessments in the past, and the rich 
information we collected on aspects such as ad-
missions  regimes,  treatment  and  entitlements, 
and enforcement. 

Comparing the migration policy regimes of 
developed and developing countries reveals strik-
ing differences as well as similarities. Some of the 
restrictions  commonly  noted  (and  criticized) 
in developed countries are also present in many 
developing countries (figure 2.8). The regimes in 
both groups of countries are biased in favour of 
high-skilled workers: 92 percent of developing 
and all of developed countries in our sample were 
open to temporary skilled migrants; for perma-
nent skilled migration, the corresponding figures 
were 62 and 93 percent. In our country sample, 
38 percent of developing and half of developed 
countries were closed to permanent migration of 
unskilled workers.72

Temporary  regimes  have  long  been  used 
and most countries provide such permits. These 
programmes stipulate rules for the time-bound 
admission,  stay  and  employment  of  foreign 
workers. The H1B visas of the United States, for 
instance,  grant  temporary  admission  to  high-
skilled workers for up to six years, while H2B 
visas are available for low-skilled seasonal work-
ers  for  up  to  three.  Similarly,  Singapore’s  im-
migration policy has Employment Passes—for 
skilled  professionals—and  a  Work  Permit  or 
R-Pass for unskilled or semi-skilled workers.73 
Among the countries in our policy assessment, 

2

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Figure 2.8

Welcome the high-skilled, rotate the low-skilled
Openness to legal immigration in developed versus  
developing countries, 2009

Panel A: Permanent immigration

High-skilled

Low-skilled

Developed

Developing

Developed

Developing

| 
0 
Share of countries in sample (%)

| 
40 

| 
20 

Panel B: Temporary immigration

High-skilled

Low-skilled

Developed

Developing

Developed

Developing

| 
0 
Share of countries in sample (%)

| 
40 

| 
20 

| 
60 

| 
80 

|

100

| 
60 

| 
80 

|

100

Open

Partially closed

Totally closed

Source:  Klugman and Pereira (2009).

long-term or even permanent residence and allow 
foreign workers to bring in their dependents. An 
example is the US’s H2B visas, although their 
annual number is capped at a low level and the 
dependents are not entitled to work. Other gov-
ernments explicitly prohibit status change and 
family reunion, or severely restrict them. 

The  temporary  worker  or  kafala  (literally 
meaning  ‘guaranteeing  and  taking  care  of’  in 
Arabic) programmes of the GCC countries are a 
special case.75 Under these programmes, foreign 
migrant workers receive an entry visa and resi-
dence permit only if a citizen of the host country 
sponsors them. The khafeel, or sponsor-employer, 
is  responsible  financially  and  legally  for  the 
worker,  signing  a  document  from  the  Labour 
Ministry to that effect.76 If the worker is found 
to have breached the contract, they have to leave 
the country immediately at their own expense. 

36

Kafala  programmes  are  restrictive  on  several 
counts, including family reunification. Human 
rights abuses—including non-payment of wages 
and sexual exploitation of domestic workers—
are well documented, especially among the in-
creasing  share  of  migrants  originating  in  the 
Indian subcontinent.77 

In recent years, some countries in the region 
have taken moderate steps in the direction of 
reforming  their  immigration  regimes.  Saudi 
Arabia  recently  passed  a  series  of  regulations 
facilitating the transfer of workers employed by 
companies providing services (e.g. maintenance) 
to government departments.78 Other initiatives 
have also been implemented to monitor the liv-
ing and working conditions of foreign migrants. 
In the United Arab Emirates, the Ministry of 
Labour has introduced a hotline to receive com-
plaints  from  the  general  public.  In  2007,  the 
authorities inspected 122,000 establishments, 
resulting in penalties for almost 9,000 violations 
of workers’ rights and of legislation on working 
conditions. However, more ambitious proposals 
for reform, such as Bahrain’s proposal in early 
2009 to abolish the kafala system, have floun-
dered, reportedly in the face of intense political 
opposition by business interests.79 

In  some  developed  countries—including 
Australia, Canada and New Zealand—the pref-
erence for high-skilled workers is implemented 
through a points system. The formulae take into 
account such characteristics as education, occu-
pation, language proficiency and age. This con-
fers some objectivity to what otherwise might 
seem  an  arbitrary  selection  process,  although 
other countries attract large numbers of gradu-
ates without a point-based system.80

Points systems are uncommon in developing 
countries. Formal restrictions on entry include 
requirements such as a previous job offer and, in 
some cases, quotas. One aspect on which devel-
oping countries appear to be relatively restrictive 
is family reunification. About half the develop-
ing countries in our sample did not allow the 
family  members  of  temporary  immigrants  to 
come and work—as opposed to one third of de-
veloped countries.

Family reunification and marriage migration 
represent a significant share of inflows into virtu-
ally all OECD countries. Indeed, some countries 
are dominated by flows linked to family ties, as in 

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

2

Figure 2.9

Enforcement practices vary
Interventions and procedures regarding irregular migrants, 2009

Interventions to detect irregular migrants

Border control

Raids by law
enforcement agencies

Random police checks

Information gained
from service providers
(e.g. schools)

None

Migrant is fined

Employer is fined

Migrant is detained

Migrant is deported

Procedure after detecting irregular migrants

| 
0 

| 
1 

| 
2 

| 
3 

|
4

Average score (1 = Never or rare; 5 = Almost always)

Developed countries   

  Developing countries

Source:  Klugman and Pereira (2009).

Policy Index (MIPEX) measures policies to in-
tegrate migrants in six policy areas (long-term 
residence, family reunion, citizenship, political 
participation, anti-discrimination measures and 
labour market access). 

Our analysis suggests that there is no system-
atic relation between various measures of rights 
and migrant numbers (figure 2.10). Comparison 
with  the  EIU  index  (panel  A),  which  has  a 
broader  sample  of  developed  and  developing 
countries, reflects essentially no correlation be-
tween the number of migrants and their access to 
basic rights, suggesting that the various regimes 
governing such access are compatible with both 
high and low numbers of migrants. Restricting 
the analysis to the smaller sample of countries 
covered by the MIPEX allows us to take advan-
tage of OECD data, which distinguish the share 
of immigrants with low levels of formal educa-
tion from developing countries. Again, we find 
essentially no correlation (panel B). For example, 

37

France and the United States, where these account 
for 60 and 70 percent of annual flows respectively. 
While it is common to distinguish between fam-
ily reunification and labour migration, it is impor-
tant to note that family migrants often either have 
or can acquire authorization to work.

Of course the stated policy may differ from 
what happens in practice. Significant variations 
exist in migration law enforcement across coun-
tries (figure 2.9). In the United States, research 
has found that border enforcement varies over 
the economic cycle, increasing during recessions 
and easing during expansions.81 In South Africa, 
deportations more than doubled between 2002 
and 2006 without a change in legislation, as the 
police  force  became  more  actively  involved  in 
enforcement.82 Our policy assessment suggested 
that while developing countries were somewhat 
less  likely  to  enforce  border  controls  and  less 
likely to detain violators of immigration laws, 
other aspects of enforcement including raids by 
law enforcement agencies and random checks, as 
well as fines, were at least as frequent as in de-
veloped countries.  Lower institutional capacity 
may explain part of this variation.  Even after 
detection, developing countries are reportedly 
more likely to do nothing or simply to impose 
fines on irregular migrants.  In some countries, 
courts  weigh  family  unity  concerns  and  the 
strength of an immigrant’s ties to a country in 
deportation procedures.83 Further discussion of 
the role of enforcement in immigration policies 
is provided in chapter 5.

One question that emerges from these rules 
on entry and treatment, which can be investi-
gated using cross-country data, is whether there 
is a ‘numbers versus rights’ trade-off. It is pos-
sible that countries will open their borders to 
a larger number of immigrants only if access to 
some basic rights is limited. This could arise if, 
for example, immigration is seen to become too 
costly, so that neither voters nor policy makers 
will support it.84 Data on the treatment of im-
migrants allow us to empirically examine this 
question.  The  Economist  Intelligence  Unit 
(EIU) has created an accessibility index for 61 
countries  (34  developed,  27  developing)  that 
summarizes official policy in terms of ease of 
hiring,  licensing  requirements,  ease  of  fam-
ily  reunification  and  official  integration  pro-
grammes for migrants. The Migrant Integration 

2

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Figure 2.10

Cross-country evidence shows little support for the
‘numbers versus rights’ hypothesis
Correlations between access and treatment

Panel A: Foreign-born migrants and EIU accessibility score, 2008

85

75

Australia

Canada

Australia

Canada

New Zealand

New Zealand

Portugal

Singapore

Singapore

Israel

Israel

Hong Kong (China)

Hong Kong (China)

Belgium

Portugal
Spain

Chile

Belgium

United States

United States

United Kingdom

Spain

Ireland
United Kingdom

Thailand

Thailand

Chile
Brazil
Peru
Brazil
Peru

65

Nigeria

Ireland
Germany

Switzerland

Switzerland

Poland

Venezuela

Poland
Venezuela
Italy

Nigeria

Hungary
Argentina
Hungary
Argentina
China

Romania
China

Romania

Mexico

Italy

India
Mexico
Turkey

Germany

Malaysia
Ukraine
Malaysia
Ukraine
Russian Federation

Côte d’Ivoire

Côte d’Ivoire

France

Russian Federation
Greece

Kazakhstan

Kazakhstan

India
Republic of Korea

Turkey
South Africa

Republic of Korea
Japan

South Africa

Greece

France

Japan

Latvia

Latvia

Jordan

Jordan

Ghana

Ghana

Estonia

Iran

Iran

| 
0 
Share of migrants in population (%)

Estonia
| 
20 

Saudi Arabia

Saudi Arabia

e
r
o
c
s
 
y
t
i
l
i

i

b
s
s
e
c
c
a
 
t
n
a
r
g
M

i

55

45

Qatar

Qatar
United Arab
Emirates
United Arab
Emirates

Kuwait

Kuwait

| 
40 

| 
60 

|
80

Panel B: Low-skilled foreign-born migrants in OECD and MIPEX aggregate score

Portugal

Portugal

Belgium

Belgium
Norway

United Kingdom

Norway

United Kingdom

Luxembourg

Luxembourg

Czech Republic

Czech Republic

Denmark

Denmark

Finland

Finland

Netherlands

Netherlands
Italy

Italy
Spain

Spain

Ireland

Ireland

Hungary

Hungary

Poland

Poland

Slovakia

Slovakia

Sweden

Sweden

Canada

Canada

France

Germany

France

Germany

Switzerland

Switzerland

Greece

Greece

Austria

Austria

85

75

65

55

45

)

X
E
P
M

I

(
 

n
o
i
t
a
r
g
e
t
n

i
 
t
n
a
r
g
m

i

 
f
o
 
x
e
d
35I
n

| 
0 
Low-skilled migrants from developing countries as share of population (%)

| 
6 

| 
2 

| 
4 

| 
8 

|
10

Source:  UN (2009d), The Economist Intelligence Unit (2008), OECD (2009a) and Migration Policy Group and British Council (2007).

38

countries like Poland and Ireland have very low 
shares of low-skilled workers from developing 
countries, yet score poorly in the MIPEX. We 
have also found that countries that have seen in-
creases in their migrant shares over time did not 
curtail the rights and entitlements provided to 
immigrants.85 For example, between 1980 and 
2005 the share of immigrants in Spain increased 
from 2 to 11 percent; during the same period the 
Spanish government extended the provision of 
emergency and non-emergency health care to ir-
regular migrants.86

Similar results were found in our policy as-
sessment, which allowed us to distinguish be-
tween different components of migration policy. 
In fact, if there was any indication of a correla-
tion, it was often the opposite of that proposed 
by the numbers versus rights hypothesis. What 
the data reveal is that, in general, across many 
measures, developing countries have lower me-
dian shares of foreign-born workers and lower 
protection of migrant rights. Developed coun-
tries,  which  have  more  migrants,  also  tend  to 
have rules that provide for better treatment of 
migrants. For example, India has the lowest score 
on provision of entitlements and services to in-
ternational migrants in our assessment, but has 
an immigrant share of less than 1 percent of the 
population; Portugal has the highest score while 
having an immigrant share of 7 percent.

Policies  towards  migration  are  not  deter-
mined solely at the national level. Supra-national 
agreements, which can be bilateral or regional 
in  nature,  can  have  significant  effects  on  mi-
gration  flows.  Regional  agreements  have  been 
established under various political unions, such 
as the Economic Community of West African 
States (ECOWAS), the European Union and the 
Mercado Común del Sur (MERCOSUR), while 
a good example of a bilateral agreement is that of 
the Trans-Tasman Travel Arrangement between 
Australia and New Zealand. These agreements 
have had significant effects on migration flows 
between  signatory  countries.  They  are  most 
likely to allow freedom of movement when par-
ticipating member states have similar economic 
conditions and when there are strong political 
or other motivations for socio-economic integra-
tion. For the countries in our policy assessment, 
about half of the special mobility agreements of 
developed countries were with other developed 

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

2

Box 2.4

  Global governance of mobility

Beyond  a  well-established  convention  on  refugees,  international 
mobility lacks a binding multilateral regime. The ILO has long had 
conventions on the rights of migrant workers, but they are heavily 
undersubscribed (chapter 5). The IOM has expanded beyond its his-
toric role in the post-war repatriation of refugees towards a more gen-
eral mission to improve migration management and has increased 
its membership, but it is outside the UN system and remains largely 
oriented towards service provision to member states on a project 
basis. Under the General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS) of 
the World Trade Organization (WTO), some 100 member states have 
made commitments to the temporary admission of foreign nationals 
who provide services, but these mostly involve business visitor visas 
for up to 90 days and fixed-term intra-company transfers involving 
high-skilled professionals.

The lack of multilateral cooperation on migration has been at-
tributed to several related factors. In contrast to trade negotiations, 
where countries negotiate over the reciprocal reduction of barriers to 
each other’s exports, developing countries are in a weaker bargain-
ing position on the migration front. Most migrants from developed 
countries go to other developed countries, so there is little pressure 
from developed country governments to open channels for entering 
developing countries. This asymmetry, as well as the political sen-
sitivity of the migration issue in most developed destination coun-
tries, has led to a lack of leadership from these states in international 

negotiations. International discussions have also been characterized 
by lack of cooperation among sending countries. These obstacles 
have so far defied the best efforts of international organizations and 
a handful of governments to promote cooperation and binding inter-
national commitments. 

Further liberalization is currently being canvassed in the Doha 
Round  of  trade  negotiations,  which  began  in  2000  but  have  long 
since stalled. Existing commitments under GATS are limited, refer-
ring mainly to high-skilled workers. GATS also excludes “measures 
affecting natural persons seeking access to the employment market 
of another country [or] measures regarding citizenship, residence, or 
employment on a permanent basis”. Nor does GATS apply to perma-
nent migration: most WTO members limit service providers to less 
than five years in their country.

During the Doha Round it became clear that developing countries 
want to liberalize the movement of natural persons, whereas indus-
trial countries prefer trade in services. It could be argued that the 
importance of GATS to labour migration does not lie in the relatively 
small amount of additional mobility facilitated thus far, but rather in 
the  creation  of  an  institutional  framework  for  future  negotiations. 
However, better progress might be made if the WTO took a more 
inclusive and people-centred approach, which allowed greater par-
ticipation by other stakeholders and linked more closely with existing 
legal regimes for the protection of human rights.

Source: Castles and Miller (1993), Neumayer (2006), Leal-Arcas (2007), Charnovitz (2003), p.243, Mattoo and Olarreaga (2004), Matsushita, Schoenbaum, and Mavroidis (2006), Solomon (2009), and Opeskin (2009).

countries, while more than two thirds of those 
of  developing  countries  were  with  other  de-
veloping  countries.  There  are  examples  where 
mobility is granted only to some workers, such 
as the higher skilled. For example, the migra-
tion system of the North American Free Trade 
Agreement (NAFTA) covers only nationals of 
Canada, Mexico and the United States who have 
a B.A. degree and a job offer in another member 
country. Box 2.4 briefly overviews the multilat-
eral arrangements related to human movement.
However, there can be large differences be-
tween the letter of these agreements and actual 
practice,  particularly  in  countries  where  the 
rule  of  law  is  weak.  For  example,  despite  the 
provisions  for  comprehensive  rights  of  entry, 
residence and establishment provided for in the 
ECOWAS  agreement  signed  in  1975  (which 
were to be implemented in three phases over a 
15-year period), only the first phase of the proto-
col—elimination of the need for visas for stays 
up to 90 days—has been achieved. The reasons 

for slow implementation range from inconsis-
tency between the protocol and national laws, 
regulations and practices to border disputes and 
full-scale wars which have often led to the expul-
sion of foreign citizens.87

We also find restrictions on human move-
ment  within  nations  as  well  as  on  exit.  One 
source of data on these restrictions is the NGO 
Freedom House, which has collected informa-
tion  on  formal  and  informal  restrictions  on 
foreign and internal travel as a component of its 
assessment of the state of freedom in the world.88
The results are striking, particularly given that 
the  Universal  Declaration  of  Human  Rights 
guarantees the right to move freely within one’s 
country  and  to  exit  and  return  to  one’s  own 
country: over a third of countries in the world 
impose significant restrictions on these freedoms 
(table 2.3). 

Formal restrictions on internal movement are 
present in many countries with a legacy of central 
planning, including Belarus, China, Mongolia, 

39

2

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Table 2.3

Over a third of countries significantly restrict the right to move
Restrictions on internal movement and emigration by HDI category

HDI categories

Most 

restrictive

1

2

3

Least 

restrictive

Total

Restrictions on mobility, 2008

VERY HIGH HDI

No. of Countries 
Percent (%) 

HIGH HDI

No. of Countries 
Percent (%) 

MEDIUM HDI

No. of Countries 
Percent (%) 

LOW HDI

No. of Countries 
Percent (%) 

TOTAL

No. of Countries 
Percent (%) 

Source:  Freedom House (2009).

0 
0 

2 
4 

2 
2 

2 
8 

6 
3 

3 
8 

4 
9 

13 
16 

5 
20 

25 
13 

1 
3 

4 
9 

24 
29 

13 
52 

42 
22 

3 
8 

10 
21 

27 
33 

5 
20 

45 
23 

31 
81 

27 
57 

16 
20 

0 
0 

74 
39 

38
100

47
100

82
100

25
100

192
100

the Russian Federation and Viet Nam.89 These 
restrictions  are  costly,  time-consuming  and 
cumbersome to maintain, as are informal bar-
riers, albeit to a lesser extent. Although many 
people  in  these  countries  are  able  to  travel 
without the proper documentation, they later 
find that they cannot access services and jobs 
without them. In several countries, corruption 
is  a  key  impediment  to  internal  movement. 
Checkpoints on local roads, where bribes are 
levied, are commonplace in parts of sub-Saha-
ran Africa. For instance, in Côte d’Ivoire, peo-
ple living in northern areas controlled by rebel 
groups were routinely harassed and forced to 
pay US$40–60 when attempting to travel south 
to government-controlled areas.90 Examples of 
corruption were also reported from Myanmar, 
the Russian Federation and Viet Nam, where 
bribes were required to process applications for 
changes in place of residence. In several South 
Asian  countries,  migrants  living  in  urban 
slums face constant threats of clearance, evic-
tion  and  rent-seeking  from  government  offi-
cials.91 Internal movement is also impeded by 
regulations and administrative procedures that 

40

exclude migrants from access to the public ser-
vices and legal rights accorded to local people 
(chapter 3). 

Countries can limit exit by nationals from 
their territory by several means, ranging from 
formal  prohibitions  to  practical  barriers  cre-
ated by fees and administrative requirements. 
Exorbitant  passport  fees  can  make  it  all  but 
impossible for a poor person to leave the coun-
try  through  regular  channels:  a  recent  study 
found  that  14  countries  had  passport  fees 
that exceeded 10 percent of annual per capita 
income.92  In  many  countries,  a  labyrinth  of 
procedures and regulations, often exacerbated 
by  corruption,  causes  excessive  delays  and 
compounds the costs of leaving. For example, 
Indonesian emigrants have to visit numerous 
government offices in order to acquire the nec-
essary  paperwork  to  leave.  Not  surprisingly, 
these exit restrictions are negatively correlated 
with emigration rates.93 

A handful of countries have formal restric-
tions  on  exit.  These  are  strictly  enforced  in 
Cuba  and  the  Democratic  People’s  Republic 
of  Korea,  and  are  in  place  in  China,  Eritrea, 
Iran, Myanmar, and Uzbekistan.94 Eritrea, for 
example,  requires  exit  visas  for  citizens  and 
foreign  nationals  and  has  reportedly  denied 
the exit visas of children whose parents (living 
abroad) had not paid the 2 percent tax on for-
eign income.95 Twenty countries restrict the exit 
of women—including Myanmar, Saudi Arabia 
and Swaziland—while eight impose age-specific 
restrictions  related  to  the  travel  of  citizens  of 
military service age.96 

2.4  Looking ahead: the crisis and 
beyond
The future of the global economy is a central 
concern for policy makers. Like everyone else, 
we hold no crystal ball, but we can examine the 
impacts and implications of the current crisis 
as the basis for identifying probable trends for 
the coming decades. Demographic trends, in 
particular, can be expected to continue to play 
a significant role in shaping the pressures for 
movement  between  regions,  as  we  have  seen 
over the past half-century. But new phenomena 
such as climate change are also likely to come 
into play, with effects that are much more dif-
ficult to predict.

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

2

Figure 2.11 Unemployment is increasing in key migrant destinations

Unemployment rates in selected destinations, 2007–2010

12

10

8

6

)

%

Germany
France
United States
Canada
Italy

Australia
United Kingdom

Hong Kong (China)

4

(
 
e
t
a
r
 
t
n
e
m
y
o
p
m
e
n
0U

2

l

| 

2007 

| 

2008 

| 

2009* 

|

2010*

* Forecasts

Source: Consensus Economics (2009a,b).

topped 28 percent among migrants.103 The places 
hit hardest by the crisis thus far are those where 
most migrants live—the more developed econo-
mies. The negative correlation between numbers 
of  immigrants  and  economic  growth  suggests 
that migrants are likely to be badly affected not 
only in OECD countries but also in the Gulf, 
East Asia and South Africa (figure 2.12).104

A  jobs  crisis  is  generally  bad  news  for  mi-
grants. Just as economies tend to call on people 
from abroad when they face labour shortages, so 
they tend to lay off migrants first during times 
of recession. This is partly because, on average, 
migrants have a profile typical of workers who 
are most vulnerable to recessions—that is, they 
are younger, have less formal education and less 
work  experience,  tend  to  work  as  temporary 
labourers and are concentrated in cyclical sec-
tors.105 Even controlling for education and gen-
der, labour force analysis in Germany and the 
United Kingdom found that migrants are much 
more likely to lose their job during a downturn 
than non-migrants.106 Using quarterly GDP and 
unemployment  data  from  14  European  coun-
tries  between  1998  and  2008,  we  also  found 
that, in countries that experienced recessions, 

41

2.4.1  The economic crisis and the 
prospects for recovery 
Many people are now suffering the consequences 
of the worst economic recession in post-war his-
tory.  At  the  time  of  writing,  world  GDP  was 
expected to fall by approximately 1 percent in 
2009,  marking  the  first  contraction  of  global 
output in 60 years.97 This year’s contraction in 
developed countries is much larger, approach-
ing 4 percent. However, initial optimism that 
emerging economies might be able to ‘decouple’ 
from the financial crisis has been dampened by 
mounting evidence that they too are, or will be, 
hard hit. Asian countries have suffered from col-
lapsing export demand, while increases in the 
cost  of  external  credit  have  adversely  affected 
Central and Eastern Europe. African countries 
are battling with collapsing commodity prices, 
the drying up of capital liquidity, a sharp de-
cline in remittances and uncertainty concern-
ing future flows of development aid. Some of the 
largest emerging economies, such as Brazil and 
the Russian Federation, will dip into negative 
growth, while others, notably China and India, 
will see severe slowdowns.98

Typical recessions do not have a large impact 
on long-run economic trends.99 However, it is now 
clear that this is anything but a typical recession. 
As such it is likely to have long-lasting and maybe 
even permanent effects on incomes and employ-
ment opportunities, which are likely to be expe-
rienced unequally by developing and developed 
countries.100 For example, the recession set off by 
the Federal Reserve’s increase of interest rates in 
1980 lasted just 3 years in the United States, but 
the ensuing debt crisis led to a period of stagna-
tion that became known as the ‘lost decade’ in 
Africa and Latin America, as the terms of trade of 
countries in these regions deteriorated by 25 and 
37 percent respectively. As commodity prices have 
fallen significantly from the peak levels of 2008, a 
similar scenario is probable this time round.

The financial crisis has quickly turned into 
a  jobs  crisis  (figure  2.11).  The  OECD  unem-
ployment rate is expected to hit 8.4 percent in 
2009.101 That rate has already been exceeded in 
the United States, which by May 2009 had lost 
nearly  six  million  jobs  since  December  2007, 
with the total number of jobless rising to 14.5 
million.102  In  Spain,  the  unemployment  rate 
climbed as high as 15 percent by April 2009 and 

2

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Figure 2.12 Migrants are in places hardest hit by the recession

Immigrants’ location and projected GDP growth rates, 2009

China

India

Peru

Indonesia

Honduras

Uruguay

Guatemala

Bolivia
Colombia

EI Salvador

Bulgaria

Paraguay

Chile

Romania
Ecuador

Dominican 
Republic

Poland

Venezuela

Norway

Czech
Republic

Brazil
Thailand

Argentina

Belgium

Mexico

Malaysia

Australia

Switzerland
Netherlands

Spain

Italy

Canada

France

United
Kingdom

Russian Federation

Germany

United 
States

8

4

0

9
0
0
2

 

–4

 
,
e
t
a
r
 
h
t
w
o
r
g
P
D
G
 
a
t
i
p
a
c
 
r
e
p
d
e
t
c
e
o
r
–12P

–8

 

j

Republic of Korea

Hungary

Turkey

Hong Kong (China)

Singapore

Japan

Lithuania

Estonia

Latvia

| 
14 

Ukraine

|
16

 
| 
  10 

| 
12 
Total number of immigrants (log scale)

Source:  HDR team estimates based on Consensus Economics (2009a,b,c,d) and UN (2009d).

the  unemployment  rate  of  migrants  tended 
to  increase  faster  than  that  of  other  groups. 
Within the OECD, migrants were concentrated 
in highly cyclical sectors that have suffered the 
largest  job  losses—including  manufacturing, 
construction, finance, real estate, hotels and res-
taurants—sectors that employ more than 40 per-
cent of immigrants in almost every high-income 
OECD country.107 The decline in remittances 
from migrants is likely to have adverse effects 
on family members in countries of origin, as we 
discuss in greater detail in chapter 4.

Several factors come into play in determin-
ing how the crisis affects—and will affect—the 
movement of people. They include immediate 
prospects  at  home  and  abroad,  the  perceived 
risks of migrating, staying or returning, and the 
increased barriers that are likely to come into 
place. Several major destination countries have 
introduced incentives to return (bonuses, tickets, 
lump sum social security benefits) and increased 
restrictions  on  entry  and  stay.  Some  govern-
ments are discouraging foreign recruitment and 

reducing the number of visa slots, especially for 
low-skilled  workers  but  also  for  skilled  work-
ers. In some cases these measures are seen as a 
short-term response to circumstances and have 
involved marginal adjustments rather than out-
right bans (e.g. Australia plans to reduce its an-
nual intake of skilled migrants by 14 percent).108 
But there is also a populist tone to many of the 
announcements  and  provisions.  For  example, 
the  United  States  economic  stimulus  pack-
age restricts H1B hires among companies that 
receive  funds  from  the  Troubled  Asset  Relief 
Program;109 the Republic of Korea has stopped 
issuing  new  visas  through  its  Employment 
Permit System; and Malaysia has revoked more 
than 55,000 visas for Bangladeshis in order to 
boost job prospects for locals.110 

There is some evidence of a decline of flows 
into developed countries during 2008, as the 
crisis  was  building.  In  the  United  Kingdom, 
applications for National Insurance cards from 
foreign-born people fell by 25 percent.111 Data 
from  surveys  carried  out  by  the  US  Census 

42

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

2

as the demographic trends, will persist regardless 
of the direction taken by the recession. 

2.4.2 Demographic trends
Current forecasts are that the world’s population 
will grow by a third over the next four decades. 
Virtually all of this growth will be in  developing 
countries. In one in five countries—including 
Germany, Japan, the Republic of Korea and the 
Russian Federation—populations are expected 
to shrink; whereas one in six countries—all of 
them developing and all but three of them in 
Africa—will  more  than  double  their  popula-
tions within the next 40 years. Were it not for 
migration, the population of developed coun-
tries would peak in 2020 and fall by 7 percent in 
the following three decades. The trend evident 
over the past half century—the fall in the share 
of people living in Europe and the increase in 
Africa—is likely to continue.118

Aging  of  populations  is  a  widespread  phe-
nomenon.  By  2050,  the  world  as  a  whole  and 
every  continent  except  Africa  are  projected  to 
have  more  elderly  people  (at  least  60  years  of 
age) than children (below 15). This is a natural 
consequence  of  the  decline  in  death  rates  and 
the somewhat slower decline in birth rates that 
has  occurred  in  most  developing  countries,  a 
well-known phenomenon known as the ‘demo-
graphic transition’. By 2050, the average age in 
developing countries will be 38 years, compared 
to  45  years  in  developed  countries.  Even  this 
seven-year difference will have marked effects. 
The global working-age population is expected 
to increase by 1.1 billion by 2050, whereas the 
working-age population in developed countries, 
even assuming a continuation of current migra-
tion flows, will decline slightly. Over the next 
15 years, new entrants to the labour force in de-
veloping countries will exceed the total number 
of working-age people currently living in devel-
oped countries (figure 2.13). As in the past, these 
trends will put pressure on wages and increase the 
incentives for moving among potential employees 
in poor countries—and for seeking out workers 
from abroad among employers in rich countries. 
This process affects the dependency ratio—
that  is,  the  ratio  of  elderly  and  young  to  the 
working-age  population  (table  2.4).  For  every 
100 working-age people in developed countries, 
there are currently 49 who are not of working 

Current forecasts 
are that the world’s 
population will grow by 
a third over the next  
four decades

43

Bureau show a 25 percent decline in the flow of 
Mexican migrants to the United States in the 
year ending in August 2008.112 These trends can 
be expected to continue in 2009 and 2010, as the 
full effect of the crisis plays out in rising domestic 
unemployment. There are reasons to be sceptical, 
however, that major return flows will emerge. 
As  the  experience  of  European  guest-worker 
programmes in the 1970s demonstrates, the size 
of return flows are affected by the prospects of 
re-entry to the host country, the generosity of 
the host country’s welfare system, the needs of 
family members and conditions back home—all 
of which tend to encourage migrants to stay put 
and ride out the recession.

Whether this crisis will have major structural 
effects  on  migration  patterns  is  not  yet  clear. 
Evidence  from  previous  recessions  shows  that 
the outcomes have varied. A historical review of 
several countries—Argentina, Australia, Brazil, 
Canada,  the  United  States  and  the  United 
Kingdom—showed  that,  between  1850  and 
1920, declines in domestic wages led to tighter 
restrictions  on  immigration.113  Several  schol-
ars have argued that the 1973 oil crisis, which 
heralded a prolonged period of economic stag-
nation, structural unemployment and lower de-
mand for unskilled workers in Europe, affected 
migration patterns as a wealthier Middle East 
emerged as the new destination hub.114 During 
the 1980s, the collapse of Mexican import sub-
stitution set in motion an era of mass migration 
to the United States that was unintentionally ac-
celerated by the 1986 United States immigration 
reform.115 In contrast, there is little evidence that 
the East Asian financial crisis of the late 1990s 
had a lasting impact on international migration 
flows.116

At this stage it is impossible to predict the 
type and magnitude of the structural changes 
that will emerge from the current crisis with any 
confidence.  Some  commentators  have  argued 
that the origin of the crisis and its fierce con-
centration in certain sectors in developed coun-
tries may strengthen the position of developing 
countries, particularly in Asia, even leading to 
a radically different configuration of the global 
economy.117 However, there are also reasons for 
expecting a revival of pre-crisis economic and 
structural trends once growth resumes. It is cer-
tainly true that deeper long-term processes, such 

2

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

age, roughly half of whom are children or elderly. 
In contrast, in developing countries, the ratio is 
higher, at 53, but three quarters of the depen-
dents are children. Over the next 40 years, as 
the effect of lower birth rates is felt and the pro-
portion of children falls as they reach working 
age, the dependency ratio will remain roughly 
stable in developing countries, reaching just 55 
by 2050. However, the proportion of elderly will 
rise  markedly  in  developed  countries,  so  that 
there will then be 71 non-working-age people for 
every 100 of working age, a significantly higher 
fraction  than  today.  These  dependency  ratios 
would increase even more rapidly without the 
moderate levels of immigration included in these 
scenarios: if developed countries were to become 
completely closed to new immigration, the ratio 
would rise to 78 by 2050. 

As  is  well  known,  this  scenario  makes  it 
much more difficult for developed countries to 
pay for the care of their children and old people. 
Publicly funded education and health systems 
are paid with taxes levied on the working popu-
lation, so that as the share of potential taxpayers 

shrinks it becomes more difficult to maintain 
expenditure levels. 

These  demographic  trends  argue  in  favour 
of relaxing the barriers to the entry of migrants. 
However, we do not suggest that migration is 
the only possible solution to these challenges. 
Greater  labour  scarcity  can  lead  to  a  shift  in 
specialization  towards  high-technology  and 
capital-intensive  industries,  and  technological 
innovations are possible for services that were 
traditionally  labour-intensive,  such  as  care  of 
the old. The sustainability of pensions and health 
care systems can also be addressed, at least in 
part, by increases in the retirement age and in 
social security contributions.119 Growing depen-
dency ratios will occur sooner or later in all coun-
tries undergoing demographic transitions—and 
migrants themselves grow old. Nevertheless, the 
growing labour abundance of developing coun-
tries suggests that we are entering a period when 
increased migration to developed countries will 
benefit not only migrants and their families but 
will also be increasingly advantageous for the 
populations of destination countries.

Figure 2.13 Working-age population will increase in developing regions

Projections of working-age population by region, 2010–2050

North America

0.23 

 0.27 billion
+16%

Latin America 
and the Carribean

0.39 

 0.49 billion
+26%

Europe

0.50 

 0.38 billion
–23%

Africa

0.58 

 1.3 billion
+125%

Asia

2.80 

 3.40 billion
+22%

Oceania

0.02 

 0.03 billion
+31%

  2010 

  2050

Source:  HDR team calculations based on UN(2009e).

44

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

2

Table 2.4

Dependency ratios to rise in developed countries and 
remain steady in developing countries
Dependency ratio forecasts of developed versus developing 
countries, 2010–2050

Developed countries

Developing countries

Baseline scenario

No Migration scenario

Baseline scenario

No Migration scenario

49 
55 
62 
68 
71 

50 
56 
65 
74 
78 

53 
52 
52 
53 
55 

53
52
52
53
54

Year

2010 
2020 
2030 
2040 
2050 

Source:  UN (2009e).

exposed to the risk of major climatic events and 
do not take into account the adaptation mea-
sures  that  individuals,  communities  and  gov-
ernments may undertake.125 It is thus difficult to 
know whether such inevitably crude estimates 
facilitate or obstruct reasoned public debate. 

The effect of climate change on human set-
tlement depends partly on how change comes 
about—as discrete events or a continuous pro-
cess. Discrete events often come suddenly and 
dramatically, forcing people to move quickly to 
more  secure  places.  Continuous  processes,  on 
the other hand, are associated with slow-onset 
changes like sea level rise, salinization or erosion 
of agricultural lands and growing water scarcity. 
In many cases, continuous change leads commu-
nities to develop their own adaptation strategies, 
of which migration—whether seasonal or per-
manent—may be only one component. Under 
these conditions movement typically takes the 
form  of  income  diversification  by  the  house-
hold, with some household members leaving and 
others staying behind.126 This pattern has been 
observed, for example, among Ethiopian house-
holds hit by severe and recurrent droughts.127 

Given the uncertainty as to whether climate 
change will occur through a continuous process 
or discrete events, the extent and type of result-
ing  adaptation  and  movement  are  difficult  to 
predict. Moreover, environmental factors are not 
the sole determinants of movement but interact 
with livelihood opportunities and public policy 
responses. It is often the case that natural disas-
ters do not lead to out-migration of the most vul-
nerable groups, because the poorest usually do 

45

Climate change is projected to increase en-
vironmental  stress  in  already  marginal  lands 
and to raise the frequency of natural hazards. 
Continued greenhouse gas emissions are likely 
to  be  associated  with  changes  in  rainfall  pat-
terns, desertification, more frequent storms and 
rises in sea level, all of which have implications 
for human movement.120 Changing rainfall pat-
terns, for example, will affect the availability of 
water and hence the production of food, possibly 
increasing food prices and the risk of famine. 

Existing estimates indicate that several de-
veloping areas will be strongly affected by cli-
mate  change,  although  the  range  of  estimates 
is still very wide and predictions are subject to 
considerable  uncertainty.  At  one  extreme,  by 
2020 it is expected that the yields from rainfed 
agriculture in Southern Africa could be halved 
by drought.121 Over the medium term, as glacial 
water banks run down, river flows are expected 
to diminish, severely affecting irrigated agricul-
ture, especially around major massifs such as the 
Himalayas.

2.4.3  Environmental factors
The environment can be a key driver of human 
movement. From nomadic pastoralists, who fol-
low the favourable grazing conditions that arise 
after rain, to the people displaced by natural di-
sasters such as the Indian Ocean tsunami and 
Hurricane Katrina, environmental conditions 
have  been  intimately  linked  to  movements  of 
people and communities throughout human his-
tory. Some are now expecting that the continu-
ing warming of the earth will generate massive 
population shifts. 

Rises in sea level most directly affect people 
in coastal areas. One scenario suggests that 145 
million people are presently at risk from a rise 
of  one  meter,  three  quarters  of  whom  live  in 
East and South Asia.122 In some cases, rises will 
imply the relocation of entire communities. The 
government of the Maldives, for example, is con-
sidering buying land in other countries as a safe 
haven, given the probability that their archipel-
ago will become submerged.123 

Some  estimates  of  the  numbers  of  people 
who will be forced to move as a result of climate 
change have been presented, ranging from 200 
million to 1 billion.124 Regrettably, there is little 
hard  science  backing  these  numbers.  For  the 
most part, they represent the number of people 

2

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Movement largely 
reflects people’s 
need to improve 
their livelihoods… 
this movement is 
constrained by policy 
and economic barriers

46

not have the means to move and natural disasters 
further impair their ability to do so. Empirical 
studies  in  Mexico  have  found  that  the  effects 
of  changes  in  rainfall  on  migration  patterns 
are  determined  by  socio-economic  conditions 
and the ability to finance the cost of moving.128
Background research on migration patterns in 
Nicaragua during Hurricane Mitch, carried out 
for this report, found that rural families in the 
bottom two wealth quintiles were less likely to 
migrate than other families in the aftermath of 
Hurricane Mitch.129

More fundamentally, what happens in the 
future is affected by the way we consume and 
use  our  natural  resources  today.  This  was  the 
key message of the 2007/2008 HDR (Fighting 
climate change: Human solidarity in a divided 
world): catastrophic risks for future generations 
can be avoided only if the international commu-
nity acts now. The demand for increased energy 
in developing countries, where many people still 
lack access to electricity, can be met while re-
ducing total carbon emissions. The use of more 
energy-efficient technologies that already exist 
in  developed  countries  needs  to  be  expanded 
in developing countries, while creating the next 
generation  of  still  more  efficient  technologies 
and enabling developing countries to leapfrog 
through to these better solutions. At the same 
time, energy consumption in developed coun-
tries needs to be rationalized. The policy options 
for encouraging a transition to a low-carbon en-
ergy mix include market-based incentives, new 
standards  for  emissions,  research  to  develop 
new  technologies  and  improved  international 
cooperation.130

2.5 Conclusions 
Three key findings have emerged from this chap-
ter’s analysis of global trends in human move-
ment. First, movement largely reflects people’s 
need to improve their livelihoods. Second, this 
movement  is  constrained  by  policy  and  eco-
nomic barriers, which are much more difficult 
for poor people to surmount than for the rela-
tively wealthy. Third, the pressure for increased 
flows will grow in the coming decades in the face 
of divergent economic and demographic trends. 
Ultimately, how these structural factors will 
affect the flow of people in the future depends 
critically on the stance taken by policy makers, 

especially those in host countries. At present, 
policy makers in countries with large migrant 
populations face conflicting pressures: signifi-
cant levels of resistance to increased immigration 
in public opinion on the one hand, and sound 
economic and social rationales for the relaxation 
of entry barriers on the other.

How can we expect policies to evolve in the 
next few decades? Will they evolve in ways that 
enable us to realize the potential gains from mo-
bility, or will popular pressures gain the upper 
hand? Will the economic crisis raise protection-
ist barriers against immigration, or will it serve 
as an opportunity to rethink the role of move-
ment in fostering social and economic progress? 
History and contemporary experience provide 
contrasting  examples.  Acute  labour  scarcity 
made the Americas very open to migration dur-
ing the 19th century and allowed rapid rates of 
economic development despite widespread in-
tolerance and xenophobia. This is analogous in 
some ways to the situation in the GCC states 
today. However, the tendency to blame outsiders 
for society’s ills is accentuated during economic 
downturns.  Recent  incidents  across  a  range 
of countries—from the Russian Federation to 
South Africa to the United Kingdom—could 
presage a growing radicalization and closing off 
to people from abroad.131

Yet none of these outcomes is predetermined. 
Leadership and action to change the nature of 
public  debate  can  make  a  crucial  difference. 
Shifting attitudes towards internal migrants in 
the United States during the Great Depression 
provide  us  with  a  compelling  example.  As  a 
result of severe drought in the nation’s south-
ern Midwest region, an estimated 2.5 million 
people migrated to new agricultural areas dur-
ing the 1930s. There they met fierce resistance 
from some residents, who saw these migrants as 
threats to their jobs and livelihoods. It was in this 
context that John Steinbeck wrote The Grapes of 
Wrath, one of the most powerful indictments 
of the mistreatment and intolerance of internal 
migrants ever written. Steinbeck’s novel sparked 
a national debate, leading to a congressional in-
vestigation into the plight of migrant workers 
and ultimately to a landmark 1941 decision by 
the Supreme Court establishing that states had 
no right to interfere with the free movement of 
people within the United States.132

How 
movers 
fare

3

Movers can reap large gains from the opportunities 
available in better-off places. These opportunities are 
shaped by their underlying resources—skills, money and 
networks—and are constrained by barriers. The policies 
and laws that affect decisions to move also affect the 
process of moving and the outcomes. In general, and 
especially for low-skilled people, the barriers restrict 
people’s choices and reduce the gains from moving.

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

3
3

How movers fare

People are motivated to move by the prospects of improved access 
to work, education, civil and political rights, security and health 
care. The majority of movers end up better off—sometimes much 
better off—than before they moved. The gains are potentially high-
est for people who move from poor to the wealthiest countries, but 
this type of movement is only a small share of total flows. Available 
evidence suggests that people who move to emerging and develop-
ing countries, as well as within countries, also tend to gain.

However, movement does not necessarily yield 
a  direct  positive  impact  on  the  well-being  of 
everyone. Moving is risky, with uncertain out-
comes and with the specific impacts determined 
by a host of contextual factors. For both inter-
nal  and  international  mobility,  different  as-
pects of the process—including the proximate 
causes of moving and the resources and capa-
bilities that people start out with—profoundly 
affect outcomes. Those who are forced to flee 
and leave behind their homes and belongings 
often go into the process with limited freedom 
and  very  few  resources.  Likewise,  those  who 
are moving in the face of local economic crisis, 
drought or other causes of desperate poverty, 
may not know what capabilities they will have; 
they only know that they cannot remain. Even 
migrants who end up well off after a move often 
start out with very restricted capabilities and 
high uncertainty.

The  human  development  outcomes  of 
moving  are  thus  profoundly  affected  by  the 
conditions under which people move. These 
conditions determine what resources and ca-
pabilities survive the move. Those who go to 
an embassy to collect a visa, buy a plane ticket 
and take up a position as a student in, say, the 
United Kingdom, arrive at their destination in 
much better shape than someone who is traf-
ficked—arriving  with  no  papers,  no  money 
and in bondage. The distance travelled (geo-
graphical, cultural and social) is also impor-
tant. Travelling to a country where one does 
not speak the language immediately devalues 
one’s knowledge and skills. 

This chapter examines how movement affects 
those who move, why gains are unevenly distrib-
uted and why some people win while others lose 
out. There may well be trade-offs, such as loss of 
civic rights, even where earnings are higher. The 
costs of moving also need to be taken into ac-
count. We review evidence about these impacts 
in turn, to highlight the main findings from a 
vast literature and experience. 

The key related question of how moving af-
fects those who don’t move, in source and des-
tination places, is addressed in chapter 4. These 
distinct areas of focus are of course inextricably 
linked—successful migrants tend to share their 
success with those who stay at home, while the 
policy responses of destination places affect how 
non-movers, as well as movers, fare. Home and 
host-country impacts are interconnected. Socio-
economic  mobility  in  a  host  country  and  the 
ability to move up the ladder in the homeland 
are often two sides of the same coin.

3.1  Incomes and livelihoods 
It is important to recall at the outset that esti-
mating the impacts of migration is fraught with 
difficulties, as we saw in box 1.1. The main prob-
lem is that movers may differ from non-movers 
in their basic characteristics, so straight compari-
sons can be misleading and the identification of 
causal relationships is problematic. 

That  said,  the  most  easily  quantifiable  im-
pacts  of  moving  can  be  seen  in  incomes  and 
consumption. We begin with these, then turn 
to review the costs of moving, which must be 
subtracted from the gross benefits.

49
49

3

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Figure 3.1

Movers have much higher incomes than stayers 
Annual income of migrants in OECD destination countries  
and GDP per capita in origin countries, by origin country HDI category

Low HDI

Medium HDI

High HDI

Very high HDI

Difference: US$13,736

Difference: US$12,789

Difference: US$9,431

Difference: US$2,480
| 
0 
(US$ thousands)

| 
10 

| 
5 

| 
15 

| 
20 

| 
25 

|
30

  GDP per capita at origin 

  Migrants’ income in OECD destination countries

Source:  Ortega (2009). 

Figure 3.2

Huge salary gains for high-skilled movers
Gaps in average professional salaries for selected country 
pairs, 2002–2006

Physician

Nurse

Software engineer – manager

Software engineer – developer

Professor – entry level

Professor – top level

Côte d’Ivoire
France

Zambia
Canada

Malawi
South Africa

Ghana
United Kingdom

India
United States

India
United States

China
Australia

India
United Kingdom

| 
20 

| 
0 
Annual salary (US$ thousands)

| 
65 

| 
40 

| 
80 

| 

100 

|

120

  Origin country 

  Destination country

Source:  Source:  Clemens (2009b).

50

3.1.1  Impacts on gross income
The evidence consistently reflects very large av-
erage income gains for movers. Commissioned 
research found large differences in income be-
tween stayers and movers to OECD countries, 
with the biggest differences for those moving 
from low-HDI countries (figure 3.1). Migrant 
workers in the United States earn about four 
times as much as they would in their develop-
ing countries of origin,1 while Pacific Islanders 
in New Zealand increased their net real wages 
by a factor of three.2 Evidence from a range of 
countries suggests that income gains increase 
over time, as the acquisition of language skills 
leads to better integration in the labour market.3 
Gains arise not only when people move to 
OECD countries. Thai migrants in Hong Kong 
(China) and Taiwan (Province of China), for ex-
ample, are paid at least four times as much as they 
would earn as low-skilled workers at home.4 In 
Tajikistan, when the average monthly wage was 
only US$9, seasonal earnings of US$500–700 
in the Russian Federation could cover a family’s 
annual household expenses in the capital city, 
Dushanbe.5  However,  these  average  gains  are 
unevenly distributed, and the costs of moving 
also detract from the gross gains. 

Gains  can  be  large  for  the  high-skilled  as 
well as the low-skilled. The wages of Indian soft-
ware engineers in the late 1990s, for example, 
were less than 30 percent of their United States 
counterparts, so those who were able to relocate 
to this country reaped large gains.6 Figure 3.2 
illustrates the wage gaps, adjusted for purchas-
ing power parity, between high-skilled profes-
sionals in selected pairs of countries. A doctor 
from Côte d’Ivoire can raise her real earnings 
by a factor of six by working in France. Beyond 
salaries, many are also often motivated by fac-
tors such as better prospects for their children, 
improved security and a more pleasant working 
environment.7

Internal  migrants  also  tend  to  access  bet-
ter  income-earning  opportunities  and  are 
able  to  diversify  their  sources  of  livelihood. 
Commissioned  research  found  that  internal 
migrants  in  Bolivia  experienced  significant 
real income gains, with more than fourfold in-
creases accruing to workers with low education 
levels moving from the countryside to the cities 
(figure 3.3). We also found that in 13 out of 16 

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

3

countries internal migrants had higher incomes 
than non-migrants.8 In Brazil and Panama, a se-
ries of studies controlling for education found 
income gains for indigenous groups who move.9
Studies across a range of countries suggest that 
internal  migration  has  enabled  many  house-
holds to lift themselves out of poverty, as dis-
cussed further in the next chapter.

The segmentation of labour markets in de-
veloping  countries  affects  how  movers  fare. 
Sometimes this can be traced to administrative 
restrictions, as in the hukou system in China 
(box 3.1) and the ho khau system in Viet Nam. 
However,  segmentation  is  also  widespread  in 
other regions, including South Asia, Africa and 
Latin  America,  through  barriers  that,  while 
not imposed by law, are nonetheless deeply en-
trenched through social and cultural norms.10
For example, rural–urban migrants in India are 
predominantly employed in industries such as 
construction, brick kilns, textiles and mining, 
which  entail  hard  physical  labour  and  harsh 
working and living environments; in Mongolia, 
rural–urban migrants typically work in infor-
mal activities which are temporary, strenuous 
and without legal protection.11 In Asia, recent 
low-skilled migrants from rural areas tend to oc-
cupy the lowest social and occupational rungs of 
urban society and are treated as outsiders. 

As we saw in chapter 2, most movers from 
low-HDI countries are living and working in 
other low- or medium-HDI countries, in part 
because barriers to admission are often lower 
and the costs of moving are less. At the same 
time, the conditions may well be more difficult 
than in rich countries and there are risks of both 
exploitation and expulsion. 

Labour market opportunities for migrant 
women from developing countries tend to be 
highly concentrated in care activities, paid do-
mestic  work  and  the  informal  sector.12  Such 
women may become trapped in enclaves. For 
example, in New York City, Hispanic-owned 
firms  were  found  to  provide  low  wages,  few 
benefits  and  limited  career  opportunities  to 
Dominican and Colombian women, reinforc-
ing their social disadvantages.13 Similar results 
were  found  among  Chinese  migrant  women 
workers.14  Most  Peruvian  and  Paraguayan 
women in Argentina (69 and 58 percent respec-
tively) work for low pay on an informal basis 

Significant wage gains to internal movers in Bolivia, 
especially the less well educated
Ratio of destination to origin wages for internal migrants  
in Bolivia, 2000

Figure 3.3

5 years of 
schooling

11 years of 
schooling

16 years of 
schooling

| 
| 
3 
0 
Ratio of destination to origin wages

| 
2 

| 
1 

Source:  Molina and Yañez (2009).

in  the  personal  service  sector.15  Difficulties 
are  compounded  where  migrant  women  are 
excluded from normal worker protections, as 
is the case for domestic workers in the GCC 
states.16  Although  practices  are  changing  in 
some  countries  (e.g.  Saudi  Arabia  and  the 
United  Arab  Emirates),  migrants  are  legally 
prohibited from joining local unions, and even 
when this is allowed, they may face resistance 
and hostility from other workers.17 NGOs may 
provide  services  and  protection  to  migrants, 
but their coverage tends to be limited. 

Labour  market  discrimination  can  be  a 
major obstacle to migrants. This is reflected in 
low call-back rates to job applications where the 
applicant has a foreign-sounding surname.18 Yet 
the picture is often complex, and ethnicity, gen-
der and legal status may all come into play. In the 
United Kingdom, some studies have found dis-
crimination in hiring migrants in terms of lower 
employment rates and payments, whereas other 
studies found that people with Chinese, Indian 
and Irish backgrounds tended to have employ-
ment situations at least as good as white British 
workers.19 Our analysis of the 2006 European 
Social Survey reveals that the vast majority of 
migrants (more than 75 percent) in this region 
did  not  report  feeling  discriminated  against. 
However,  in  the  much  larger  country  sample 
provided by the World Values Survey, there was 
widespread support among locally born people 
for  the  proposition,  “Employers  should  give 
priority to natives when jobs are scarce”, albeit 
with considerable differences across countries 
(see section 4.2.5).

Rural to urban 
migrants
Urban to urban 
migrants

| 
4 

|
5

51

3

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Box 3.1

China: Policies and outcomes associated with internal migration

Modelled after the Soviet propiska system, albeit with roots dating 
back to ancient times, China’s Residence Registration System oper-
ates through a permit (hukou), needed to gain access to farmland in 
agricultural areas and to social benefits and public services in urban 
areas. Until the mid-1980s, the system was administered strictly and 
movement without a hukou was forbidden. Since then, China has lib-
eralized movement but formally maintained the hukou system.

As in other areas of reform, China chose a gradual and partial 
approach. Beginning in the mid-1880s, it allowed people to work out-
side their place of residence without a hukou, but did not allow them 
access to social benefits, public services or formal-sector jobs. A 
two-tier migration system analogous to the points system in some 
developed countries was designed: changes in permanent residency 
are permitted for the well educated, but only temporary residence 
is granted for less-educated rural migrants. Many city governments 
have offered ‘blue-stamp’ hukou to well-off migrants who were able 
to make sizeable investments.

The evidence suggests that the human development gains for 
internal migrants and their families have been limited by the persis-
tence of the hukou system, along the dimensions illustrated below:

Income gains. In 2004, on average, rural–urban migrants earned 
RMB780 (US$94) per month, triple the average rural farm income. 
However, due to the segmentation created by the hukou system, tem-
porary migrants typically move to relatively low-paid jobs, and their 
poverty incidence is double that of urban residents with hukou.

Working conditions. Low-skilled migrants tend to work in informal 
jobs that have inadequate protection and benefits. According to one 
survey in three provinces, migrants’ work hours are 50 percent longer 
than locals, they are often hired without a written contract and fewer 
than 1 in 10 have old-age social security and health insurance, com-
pared to average coverage of over 70 percent in China as a whole. 

Occupational hazards are high—migrants accounted for about 75 
percent of the 11,000 fatalities in 2005 in the notoriously dangerous 
mining and construction industries. 

Access  to  services.  Children  who  move  with  temporary  sta-
tus pay additional fees and are denied access to elite schools. An 
estimated 14–20 million migrant children lack access to schooling 
altogether. Their drop-out rates at primary and secondary schools 
exceed 9 percent, compared to close to zero for locals. Access to 
basic health services is limited. Even in Shanghai, one of the better 
cities in terms of providing social services to migrants, only two thirds 
of migrant children were vaccinated in 2004, compared to universal 
rates for local children. When migrants fall ill, they often move back 
to rural areas for treatment, due to the costs of urban health care. 

Participation. Many migrants remain marginalized in destination 
places due to institutional barriers. They have few channels for ex-
pressing their interests and protecting their rights in the work place. 
Almost 8 out of 10 have no trade union, workers’ representative con-
ference, labour supervisory committees or other labour organization, 
compared to one fifth of locally born people. Long distances also 
hinder participation: in a survey of migrants in Wuhan City, only 20 
percent had voted in the last village election, mainly because they 
lived too far away from polling stations. 

Discussions about hukou reform are reportedly ongoing, while some 
regional governments have further liberalized their systems. Legislative 
reforms in 1997 significantly improved the rights of all workers—includ-
ing migrants, and measures to provide portable pensions for migrant 
workers were announced in 2008. Other signs of change come from 
Dongguan, Guangdong, for example, where migrants are now referred 
to  as  ‘new  residents’  and  the  Migrants  and  Rental  Accommodation 
Administration Office was relabelled the ‘Residents Service Bureau’.

Source:  Avenarius (2007), Gaige (2006), Chan, Liu, and Yang (1999), Fan (2002), Meng and Zhang (2001), Cai, Du, and Wang (2009), Huang (2006), Ha, Yi, and Zhang (2009b), Fang and Wang (2008), and Mitchell (2009).

One problem facing many migrants on ar-
rival is that their skills and credentials go un-
recognized.20 Coupled with language and other 
social  barriers,  this  means  that  they  tend  to 
earn  much  less  than  similarly  qualified  local 
residents.21  The  extent  of  this  problem  seems 
to vary across sectors. Information technology 
firms tend to be more flexible on credentials, for 
example,  whereas  public-sector  organizations 
are often more closed. The failure to fully deploy 
their skills can cause new immigrants to incur 
significant costs. The Migration Policy Institute 
recently estimated that up to 20 percent of col-
lege-educated migrants in the United States were 
unemployed or working in low-skilled jobs, and 

in Canada, despite the points system, this prob-
lem is estimated to drain US$1.7 billion a year 
from the economy.22 In response, the Canadian 
government has launched programmes to speed 
up the recognition of credentials earned abroad.
Incomes  do  not  depend  solely  on  labour 
market earnings. In countries with established 
welfare systems, social transfers reduce poverty 
rates among disadvantaged groups through un-
employment benefits, social assistance and pen-
sions.  Whether  or  not  a  programme  benefits 
migrant  families  depends  on  the  design  and 
rules  of  the  system.  There  are  obvious  differ-
ences across countries in the generosity of these 
programmes,  as  their  scale  tends  to  be  more 

52

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

3

limited in developing countries due to budget-
ary  constraints.  Since  most  developing  coun-
tries do not have extensive systems in place, the 
question of equality of access does not arise. The 
focus here is therefore on developed countries.
Our policy assessment found that nearly all 
developed countries in the sample granted per-
manent migrants access to unemployment ben-
efits  and  family  allowances.  However,  people 
with temporary status are less likely to be able 
to  access  assistance.  Some  countries,  includ-
ing Australia and New Zealand, have imposed 
waiting periods before various benefits can be 
accessed. And in efforts to avoid welfare depen-
dency, countries such as France and Germany 
require that applications for family reunifica-
tion demonstrate that the applicant has stable 
and  sufficient  income  to  support  all  family 
members without relying on state benefits.

The  Luxembourg  Income  Study  and 
the  European  Survey  of  Income  and  Living 
Conditions allow estimates of the effects of social 
transfers on poverty among families with chil-
dren.23 For all 18 countries in the sample, migrant 
families are more likely to be poor than locally 
born families. Based on market incomes before 
social transfers, poverty rates among children ex-
ceed 50 and 40 percent among migrant families 

in France and the United Kingdom respectively. 
The redistributive effect of social welfare in these 
countries is significant, since transfers more than 
halve  these  rates  for  both  migrant  and  locally 
born children (figure 3.4).24 In contrast, in the 
United States the poverty-reducing effect of so-
cial transfers for both local and migrant families 
is  negligible,  because  transfers  overall  are  rela-
tively small. At the same time it is notable that in 
Australia, Germany and the United States rates of 
market–income poverty are much lower than in 
France and the United Kingdom, suggesting that 
migrant families are doing better in the labour 
market in those countries. 

3.1.2 Financial costs of moving
The gross income gains reported in the litera-
ture typically do not account for the monetary 
costs of moving. These costs arise from various 
sources,  including  official  fees  for  documents 
and  clearances,  payments  to  intermediaries, 
travel expenses and, in some cases, payments of 
bribes. The costs appear regressive, in that fees 
for unskilled workers are often high relative to 
expected wages abroad, especially for those on 
temporary contracts.25

Substantial costs may arise for those with-
out  basic  documents.  Around  the  world,  an 

Figure 3.4

  Poverty is higher among migrant children, but social transfers can help

Effects of transfers on child poverty in selected countries, 1999–2001

Australia

32

20

13

56

France

United States

33

20

19

Share of migrant children in poverty
before social transfers (%)

Share of migrant children in poverty
after social transfers (%)

Share of non-migrant children in poverty
after social transfers (%)

6

8

15

22

Germany

16

23

Source:  Smeeding, Wing, and Robson (2008).

43

United Kingdom

53

3

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Figure 3.5

Costs of moving are often high
Costs of intermediaries in selected corridors against income  
per capita, 2006–2008

Viet Nam to Japan (6 years, 5 months and 4 days)

Bangladesh to Saudi Arabia (5 years, 2 months and 3 days)

China to Australia (3 years, 10 months and 16 days)

Colombia to Spain (1 year, 8 months and 3 days)

India to United Kingdom (1 year, 3 months)

Philippines to Singapore (8 months and 26 days)

= Origin country annual GNI per capita

Source:  Bangladesh to Saudi Arabia: Malek (2008); China to Australia: Zhiwu (2009); Colombia to Spain: Grupo de Investigación en Movilidad Humana (2009); 
Philippines to Singapore: TWC (2006); Viet Nam to Japan: van Thanh (2008).

Figure 3.6

Moving costs can be many times expected 
monthly earnings
Costs of movement against expected salary of low-skilled 
Indonesian workers in selected destinations, 2008

Hong Kong (China)

Taiwan (Province of China)

Malaysia

Singapore

= Monthly expected salary

s
h
t
n
o
m
2
1

 

Source:  The Institute for ECOSOC Rights (2008).

54

estimated 48 million children, often from very 
poor families, lack a birth certificate. The main 
reason is the fee for obtaining such documents 
and related factors such as distance to the regis-
tration centre.26

Lengthy application processes and, in some 
countries,  payments  of  bribes  for  routine  ser-
vices can make applying for vital records and 
basic travel documents very expensive.27 In the 
Democratic  Republic  of  the  Congo  passport 
applicants can expect to pay up to US$500 (70 
percent of average annual income) in bribes.28
Other countries with limited bureaucratic ca-
pacity and corruption in the issuance of travel 
documents reportedly include Azerbaijan, India 
and Uzbekistan.29

Intermediaries, also known as ‘middlemen’, 
perform a specific function in the global labour 
market. They help to overcome information gaps 
and meet administrative requirements (such as 
having a job offer prior to visa application) and 
sometimes lend money to cover the upfront costs 
of the move. There are a large number of agen-
cies: in the Philippines alone there are nearly 
1,500 licensed recruitment agencies, while India 
has close to 2,000.30 The cost of intermediary 
services appears to vary enormously, but often 
exceeds per capita income at home (figure 3.5). 
The  example  of  Indonesia  illustrates  how 
the costs can vary by destination, with moves to 
Malaysia and Singapore costing about six months’ 
expected salary and to Taiwan a full year (figure 
3.6).  Legal  caps  on  fees  charged  by  recruiters 
are generally ignored, as migrants routinely pay 
much more.31 The difference between wages at 
home and expected wages abroad is perhaps the 
most important determinant of the price of in-
termediary services. Where relatively few jobs are 
available, intermediaries who are in a position to 
allocate these slots are able to charge additional 
rents. There are cases of abuse and fraud, where 
prospective movers pay high recruitment fees only 
to find later on (at the destination) that the work 
contract does not exist, there have been unilat-
eral changes to the contract, or there are serious 
violations related to personal safety and working 
conditions.32 Some migrants report that employ-
ers confiscate their passports, mistreat their em-
ployees and deny access to medical care.33 

Extensive  regulations  and  official  fees  can 
encourage irregularity. For Russian employers, 

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

3

Figure 3.7

  The children of movers have a much greater chance of surviving

Child mortality at origin versus destination by origin country HDI category, 2000 census or latest round

Low HDI

Medium HDI

High HDI

Very high HDI

(100 versus 7 per thousand)

(50 versus 7 per thousand)

(16 versus 7 per thousand)

(5 versus 7 per thousand)

  Child mortality at origin 

  Child mortality at destination

Source:  Ortega (2009).

the administrative procedure to apply for a li-
cense to hire a foreign worker is reportedly so 
time-consuming and corrupt that it frequently 
leads to evasion and perpetuates irregular em-
ployment practices.34 In Singapore, employers of 
low-skilled migrants must pay a levy, which they 
in  turn  deduct  from  workers’  wages.35  Under 
agreements between Thailand, Cambodia and 
the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, recruit-
ment fees are equivalent to 4–5 months’ salary, 
processing time averages about four months and 
15 percent of wages are withheld pending the 
migrant’s return home. In contrast, smugglers in 
these corridors reportedly charge the equivalent 
of one month’s salary. Given these cost differ-
ences, it is not surprising that only 26 percent 
of migrant workers in Thailand were registered 
in 2006.36

3.2 Health 
This section reviews the impacts of movement 
on the health of those who move. Gaining bet-
ter  access  to  services,  including  health  care, 
may be among the key motivations for moving. 
Among top high-school graduates from Tonga 
and Papua New Guinea, ‘health care’ and ‘chil-
dren’s  education’  were  mentioned  more  often 
than ‘salary’ as reasons for migrating, and an-
swers such as ‘safety and security’ were almost 

as  frequent.37  However,  the  links  between 
migration  and  health  are  complex.  Migrants’ 
health  depends  on  their  personal  history  be-
fore moving, the process of moving itself, and 
the circumstances of resettlement. Destination 
governments often rigorously screen applicants 
for work visas, so successful applicants tend to 
be  healthy.38  Nevertheless,  irregular  migrants 
may  have  specific  health  needs  that  remain 
unaddressed. 

Moving  to  more  developed  countries  can 
improve access to health facilities and profes-
sionals as well as to health-enhancing factors 
such as potable water, sanitation, refrigeration, 
better health information and, last but not least, 
higher incomes. Evidence suggests that migrant 
families have fewer and healthier children than 
they would have had if they had not moved.39
Recent research conducted in the United States 
using panel data, which tracks the same indi-
viduals over time, found that health outcomes 
improve  markedly  during  the  first  year  after 
immigration.40 

Our commissioned study found a 16-fold re-
duction in child mortality (from 112 to 7 deaths 
per 1,000 live births) for movers from low-HDI 
countries (figure 3.7). Of course these gains are 
partly explained by self-selection.41 Nonetheless, 
the sheer size of these differences suggests that 

55

3

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Barriers to health 
services arise due to 
financial constraints 
as well as status, 
cultural and language 
differences

56

similar outcomes would have been very difficult 
to realize at home. For comparison, as reported 
in the 2006 HDR, families in the richest quin-
tile in Burkina Faso had a child mortality rate of 
about 150 deaths per 1,000 live births. 

Not surprisingly, given the poor health ser-
vices, water quality and sanitation in rural areas, 
studies suggest that migrants to urban centres 
significantly improve their chances of survival 
relative to rural residents.42 The size of this effect 
has been correlated with duration of stay, which 
was itself associated with higher incomes and 
improved knowledge and practices. Sometimes 
migrants  use  health  care  services  more  than 
urban locals, suggesting that the availability of 
these may have motivated their move in the first 
place. However, the health outcomes associated 
with urbanization are variable: a broader study 
found  that  internal  migrants’  outcomes  were 
worse than those of urban natives, due to their 
socio-economic disadvantage, and our commis-
sioned  research  found  that  internal  migrants 
had higher life expectancy than non-migrants 
in only half of the countries studied.43

Detailed  studies  in  a  number  of  OECD 
countries  have  found  that  migrants’  initial 
health advantage tends to dissipate over time.44 
This is believed to reflect the adoption of poorer 
health  behaviour  and  lifestyles  as  well  as,  for 
some, exposure to the adverse working, hous-
ing  and  environmental  conditions  that  often 
characterize  low-income  groups  in  industrial 
countries.  Separation  from  family  and  social 
networks and uncertainty regarding job secu-
rity and living conditions can affect health. In 
several studies, migrants have reported higher 
incidence of stress, anxiety and depression than 
residents,45 outcomes that were correlated with 
worse economic conditions, language barriers, 
irregular status and recent arrival. Conversely, 
other studies have found positive effects of mi-
gration on mental health, associated with better 
economic opportunities.46 

Poor housing conditions and risky occupa-
tions  can  increase  accidents  and  compromise 
health, which may be worse for irregular mi-
grants.47 There are well-documented  inequali-
ties in health care and status between vulnerable 
migrant groups and host populations in devel-
oped countries.48 The health of child migrants 
can also be affected by their type of work, which 

Not all types of migrants have the same ac-
cess to health care.52 Permanent migrants often 
have  greater  access  than  temporary  migrants, 
and the access of irregular migrants tends to be 
much more restricted (figure 3.8). Movement 
sometimes  deprives  internal  migrants  of  ac-
cess to health services if eligibility is linked to 
authorized residence, as in China. In contrast, 
permanent migrants, especially the high-skilled, 
tend  to  enjoy  relatively  good  access,  while  in 
some  countries  health  care  is  open  to  all  mi-
grants, regardless of their legal status, as is the 
case in Portugal and Spain. In the United Arab 
Emirates coverage varies by emirate, but both 
Abu Dhabi and Dubai have compulsory insur-
ance schemes to which employers must contrib-
ute on behalf of their workers. In Canada all 
residents are entitled to national health insur-
ance, and the provincial authorities determine 
who qualifies as a resident. 

In practice, barriers to health services arise 
due  to  financial  constraints  as  well  as  status, 
cultural and language differences,53 especially 
for irregular migrants. In France, Germany and 
Sweden there is a ‘responsibility to report’ the 
treatment of an irregular migrant, which can 
lead to a lack of trust between providers and pa-
tients and deter migrants from seeking care.54 
If single female migrants in the GCC states are 
found to be pregnant, they are deported.55 

may be abusive and/or hazardous.49 In India, for 
example, many internal migrants work in dan-
gerous construction jobs, while working condi-
tions in the leather industry expose the mainly 
migrant  workers  to  respiratory  problems  and 
skin  infections.50  Yet  these  jobs  are  well  paid 
compared to what was available at home, and 
interviews in rural Bihar indicate that such jobs 
are highly sought after.51 

In less-wealthy destination countries there is 
a tension between the ideal of granting health 
care access to irregular migrants and the real-
ity  of  resource  constraints.  In  South  Africa 
many  non-nationals  report  not  being  able  to 
access  antiretroviral  drugs  against  AIDS  be-
cause facilities deny treatment on the basis of 
‘being foreign’ or not having a national identity 
booklet.56 Given that South Africa has one of 
the highest HIV prevalence rates in the world, 
combined with improved but still limited ac-
cess to antiretrovirals, it is not surprising that 

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

3

Figure 3.8

Temporary and irregular migrants often lack access 
to health care services
Access to health care by migrant status in developed versus 
developing countries, 2009

Panel A: Preventive care

Developed countries

Permanent

Temporary

Irregular

Humanitarian

Permanent

Temporary

Irregular

Humanitarian

Developing countries

| 
0 
Share of countries in sample (%)

| 
40 

| 
20 

| 
60 

Panel B: Emergency care

Developed countries

Permanent

Temporary

Irregular

Humanitarian

Permanent

Temporary

Irregular

Humanitarian

Developing countries

| 
0 
Share of countries in sample (%)

| 
40 

| 
20 

| 
60 

| 
80 

|

100

| 
80 

|

100

Only available for citizens or not available
Available for migrants with conditions
Immediately available for migrants

Source:  Klugman and Pereira (2009).

57

irregular  migrants  represent  a  low  priority. 
But more positive examples are found in other 
parts of the world. Thailand, for example, pro-
vides antiretroviral treatment to migrants from 
Cambodia  and  Myanmar,  with  support  from 
the  Global  Fund  on  AIDS,  Tuberculosis  and 
Malaria. Thailand also provides migrants with 
access to health insurance, and efforts are under 
way to reach irregular migrants. 

3.3  Education 
Education has both intrinsic value and brings 
instrumental gains in income-earning potential 
and social participation. It can provide the lan-
guage, technical and social skills that facilitate 
economic and social integration and intergener-
ational income gains. Movement is likely to en-
hance educational attainment, especially among 
children. Many families move with the specific 
objective of having their children attend better 
and/or more advanced schools. In many rural 
areas in developing countries education is avail-
able only at primary level and at a lower quality 
than  in  urban  areas,  providing  an  additional 
motive for rural–urban migration.57 Similarly, 
international  migration  for  educational  pur-
poses—school migration—is rising.58 

In this section we review the evidence con-
cerning  school  completion  levels  at  places  of 
origin  and  at  destinations,  whether  migrant 
children can access state schools and how well 
they perform relative to children born locally. 
School enrolments can change for a number 
of reasons when a family relocates. Higher in-
comes are part of the story, but other factors, 
such as the availability of teachers and schools, 
the  quality  of  infrastructure  and  the  cost  of 
transport, may be important as well. A natu-
ral  starting  point  when  measuring  education 
gains is a comparison of enrolment rates. These 
present a striking picture of the advantages of 
moving (figure 3.9), with the crude differences 
being largest for children from low-HDI coun-
tries. Two familiar notes of caution should be 
sounded,  however:  these  results  may  be  over-
estimated due to positive selection; and mere 
enrolment  guarantees  neither  a  high-quality 
education  nor  a  favourable  outcome  from 
schooling.59

The importance of early stimulation to the 
physical, cognitive and emotional development 

3

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Figure 3.9

Gains in schooling are greatest for migrants 
from low-HDI countries
Gross total enrolment ratio at origin versus destination by  
origin country HDI category, 2000 census or latest round

Low HDI

Medium HDI

High HDI

Very high HDI

(47% versus 95%)

(66% versus 92%)

(77% versus 92%)

(92% versus 93%)

  Enrolment ratio at origin 

  Enrolment ratio at destination

Source: Ortega (2009).

Note:  Gross total enrolment includes primary, secondary and tertiary education.

Figure 3.10 Migrants have better access to education in 

developed countries
Access to public schooling by migrant status in  
developed versus developing countries, 2009

Developed countries

Developing countries

Permanent

Temporary

Irregular

Humanitarian

Permanent

Temporary

Irregular

Humanitarian

| 
0 
Share of countries in sample (%)

| 
40 

| 
20 

| 
60 

Only available for 
citizens or not 
available

Available for 
migrants with 
conditions

Immediately 
available for 
migrants

| 
80 

|

100

Source: Klugman and Pereira (2009).

58

of  children,  and  the  associated  importance 
of  early  childhood  development  (ECD)  pro-
grammes, is well established.60 Research from 
Germany  indicates  that  ECD  can  bring  the 
children of migrants to par with native children 
with  the  same  socio-economic  background.61

However,  due  to  traditional  norms,  language 
and cultural barriers and sometimes uncertain 
legal  status,  these  children  are  generally  less 
likely to enrol in formal ECD programmes, de-
spite the fact that authorities in Europe and the 
United States often actively reach out to migrant 
children.62 Thailand is among those developing 
countries that seek to extend informal ECD to 
migrants, in border areas in the north. Similar 
arrangements can be found in some other coun-
tries; programmes in the Dominican Republic 
serve Haitian children, for example. 

In some countries migrant children may not 
have access to state schools or their parents may 
be asked to pay higher fees. Our policy assess-
ment found that developed countries are more 
likely to allow immediate access to schooling for 
all  types  of  migrant—permanent,  temporary, 
humanitarian and irregular (figure 3.10). Yet a 
third of developed countries in our sample, in-
cluding Singapore and Sweden,63 did not allow 
access to children with irregular status, while 
the same was true for over half the developing 
countries in the sample, including Egypt and 
India. Some specific cases: in the United Arab 
Emirates children with irregular migrant sta-
tus do not have access to education services; in 
Belgium education is free and a right for every 
person, but not compulsory for irregular chil-
dren; in Poland education for children between 
6  and  18  years  is  a  right  and  is  compulsory, 
but  children  with  irregular  status  cannot  be 
counted for funding purposes, which may lead 
the school to decline to enrol such children.64

Poverty and discrimination (formal and in-
formal) can inhibit access to basic services. Even 
if children with irregular status have the right 
to attend a state school, there may be barriers 
to  their  enrolment.  In  several  countries  (e.g. 
France, Italy, the United States), fears that their 
irregular situation will be reported have been 
found  to  deter  enrolment.65  In  South  Africa 
close  to  a  third  of  school-age  non-national 
children  are  not  enrolled,  for  a  combination 
of  reasons  including  inability  to  pay  for  fees, 
transport, uniforms and books, and exclusion 
by school administrators, while those in school 
regularly report being subjected to xenophobic 
comments by teachers or other students.66 

The steepest challenges appear to be faced 
by  two  groups:  children  who  migrate  alone, 

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

3

Box 3.2

Independent child migrants

Trafficking  and  asylum-seeking  are  often  depicted  as  accounting  for  most  of  the 
independent movement of children. However, evidence with a long historic record 
confirms that children also move in search of opportunities for work and education. 
The Convention on the Rights of the Child goes some way to recognizing children as 
agents, decision makers, initiators and social actors in their own right. However, the 
literature and policy responses to children’s mobility have largely focused on welfare 
and protection from harm, and tended to neglect policies of inclusion, facilitation and 
non-discrimination. 

As  for  other  types  of  movement,  the  effect  of  independent  child  migration  is 
context-specific. Some studies have found a significant link between non-attendance 
at school and the propensity to migrate to work among rural children, while others 
find that migration is positively associated with education. A recent study using cen-
sus data in Argentina, Chile and South Africa shows that independent child migrants 
had worse shelter at destination, whereas dependent child migrants were similar to 
non-migrants in their type of shelter. Over a fifth of international independent child 
migrants aged 15–17 years in these countries were employed, compared to fewer than 
4 percent of non-migrant dependent children. Many live with relatives or employers, 
but shelter and security can be important concerns. Children may be less able than 
adults to change jobs, find it harder to obtain documents even when eligible, may be 
more likely to suffer employer violence or encounters with the police, and may be more 
easily cheated by employers and others. 

Source:  Bhabha (2008) and Yaqub (2009).

children are often disadvantaged by the absence 
of a parent.

In OECD countries migrant pupils generally 
attend  schools  with  teachers  and  educational 
resources of similar quality to those attended 
by locally-born pupils, although there are some 
exceptions,  including  Denmark,  Greece,  the 
Netherlands and Portugal. In some cases, the 
quality of schools that migrant children attend 
is  below  national  standards,  but  this  is  more 
often  related  to  local  income  levels  generally 
than to migrant status in particular. Studies on 
school segregation in the United States suggest 
that children from migrant families have worse 
test  scores  if  they  attend  minority,  inner-city 
schools.73  Studies  from  the  Netherlands  and 
Sweden find that clustering migrant children 
and separating them from other children is det-
rimental to school performance.74 Even if they 
are not at a disadvantage with regard to instruc-
tional materials and equipment, migrant pupils 
may need special services, such as local language 
instruction. 

Our  interest  in  schooling  is  partly  due  to 
its value in improving the prospects of future 

59

who  tend  to  have  irregular  status  (box  3.2), 
and children who migrate within and between 
developing  countries  with  their  parents,  on  a 
temporary basis. The first group is unlikely to 
be able to access education at all, due to social 
and cultural isolation, strenuous and hazardous 
work, extreme poverty, poor health conditions 
and language barriers.67 As regards the second 
group,  qualitative  studies  in  Viet  Nam  and 
Pakistan  have  found  that  seasonal  migration 
disrupts their education.68 For instance, the Rac 
Lai minority in Viet Nam migrate with their 
children to isolated mountainous areas during 
the harvest season and their children do not at-
tend school during this period.69

Even if migrant children gain access to bet-
ter schools than would have been available to 
them  at  origin,  they  do  not  all  perform  well 
in  examinations  in  comparison  with  their  lo-
cally born peers. In the 21 OECD and 12 non-
OECD  countries  covered  by  the  Programme 
for International Student Assessment,70 which 
tested performance in science, pupils who were 
migrants tended to perform worse in this sub-
ject than locally born children. However, for-
eign-born pupils perform as well as their native 
peers in Australia, Ireland and New Zealand, 
as well as in Israel, Macao (China) the Russian 
Federation  and  Serbia.  Likewise,  pupils  from 
the same country of origin performed differently 
across even neighbouring countries: for example, 
migrant pupils from Turkey perform better in 
mathematics in Switzerland than in Germany.71 
The next generation—children of migrants who 
are born in the destination place—generally do 
better, but with exceptions, including Denmark, 
Germany and the Netherlands. 

Part of the educational disadvantage of chil-
dren in migrant families can be traced to low 
parental education and low income. Children 
whose  parents  have  less  than  full  second-
ary  completion—which  tends  to  be  the  case 
in  migrant  households  in  France,  Germany, 
Switzerland and the United States—typically 
complete fewer years of school. However, while 
many migrant families live away from relatives 
and social networks, a study of migrant children 
in eight developed countries found that they are 
generally more likely than local children to grow 
up with both parents.72 This counters a belief 
sometimes found in the literature that migrant 

3

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Box 3.3

The next generation

People who move are often motivated by the prospect of better lives 
for their children. And indeed the children of migrants can represent 
a key population group requiring the attention of policy makers. In 
Brussels, for example, they represent over 40 percent of the school-
age population, while in New York they are half and in Los Angeles 
County almost two thirds. 

Obtaining  a  good  education  is  critical  to  future  prospects. 
Evidence suggests that the children of migrants typically perform 
better than their parents, but do not fully catch up with children with-
out a migrant background, even after controlling for socio-economic 
characteristics. There are exceptions, however, including Australia 
and Canada, where school performance is close to or exceeds that 
of native peers. Countries with education systems that involve early 
streaming, such as Germany and the Netherlands, appear to have 
the biggest gaps in school performance. 

How the children of migrants fare in the labour market also tends 
to differ across countries and groups. Recent findings suggest that 

they  have  higher  employment  rates  compared  to  migrants  in  the 
same age group, but they are at a disadvantage compared to those 
without a migrant background. In some European countries youth 
unemployment  rates  are  worse  among  the  children  of  migrants. 
Limited  access  to  informal  networks  and  discrimination  (whether 
origin- or class-based) can contribute to these disparities. 

Some  children  of  migrants  encounter  racism,  often  linked  to 
limited job opportunities. Studies in the United States, for exam-
ple, have suggested that there is a risk of ‘segmented assimilation’, 
meaning that the contacts, networks and aspirations of children of 
immigrants are limited to their own ethnic group, but also that this 
risk  varies  across  groups.  Teenage  children  of  Mexican  migrants 
have been found to be at higher risk of dropping out of school, going 
to prison or becoming pregnant. The same studies suggest that eco-
nomic and social resources at the family and community levels can 
help to overcome these risks and avert the rise of an underclass of 
disaffected youth.

Source:  Crul (2007), OECD (2007), Castles and Miller (1993), and Portes and Zhou (2009).

generations.  Some  evidence  on  the  extent  to 
which this happens is presented in box 3.3. 

3.4 Empowerment, civic rights 
and participation 
Moving has the potential to affect not only mate-
rial well-being but also such things as bargaining 
power, self-respect and dignity. Empowerment, 
defined as the freedom to act in pursuit of per-
sonal goals and well-being,75 can be enhanced 
through movement. However, the reception in 
the host country obviously matters, especially 
when  migrants  face  local  hostility,  which  can 
even lead to outbreaks of violence.

Human development is concerned with the 
full range of capabilities, including social free-
doms that cannot be exercised without political 
and civic guarantees. These form part of the di-
mension of freedom that some philosophers have 
labelled “the social bases of self-respect”.76 They 
can be just as important as gains in income and 
may be associated with these gains, but are often 
held in check by deep-seated social, class and ra-
cial barriers. In many countries the attitude to-
wards migration is negative, which can diminish 
migrants’ sense of dignity and self-respect. This 
is not a new phenomenon: in the 19th century, 
the Irish faced the same prejudices in the United 
Kingdom, as did the Chinese in Australia. 

Movement can allow rural women to gain 
autonomy. Empowerment tends to occur when 
migration  draws  women  from  rural  to  urban 
areas, separating them from other family mem-
bers and friends and leading them to take paid 
work  outside  the  home.77  Qualitative  studies 
in  Ecuador,  Mexico  and  Thailand  have  dem-
onstrated such effects. For the women in these 
studies, returning to the old rural way of life was 
an  unthinkable  proposition.78  Higher  labour 
force participation and greater autonomy have 
also  been  found  among  Turkish  women  who 
emigrated.79 It is not only women who seek to 
challenge  traditional  roles  when  they  move: 
young  migrant  men  can  be  similarly  empow-
ered to challenge patriarchal structures within 
the family.80 

But such positive outcomes are not inevita-
ble. Some migrant communities become caught 
in a time warp, clinging to the cultural and so-
cial practices that prevailed in the home country 
at the time of migration, even if the country has 
since  moved  on.81  Or  the  migrant  communi-
ties  may  develop  radically  conservative  ideas 
and practices, as a way to isolate them from the 
host culture. This can lead to alienation and, 
occasionally, to extremism. There is a complex 
dynamic  between  cultural  and  community 
traditions, socio-economic circumstances and 

60

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

3

for many refugees fleeing from conflict, even if 
their legal situation remains tenuous while they 
are  seeking  asylum.  Our  analysis  of  determi-
nants of flows between pairs of countries shows 
that the level of democracy in a country has a 
positive, significant effect on migrant inflows.85
Yet even countries with strong legal tradi-
tions are tested when routine police work in-
volves  the  enforcement  of  migration  law.  As 
we  saw  in  chapter  2,  countries  vary  in  their 
enforcement  practices.  In  some  countries,  ir-
regular migrants may be seen as easy targets by 
corrupt officials. In South Africa police hoping 
to extort bribes often destroy or refuse to rec-
ognize documents in order to justify arrest.86
Mongolian migrants in the Czech Republic also 
report paying fines during police raids, regard-
less of whether they are authorized or not.87 In 
Malaysia migrants have sometimes been subject 
to  informal  enforcement  mechanisms,  which 
have led to complaints of abuse (box 3.4).

As we shall see in chapter 4, people in des-
tination places often have concerns about the 
economic, security and cultural impacts of im-
migration.  In  some  cases,  xenophobia  arises. 
This appears to be most likely where extrem-
ists  foment  fears  and  insecurities.  Outbreaks 
of violence towards migrants can erupt—such 

Figure 3.11

Voting rights are generally reserved for citizens
Voting rights in local elections by migrant status in  
developed versus developing countries, 2009

Developed countries

Developing countries

Permanent

Temporary

Permanent

Temporary

| 
0 
Share of countries in sample (%)

| 
40 

| 
20 

| 
60 

| 
80 

|

100

Only available for citizens or not available

Available for migrants with conditions

Source:  Klugman and Pereira (2009).

61

public  policies.  Recent  micro-analysis  for  10 
Latin American countries found that internal 
migrants  of  indigenous  origin  still  faced  dis-
crimination  in  urban  areas,  even  while  they 
gained greater access to services than they had 
in their rural area.82 Another study found that 
Bolivian  women  in  Argentina  were  discrimi-
nated  against,  had  only  limited  employment 
opportunities and continued to occupy subor-
dinate social positions.83

Participation and civic engagement are im-
portant aspects of empowerment. Our analysis 
using  the  World  Values  Survey  suggests  that 
people  with  a  migrant  background  are  more 
likely to participate in a range of civic associa-
tions.  Compared  to  people  who  do  not  have 
a migrant parent, they are more likely to be a 
member of, and also tend to have more confi-
dence in, a range of organizations, such as sport, 
recreational, art and professional organizations. 
Research also suggests that political participa-
tion increases with the ability to speak the host 
country’s language, with duration of stay, educa-
tion in the destination country, connections to 
social networks and labour markets, and when 
institutional barriers to registering and voting 
are lower.84 

Institutional factors matter, especially civic 
and  electoral  rights.  Our  policy  assessment 
found  that  voting  in  national  elections  was 
largely restricted to citizens, although several 
developed  countries  allow  foreigners  to  vote 
in  local  elections  (figure  3.11).  The  Migrant 
Integration Policy Index (MIPEX), which as-
sesses  the  opportunities  for  migrants  to  par-
ticipate  in  public  life  in  terms  of  collective 
associations, voting in, and standing for local 
elections and support provided to migrant asso-
ciations, found policies in Western Europe to be 
favourable to participation, but those in Central, 
Eastern and South-Eastern Europe were less so. 
In Sweden any legal resident who has lived in 
the country for three years can vote in regional 
and local elections and stand for local elections, 
while in Spain foreigners can vote in local elec-
tions as long as they are registered as residents 
with their local authority.

Many people move at least partly to enjoy 
greater physical and personal security, and to 
places where the rule of law and government ac-
countability are better. This is obviously the case 

3

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Box 3.4

Enforcement mechanisms in Malaysia

As one of the most robust economies in South-East Asia, Malaysia has attracted 
many migrant workers (officially measured at around 7 percent of the population in 
2005). The Malaysian labour force at the end of 2008 was almost 12 million, about 
44 percent of the 27 million residents, and included about 2.1 million legal migrants 
from Bangladesh, Indonesia and other Asian countries. The Malaysian government 
has tended to tolerate unauthorized migration, while regularizations have sometimes 
been coupled with a ban on new entries and stepped up enforcement. 

Since  1972,  Malaysia’s  People’s  Volunteer  Corps  (Ikatan  Relawan  Rakyat  or 
RELA) has helped to enforce laws, including immigration laws. RELA volunteers, who 
number about 500,000, are allowed to enter workplaces and homes without warrants, 
to carry firearms and to make arrests after receiving permission from RELA leaders. 
Migrant activists say that RELA volunteers have become vigilantes, planting evidence 
to justify arrests of migrants and using excessive force in their policing. The govern-
ment has recently announced its intention to curb abuses and is currently looking into 
ways of improving RELA by providing training to its members.

Source:  Crush and Ramachandran (2009), Vijayani (2008) and Migration DRC (2007).

as those in Malaysia and South Africa in 2008 
and Northern Ireland in 2009, for example—
with  serious  repercussions  for  both  the  indi-
viduals involved and the societies as a whole.88
Experience suggests that such outbreaks typi-
cally  occur  where  political  vacuums  allow 
unscrupulous local actors to manipulate under-
lying social tensions.89

Ironically, although intolerance often results 
in resistance to social contact, evidence suggests 
that increased social contact between migrants 
and non-migrants can improve levels of toler-
ance for migrant groups and counter existing 
biases.90 Clearly, moderate politicians, govern-
ment authorities and NGOs all have a critical 
part to play in designing and delivering policies 
and services that facilitate integration and avert 
escalated  tensions.  Having  legislation  on  the 
books is not enough: it must be accompanied by 
leadership, accountability and informed public 
debate (chapter 5). 

3.5  Understanding outcomes 
from negative drivers
Some  people  move  because  their  luck  im-
proves—they win the green card lottery, or a 
friend or relative offers a helping hand to take 
up  a  new  opportunity  in  the  city.  But  many 
others  move  in  response  to  difficult  circum-
stances—economic collapse and political unrest 
in Zimbabwe, war in Sudan, natural disasters 

62

such as the Asian tsunami. Moving under these 
circumstances  can  expose  people  to  risk,  in-
crease their vulnerability and erode their capa-
bilities. But of course in these cases it is not the 
migration per se but the underlying drivers that 
cause such deterioration in outcomes. This sec-
tion reviews the outcomes associated with three 
broad  drivers:  conflict,  development-induced 
displacement and trafficking. 

3.5.1  When insecurity drives 
movement 
People who flee insecurity and violence typically 
see an absolute collapse in their human devel-
opment outcomes. But migration nonetheless 
protects them from the greater harm they would 
doubtless come to if they were to stay put. Several 
forms of protection are available for refugees, es-
pecially for those covered by the 1951 Refugee 
Convention—which defines the criteria under 
which individuals may be granted asylum by its 
signatory countries and sets out their associated 
rights—and thus under the UNHCR mandate. 
This protection has allowed millions of people 
to move to new safe and secure environments. 
Contemporary conflicts are increasingly as-
sociated with large population movements, in-
cluding deliberate displacement of civilians as a 
weapon of war.91 While some are able to flee to 
more distant places in North America, Western 
Europe and Australasia, most displaced people 
relocate within or near their country of origin. 
Even if camps host only about a third of those 
displaced by conflicts,92 these settlements have 
come to symbolize the plight of people in poor, 
conflict-affected  regions.  A  contemporary  ex-
ample is the people of Darfur, Sudan, who fled 
their  villages  in  the  wake  of  attacks  that  de-
stroyed their cattle and crops, wells and homes, 
to join what was already the largest displaced 
population in the world in the wake of the long-
running war in southern Sudan. 

When  the  poor  and  destitute  flee  combat 
zones, they run severe risks. Conflict weakens 
or destroys all forms of capital and people are 
cut off from their existing sources of income, 
services and social networks, heightening their 
vulnerability. After flight, those displaced may 
have escaped the most direct physical threats, 
but  still  face  a  range  of  daunting  challenges. 
Security concerns and local hostility rank high 

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

3

Map 3.1

Conflict as a driver of movement in Africa
Conflict, instability and population movement in Africa

Morocco

Tunisia

Algeria

Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya

Egypt

0.3

Western
Sahara

Mauritania

Mali

Niger

Senegal
0.6

Gambia
Guinea- 
Bissau

Guinea

Sierra
Leone

Burkina

Faso

Benin

Ghana

Togo

Liberia Côte
d’Ivoire

Nigeria

Cameroon

3.5

Central

African Republic
24.9

Equatorial Guinea

Sao Tome and Principe

Congo

Gabon

20.0

3.7

Chad

Eritrea

0.3

Sudan

2.5

Ethiopia

Djibouti

16.6

0.6

2.7

9.4

2.6

1.2

Uganda

Rwanda
Burundi

Somalia

23.8

Kenya

7.0

0.4
0.1

Congo, 
(Dem. Rep. of the)
0.3

Tanzania

Angola

Namibia

Zambia

Malawi

Mozambique

Zimbabwe

Madagascar

Botswana

Swaziland

Lesotho

South Africa

Recent conflict zones

Ongoing UN peacekeeping missions (2009)

23.8

Refugee flows in 2007 (in thousands)

Number of refugees (end of 2008)

0–1,000

1,000–10,000

10,000–100,000

100,000–523,032

Internally displaced persons (end of 2008)
Burundi 
Central African Republic 
Chad 
Congo 
Congo, DRC 
Côte d’Ivoire 
Ethiopia 
Kenya 
Liberia 
Rwanda 
Senegal 
Somalia 
Sudan 
Uganda 
Zimbabwe 

100,000
108,000
180,000
Up to 7,800
1,400,000
At least 621,000
200,000–300,000
300,000–600,000
Undetermined
Undetermined
10,000–70,000
1,300,000
4,900,000
869,000
570,000–1,000,000

Source:  UNHCR (2008) and IDMC (2008). 

Note: This map illustrates refugee flows based on official UNHCR data and misses important flows associated with instability, as in the case of Zimbabweans fleeing to 
South Africa for example.

63

among their problems, especially in and around 
camps.93 In civil wars, the internally displaced 
may face harassment from government and ani-
mosity from local people. 

Nevertheless, it is important to bear in mind 
that conflict and insecurity drive only a small 
share of all movement—about one tenth of in-
ternational  movement  and  around  one  twen-
tieth of internal movement. There are regional 
differences: Africa has been more extensively af-
fected, conflict being associated with about 13 
percent of international movement on the con-
tinent. Map 3.1 shows the location of conflicts 
and major flows of people displaced within and 
across borders in Africa. While the map paints 
a  sombre  picture,  we  underline  that  the  vast 
majority of migration in Africa is not conflict-
induced and that most Africans move for the 
same reasons as everyone else.94 

Beyond  continuing  insecurity,  trying  to 
earn a decent income is the single greatest chal-
lenge that displaced people encounter, especially 
where they lack identity papers.95 In commis-
sioned case studies,96 Uganda was the only one 
of six countries where refugees were legally al-
lowed to move around freely, to accept work and 
to access land. About 44 percent of Uganda’s 
working-age  camp  population  was  employed, 
whereas in all five other countries the figure was 
below 15 percent. Even if the displaced are per-
mitted to work, opportunities are often scarce. 
The human development outcomes of those 
driven to move by insecurity vary considerably. 
While the UN Guiding Principles on Internal 
Displacement have raised awareness, internally 
displaced  people—80  percent  of  whom  are 
women and children—do not benefit from the 
same  legal  rights  as  refugees.97  Roughly  half 
the  world’s  estimated  26  million  internally 
displaced  people  receive  some  support  from 
UNHCR,  IOM  and  others,  but  sovereignty 
is often invoked as a justification for restrict-
ing international aid efforts. In 2007, Sudan, 
Myanmar and Zimbabwe each had more than 
500,000  crisis-affected  people  who  were  be-
yond the reach of any humanitarian assistance.98
Even in less extreme cases, malnutrition, poor 
access to clean water and health care, and lack 
of documentation and property rights are typi-
cal among the internally displaced. However, 
some governments have made concerted efforts 

3

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

to improve the rights and living conditions of 
their internally displaced populations.99

The situation of international refugees also 
varies, but can be bleak, especially in cases of 
protracted  conflict,  such  as  Palestine.  Such 
cases account for roughly half of all refugees. 
Our commissioned analysis confirmed overall 
weak human development outcomes, alongside 
some heterogeneity across groups and countries. 
The incidence of sexual and gender-based vio-
lence is high. Paradoxically, however, women in 
Burundi and Sri Lanka were reportedly empow-
ered as they adopted new social roles as protec-
tors and providers for their families.100

Education and health indicators in refugee 
camps are sometimes superior to those of sur-
rounding local populations. Our study found 
that  the  share  of  births  attended  by  skilled 
medical personnel in camps surveyed in Nepal, 
Tanzania and Uganda was significantly higher 
than  among  these  countries’  population  as  a 
whole.  Similarly,  education  indicators—such 
as gross primary enrolment ratios and pupil-to-
teacher ratios—were better among camp-based 

Figure 3.12

School enrolment among refugees often exceeds 
that of host communities in developing countries
Gross primary enrolment ratios: refugees, host populations 
and main countries of origin, 2007

Kenya

Uganda

Bangladesh

Tanzania

Nepal

Thailand

| 
20 

| 
0 
Gross enrolment ratio (%)

| 
60 

| 
40 

Refugees

Population of main 
origin country

Population of 
asylum country

| 
80 

| 

100 

| 

120 

| 

140 

|

160

Source:  de Bruijn (2009), UNHCR (2008) and UNESCO Institute for Statistics (2008b).

64

refugees than for the general population (figure 
3.12). These patterns reflect both the effects of 
humanitarian assistance in camps and the gen-
erally poor human development conditions and 
indicators prevailing in countries that host the 
bulk of refugees.

As noted above, most refugees and internally 
displaced people do not end up in camps at all, 
or at least not for long. For example, less than a 
third of Palestinian refugees live in UNRWA-
administered camps.101 On average, those who 
relocate to urban centres seem to be younger and 
better educated, and may enjoy better human de-
velopment outcomes than those living in camps. 
Others, usually the better off, may be able to flee 
to more distant and wealthier countries, some-
times under special government programmes. 

Only a minority of asylum seekers succeed 
in obtaining either refugee status or residency, 
and those whose request is denied can face pre-
carious situations.102 Their experience depends 
on  the  policies  of  the  destination  country. 
Developed countries in our policy assessment 
allowed humanitarian migrants access to emer-
gency  services,  but  more  restricted  access  to 
preventive services, whereas in the developing 
countries in our sample, access to public health 
services was even more restricted (figure 3.8). 

Finding durable long-term solutions to the 
problem  in  the  form  of  sustainable  return  or 
successful local integration has proved a major 
challenge. In 2007, an estimated 2.7 million in-
ternally displaced people and 700,000 refugees, 
representing about 10 and 5 percent of stocks 
respectively, returned to their areas of origin.103 
Perhaps  the  Palestinian  case,  more  than  any 
other,  illustrates  the  hardships  faced  by  refu-
gees when conflict is protracted, insecurity is 
rampant and local economic opportunities are 
almost non-existent.104

In other cases, gradual integration into local 
communities,  sometimes  through  naturaliza-
tion, has taken place in a number of develop-
ing and developed countries, although refugees 
tend to be relatively disadvantaged, especially as 
regards labour market integration.105

3.5.2 Development-induced 
displacement 
Outcomes may also be negative when people are 
displaced by development projects. The classic 

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

3

This  issue  was  addressed  in  the  Guiding 
Principles on Internal Displacement mentioned 
above. The principles provide that, during the 
planning stage, the authorities should explore 
all  viable  options  for  avoiding  displacement. 
Where it cannot be avoided, it is up to the au-
thorities to make a strong case for it, stating why 
it is in the best interests of the public. The sup-
port and participation of all stakeholders should 
be  sought  and,  where  applicable,  agreements 
should stipulate the conditions for compensa-
tion  and  include  a  mechanism  for  resolving 
disputes. In all instances, displacement should 
not  threaten  life,  dignity,  liberty  or  security, 
and should include long-term provisions for ad-
equate shelter, safety, nutrition and health for 
those displaced. Particular attention should be 
given to the protection of indigenous peoples, 
minorities, smallholders and pastoralists.

These  principles  can  help  inform  devel-
opment  planners  as  to  the  social,  economic, 
cultural  and  environmental  problems  that 
large- and even small-scale development proj-
ects can create. Incorporating such analysis in 
planning processes, as has been done for some 
major sources of development finance—includ-
ing the World Bank, which has an Involuntary 
Resettlement  Policy—has  been  an  important 
step forward.111 Such policies allow for rights of 
appeal by aggrieved parties through inspection 
panels and other mechanisms. Approaches of 
this kind can enable favourable human develop-
ment outcomes for the majority while helping to 
mitigate the risks borne by the displaced minor-
ity, though the challenges remain large. 

3.5.3  Human trafficking 
The images associated with trafficking are often 
horrendous, and attention tends to focus on its 
association with sexual exploitation, organized 
crime, violent abuse and economic exploitation. 
Human  trafficking  not  only  adversely  affects 
individuals but can also undermine respect for 
whole groups. However, the increasing focus on 
this phenomenon has not yet provided a reliable 
sense of either its scale or its relative importance 
in movements within and across borders (chap-
ter 2). 

Above all, trafficking is associated with re-
strictions on human freedom and violations of 
basic human rights. Once caught in a trafficking 

Above all, trafficking 
is associated with 
restrictions on human 
freedom and violations 
of basic human rights

65

case of this occurs when large dams are built 
to provide urban water supplies, generate elec-
tricity or open up downstream areas for irriga-
tion. Agricultural expansion is another major 
cause, as when pastoralists lose traditional riv-
erine grazing lands when these are developed 
for irrigated cash crops. Infrastructure projects 
such as roads, railways or airports may also dis-
place people, while the energy sector—mining, 
power  plants,  oil  exploration  and  extraction, 
pipelines—may be another culprit. Parks and 
forest reserves may displace people when man-
aged in a top-down style rather than by local 
communities. 

These types of investment generally expand 
most people’s opportunities—in terms of pro-
viding  yield-increasing  technology,  links  to 
markets and access to energy and water, among 
other  things.106  But  how  the  investments  are 
designed and delivered is critical. By the 1990s 
it was recognized that such interventions could 
have negative repercussions for the minority of 
people directly affected, and were criticized on 
social justice and human rights grounds.107 One 
vocal critic has been the World Commission on 
Dams, which has stated that, “impoverishment 
and disempowerment have been the rule rather 
than  the  exception  with  respect  to  resettled 
people around the world,”108 and that these out-
comes have been worst for indigenous and tribal 
peoples displaced by big projects. 

Among the impacts observed in indigenous 
communities are loss of assets, unemployment, 
debt bondage, hunger and cultural disintegra-
tion.  There  are  many  such  examples,  which 
have  been  well  documented  elsewhere.109  The 
India Social Institute estimates that there are 
about  21  million  development-induced  dis-
placed persons in India, many of whom belong 
to scheduled castes and tribal groups. In Brazil 
the construction of the Tucuruí Dam displaced 
an estimated 25,000 to 30,000 people and sig-
nificantly  altered  the  lifestyle  and  livelihood 
means of the Parakanã, Asurini and Parkatêjê 
indigenous groups. Poor resettlement planning 
split up communities and forced them to relo-
cate several times, often in areas that lacked the 
necessary infrastructure to serve both the needs 
of a growing migrant population (pulled in by 
construction jobs) and those displaced by the 
project.110 

3

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Trafficking can be 
most effectively 
combated through 
better opportunities and 
awareness at home—
the ability to say ‘no’ to 
traffickers is the best 
defence

66

network, people may be stripped of their travel 
documents and isolated, so as to make escape 
difficult if not impossible. Many end up in debt 
bondage in places where language, social and 
physical barriers frustrate their efforts to seek 
help. In addition, they may be reluctant to iden-
tify themselves, since they risk legal sanctions 
or criminal prosecution. People trafficked into 
sex work are also at high risk of infection from 
HIV and other sexually transmitted diseases.112
One  basic  constraint  in  assessing  the  im-
pacts of trafficking relates to data. The IOM’s 
Counter Trafficking Module database contains 
data on fewer than 14,000 cases that are not a 
representative sample, and the same applies to 
the database of the United Nations Office on 
Drugs  and  Crime  (UNODC).113  The  picture 
that emerges from these data, alongside existing 
studies and reports, suggests that most people 
who are trafficked are young women from mi-
nority ethnic groups. This is confirmed by other 
sources—for example a study in South-eastern 
Europe,  which  found  that  young  people  and 
ethnic minorities in the rural areas of post-con-
flict countries were vulnerable to trafficking, as 
they tended to experience acute labour market 
exclusion  and  disempowerment.114  However, 
this picture may be biased, since it is possible 
that males are less willing to self-report for fear 
they will be refused victim status. In addition 
to social and economic exclusion, violence and 
exploitation at home or in the home community 
increase vulnerability to trafficking. So too does 
naïve belief in promises of well-paid jobs abroad. 
Sexual exploitation is the most commonly 
identified  form  of  human  trafficking  (about 
80 percent of cases in the UNODC database), 
with economic exploitation comprising most of 
the balance. For women, men and children traf-
ficked for these and other exploitative purposes, 
bonded labour, domestic servitude, forced mar-
riage, organ removal, begging, illicit adoption 
and conscription have all been reported. 

Alongside the lack of power and assets of the 
individuals involved, the negative human devel-
opment outcomes of trafficking can be partly 
associated with the legal framework of destina-
tion countries. Restrictive immigration controls 
mean that marginalized groups tend to have ir-
regular status and so lack access to the formal la-
bour market and the protections offered by the 

state to its citizens and to authorized migrant 
workers.115 More generally, of course, trafficking 
can be most effectively combated through better 
opportunities and awareness at home—the abil-
ity to say ‘no’ to traffickers is the best defence.

Difficulties  in  distinguishing  trafficking 
from other types of exploitation, as well as chal-
lenges involved in defining exploitative practices, 
further complicate the rights of trafficked peo-
ple. Problems can arise over enforcement. It ap-
pears that trafficking is sometimes very broadly 
interpreted to apply to all migrant women who 
engage in sex work. This can be used to justify 
their harassment and deportation, making them 
even more vulnerable to exploitation. And once 
identified, they are virtually always deported or 
referred to assistance programmes conditional 
on cooperation with law enforcement.

Anti-trafficking initiatives have burgeoned 
in recent years. Interventions to reduce vulner-
ability in potential source communities, such as 
awareness  campaigns  and  livelihood  projects, 
have been undertaken. Assistance programmes 
have  also  provided  counselling,  legal  aid  and 
support for return and reintegration. Some of 
these programmes are proving successful, such 
as the use of entertainment and personal stories 
as community awareness tools in Ethiopia and 
Mali,  or  door-to-door  mass  communication 
campaigns  as  in  the  Democratic  Republic  of 
the Congo.116 Other initiatives, however, have 
led to counterproductive and sometimes even 
disastrous outcomes, including prejudicial limi-
tations on women’s rights. In Nepal, for exam-
ple, prevention messages discouraged girls and 
women from leaving their villages, while HIV 
awareness campaigns stigmatized returnees.117 
Anti-trafficking  initiatives  clearly  raise  very 
complex and difficult challenges, which need to 
be carefully handled.

The  lines  between  traffickers  on  the  one 
hand and recruiters and smugglers on the other 
can be blurred. For example, the business of re-
cruitment expands to include numerous layers 
of informal sub-agents. These sub-agents, work-
ing under the umbrella of legitimate recruiters 
can  reduce  accountability  and  increase  costs. 
The risks of detention and deportation are high. 
Smuggling costs in some cases include bribing 
corrupt border officials and manufacturing false 
documents.118 

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

3

Figure 3.13

Significant human development gains to internal movers
Ratio of migrants’ to non-migrants’ estimated HDI in selected 
developing countries, 1995–2005

Guinea

Madagascar

Uganda

Indonesia

Viet Nam

Côte d’Ivoire

Ghana

Kyrgyzstan

Paraguay

Cameroon

Bolivia

Nicaragua

Colombia

Peru

Zambia

Guatemala

| 
0.6 

| 
0.8 

HDI ratio

| 
1.0 

| 
1.2 

| 
1.4 

|
1.6

Source:  Harttgen and Klasen (2009).

levels of happiness and health were very similar 
among migrants and non-migrants: 84 percent 
of migrants felt happy (compared to 83 percent 
of  non-migrants),  while  72  percent  felt  that 
their health was good or very good (compared 
to 70 percent of non-migrants); only 9 percent 
were  ‘not  satisfied’  with  life  (compared  to  11 
percent of non-migrants). The share of migrants 
reporting that they felt quite or very happy was 
highest in developed countries. Similar shares 
of foreign and locally born respondents—more 
than 70 percent—felt that they have ‘freedom 
and choice over their lives’.121 

67

3.6  Overall impacts
We have studied the discrete impacts of migra-
tion on incomes, health, education and aspects 
of empowerment and agency—and looked at the 
negative outcomes that can occur when people 
move under duress. Differences in the HDI are 
a simple way to capture overall changes.

Our background research found very large 
average  differences  between  the  HDI  of  mi-
grants  and  that  of  non-migrants,  moving  in-
ternally  and  across  borders.  We  found  that, 
on average, migrants to OECD countries had 
an HDI about 24 percent higher than that of 
people who stayed in their respective countries 
of origin.119 But the gains are large not only for 
those who move to developed countries: we also 
found  substantial  differences  between  inter-
nal migrants and non-migrants.120 Figure 3.13 
shows that, in 14 of the 16 developing countries 
covered by this analysis, the HDI for internal 
migrants is higher than that of non-migrants. 

In some cases the differences are substantial. 
For internal movers in Guinea, for example, the 
HDI for migrants is 23 percent higher than for 
non-migrants—only one percentage point lower 
than for migrants to OECD countries. If these 
migrants were thought of as a separate country, 
they would be ranked about 25 places higher 
than non-migrants in the global HDI. 

There are two major exceptions to the over-
all  pattern  of  improved  well-being  from  in-
ternal  movement:  in  Guatemala  and  Zambia 
internal migrants appear to do worse than non-
migrants. Both these cases underline the risks 
that accompany migration. In Guatemala most 
movers were displaced by violence and civil war 
in the 1980s and early 1990s, while in Zambia 
migrants faced extreme urban poverty follow-
ing  the  successive  economic  shocks  that  have 
hit this country over the past 20 years. In a few 
other cases—Bolivia and Peru, for example—
the  overall  human  development  outcome  ap-
pears  marginal  despite  sizeable  income  gains, 
suggesting poor access to services as a factor in-
hibiting well-being. However, these exceptional 
cases serve to emphasize the norm, which is that 
most movers are winners. 

These findings for international movers are 
borne out by evidence on migrants’ own sense of 
well-being (figure 3.14). We analysed data for 52 
countries in 2005 and found that self-reported 

3.7  Conclusions
The complex effects associated with movement 
are  difficult  to  summarize  simply.  The  broad 
findings presented in this chapter underline the 
role  of  movement  in  expanding  human  free-
doms that was outlined in chapter 1. We saw 
that  people  who  move  generally  do  enhance 
their opportunities in at least some dimensions, 
with gains that can be very large. However, we 
also saw that the gains are reduced by policies 
at home and destination places as well as by the 
constraints facing individuals and their fami-
lies. Since different people face different oppor-
tunities and constraints, we observed significant 
inequalities  in  the  returns  to  movement.  The 
cases in which people experience deteriorations 
in their well-being during or following the pro-
cess of movement—conflict, trafficking, natural 
disasters, and so on—were associated with con-
straints that prevent them from choosing their 
place in life freely. 

A  key  point  that  emerged  is  that  human 
movement  can  also  be  associated  with  trade-
offs—people may gain in some and lose in other 
dimensions of freedom. However, the losses can 
be alleviated and even offset by better policies, 
as we will show in the final chapter.

3

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Figure 3.14 Migrants are generally as happy as locally-born people
Self-reported happiness among migrants and locally-born 
people around the world, 2005/2006

Locally born

Foreign born

Total

Total

Low HDI

Medium HDI

High HDI

Very high HDI

| 
0 
Percent of responses

| 
20 

| 
40 

| 
60 

| 
80 

|

100

“All things considered, would you say you are:”

Very happy 

  Quite happy 

  Not very happy 

  Not at all happy

Source:  HDR team estimates based on WVS (2006).

68

Impacts 
at origin 
and 
destination

4

Movement has multiple impacts on other people besides 
those who move—impacts that critically shape its overall 
effects. This chapter explores impacts in the country 
of origin and in the host country while underlining their 
interconnectedness. Families with members who have 
moved elsewhere in the country or abroad tend to 
experience direct gains, but there can also be broader 
benefits, alongside concerns that people’s departure 
is a loss to origin communities. As regards impacts on 
places of destination, people often believe that these are 
negative—because they fear that newcomers take jobs, 
burden public services, create social tensions and even 
increase criminality. The evidence suggests that these 
popular concerns are exaggerated and often unfounded. 
Still, perceptions matter—and these warrant careful 
investigation to help frame the discussion of policy.

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

4
4

Impacts at origin and destination

Among people who do not move but can be affected by movement 
are the families of movers and communities at places of origin and 
destination. The multiple impacts of movement in these differ-
ent places are critical in shaping the overall human development 
effects of movement; this chapter addresses each in turn.

At places of origin, impacts can be seen on in-
come and consumption, education and health, 
and broader cultural and social processes. These 
impacts are mostly favourable, but the concern 
that communities lose out when people move 
needs  to  be  explored.  Our  review  of  the  evi-
dence shows that impacts are complex, context-
specific  and  subject  to  change  over  time.  The 
nature  and  extent  of  impacts  depend  on  who 
moves, how they fare abroad and their procliv-
ity to stay connected, which may find expression 
in flows of money, knowledge and ideas, and in 
the stated intention to return at some date in the 
future. Because migrants tend to come in large 
numbers  from  specific  places—e.g.  Kerala  in 
India and Fujian Province in China—impacts 
on local communities may be more pronounced 
than national impacts. Yet the flow of ideas can 
also  have  far-reaching  effects  on  social  norms 
and class structures, rippling out to the broader 
community over the longer term. Some of these 
impacts have traditionally been seen as negative, 
but a broader perspective suggests that a more 
nuanced view is appropriate. In this light we also 
examine the extent to which national develop-
ment plans, such as poverty reduction strategies 
(PRSs), reflect and frame efforts of developing 
countries to promote gains from mobility. 

Much  academic  and  media  attention  has 
been  directed  to  the  impacts  of  migrants  on 
places of destination. One widespread belief is 
that these impacts are negative—newcomers are 
seen as ‘taking our jobs’ if they are employed, liv-
ing off the taxpayer by claiming welfare benefits 
if they are not employed, adding an unwanted 
extra burden to public services in areas such as 
health  and  education,  creating  social  tensions 
with  local  people  or  other  immigrant  groups 
and  even  increasing  criminal  behaviour.  We 

investigate the vast empirical literature on these 
issues, which reveals that these fears are exagger-
ated and often unfounded. Nevertheless, these 
perceptions matter because they affect the po-
litical climate in which policy decisions about 
the  admission  and  treatment  of  migrants  are 
made—fears may stoke the flames of a broader 
hostility to migrants and allow political extrem-
ists to gain power. Indeed, historical and con-
temporary evidence suggests that recessions are 
times when such hostility can come to the fore. 
We end this chapter by tackling the thorny issue 
of public opinion, which imposes constraints on 
the policy options explored in the final chapter. 

4.1 Impacts at places of origin
Typically, only a small share of the total population 
of an origin country will move. The exceptions—
countries  with  significant  shares  abroad—are 
often small states, including Caribbean nations 
such as Antigua and Barbuda, Grenada, and Saint 
Kitts and Nevis. In these cases the share can ex-
ceed 40 percent. The higher the share, the more 
likely it is that impacts on people who stay will 
be more pervasive and more profound. While the 
discussion below focuses on developing countries, 
it is important to bear in mind that, as shown in 
chapter 2, emigration rates for low-HDI countries 
are the lowest across all country groupings. 

In general, the largest impacts at places of 
origin are felt by the households with an absent 
migrant. However, the community, the region 
and even the nation as a whole may be affected. 
We now look at each of these in turn.

4.1.1 Household level effects
In many developing countries, movement is a 
household strategy aimed at improving not only 
the mover’s prospects but those of the extended 

71
71

4

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Despite these financial 
rewards, separation 
is typically a painful 
decision incurring high 
emotional costs for 
both the mover and 
those left behind

72

family  as  well.  In  return  for  supporting  the 
move,  the  family  can  expect  financial  remit-
tances when the migrant is established—trans-
fers that typically far outweigh the initial outlay 
or what the mover might have hoped to earn in 
the place of origin. These transfers can in turn 
be used to finance major investments, as well as 
immediate consumption needs. 

Despite these financial rewards, separation is 
typically a painful decision incurring high emo-
tional costs for both the mover and those left 
behind. In the words of Filipina poet Nadine 
Sarreal:

Your loved ones across that ocean
Will sit at breakfast and try not to gaze
Where you would sit at the table
Meals now divided by five
Instead of six, don’t feed an emptiness.1

The fact that so many parents, spouses and 
partners are willing to incur these costs gives an 
idea of just how large they must perceive the re-
wards to be.

Financial remittances are vital in improving the 
livelihoods  of  millions  of  people  in  developing 
countries. Many empirical studies have confirmed 
the positive contribution of international remit-
tances to household welfare, nutrition, food, health 
and living conditions in places of origin.2 This con-
tribution is now well recognized in the literature on 
migration and reflected in the increasingly accurate 
data on international remittances published by the 
World Bank and others, illustrated in map 4.1. 
Even those whose movement was driven by conflict 
can be net remitters, as illustrated at various points 
in  history  in  Bosnia  and  Herzegovina,  Guinea-
Bissau, Nicaragua, Tajikistan and Uganda, where 
remittances helped entire war-affected communi-
ties to survive.3 

In some international migration corridors, 
money  transfer  costs  have  tended  to  fall  over 
time,  with  obvious  benefits  for  those  sending 
and receiving remittances.4 Recent innovations 
have also seen significant falls in costs at the na-
tional level, as in the case of Kenya described in 
box 4.1. With the reduction in money transfer 
costs, families who once relied on relatives and 
close family friends or who used informal ave-
nues such as the local bus driver to remit are now 
opting  to  send  money  through  banks,  money 
transfer companies and even via cell-phones. 

An important function of remittances is to di-
versify sources of income and to cushion families 
against setbacks such as illness or larger shocks 
caused by economic downturns, political con-
flicts or climatic vagaries.5 Studies in countries as 
diverse as Botswana, El Salvador, Jamaica and the 
Philippines have found that migrants respond to 
weather shocks by increasing their remittances, 
although it is difficult to establish whether these 
effectively serve as insurance. Recent examples 
include the 2004 Hurricane Jeanne in Haiti, the 
2004 tsunami in Indonesia and Sri Lanka and 
the 2005 earthquake in Pakistan.6 In a sample 
of  poor  countries,  increased  remittances  were 
found to offset some 20 percent of the hurricane 
damage experienced,7 while in the Philippines 
about 60 percent of declines in income due to 
rainfall shocks were offset.8 In El Salvador crop 
failure caused by weather shocks increased the 
probability of households sending a migrant to 
the United States by 24 percent.9 

Migrants can provide this kind of protection 
if their incomes are large enough and do not vary 
in tandem with their families’. This depends on 
the nature and breadth of the shock, as well as 
the location of the migrant. For example, remit-
tances may not provide much insurance against 
the effects of the current global economic reces-
sion, as migrant workers almost everywhere suf-
fer retrenchment just when their families most 
need support (box 4.2). Remittances to develop-
ing countries are expected to fall from US$308 
billion in 2008 to US$293 billion in 2009.10 

Even when the total volume of remittances 
is  large,  their  direct  poverty-reducing  impact 
depends on the socio-economic background of 
those who moved. Within the Latin America 
region, for example, a recent study found that 
in  Mexico  and  Paraguay  remittance-receiving 
households were primarily from the bottom of 
the income and education distribution, whereas 
the  opposite  pattern  was  found  in  Peru  and 
Nicaragua.11  More  generally,  however,  restric-
tions imposed by the limited opportunities of 
the low-skilled to move across borders mean that 
remittances do not tend to flow directly to the 
poorest families,12 nor to the poorest countries.13 
Take  China,  for  example:  because  migrants 
generally do not come from the poorest house-
holds, the aggregate poverty impact of internal 
migration  is  limited  (an  estimated  1  percent 

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

4

Map 4.1

  Remittances flow primarily from developed to developing regions

Flows of international remittances, 2006–2007

0.9

0.3

2.2

17.3

4.4

North America

0.4

0.02

1.2

36.3

Latin America
& Caribbean

1.9

1.1

0.1

0.9

2.8

3.6

30.1

10.3

0.01

0.08

42.0

Asia

1.6

5.3

52.5

Europe

15.9

2.9

0.3

Africa

2.2

0.3

0.02

4.0

0.2

3.1

1.5

Oceania

Remittances as a share of GDP, 2007

no data
0.0%–0.4%
0.5%–0.9%
1.0%–4.9%
5.0%–9.9%

10.0%–14.9%
15.0%–19.9%
20.0%–24.9%
25.0%–29.9%
>30%

Source: HDR team data based on Ratha and Shaw (2006) and World Bank (2009b). 

0.5

0.02

Regions
North America
Europe
Oceania
Latin America and the Caribbean
Asia
Africa

Remittances, 2006 (in US$ billions)

Intra-
regional
remittances

reduction), although this still translates into al-
most 12 million fewer poor.14 At the same time, 
some migrants do come from poor households 
and significant remittances sometimes flow to 
non-family members, which allows for broader 
benefits—as has been found for Fiji and Jamaica, 
for example.15

The poverty-reducing effects of internal mi-
gration, which have been demonstrated by stud-
ies in a diverse range of national situations, may 
be even more significant. In Andhra Pradesh and 
Madhya Pradesh in India poverty rates in house-
holds with a migrant fell by about half between 
2001/02 and 2006/07,16 and similar results were 
found  for  Bangladesh.17  Large  gains  have  also 
been reported from panel data, tracking individ-
uals over time, in the Kagera region of Tanzania 
between 1991 and 2004.18 Research conducted 

for this report, using panel data and controlling 
for selection bias, examined the cases of Indonesia 
between 1994 and 2000 and Mexico between 
2003  and  2005.  In  Indonesia,  where  almost 
half of all households had an internal migrant, 
poverty rates for non-migrants were essentially 
stable for the period (which included the East 
Asian financial crisis), falling slightly from 40 
to 39 percent, but declined rapidly for migrants, 
from 34 to 19 percent. In Mexico, where about 9 
percent of households had an internal migrant, 
poverty rates rose sharply from 25 to 31 percent 
for non-migrants for the period (which included 
the 2001/02 recession), but only slightly, from 29 
to 30 percent, for migrants. In both countries, at 
the outset households with a migrant made up 
less than half of the top two wealth quintiles, but 
over time this share rose to nearly two thirds.19 

73

4

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Box 4.1

How cell-phones can reduce money transfer costs: the case of Kenya

For many people in remote rural areas of developing countries, the 
costs of receiving money remain high: recipients typically have to 
travel long distances to a regional or national capital to collect cash, 
or the cash has to be hand-delivered by an intermediary, who may 
take a sizeable margin.

The rapid diffusion of cell-phone technology over the past de-
cade has led to the development of innovative money transfer sys-
tems in several countries. For example, in Kenya, a leading cell-phone 
company, Safaricom, teamed up with donors to pilot a system that 
subsequently led to the launch in 2007 of M-PESA (meaning ‘Mobile-
Cash’). Anyone with a cell-phone can deposit money in an account 
and send it to another cell-phone user, using M-PESA agents distrib-
uted across the country. 

Source:  Jack and Suri (2009).

A recent survey of users across Kenya found that, in just two 
years, M-PESA has expanded rapidly. It is now used by some 6 
million people or 17 percent of the population—out of 26 percent 
who  are  cell-phone  owners—and  is  supported  by  a  network  of 
more than 7,500 agents. Transfers can be made from the port city 
of  Mombasa  to  Kisumu  on  the  shores  of  Lake  Victoria,  or  from 
Nairobi in the south to Marsabit in the north—both two-day bus 
trips—with the push of a few buttons and at a cost of less than a 
dollar. By mid-2008, the volume of money sent had reached some 
8 percent of GDP, mostly in the form of a large number of relatively 
small transactions.

One dimension of movement that appears to 
affect remittance flows is gender. Evidence sug-
gests that women tend to send a larger propor-
tion of their incomes home, on a more regular 
basis, though their lower wages often mean that 
the absolute amounts are smaller.20

There is also a temporal dimension to these 
flows. Over time, the knock-on effects of remit-
tances  may  substantially  broaden  the  impacts 
on poverty and inequality.21 The poor may gain 
when remittances are spent in ways that gener-
ate local employment, such as building houses, or 
when businesses are established or expanded.22
Some  studies  have  found  that  remittance  re-
cipients exhibit greater entrepreneurship and a 
higher marginal propensity to invest than house-
holds without a migrant.23 Positive investment 
effects can take decades to materialize in full, 
however,  and  are  complex  and  far  from  auto-
matic. The lag may reflect delays in the sending 
of remittances as migrants adapt to their new 
homes,  or  political  and  economic  conditions 
in places of origin—such as a poor climate for 
investment—which can inhibit or deter trans-
fers.24 Lastly, remittances can also create a store 
of capital to fund further migration, years after 
the first family member has left. 

Some  commentators  discount  the  impor-
tance  of  remittances  because  they  are  partly 
spent  on  consumption.  This  critique  is  mis-
taken, for two broad reasons. First, consumption 
can be inherently valuable and often has long-
term, investment-like effects, especially in poor 

communities.  Improvements  in  nutrition  and 
other basic consumption items greatly enhance 
human  capital  and  hence  future  incomes.25 
Similarly, spending on schooling is often a pri-
ority for families receiving remittances, because 
it increases the earning power of the next genera-
tion. Second, most types of spending, especially 
on labour-intensive goods and services such as 
housing and other construction, will benefit the 
local economy and may have multiplier effects.26
All of these effects are positive. 

Families with migrants appear more likely 
to send their children to school, using cash from 
remittances to pay fees and other costs. This re-
duces child labour. And, once there, the children 
of migrants are more likely to finish school, as the 
better prospects associated with migration affect 
social norms and incentives.27 In Guatemala in-
ternal and international migration is associated 
with increased educational expenditures (45 and 
48 percent respectively), especially on higher lev-
els of schooling.28 In rural Pakistan temporary 
migration can be linked with increased enrol-
ment rates and declines in school dropout rates 
that exceed 40 percent, with larger effects for 
girls than for boys.29 In our own commissioned 
research, similar results were found in Mexico, 
where children in households with an internal 
migrant had a 30–45 percent higher probability 
of being in an appropriate grade for their age.30
The prospect of moving can strengthen in-
centives to invest in education.31 This has been 
predicted  in  theory  and  shown  in  practice  in 

74

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

4

Box 4.2

The 2009 crisis and remittances

The 2009 economic crisis, which began in major destination countries and has now 
gone global, has shrunk flows of remittances to developing countries. There is already 
evidence of significant declines in flows to countries that depend heavily on remit-
tances, including Bangladesh, Egypt, El Salvador and the Philippines. 

Countries and regions vary in their exposure to the crisis via remittance effects. 
Remittances to Eastern European and Central Asian countries are forecast to suffer 
the biggest drop in both relative and absolute terms, partly reflecting the reversal of 
the rapid expansion that had followed European Union accession and the economic 
boom in the Russian Federation. In Moldova and Tajikistan, where remittance shares 
of GDP are the highest in the world (45 and 38 percent respectively), flows are pro-
jected to shrink by 10 percent in 2009. El Salvador is facing a significant decline in 
remittances, which account for over 18 percent of its GDP. 

About three quarters of remittances to sub-Saharan Africa come from the United 
States and Europe, which have been badly affected by the downturn (chapter 2). It 
remains to be seen whether these sources will prove more or less resilient than official 
development aid and private investment flows.

Source: Ratha and Mohapatra (2009a,b).

Figure 4.1

  The global recession is expected to impact remittance flows
Projected trends in remittance flows to developing regions, 
2006–2011

70

60

50

40

30

20

)
s
n
o

i
l
l
i

b
 
$
S
U
n

 

i
(
 
s
w
o
fl
 
e
c
n
a
t
t
i

m
e

10R

East Asia and the Pacific
South Asia
Latin America
and the Carribean

Central and Eastern Europe
and the CIS

Arab States

Sub-Saharan Africa

  | 
 2006 

| 

2007 

| 

2008* 

| 

2009** 

| 

2010** 

|

2011** 

* Estimate ** Forecasts
Source: Ratha and Mohapatra (2009b) and The Economist Intelligence Unit (2009).
Note: These regional groupings include all developing countries as per UNDP Regional Bureaux’ classification. For the complete list of countries in each region see 
‘Classification of Countries’ in the Statistical Annex.

Offsetting the potential gains in consump-
tion,  schooling  and  health,  children  at  home 
can  be  adversely  affected  emotionally  by  the 
process  of  migration.  One  in  five  Paraguayan 
mothers residing in Argentina, for example, has 

75

some countries. Emigration of Fijians to high-
skilled  jobs  in  Australia,  for  example,  has  en-
couraged the pursuit of higher education in Fiji. 
This effect is so large that, while roughly a third 
of the Indo-Fijian population has emigrated in 
the past three decades and skilled workers are 
over-represented among emigrants, the absolute 
number of skilled Indo-Fijian workers in Fiji has 
greatly increased.32 A number of governments, 
including  the  Philippines,  have  deliberately 
sought to promote work abroad in part by facili-
tating the generation of skills at home.33

The  impacts  of  migration  prospects  on 
schooling  incentives  are  shaped  by  the  con-
text and the prospects themselves. In Mexico, 
for  instance,  where  low-skilled,  often  ir-
regular  migration  predominates,  boys  were 
more likely to drop out of school to take up 
this option.34 In our commissioned study of 
Chinese  census  data  at  the  provincial  level, 
investments in schooling in rural source com-
munities  responded  to  the  skills  needed  for 
job opportunities outside the province. Thus, 
where internal migrants had secondary educa-
tion, this generally encouraged the completion 
of higher levels by children remaining in the 
community, whereas in provinces where mi-
grants tended to have completed only middle 
school,  this  was  associated  with  lower  high 
school completion rates.35

The health outcomes of people who do not 
move  may  be  affected  by  migration,  through 
effects  on  nutrition,  living  conditions,  higher 
incomes  and  the  transmission  of  knowledge 
and practices. There is evidence that the higher 
incomes  and  better  health  knowledge  associ-
ated with migration have a positive influence on 
infant and child mortality rates.36 However, in 
Mexico at least, it was found that longer term 
health outcomes may be adversely affected, be-
cause levels of preventive health care (e.g. breast 
feeding and vaccinations) were lower when at 
least  one  parent  had  migrated.37  This  may  be 
associated  with  the  higher  work  burden  and/
or reduced levels of knowledge associated with 
single parenting or families with fewer adults. 
Moreover, when infectious diseases can be con-
tracted in destination places, return travel can 
bring significant health risks to families at home. 
The risks of HIV and other sexually transmitted 
diseases can be especially high.38 

4

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

The effects of 
skills flows are less 
detrimental for origin 
communities than is 
often assumed

76

young children in Paraguay.39 Studies investigat-
ing the possible impacts have found that these 
depend on the age of the child when the separa-
tion occurs (in the first years of life the impact 
may be greater), on the familiarity and attitude 
of the adult in whose care the child is left, and 
on whether the separation is permanent or tem-
porary.40 The advent of cheap and easy commu-
nication, for example by cell-phone and Skype, 
has eased the separation of family members and 
has greatly helped the maintenance of ties and 
relationships in recent years. 

Movement  can  affect  gender  relations  at 
home.41 When women move, this can change tra-
ditional roles, especially those surrounding the 
care of children and the elderly.42 When men mi-
grate, rural women can be empowered by their ab-
sence: field studies conducted in Ecuador, Ghana, 
India, Madagascar and Moldova all found that, 
with male migration, rural women increased their 
participation in community decision-making.43
Norms adopted in a migrant’s new home—such as 
a higher age of marriage and lower fertility, greater 
educational expectations of girls, and labour force 
participation—can filter back to the place of ori-
gin. This diffusion process may be accelerated in 
cases where the social and cultural gap between 
sending and receiving countries is large.44 This has 
been confirmed by recent findings regarding the 
transfer of fertility norms from migrants to the 
extended family and friends at places of origin: 
lower numbers of children at the national level 
become the norm in both places.45 

Overall, however, the evidence about impacts 
on traditional gender roles is mixed. For example, 
where the lives of migrants’ wives at home remain 
largely confined to housekeeping, child-rearing 
and agricultural work, little may change—except 
that their workloads increase. Gains in authority 
may be temporary if male migrants resume their 
position as head of the household on return, as 
has  been  reported  from  Albania  and  Burkina 
Faso, for example.46 

 The transmission of norms may extend to par-
ticipation in civic affairs. Recent studies in six Latin 
American countries have found that individuals 
with greater connections to international migrant 
networks participate more in local community af-
fairs, are more supportive of democratic principles 
and are also more critical of their own country’s 
democratic performance.47 

4.1.2  Community and national level 
economic effects
Beyond its direct impacts on families with mi-
grants,  movement  may  have  broader  effects. 
Migration-driven processes of social and cultural 
change can have significant impacts on entrepre-
neurship, community norms and political trans-
formations—impacts that are often felt down the 
generations. For example, Kenya, and indeed most 
of Africa, may be affected today and in the future 
by  Barack  Obama  Senior’s  decision,  taken  five 
decades ago, to study in the United States. Most 
of these effects are highly positive. However, one 
concern that needs to be addressed is the outflow 
of skills from source communities. 

Fears that the mobility of the skilled harms 
the economy of origin countries have long been 
voiced, though the debate has become more nu-
anced  in  recent  years.48  The  concerns  surface 
regularly in a range of small states and poorer 
countries, but also extend to such countries as 
Australia, which sees many of its graduates go 
abroad. This issue has, over the past few decades, 
spawned a range of proposals, which are reviewed 
in chapter 5. But an important underlying point 
is that mobility is normal and prevalent, even in 
prosperous societies (chapter 2). Skilled people, 
like everyone else, move in response to a perceived 
lack of opportunities at home and/or better op-
portunities elsewhere, for both themselves and 
their children. Attempts to curtail these move-
ments without addressing underlying structural 
causes are unlikely to be effective. There are also 
reasons to believe that the effects of skills flows 
are less detrimental for origin communities than 
is often assumed, as argued in box 4.3.

One traditional concern has been that the 
departure of able-bodied youth leads to labour 
shortages and declines in output, particularly in 
agriculture.49 In Indonesia, for example, com-
munities faced shortages of labour for coopera-
tive farm work.50 However, in many developing 
countries, movements of labour from agriculture 
to urban areas can be an important part of struc-
tural transformation. And to the extent that a 
shortage of capital, not labour, constrains growth 
in most developing countries, remittances can be 
an important source of rural investment finance. 
Migration can be a strong force for conver-
gence in wages and incomes between source and 
destination  areas.  This  is  because,  as  mobility 

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

4

Box 4.3

  Impacts of skills flows on human development

The emigration of people with university degrees has attracted much 
popular and academic attention, especially because the shortage of 
skills is acute in many poor countries. The evidence suggests that 
improving local working conditions in order to make staying at home 
more attractive is a more effective strategy than imposing restric-
tions on exit. 

It is important to recognize that the dreadful quality of key service 
provision in some poor countries cannot be causally traced to the 
emigration of professional staff. Systematic analysis of a new data-
base on health worker emigration from Africa confirms that low health 
staffing levels and poor public health conditions are major problems, 
but tend to reflect factors unrelated to the international movement 
of  health  professionals—namely  weak  incentives,  inadequate  re-
sources, and limited administrative capacity. Migration is more accu-
rately portrayed as a symptom, not a cause, of failing health systems.
The social cost associated with skilled emigration should not be 
overestimated. Where graduate unemployment is high, as it often is 
in poor countries, the opportunity cost of departure may not be large. 
If a highly productive but modestly paid worker leaves a community, 
it suffers a significant loss; but if an equally skilled but unproductive 

worker  leaves,  the  community  is  hardly  affected.  If,  for  example, 
teachers often do not show up to work, the direct impacts of their de-
parture are unlikely to be large. While this should not weaken the drive 
to address these underlying sources of inefficiency and waste, the 
fact that staff may not currently be serving their communities is not a 
point that can simply be wished away in the debate about skills flows.
Like other migrants, skilled people abroad often bring benefits to 
their countries of origin, through remittances and the development of 
networks. As shown in figure 3.2, the absolute gain in income from 
migration can be huge, so that if only a fraction of the difference is re-
mitted, the benefits to the home country can be considerable. Some 
research has suggested that the share of foreign direct investment in 
a developing country is positively correlated with the number of that 
country’s graduates present in the investing country. Other studies 
have found that the more high-skilled emigrants from one country live 
in another, the more trade occurs between those countries. 

Last but not least, significant numbers of skilled emigrants do re-
turn—a recent estimate suggested that about half do so, usually after 
about five years. Recent literature has also emphasized the increas-
ing importance of circular movement as transnational networks grow.

Source: Clemens (2009b), Banerjee and Duflo (2006), Javorcik, Ozden, Spatareanu, and Neagu (2006), Rauch (1999), Felbermayr and Toubal (2008), Findlay and Lowell (2001) and Skeldon (2005).

increases between two regions, their labour mar-
kets become more integrated and large differences 
in wages become more difficult to sustain. There 
is  considerable  historical  evidence,  reviewed  in 
chapter 2, that enhanced mobility is associated 
with the reduction of wage disparities between 
countries. Inequalities within countries can fol-
low a bell-shaped pattern over time: progress in 
some areas creates wealth and thus increases in-
equality, which encourages migration, which over 
time in turn tends to reduce inequality. Studies 
have associated greater internal labour mobility 
with a reduction in inter-regional income dispari-
ties in Brazil, India, Indonesia and Mexico.51

Interestingly,  emigration  rates  for  skilled 
workers are substantially higher among women 
than  men  in  most  developing  countries.52
Women with tertiary degrees are at least 40 per-
cent more likely than male graduates to emigrate 
to OECD countries from a wide range of coun-
tries,  including  Afghanistan,  Croatia,  Ghana, 
Guatemala, Malawi, Papua New Guinea, Togo, 
Uganda and Zambia. While this could reflect 
various factors, structural and/or cultural barri-
ers to professional achievement at home seem the 
most likely explanation.53 

The  movement  of  skilled  people  happens 
not only across but also within borders, as peo-
ple move towards better opportunities. This is 
illustrated in figure 4.2, which compares move-
ment  within  Brazil,  Kenya,  Philippines  and 
United States to international rates. The strik-
ing result is that we find very similar patterns of 
migration of skilled workers within and across 
nations. In particular, the tendency for a higher 
proportion of skilled workers to emigrate from 
small states is echoed in a similar tendency to 
migrate more from small localities. This sug-
gests that the policy options explored in discus-
sions of local development—such as increased 
incentives and improved working conditions—
may also be relevant to policy-making related to 
the emigration of skilled professionals abroad. 
More broadly, the economic effects of mi-
gration  at  the  national  level  in  countries  of 
origin are complex and, for the most part, dif-
ficult to measure. Networks may arise that fa-
cilitate the diffusion of knowledge, innovation 
and attitudes and so promote development in 
the medium to longer term. There is a host of 
anecdotal  evidence  indicating  that  migrants 
support productive activities in their countries 

77

4

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

of origin, through technology transfer, the re-
patriation of enhanced skills and exposure to 
better  working  and  management  practices.54
The  Chinese  government  has  pursued  links 
with  Chinese  studying  abroad  to  help  pro-
mote  academic  excellence  in  its  universities. 
Similarly, India’s ‘argonauts’—young graduates 
who helped fuel the country’s high-tech boom 
in the early 2000s—brought to their jobs the 
ideas,  experience  and  money  they  had  accu-
mulated in the United States and elsewhere.55
The entire software industry model changed as 
firms  increasingly  outsourced  production  to 
India or based themselves there. In this case, 
skilled migration brought significant external 
and dynamic effects, which benefit both work-
ers and the industry in the place of origin. 

The spread of new industries via international 
networks of skilled professionals can be rapid 
and unpredictable, can find niches even amidst 
otherwise low levels of overall development, and 
depends crucially on the openness of the busi-
ness and political environment at home. It ap-
pears that countries such as the Islamic Republic 
of Iran, Viet Nam and the Russian Federation, 
which have more closed systems, have benefited 
less  in  high-tech  business  formation  via  their 

skilled  workers  abroad  than  have  India  and 
Israel, for example.56

Almost all the quantitative macro studies 
on  effects  at  the  national  level  have  focused 
more narrowly on the scale and contribution 
of remittances. In 2007 the volume of officially 
recorded remittances to developing countries 
was about four times the size of total official 
development aid.57 At this scale, remittances 
are likely to be making a strong contribution 
to foreign exchange earnings relative to other 
sources  in  individual  countries.  In  Senegal, 
for  instance,  remittances  in  2007  were  12 
times  larger  than  foreign  direct  investment. 
Remittances  represent  a  significant  share  of 
GDP in a range of small and poor states, with 
Tajikistan topping the list at 45 percent; for all 
the countries in the top 20 remittance receiv-
ing countries, the share exceeded 9 percent in 
2007; and in more than 20 developing coun-
tries, remittances exceed the earnings from the 
main commodity export. 

However, two major qualifications should 
be  attached  to  these  findings.  First,  the  vast 
bulk  of  these  flows  do  not  go  to  the  poorest 
countries. Of the estimated inflows of remit-
tances  in  2007,  less  than  1  percent  went  to 

Figure 4.2

Skilled workers move similarly across and within nations
Population and share of skilled workers who migrate internally and internationally

)

%

(
 

i

 

d
e
t
a
r
g
m
o
h
w
 
s
r
e
k
r
o
w
d
e

 

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

l
l
i

0.2

k
s
 
f
o
 
e
r
a
h
0S

Source: Clemens (2009b).

Note:  Shares represented using Kernel density regressions.

78

Kenyan districts

US states

Filipino provinces

Brazilian states

  | 
  0 

| 
 

| 
 

| 
 

| 
 

| 
15 

| 
 

| 
 

| 
 

| 
 

|
20

Total population (in millions, log scale)

Countries

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

4

countries in the low-HDI category. So, for this 
group, remittances are only about 15 percent 
of their official development aid. By contrast, 
in  Latin  America  and  the  Caribbean  remit-
tances in 2007 amounted to about 60 percent 
of the combined volume of all foreign direct 
investment and aid. Second, studies that have 
sought to trace the impacts of remittances on 
the long-term growth of the recipient country 
suggest that these impacts are generally small, 
although the findings are mixed.58 This stems in 
part from the fact that the development impact 
of remittances is ultimately contingent on local 
institutional structures.59

Concerns  have  been  expressed  that  remit-
tances create a form of ‘resource curse’, contrib-
uting to undesirable currency appreciation and 
thereby hampering competitiveness. Here again, 
however, the evidence is mixed.60 Moreover, re-
mittances go to individuals and families and are 
thus distributed more widely than rents from 
natural resources, which flow only to govern-
ments  and  a  handful  of  companies  and  thus 
can tend to exacerbate corruption. One positive 
macroeconomic feature of remittances is that 
they tend to be less volatile than either official 
development aid or foreign direct investment, 
although still subject to cyclical fluctuations, as 
seen in 2009 (box 4.2).61 

In  general,  ‘remittance-led  development’ 
would not appear to be a robust growth strat-
egy. Like flows of foreign aid, remittances alone 
cannot  remove  the  structural  constraints  to 
economic growth, social change and better gov-
ernance that characterize many countries with 
low levels of human development. That said, for 
some small states, particularly those facing addi-
tional challenges related to remoteness, mobility 
may be integral to an effective overall strategy for 
human development (box 4.4). 

4.1.3 Social and cultural effects
Mobility can have profound consequences for 
social,  class  and  ethnic  hierarchies  in  origin 
communities  if  lower  status  groups  gain  ac-
cess  to  substantially  higher  income  streams. 
This is illustrated by the cases of the Maya in 
Guatemala62 and the Haratin, a group of mainly 
black  sharecroppers,  in  Morocco.63  These  are 
welcome changes, which can disrupt traditional, 
caste-like forms of hereditary inequality based 

on such things as kinship, skin colour, ethnic 
group or religion, which are associated with un-
equal access to land and other resources.

The  ideas,  practices,  identities  and  social 
capital that flow back to families and communi-
ties at origin are known as social remittances.64
These remittances can arise through visits and 
through  rapidly  improving  communications. 
The case of the Dominican village of Miraflores, 
where two thirds of families sent members to 
Boston in the 1990s, shows the impacts on gen-
der dynamics. Women’s roles changed, not only 
in Boston, where they went out to work, but also 
in the Dominican Republic, where they enjoyed 
a more equal distribution of household tasks and 
greater empowerment generally. Another exam-
ple comes from Pakistanis at the Islamic Center 
of  New  England  in  the  United  States,  where 
women  pray  and  run  the  mosque  alongside 
men. News of these changes has travelled back 
to Karachi in Pakistan, where some women still 
prefer traditional approaches but others are try-
ing to create new spaces where women can pray 
and study together. Health is another area where 
social remittances have an impact. As a result of 
exposure abroad, visiting or returning migrants 
may bring back practices such as drinking safe 
water, keeping animals out of living spaces, or 
going for annual medical check-ups. 

The social and cultural effects of migration 
are  not  always  positive,  however.  A  counter-
example is the deportation of youth from the 
United States back to Central America, which 
has been likened to the export of gangs and gang 
cultures.65 Although detailed data and analysis 
are not available, a recent regional report found 
that the distinction between home-grown gangs 
(pandillas) and those exported from the United 
States (maras) is not always clear.66 In either case, 
programmes that target at-risk individuals and 
communities with a view to preventing youth 
and gang violence are needed, alongside inter-
governmental cooperation and greater support 
and funding for reintegration programmes.67

For many young people all over the world, 
spending  time  abroad  is  considered  a  normal 
part of life experience and migration marks the 
transition to adulthood. Field studies in Jordan, 
Pakistan, Thailand and Viet Nam have found 
that migration was a means of enhancing a fam-
ily’s social status in the local community. It is 

The ideas, practices, 
identities and social 
capital that flow 
back to families and 
communities at origin 
are known as social 
remittances

79

4

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Box 4.4

Mobility and the development prospects of small states

As noted in chapter 2, it is striking that the countries with the high-
est rates of emigration are small states. These rates often coincide 
with underdevelopment. For poorer small states, the disadvantages 
of being small include over-dependence on a single commodity or 
sector and vulnerability to exogenous shocks. Small countries cannot 
easily take advantage of economies of scale in economic activity and 
in the provision of public goods, and often face high production costs 
and consumer prices. In the case of small island states, remoteness 
is an additional factor, raising transport costs and times and making 
it difficult to compete in external markets. All these factors encour-
age out-migration. 

The  financial  benefits  associated  with  migration  are  relatively 
large for small states. In 2007, remittances averaged US$233 per cap-
ita, compared to a developing country average of US$52. The annual 
highest flows relative to GDP are found in the Caribbean, with remit-
tances accounting for 8 percent of GDP. However, most small states 
are not among the countries with the highest GDP shares of remit-
tances, so they are not especially exposed to shocks from this source. 
At the same time, the benefits of migration for small states go well 
beyond the monetary value of remittances. Moving opens up oppor-
tunities for labour linkages, which can enhance integration with eco-
nomic hubs. Temporary labour migration can be a way of balancing 
the economic needs of both the origin and destination sides, of pro-
viding opportunities for low-skilled workers and of enabling broader 
benefits at home through the repatriation of skills and business ideas. 
To the extent that smallness overlaps with fragility and, in some coun-
tries, instability, migration can be a safety valve to mitigate the risk 
of conflict, as well as a diversification strategy over the longer term. 
Some small states have integrated emigration into their develop-
ment strategies, mainly to meet the challenge of job creation. Our com-
missioned review of PRSs showed that many small states (Bhutan, 
Cape Verde, Dominica, Guinea-Bissau, Sao Tome and Principe, and 
Timor-Leste) mention positive elements of international migration in 
terms of impact on development and/or poverty reduction. Among 
the goals in Timor-Leste’s Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP) 

(2003) was that of developing a plan for 1,000 workers to go abroad an-
nually. However, others (Djibouti, Gambia, Guyana and Maldives) refer 
to emigration only as a problem. Some see negative aspects, such 
as exposure to downturns in remittances (Cape Verde) and increased 
inequality (Bhutan). Dominica’s PRS saw emigration both as a cause 
of poverty and as contributing to poverty reduction. 

Small states can make migration a strategic element of develop-
ment efforts in several ways, some of which involve regional agree-
ments. Some countries focus on temporary employment abroad. 
Others emphasize the creation of skills, sometimes in concert with 
neighbours. Mauritius has actively encouraged temporary employ-
ment abroad as a way of acquiring skills and capital that migrants 
can use to set up their own business on return. Supported by do-
nors, the government has established a programme that provides 
technical and financial support to returning migrants. The Lesotho 
Development Vision 2020 focuses on generating jobs at home by 
attracting foreign direct investments, while recognizing the role of 
work abroad, especially in neighbouring South Africa. Its PRS sets 
out reform measures that include automation and decentralization 
of immigration services, establishment of a one-stop shop for ef-
ficient processing of immigration and work permits, and anti-cor-
ruption measures in the Department of Immigration. Development 
strategies can take broader measures to deal with the challenges of 
remoteness. For example, in the South Pacific, regional universities 
and vocational training have facilitated mobility, and several states 
have entered into migration agreements with their neighbours. 

Emigrants from small states have similar profiles to migrants gen-
erally, in that they tend to have more skills and resources than people 
who stay. In Mauritius, for example, the total emigration rate is 12.5 
percent, but about 49 percent for graduates. Overall, however, there 
is no significant difference in the net supply of skills, measured by the 
number of doctors per 10,000 population, between small and large 
states. In terms of simple averages, the number of doctors is actually 
higher for small states, at 23 per 10,000 compared to 20 per 10,000 
on average for all countries.

Source:  Luthria (2009), Winters and Martin (2004), Black and Sward (2009), Seewooruthun (2008), Government of Lesotho (2004), Winters, Walmsley, Wang, and Grynberg (2003), Amin and Mattoo (2005), Koettl (2006) and Pritchett (2006).

thus not surprising that the probability of mi-
gration increases for those with links to people 
already abroad. 

Sometimes a ‘culture of migration’ emerges, 
in  which  international  migration  is  associated 
with personal, social and material success while 
staying home smacks of failure.68 As the social 
network grows, the culture is further engrained 
and migration becomes the norm, particularly 
among  the  young  and  able.  This  has  been  ob-
served in cases where there has been large-scale 

out-migration, such as the Philippines, as well as 
in West and Southern Africa. A study in Nigeria 
found that two out five undergraduate students 
were more interested in leaving Nigeria as a way 
of gaining social status than in seeking gainful 
employment  at  home.69  This  can  also  be  seen 
with respect to internal migration: a recent study 
from Ethiopia suggests that shifting preferences 
and aspirations as a result of education could lead 
people to migrate out of rural areas, irrespective 
of  the  earning  potential  that  migration  may 

80

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

4

goods such as local church or soccer field resto-
rations. Sometimes these are co-financed—the 
most famous example being Mexico’s Tres Por 
Uno  programme,  which  aims  to  increase  col-
lective  remittances  by  assuring  migrant  asso-
ciations that, for every peso they invest in local 
development projects, the federal, municipal and 
local government will put in three. The amount 
transferred  as  collective  remittances  remains 
only a fraction of that sent back individually to 
families, so the potential development impact 
of such programmes should not be overstated.79
For example, it has been estimated that, since 
1990,  Filipinos  in  the  United  States  have  do-
nated US$44 million in financial and material 
assistance  to  charitable  organizations  in  the 
Philippines, an amount equivalent to only 0.04 
percent of GDP in 2007.80

Evidence that 
emigrants have spurred 
the improvement of 
political institutions in 
their home countries is 
accumulating

81

Mobility can affect social and political life in 
countries of origin in a broader sense. Migrants 
and their descendants may return and become 
directly involved in civic and political activities. 
Alternatively, business investments, frequent re-
turn visits and/or collective initiatives can affect 
patterns of participation by others at home. For 
example, in Lebanon, new political forces were 
formed, particularly after the 1989 Ta’ef Accord, 
as returning migrants used the wealth earned 
abroad to engage in politics.81 

Evidence that emigrants have spurred the im-
provement of political institutions in their home 
countries is accumulating. Democratic reform has 
been found to progress more rapidly in developing 
countries that have sent more students to universi-
ties in democratic countries.82 Knowledge and ex-
pectations brought home by a group of Moroccans 
returning from France have been found to shape 
basic infrastructure investments by the govern-
ment in their home region.83 However, if emi-
gration serves simply as a safety valve, releasing 
political pressure, the incentives of the established 
political elite to reform are diminished.84

Just  as  migrants  enrich  the  social  fabric 
of their adopted homes, so too they can act as 
agents of political and social change if they re-
turn  with  new  values,  expectations  and  ideas 
shaped by their experiences abroad. Sometimes 
this has taken the form of supporting civil wars, 
as  in  the  case  of  Sri  Lanka’s  diaspora,  but  in 
most cases engagement is more constructive.85
Contemporary  high-profile  examples  include 

provide.70 The culture can acquire its own self-
perpetuating momentum, as illustrated by the 
Irish, who continued to emigrate at the height of 
the Celtic Tiger boom. 

In West Africa, migration is often not merely 
a vehicle for economic mobility but is also consid-
ered a process through which a boy attains matu-
rity.71 For some groups in Mali, Mauritania and 
Senegal, migration is a rite of passage: it is through 
the  knowledge  and  experience  acquired  from 
travel that young adolescent males become men.72 
In the Soninke village of Kounda in Mali mobil-
ity distinguishes males and females.73 Masculinity 
involves  the  freedom  to  move,  whereas  women 
in the village are to a large extent fixed inside the 
household. Men who do not migrate and remain 
economically dependent on their kin are consid-
ered to be immature youngsters and women refer 
to  them  with  a  derogatory  term,  tenes,  which 
means ‘being stuck like glue’. In Mali, the collo-
quial French term used to describe migration is 
aller en aventure, literally, to go on adventure. For 
the Soninke, being ‘on adventure’ implies being 
‘on the path to adulthood’.

The effect of migration on income distribution 
and social inequality is primarily a function of se-
lection—that is, who moves (see chapter 2).74 In 
general, money flows associated with international 
migration tend to go to the better off, whereas, at 
least in the longer term, remittances from internal 
migrants tend to be more equalizing.75 This type of 
pattern has been found for Mexico and Thailand, 
for  example.76  Our  commissioned  research  on 
China  also  found  that  inequality  initially  rose 
with internal remittances, then fell.77 

If it is the better off who tend to migrate, then 
an  appropriate  response  is  to  ensure  access  to 
basic services and opportunities at home as well 
as to facilitate the mobility of the poor. As we 
argue in chapter 5, poor people should not have 
to move in order to be able to send their children 
to decent schools: they should have options at 
home, alongside the possibility of moving. 

Collective remittances sent through home-
town associations and other community groups 
have  arisen  in  recent  decades.78  These  usually 
take the form of basic infrastructure projects, 
such as the construction of roads and bridges, 
the installation of drinking water and drainage 
systems,  the  sinking  of  wells,  the  bringing  of 
electricity and telephone lines, and other public 

4

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Box 4.5

Mobility and human development: some developing country perspectives

Several recent National Human Development Reports (NHDRs), in-
cluding those of Albania, El Salvador and Mexico, have focused on 
the development implications of mobility. In other countries NHDRs 
have  considered  how  mobility  influences  selected  aspects  of  de-
velopment, such as the role of civil society (Egypt), rural develop-
ment (Uganda), economic growth (Moldova), social cohesion (Côte 
d’Ivoire) and inequality (China). 

Mexico’s NHDR identifies inequality as the most robust deter-
minant of migratory flows, and movement as a factor that modi-
fies  the  availability  of  opportunities  to  others,  including  stayers. 
Drawing on the National Employment Survey, the average Mexican 
migrant is found to have slightly above-average schooling and in-
termediate income levels but comes from a marginalized munici-
pality, suggesting an initial set of capabilities coupled with lack of 
opportunities  as  major  driving  factors.  The  report  finds  that  the 

overall  human  development  impacts  of  migration  in  Mexico  are 
complex and conditional on the profile and resources of different 
groups. For example, while migration tends to reduce education 
inequality, especially for girls, it can also discourage investment in 
higher education in communities where most migrants traditionally 
go abroad for low-skilled jobs.

Different insights come from El Salvador, where emigrants repre-
sent 14 percent of the population and the impact of migration is more 
visible at the macro level. The recent acceleration of migration is seen 
to have contributed to the country’s transition to a service economy, 
which has relied heavily on remittances and a mosaic of small busi-
nesses specialized in delivering goods and services to migrants and 
their families, including nostalgia products and communications. The 
report suggests that migration allows some relatively poor people a 
degree of upward mobility through their links to the global economy.

Source:  UNDP (2000; 2004a; 2005a,b; 2006a; 2007c,e; 2008c).

Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf, President of Liberia and 
Africa’s first female head of state, and Joaquim 
Chissano, former President of Mozambique and 
now a respected elder statesman. Recognizing 
the potential benefits of diaspora engagement, 
some governments have begun to actively reach 
out.86 For example, Morocco and Turkey have 
extended political and economic rights to emi-
grants and allowed dual citizenship.87 However, 
whether  these  policies  of  engagement  benefit 
non-migrants or simply subsidize an elite group 
outside the country remains an open question. 
By improving its investment climate (presently 
ranked first in Africa by the World Bank’s Doing 
Business Index), Mauritius has also attracted mi-
grants back; similar patterns have been seen in 
India and Turkey, among other countries. 

4.1.4  Mobility and national 
development strategies 
To date, national development and poverty re-
duction strategies in developing countries have 
tended not to recognize the potential of mobil-
ity, nor integrated its dynamics into planning 
and monitoring. This is in part due to the range 
of  other  pressing  priorities  facing  these  coun-
tries, from improving systems of service deliv-
ery,  through  building  basic  infrastructure,  to 
promoting broad-based growth. 

Country-level  perspectives  on  the  links  be-
tween mobility and development can be gleaned 

from  recent  National  Human  Development 
Reports. The highlights are summarized in box 4.5.
To gain insights into the link between na-
tional  development  strategies  and  migration 
in  a  larger  sample  of  countries,  we  commis-
sioned a study to review the role of migration 
in Poverty Reduction Strategies (PRSs). These 
strategies are statements of development objec-
tives and policy, prepared by poorer countries 
whose views are often neglected in migration 
debates. PRSs are of interest since they also in-
volve contributions from, or partnerships with, 
civil society actors, are intended to be based on 
quantitative  and  participatory  assessments  of 
poverty, and provide a sense of government pri-
orities.88 They are also important important be-
cause international partners have committed to 
aligning their assistance to these national strate-
gies, given the importance of country ownership 
in development. 

To date, Bangladesh’s PRS has perhaps the 
most comprehensive treatment of migration and 
development linkages. The most recent PRSs for 
Albania, the Kyrgyzstan and Sri Lanka also re-
flect a major focus on migration-related issues. 
Many African countries acknowledge the role of 
remittances, the advantages of return and circu-
lar migration of skilled expatriates and the value 
of knowledge transfer from such people. Several 
strategies intend to attract development invest-
ments from wealthy members of the diaspora. 

82

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

4

4.2  Destination place effects 
Debates about migration often dwell on the eco-
nomic  and  social  impacts  on  rich  destination 
countries. This report has deliberately sought to 
redress this imbalance, by beginning with the 
migrants and their families, then focusing on 
the places they came from. However, that is not 
to say that the impacts on people in destination 
communities are unimportant. 

In many developed countries, the percentage 
of migrants in the total population has risen rap-
idly over the past 50 years. It is now estimated to 
be in double figures in more than a dozen OECD 
countries.91 As noted in chapter 2 and shown in 
detail in Statistical Table A, the highest shares are 
found in Oceania (16 percent)—which includes 
Australia  and  New  Zealand,  North  America 
(13 percent) and Europe (8 percent). The shares 
range between only 1 and 2 percent in the three 
major  developing  regions  of  Africa,  Asia,  and 
Latin America and the Caribbean. The highest 
country shares are recorded in the GCC states 
and in South-East Asia, including 63 percent in 
Qatar, 56 percent in the United Arab Emirates, 
47 percent in Kuwait and 40 percent in Hong 
Kong (China). The real and perceived impacts of 
immigration are critical, not least because these 
perceptions shape the political climate in which 
policy reforms are debated and determined. 

We begin this section by reviewing the eco-
nomic impacts of immigration as a whole, then 
focus more narrowly on the labour market and 

Table 4.1

PRSs recognize the multiple impacts of migration
Policy measures aimed at international migration in PRSs, 
2000–2008

Proactive/facilitative

No. of 
countries

Proactive/facilitative

No. of 
countries

Regulation/control

No. of 
countries

Export labour 
Encourage female migration 
Promote student mobility 
Sign bilateral agreements 
Improve labour conditions abroad 
Pre-departure training 

Develop consular services 
Regulate recruitment industry 
Facilitate portability of pensions 
Promote refugee integration 

10 
1 
3 
9 
6 
6 
 
3 
2 
2 
7 

Facilitate remittances 
9 
Encourage legal remittance channels  3 
17 
Engage diasporas 
8 
Promote investment by diasporas 
4 
Import skills 
Participate in regional  
 
8
cooperation programmes 
8 
Promote more research/monitoring 
Build institutional capacity 
5 
Combat HIV/AIDS amongst migrants  7
Re-integrate trafficking victims 
5

Combat trafficking 
Modernise customs 
Strengthen border control 
Combat illegal migration 
Promote refugee return 
Tackle the ‘brain drain’ 

19
18
17
12
10
9

Support return 
7
Sign readmission agreements  2

Source:  Adapted from Black and Sward (2009).
Note:  84 PRSs reviewed.

83

Earlier analysis of the treatment of interna-
tional migration in PRSs was based in part on the 
number  of  mentions  of  the  word  ‘migration’.89 
While simple, this indicator is not very meaning-
ful. It is nonetheless striking that there is no sig-
nificant correlation in PRSs between the number 
of references to migration and various measures of 
its possible importance for national development, 
such as share of the population living abroad, level 
of remittances and rate of urbanization.90

PRSs have laid out a wide range of migra-
tion-related policy initiatives, although these 
are often not explicitly based on prior analy-
sis. In many cases the state of knowledge about 
the relationship between the proposed initia-
tive and its expected development impact is 
weak,  underlining  the  importance  of  better 
data and analysis. 

In  general,  PRSs  appear  to  recognize  the 
complexity of international migration, acknowl-
edging both its advantages—opportunities for 
development  and  poverty  reduction—and  its 
possible  negative  effects.  Some  tend  to  stress 
the positive—for example the most recent PRSs 
of  Ethiopia,  Nepal,  Senegal  and  Uzbekistan 
frame  emigration  as  an  opportunity,  without 
mentioning  possible  downsides.  Most  recent 
strategies  emphasize  the  role  of  remittances, 
including  those  of  Bangladesh,  Democratic 
Republic of the Congo, Ghana, the Lao People’s 
Democratic Republic, Liberia, Pakistan, Timor-
Leste and Uzbekistan.

Several strategies articulate policies towards 
migration.  We  can  distinguish  between  poli-
cies that are broadly ‘proactive/facilitative’ and 
those focused on ‘regulation/control’ (table 4.1). 
Combating  trafficking,  preventing  irregular 
migration  and  modernizing  and  strengthen-
ing  immigration  and  customs  services  feature 
frequently.  It  is  striking  how  some  of  these 
policies  echo  those  promoted  by  rich  country 
governments. 

To sum up, while the PRS framework gen-
erally has not been geared towards addressing 
migration policy per se, it could provide a useful 
tool for integrating migration and development 
issues.  Fitting  this  dimension  into  an  overall 
national strategy for development will require 
investments in data and analysis and in broad 
stakeholder consultation. These challenges are 
discussed further in chapter 5. 

4

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Migrants can bring 
broader economic 
benefits, including 
higher rates of 
innovation

fiscal impacts. For each of these types of impact 
there are important distributional issues—while 
there  are  overall  gains,  these  are  not  evenly 
distributed.

4.2.1 Aggregate economic impacts
The impact of migration on aggregate growth 
rates  of  destination  countries  has  been  much 
discussed, but robust measurement is difficult. 
The  data  requirements  and  methodological 
complexities, including the need to disentangle 
direct and indirect effects and work out their 
timing, all present challenges (see box 1.1).

Economic theory predicts that there should 
be significant aggregate gains from movement, 
both  to  movers  and  to  destination  countries. 
This  is  because  migration,  like  international 
trade, allows people to specialize and take ad-
vantage of their relative strengths. The bulk of 
the gains accrue to the individuals who move, 
but some part goes to residents in the place of 
destination as well as to those in the place of ori-
gin via financial and other flows. In background 
research commissioned for this report, estimates 
using a general equilibrium model of the world 
economy  suggested  that  destination  countries 
would capture about one-fifth of the gains from 
a 5 percent increase in the number of migrants 
in developed countries, amounting to US$190 
billion dollars.92

To complement our review of the country-
level  studies,  we  commissioned  research  to 
construct  a  new  dataset  on  migration  flows 
and  stocks,  including  consistent  annual  data 
on nature of employment, hours worked, capi-
tal accumulation and changes in immigration 
laws  for  14  OECD  destination  countries  and 
74 origin countries for each year over the pe-
riod  1980–2005.93  Our  research  showed  that 
immigration  increases  employment,  with  no 
evidence of crowding out of locals, and that in-
vestment also responds vigorously. These results 
imply that population growth due to migration 
increases real GDP per capita in the short run, 
one-for-one (meaning that a 1 percent increase 
in population due to migration increases GDP 
by 1 percent). This finding is reasonable, since in 
most instances annual migration flows are only 
a fraction of a percentage point of the labour 
force of the receiving country. Moreover, these 
flows are largely predictable, implying that the 

84

full adjustment of per capita investment levels is 
plausible even in the short run.

At the individual country level, at least in 
the OECD countries, similar results have been 
found—that  is,  increased  migration  has  neu-
tral or marginally positive effects on per capita 
income.  For  example,  simulations  following 
the  European  Union  accessions  of  2004  sug-
gest that output levels in the United Kingdom 
and Ireland, which allowed large-scale inflows 
from the new member states of Eastern Europe, 
would be 0.5–1.5 percent higher after about a 
decade.94 In countries where migrants account 
for a much higher share of the population and 
labour force—for example in the GCC states—
the aggregate and sectoral contributions to the 
economy can be expected to be larger. However, 
detailed empirical analysis is unfortunately not 
available. 

Migrants can bring broader economic ben-
efits,  including  higher  rates  of  innovation. 
Productivity gains in a number of destination 
places have been traced to the contributions of 
foreign students and scientists to the knowledge 
base. Data from the United States show that be-
tween 1950 and 2000, skilled migrants boosted 
innovation: a 1.3 percent increase in the share 
of  migrant  university  graduates  increased  the 
number of patents issued per capita by a massive 
15 percent, with marked contributions from sci-
ence and engineering graduates and without any 
adverse effects on the innovative activity of local 
people.95 

Countries explicitly compete for talent at the 
global level and the share of graduates among mi-
grants varies accordingly.96 The United States, in 
particular, has been able to attract migrant tal-
ent through the quality of its universities and 
research infrastructure and its favourable patent-
ing rules.97 In Ireland and the United Kingdom 
the  share  of  migrants  with  tertiary  education 
exceeds 30 percent, while in Austria, Italy and 
Poland it is below 15 percent.98 Countries offer-
ing more flexible entry regimes and more prom-
ising long-term opportunities have done better 
in attracting skilled people, whereas restrictions 
on duration of stay, visa conditions and career 
development, as in Germany for example, limit 
uptake. This has led to discussions about a blue 
card  or  European  Union-wide  employment 
permit—an idea that has received preliminary 

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

4

lively academic debates on the subject, notably 
in the United States. Yet it is striking that most 
empirical  studies  in  the  OECD  draw  similar 
conclusions, namely that the aggregate effect of 
immigration on the wages of local workers may 
be positive or negative but is fairly small in the 
short and long run.103 In Europe, both multi- and 
single-country studies find little or no impact of 
migration on the average wages of local people.104
At the same time it must be recognized that 
wage responses to immigration are unlikely to 
be distributed evenly across all workers and will 
be most pronounced where locally born work-
ers compete with immigrants. The debates have 
clarified that it is not just the total number of 
migrants that matter but their skill mix as well. 
The kinds of skill that migrants bring affect the 
wages and employment opportunities of differ-
ent segments of the local population, sometimes 
in subtle ways. If the skills of migrant workers 
complement those of locally born workers, then 
both groups will benefit.105 If the skills match 
exactly,  then  competition  will  be  heightened, 
creating the possibility that locally born workers 
will lose out. However, this is not a foregone con-
clusion: often the results are mixed, with some 
individuals in both groups gaining while others 
lose. Assessing these effects is problematic, be-
cause measuring the degree to which different 
groups’ skills complement or substitute for one 
another is difficult, particularly across interna-
tional borders.106

One striking example of complementarity is 
how migrants can facilitate higher labour force 
participation among locally born females.107 The 
availability  of  low-cost  child  care  can  free  up 
young mothers, enabling them to go out and find 
a job. There is consensus in the literature that 
low-skilled  migrant  labour  generally  comple-
ments local labour in Europe.108 This may arise 
in part because migrants are more mobile than 
locally born workers—as in Italy, for example.109
More importantly, migrants are often willing to 
accept work that locals are no longer prepared to 
undertake, such as child care, care of the elderly 
(much in demand in aging societies), domestic 
work, and restaurant, hotel and other hospitality 
industry work. 

As noted, the small average effect on pay may 
mask considerable variation across types of local 
workers. There is a vast empirical literature on 

Migrants can facilitate 
higher labour force 
participation among 
locally born females

85

backing from the European Parliament and ap-
proval  by  the  European  Council.99  Singapore 
and Hong Kong (China), have explicit policies 
to  welcome  foreign  high-skilled  professionals. 
These policies range from allowing immigrants 
to bring their families, through facilitating per-
manent residence after defined waiting periods 
(two years for Singapore, seven for Hong Kong 
(China)), to the option of naturalization.100 

Programmes  to  attract  skilled  labour  can 
be developed using a general points-based ap-
proach,  linked  to  labour  market  tests  and/or 
employer requirements (chapter 2). A centralized 
‘manpower’ planning approach can be difficult 
to implement, especially in the face of structural 
change  and  economic  shocks.  Points-based 
schemes,  which  have  the  virtue  of  simplicity, 
have been used by destination governments to fa-
vour high-skilled migrants or to attract workers 
for occupations in short supply on the national 
labour market, as in Australia’s General Skilled 
Migration programme. 

Migration can stimulate local employment 
and businesses, but such effects are likely to be 
context-specific. Migrants also affect the level 
and composition of consumer demand, for ex-
ample in favour of nostalgia goods, as well as 
locally  available  goods  and  services  that  are 
close to homes and work-places. Our commis-
sioned study of such effects in California found 
evidence suggesting that an influx of immigrants 
over the decade to 2000 into specific areas (se-
lected to capture the potential pool of custom-
ers for different firms) was positively correlated 
with higher employment growth in some sectors, 
especially in education services. The impact on 
the composition of demand was mixed: a higher 
share  of  migrants  was  associated  with  fewer 
small  firms  and  stand-alone  retail  stores,  but 
more large-scale discount retailers. At the same 
time,  consistent  with  expectations,  the  study 
found that increased immigration was associated 
with increased ethnic diversity of restaurants.101 

4.2.2  Labour market impacts
There is controversy around the effects of mi-
gration on employment and wages in the des-
tination country, especially for those with low 
levels of formal education. Public opinion polls 
show that there is significant concern that im-
migration lowers wages.102 There have also been 

4

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Legal and institutional 
factors—both their 
design and their 
enforcement—matter

86

the  effect  of  immigration  on  the  distribution 
of wages in developed countries. In the United 
States, estimates of the effect on the wages of un-
skilled workers range from –9 to +0.6 percent.110
Locals with low levels of formal schooling may 
still have advantages over migrants due not only 
to language but also to knowledge of local insti-
tutions, networks and technology, which enables 
them to specialize in complementary and better-
paid tasks.111

The imperfect substitutability of migrant and 
local labour is consistent with recent evidence 
suggesting  that  the  workers  affected  most  by 
the entry of new migrants are earlier migrants. 
They feel the brunt of any labour market adjust-
ment, since newcomers primarily compete with 
them.  In  the  United  Kingdom,  for  example, 
heightened competition among migrants in the 
early 2000s may have increased the difference 
between the wages of locals and migrants by up 
to 6 percent.112 

While the evidence about employment im-
pacts  is  less  extensive,  the  pattern  is  similar. 
Detailed  investigations  have  not  established  a 
systematic  relationship  between  immigration 
and unemployment. This is in part because of 
labour market segmentation, as low-skilled mi-
grants accept jobs that are less attractive to lo-
cals, enabling the latter to move to other sectors 
and jobs. The massive inflows associated with 
European  Union  accession  led  neither  to  the 
displacement of local workers nor to increased 
unemployment  in  Ireland  and  the  United 
Kingdom.  Recent  experience  in  Europe  thus 
supports the idea that migrant labour does not 
have a large effect on the employment of locals. 
One European study found that a 10 percent in-
crease in the share of migrants in total employ-
ment would lower the employment of residents 
by between 0.2 and 0.7 percent.113

These econometric results should also be in-
terpreted in the light of the evidence concern-
ing the labour market disadvantage of migrants 
that was reviewed in chapter 3. Legal and insti-
tutional  factors—both  their  design  and  their 
enforcement—matter.  If  migrant  workers  fall 
through  the  net  of  the  formal  arrangements 
that protect wages and working conditions, un-
fair competition with locally born workers could 
well follow. A similar outcome can be expected 
where people are excluded from unions or where 

the enforcement of regulations is weak. Even in 
countries  with  well-regulated  labour  markets, 
workers with irregular status often tend to fall 
‘under  the  radar’—the  drowning  of  Chinese 
cockle  gatherers  in  Morecambe  Bay  in  the 
United Kingdom was a notorious case of lack 
of enforcement of health and safety standards. 
Recent British research found that more general 
structural trends, particularly the increasing use 
of agency (temporary) labour contracts, which 
are associated with fewer rights for workers, are 
significant factors shaping the pay and working 
conditions of migrant workers. There is wide-
spread evidence of payment below the legal mini-
mum wage, especially for younger migrants.114 
Among  emerging  and  developing  econo-
mies, empirical evidence on the labour market 
impacts of immigration is sparse. A recent study 
of Thailand, which investigated whether places 
with  higher  concentrations  of  migrants  had 
lower wages, found that a 10 percent increase 
in migrants reduced the wages of Thai locals by 
about 0.2 percent but did not lower employment 
or reduce internal migration.115 Simulations con-
ducted for Hong Kong (China), found that even 
large increases in new immigrants (a 40 percent 
increase) would lower wages by no more than 1 
percent.116 To the extent that migrants can find 
employment only in the informal labour mar-
ket, their arrival will have a larger effect on lo-
cals who themselves operate informally. In many 
developing countries, informality is ubiquitous, 
so migrants are likely to join an already large seg-
ment of the market. 

4.2.3 Rapid urbanization 
Rapid  urban  growth,  which  can  be  partly  at-
tributed to internal migration, can pose major 
challenges. While people may be attracted by 
the better opportunities available in cities, it is 
nonetheless true that local services and amenities 
may come under severe strain. This can be seen in 
large cities, such as Calcutta and Lagos, as well as 
the myriad medium-sized cities, from Colombo 
to Guayaquil to Nairobi. Many newcomers and 
their families in developing countries end up in 
shanty towns and slums, typically on the out-
skirts of large cities. Residents in these areas often 
face high service costs. They may also be at risk 
from flooding and landslides, not to mention ha-
rassment from the authorities and violence, theft 

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

4

Amartya Sen’s argument about the positive ef-
fects of democratic processes and a free press.121
Clearly,  however,  some  municipal  govern-
ments have wielded levers with negative reper-
cussions for migrants. For instance, a review of 
urbanization experiences in Asia, commissioned 
for this report, finds that a number of govern-
ments continue to pursue policies aimed at de-
celerating in-migration. Several countries were 
found to have forcibly cleared slums, pushing the 
poor into periphery areas void of services.122 In 
Dhaka, Bangladesh, some 29 slum areas, home 
to 60,000 people, were cleared by the authorities 
in early 2007. In Jakarta, Indonesia, the ‘closed 
city’ policy requires migrants to present proof 
of  employment  and  housing,  making  it  diffi-
cult for them to stay legally, while a law passed 
in September 2007 makes squatter settlements 
on river banks and highways illegal. Sometimes 
this kind of intervention can lead to unrest, as 
in Bangladesh, for example, following evictions 
in Agargoan and other settlements.123 It appears 
that mass evictions are more likely when democ-
racy and accountability are weak, as the shanty-
town  clearances  around  Harare  in  Zimbabwe 
during 2005 demonstrate. 

One final point: popular perceptions among 
local  people  in  Europe  and  the  United  States 
as well as South Africa, for example, associate 
migrants with price increases in certain private 
markets, such as the rental market for housing. 
To the best of our knowledge, no studies estab-
lish the existence of such an effect. 

4.2.4  Fiscal impacts
A popular measure of the impact of migration, 
though not one that necessarily reflects its true 
economic and social effects, is the perception of 
the changes it brings to the government’s fiscal 
position.124 People across the political spectrum 
often share concerns about the implications of 
migration for the welfare state. Our analysis of 
the European Social Survey of 2002 suggested 
that up to 50 percent of the region’s population 
worry about migrants being a net fiscal burden, 
with those most concerned tending to be less 
well educated, older and/or unemployed. The 
concerns are most acute in the Czech Republic, 
Greece, Hungary and Ireland, much less so in 
Italy, Luxembourg, Portugal and Sweden. Some 
people are worried about increased costs, others 

People across the 
political spectrum 
often share concerns 
about the implications 
of migration for the 
welfare state

87

or extortion at the hands of criminals. 

When movement is driven by falling living 
standards and weak support services in places of 
origin, the rate of migration to urban centres can 
exceed the demand for labour and the provision 
of services there.117 Under these conditions the 
outcome is high structural unemployment and 
underemployment.  Moreover,  where  local  au-
thorities are ill prepared for population growth 
and face severe institutional and financial con-
straints, the result is likely to be rapidly increas-
ing  disparities  in  incomes  and  well-being  and 
segmentation of the city into areas that are rela-
tively prosperous and safe, with good services, 
and ‘no-go’ areas where living conditions are fall-
ing apart. In contrast, when people are attracted 
to cities because of employment opportunities, 
net benefits are likely to accrue as the concentra-
tion of ideas, talent and capital lead to positive 
spillovers. This has been found in the Republic 
of Korea, for example.118 

These contrasting scenarios underline the im-
portance of good urban governance, which can 
be defined as the sum of the many ways individu-
als and institutions—public and private—plan 
and manage city life. Among the most important 
aspects of urban governance for migrants are: ad-
equate financial resources, which must often be 
generated through local taxation; equitable pric-
ing policies for basic social services and utilities; 
the extension of services to areas where migrants 
live; even-handed regulation of the informal sec-
tor; outreach and support services (such as lan-
guage classes) targeted to migrant groups; and 
accountability, through such mechanisms as rep-
resentation on local authorities, the publication 
of performance standards for key services, and 
the regular independent audit and publication 
of municipal accounts.

Field research provides useful insights into 
how city authorities are handling flows of people 
and the more general challenges of urban pov-
erty. The findings suggest that decentralization 
and democratization can allow the poor more 
opportunities to lobby and to make incremental 
gains, at least in terms of infrastructure provi-
sion.119 Having a voice—and having that voice 
heard—seems to work in terms of protecting the 
poor from the worst excesses of bad governance, 
particularly  from  harassment  and  removal  of 
informal traders.120 There are clearly echoes of 

4

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

A migrant whose child 
attends state school 
may also provide 
childcare services that 
facilitate the entry of a 
high-skilled woman into 
the labour force—and 
both pay taxes

88

about sustainability in the face of reduced so-
cial cohesion. Some governments have sought to 
address these concerns by introducing waiting 
periods for becoming eligible to receive benefits, 
as in Australia, New Zealand and the United 
Kingdom, for example. 

Do migrants ‘take more than they give,’ or 
vice versa? This is a highly contentious issue, and 
one that we believe has garnered unwarranted 
attention.  Estimating  migrants’  use  of  public 
services is fraught with measurement difficul-
ties, while calculating their offsetting tax con-
tributions adds another layer of complexity. A 
migrant whose child attends state school may 
also provide childcare services that facilitate the 
entry of a high-skilled woman into the labour 
force—and both pay taxes. 

In  practice,  there  is  wide  variation  across 
countries in both the existence and generosity of 
welfare benefits and the eligibility of migrants. 
Studies  in  the  United  States,  which  has  low 
levels of benefits for a rich country, have found 
a range of estimates, but the general picture is 
consistent:  first-generation  migrants  tend  to 
generate  net  fiscal  costs  whereas  later  genera-
tions tend to produce large fiscal surpluses.125
At the same time, taxes paid by migrants may 
not accrue to the levels of government providing 
services to migrants. Especially where migrants 
are  under-counted  and  where  fiscal  transfers 
are made to local authorities on a per capita or 
needs basis, it may be that the localities facing 
the largest burdens in extending basic services to 
migrants also lack adequate resources to do so.
Local  government  typically  accounts  for 
a significant share of total government spend-
ing  and  often  bears  the  burden  of  financing 
basic services, including services for migrants. 
According  to  the  International  Monetary 
Fund,126 the share of spending in 2007 by sub-
national  authorities  in  developed  countries 
ranged from 63 percent for Denmark to 6 per-
cent  for  Greece.  The  share  is  significant  in  a 
number of other major destination countries, in-
cluding the Russian Federation (51 percent) and 
South Africa (47 percent). But there are excep-
tions—for example Thailand, where the share is 
below 15 percent. Thus, depending on the struc-
ture of public finances, migrants could impose 
net fiscal costs on one level of government while 
being net contributors to total public revenue. 

For example, the costs of providing educational 
and health services, which may include special 
programmes such as language courses, may be 
concentrated in local authorities, while income 
taxes accrue to the central government. 

In the United States, fiscal concerns appear 
to affect the immigration policy preferences of 
different groups. One study found that locals 
tend to be in favour of curbing immigration if 
they live in states that have large migrant popu-
lations and provide migrants with generous wel-
fare benefits.127 This opinion is strongest among 
locals with high earnings potential, who tend to 
be in higher tax brackets. Similar results were 
obtained using a sample of over 20 countries in 
Europe.128

In  countries  with  progressive  tax  systems 
and welfare benefits, low-skilled migrants, refu-
gees and those entering under family reunifica-
tion programmes are associated with higher net 
fiscal  costs.  In  some  European  countries  mi-
grants, after accounting for their demographic 
characteristics,  appear  to  be  more  dependent 
on welfare programmes than locals, but this is 
certainly not the case in all countries.129 The dif-
ference can be traced back at least partly to the 
relative generosity of the welfare systems. 

In  the  2008/09  recession,  rising  unem-
ployment  and  hardship  among  migrants  can 
be  expected  to  impose  additional  costs  on 
public finances, although the degree to which 
this  happens  in  practice  remains  to  be  seen. 
Determining factors in each country will be the 
share of migrants among the unemployed and 
the  structure  of  unemployment  benefits,  par-
ticularly the eligibility rules. Even in countries 
with well-developed welfare systems, the access 
of migrants to benefits may be limited. A recent 
study  predicted  that,  among  European  coun-
tries,  Estonia,  France  and  Latvia  were  likely 
to face a higher public finance burden due to 
the costs of migrants’ welfare benefits during 
the 2009 downturn, whereas Austria, Finland, 
Germany,  Ireland  and  Spain  would  register 
less-marked  increases.130  In  many  developing 
countries, the issue of rising fiscal costs during 
a time of recession typically does not arise, be-
cause welfare benefits are simply unavailable to 
anyone.

Migration is sometimes touted as a solution 
to the looming fiscal crisis associated with rapid 

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

4

different backgrounds can pose challenges, es-
pecially in societies that were traditionally ho-
mogeneous. Broadly speaking, three interlinked 
types of concern can be distinguished, related 
to security and crime, socio-economic factors, 
and cultural factors.133 We end this chapter by 
addressing each of these aspects in turn. 

Following the attacks on the United States 
in 2001, security concerns rose to the top of the 
political agenda. A major issue was the associa-
tion, real or imagined, of foreigners with a lack 
of loyalty and the threat of terrorism. Such fears 
are  far  from  new,  having  characterized  many 
historical instances of anti-immigration senti-
ment. Examples include the ethnic Chinese in 
Indonesia, who were suspected of political sub-
version on behalf of Communist China during 
the 1960s, and the ethnic Russian populations 
in the Baltic states who were suspected of un-
dermining the states’ newly won independence 
after the collapse of the Soviet Union in the early 
1990s.  These  concerns  normally  abate  some-
what over time, only to resurface in new forms 
at times of political instability and change.

Security concerns also derive from the per-
ceived links between immigration and crime, 
which are often cited in popular debates about 
migration. We found that more than 70 percent 
of respondents to the European Social Survey of 
2002 believed that immigrants worsen a coun-
try’s crime problems, with the figure rising to 
more than 85 percent in Germany, the Czech 
Republic  and  Norway.  As  exemplified  by  the 
film  The  Godfather,  stereotype  images  associ-
ating  immigrants  with  crime  have  long  been 
propagated through the popular media, which 
often feature violence perpetrated by a range of 
immigrant groups including the Italian mafia, 
Chinese  triads  and  Central  American  gangs 
such as the Salvadoran Mara Salvatrucha. 

The data do not confirm these stereotypes. 
However, they do reveal significant variation in 
immigrant  crime  rates  across  countries.  Data 
from the 2000 US census show that, for every 
ethnic group, incarceration rates among young 
men are lowest for immigrants, even those who 
are the least educated. On average, among men 
aged 18 to 39 (who comprise the vast majority 
of the prison population), the incarceration rate 
of the locally born in 2000 was 3.5 percent, five 
times higher than the 0.7 percent rate of the 

Whether positive or 
negative, the net fiscal 
impacts of immigration 
are not large

89

aging in many developed countries (chapter 2). 
This would require that migrants be net contrib-
utors to the fiscal system in the short to medium 
term.  The  longer  term  costs  when  migrants 
themselves retire need also to be taken into ac-
count. Both imply the need either to continu-
ally expand immigration or, more realistically, 
to raise social security contributions from the 
increased numbers of working migrants while 
introducing structural changes to the design of 
social security and retirement systems.

Whether positive or negative, the net fiscal 
impacts of immigration are not large. Putting 
the  various  effects  together,  relative  to  GDP, 
most estimates for the United States and Europe 
place the net fiscal impact of immigration in the 
range of ± 1 percent of GDP.131 For example, the 
figure for the United Kingdom is ± 0.65 percent 
of GDP.132 These estimates indicate that the fis-
cal consequences of migration should not gener-
ally be a key factor in designing policy.

Some destination governments impose ad-
ditional  fees  on  migrants,  based  on  the  prin-
ciple  that  individuals  receiving  a  benefit  over 
and above the services enjoyed by the local tax-
payer should contribute more. In 1995, Canada 
introduced  a  Right  of  Permanent  Residence 
Fee equivalent to US$838, to be paid before a 
visa can be issued (but refundable if the client 
is refused or chooses not to proceed). Several 
amendments over time have sought to mitigate 
negative impacts with a loan option, flexibility 
in the timing of payment, elimination of the 
fee for refugees, protected persons and depen-
dent children—and then halving of the fee in 
2006. In addition to the fee, there is a US$430 
administrative charge for adults (US$86 for de-
pendents). However, in the Canadian and other 
similar  cases,  there  is  no  direct  link  between 
the revenues generated from this fee and fund-
ing  for  integration  programmes.  The  United 
Kingdom recently introduced a landing fee, at 
a more symbolic level of UK£50 (US$93). Both 
these examples seem oriented more towards as-
suaging popular concerns than towards raising 
revenue to cover fiscal costs. 

4.2.5 Perceptions and concerns about 
migration 
Migration is a controversial issue in many coun-
tries.  The  mere  presence  of  newcomers  from 

4

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Figure 4.3

Support for immigration is contingent on job availability
Attitudes towards immigration and availability of jobs, 
2005/2006

Rwanda
Burkina Faso
Mali
Viet Nam
Andorra
Ukraine
Switzerland
Peru
Sweden
China
Morocco
Ethiopia
Bulgaria
Romania
Republic of Moldova
Slovenia
Republic of Korea
Australia
Argentina
Mexico
Ghana
Chile
Italy
Brazil
Spain
Hong Kong (China)
Cyprus
Turkey
Germany
Finland
Poland
New Zealand
Japan
India
United States
Zambia
Serbia
Trinidad and Tobago
Taiwan (Province of China)
Jordan
Egypt
South Africa
Iran (Islamic Republic of)
Thailand
Indonesia
Malaysia

Source:  Kleemans and Klugman (2009).

90

  | 
  0 

| 
10 

| 
30 
Percent of responses

| 
20 

| 
40 

| 
50 

| 
60 

| 
70 

| 
80 

| 
90 

|

100

“How about people from other countries coming here to work.
Which one of the following do you think the government should do?”

Let anyone come who wants to
Let people come as long as there are jobs available 
Limit/prohibit immigration

foreign-born.134 Earlier studies for the United 
States yielded similar findings.135 However, the 
picture in Europe is more varied. Data from the 
Council of Europe on 25 countries show that 
on average there are more than twice as many 
foreign-born people in prison than locally born. 
A study on six European countries found that, 
in  Austria,  Germany,  Luxembourg,  Norway 
and Spain, offense rates are higher for foreign-
ers, while this was not the case in Greece, for 
example.136 

Fears  that  migrants  will  undermine  the 
socio-economic status of local people have been 
tested empirically. As already indicated, the ef-
fects can be positive for some individuals and 
groups and negative for others, but are seldom 
very  large.  However,  the  2008/09  economic 
recession  represents  a  severe  shock  to  many 
workers  in  destination  (and  other)  countries, 
possibly the worst since the Great Depression 
of the 1930s. While there is no serious sugges-
tion that this shock has been caused by migrant 
labour, it has nevertheless stoked the flames of 
anti-immigrant rhetoric, as local workers search 
for ways of saving their own jobs. Governments 
are under enormous pressure—and often fail to 
withstand it. Opinions are shifting, even in cases 
where migration has been broadly welcomed by 
the public thus far—for example, in the United 
Kingdom  against  Eastern  Europeans,  despite 
the successful experience of large-scale inflows 
during the long boom.137

People’s  views  about  migration  are  condi-
tioned by the availability of jobs. In the majority 
of the 52 countries covered in the latest World 
Values Survey, most respondents endorsed re-
strictions  on  immigration,  but  many  empha-
sized  that  these  restrictions  should  be  clearly 
linked to the availability of jobs (figure 4.3).138 
The  demographic  and  economic  projections 
presented in chapter 2 suggest that, beyond the 
current recession, structural features will lead to 
the re-emergence of job vacancies and hence new 
opportunities for migrants.

Even in normal times, many feel that pref-
erence should be given to locally born people 
(figure 4.4). Our regression analysis found that 
this  view  prevailed  more  among  people  who 
were older, had lower incomes, lived in small 
towns and did not have a migrant background. 
Interestingly, however, people were more likely 

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

4

Figure 4.4

When jobs are limited, people favour the locally born
Public opinion about job preferences by destination  
country HDI category, 2005/2006

Total

Low HDI 

Medium HDI

High HDI

Very high HDI

  | 
  0 

| 
20 

| 
40 
Percent of responses

| 
60 

| 
80 

|

100

“When jobs are scarce, employers should give priority 
to [natives] over immigrants”

  Disagree 

  Agree 

  Neither

Source:  Kleemans and Klugman (2009).

are generally not permitted to vote in national 
elections.  Their  preferences  may  be  more  sig-
nificant  in  local  elections,  where  granting  of 
voting rights to first-generation immigrants is 
more common.142 Over time, as economic, social 
and cultural assimilation deepens, the effects of 
migrants on voting patterns become even less 
predictable.143

Last  but  not  least,  in  sufficient  numbers, 
migrants can affect the ethnic and cultural di-
versity of a society, literally changing the face 
of  a  nation.  Several  countries  that  today  are 
highly prosperous were historically founded by 
migrants. Australia, Canada, New Zealand and 
United States have continued to welcome large 
inflows over time, in successive waves from dif-
ferent  countries  of  origin,  and  generally  have 
been  highly  successful  in  absorbing  migrants 
and giving them a common sense of belonging 
to the new nation despite their cultural differ-
ences.144  In  countries  with  a  long  and  proud 
history of independence and a strong sense of 
national identity, the arrival of newcomers may 
pose more challenges. 

Of  course,  some  cultural  attributes  are 
more easily adopted by locals than others. For 
example, many societies welcome new cuisines 
(probably  the  most  resistant  are  the  French 
and  Italians,  who  think  they  have  figured  it 
out  already).  This  confirms  Paul  Krugman’s 
thesis that a taste for variety, combined with 

91

to favour equal treatment of migrants in coun-
tries where the stock of migrants was relatively 
high.

Economic and security concerns can some-
times reinforce each other, in what becomes a 
vicious circle. Migrants who are marginalized—
due, for example, to temporary or irregular sta-
tus or high levels of unemployment—may resort 
to anti-social or criminal behaviour, confirming 
the security fears of locals. If this leads to fur-
ther discrimination in the labour market and in 
policy formation, such migrants may turn away 
from the new society back to the old, possibly 
forming  gangs  or  other  anti-social  organiza-
tions that threaten local populations. This type 
of  pathology  has  been  observed  among  some 
young Maghrebians in France and some Central 
American groups in the United States.

Where  labour  market  disadvantage  leads 
to social exclusion, repercussions for social co-
hesion can quickly follow. Recent research in 
seven developed countries has highlighted bar-
riers to socialization encountered by children in 
immigrant families.139 These families are often 
concentrated in certain locations, such as par-
ticular low-income urban localities. This fosters 
educational  and  socio-economic  segregation: 
residence in segregated neighbourhoods limits 
contacts with locally born people, a separation 
reinforced by attendance at schools that are de 
facto segregated. A study we commissioned on 
Latino immigrant identity in the United States 
suggested that restrictive migration policies and 
increasingly adverse public opinion over time, 
alongside mixed human development outcomes, 
have affected people’s sense of self. The study, 
based on interviews with immigrants and their 
children  from  several  Latin  American  coun-
tries, suggests that immigrants have formative 
experiences that engender group solidarity but 
promote a rejection of American identity, re-
lated to the realities of the labour market during 
a period of rising inequality.140

Concerns are also expressed about the pos-
sible  impacts  of  immigration  on  the  political 
climate.141  However,  in  most  countries,  the 
relative  size  of  the  migrant  population  is  too 
small to have a direct effect on national elec-
toral politics, particularly since migrants come 
from a diversity of backgrounds and will have a 
diversity of political views. In any case migrants 

4

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

economies of scale, does more to explain inter-
national trade patterns than any other factor. 
But some find it harder to open the door to new 
religious and social customs such as the wear-
ing of headscarves by women and the payment 
of dowries. 

While specific issues can arise, the evidence 
suggests that people are generally tolerant of 
minorities and have a positive view of ethnic 
diversity (figure 4.5). People who are less well-
educated,  older,  unemployed  and  without  a 
migrant  background  are  less  likely  to  value 
ethnic diversity.145 At the same time, more than 
75  percent  of  respondents  in  the  2005/2006 
World Values Survey did not object to having 
a migrant as their neighbour. These attitudes 
point  to  clear  opportunities  for  building  a 
broad  consensus  around  better  treatment  of 
migrants,  a  policy  option  that  we  explore  in 
the next chapter. 

Insecurity and adverse reactions may arise 
when migrant communities are seen to repre-
sent  alternative  and  competing  social  norms 
and structures, implicitly threatening the local 
culture. This is associated with the view that 
ethnic identities compete with each other and 
vary considerably in their commitment to the 
nation state, implying that there is a zero sum 

Figure 4.5

Many people value ethnic diversity
Popular views about the value of ethnic diversity by destination 
country HDI category, 2005/2006

Total

Low HDI 

Medium HDI

High HDI

Very High HDI

  | 
  0 

| 
20 

| 
40 
Percent of responses

| 
60 

| 
80 

|

100

“Turning to the question of ethnic diversity, with which of 
the following views do you agree?”

  Ethnic diversity compromises a country’s unity 
  Neither 
  Ethnic diversity helps enrich life

Source:  Kleemans and Klugman (2009).

92

game between recognizing diversity and unify-
ing the state. Yet individuals can and do have 
multiple identities that are complementary—
in terms of ethnicity, language, religion, race 
and  even  citizenship  (chapter  1).  Thus  when 
migrants  integrate  more  fully  and  more  dif-
fusely with their adopted homeland, which in 
turn becomes even more diverse, they have a 
better chance of being valued as enriching so-
ciety and introducing complementary cultural 
traits.

4.3  Conclusions
This chapter has explored the impacts of mobil-
ity on those who do not move. We began with 
places  of  origin  and  focused  on  developing 
countries (although by far the highest regional 
rates of out-migration are observed for Europe 
and the lowest for Africa). The greatest impacts 
are at the household level, for those who have 
family  members  who  have  moved,  and  these 
are largely positive for income, consumption, 
education  and  health.  However,  the  poverty 
impacts are limited because those who move 
are mainly not the poorest. Broader commu-
nity and national effects can also be observed, 
although these patterns are often complex, con-
text-specific and subject to change over time. 

Given  the  global  recession  of  2008/09,  it 
is especially important to assess the impact of 
migration on host communities and countries. 
There is no evidence of significant adverse eco-
nomic,  labour  market  or  fiscal  impacts,  and 
there is evidence of gains in such areas as so-
cial diversity and capacity for innovation. Fears 
about migrants are generally exaggerated.

These findings, alongside those in the pre-
ceding chapter, suggest the possibility of creat-
ing  virtuous  circles  through  policy  measures 
that enhance and broaden the benefits of mo-
bility. This would increase migrants’ economic 
and  social  contributions  to  both  destination 
and origin communities and countries. 

The public policies that people encounter 
when they move play a large part in shaping 
their futures. Designing these policies well is 
in  the  interests  of  migrants  themselves,  the 
communities they leave behind and the other 
residents in their adopted homes. It is to this 
topic that we turn in the final chapter of this 
report.

Policies 
to enhance 
human 
development 
outcomes

5

This final chapter proposes reforms that will allow 
mobility to contribute to a fuller enhancement of 
people’s freedoms. At present, many people who 
move have at best only precarious rights and face 
uncertain futures. The policy mismatch between 
restrictive entry and high labour demand for low-
skilled workers needs to be addressed. We propose 
a core package of reforms that will improve 
outcomes for individual movers and their families, 
their origin communities and host places. The 
design, timing and acceptability of reforms depend 
on a realistic appraisal of economic and social 
conditions and a recognition of public opinion and 
political constraints.

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

5
5

Policies to enhance human  
development outcomes

The foregoing analysis has shown that large gains to human devel-
opment would flow from improved policies towards movers. These 
would benefit all groups affected by migration. A bold vision is 
needed to realize these gains—a vision that embraces reform be-
cause of its potential pay-offs, while recognizing the underlying 
challenges and constraints.

We have also shown that the entry policies 
that have prevailed in many destination coun-
tries over recent decades can be largely charac-
terized by denial and delay on the one hand, and 
heightened border controls and illegal stays on 
the  other.  This  has  worsened  the  situation  of 
people lacking legal status and, especially dur-
ing the recession, has created uncertainty and 
frustration among the wider population. 

The  factors  driving  migration—includ-
ing  disparate  opportunities  and  rapid  demo-
graphic transitions—are expected to persist in 
the  coming  decades.  Lopsided  demographic 
patterns mean that nine tenths of the growth 
in the world’s labour force since 1950 has been 
in developing countries, while developed coun-
tries  are  aging.  These  trends  create  pressures 
for  people  to  move,  but  the  regular  channels 
allowing movement for low-skilled people are 
very restricted. Demographic projections to the 
year  2050  predict  that  these  trends  will  con-
tinue, even if the demand for labour has been 
temporarily attenuated by the current economic 
crisis. This implies a need to rethink the policy 
of restricting the entry of low-skilled workers, 
which ill accords with the underlying demand 
for such workers. This chapter tackles the major 
challenge of how governments can prepare for 
the resumption of growth, with its underlying 
structural trends.

Our proposal consists of a core package of 
reforms  with  medium-  to  long-term  pay-offs. 
The package consists of six ‘pillars’. Each pillar 
is beneficial on its own, but together they offer 
the best chance of maximizing the human devel-
opment impacts of migration:

1. Liberalizing and simplifying regular chan-
nels that allow people to seek work abroad;

2. Ensuring basic rights for migrants;
3.  Reducing transaction costs associated with 

migration;

4.  Improving outcomes for migrants and desti-

nation communities;

5.  Enabling benefits from internal mobility; and
6. Making mobility an integral part of national 

development strategies.
Our  proposal  involves  new  processes  and 
norms  to  govern  migration,  but  does  not  pre-
scribe any particular levels of increased admis-
sions, since these need to be determined at the 
country level. 

Our agenda is largely oriented towards the 
longer-term  reforms  needed  to  enhance  the 
gains  from  movement,  while  recognizing  the 
major challenges in the short term. In the midst 
of what is shaping up to be the worst economic 
crisis since the Great Depression, unemployment 
is rising to record highs in many countries. As a 
result, many migrants find themselves doubly at 
risk: suffering unemployment, insecurity and so-
cial marginalization, yet at the same time often 
portrayed as the source of these problems. It is 
important that the current recession must not 
become an occasion for scapegoating, but rather 
be seized as an opportunity to institute a new 
deal for migrants—one that will benefit work-
ers at home and abroad while guarding against 
a protectionist backlash. Forging that new deal 
and selling it to the public will require political 
vision and committed leadership.1 

Open dialogue is critical if progress is to be 
made in the public debate about migration. In 

95
95

5

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Open dialogue is 
critical if progress is to 
be made in the public 
debate about migration

96

this debate, the benefits should not be overplayed 
and the concerns about distributional effects—
especially among low-skilled workers—need to 
be recognized and taken into account. The po-
litical economy of reform is directly addressed 
below.

Because this is a global report with diverse 
stakeholders—governments in origin, destina-
tion and transit countries; donors and interna-
tional organizations; the private sector; and civil 
society, including migrant groups and diaspora 
associations, academia and the media—the pol-
icy directions we outline are inevitably pitched 
at a general level. Our intention is to stimulate 
debate  and  follow-up  in  discussing,  adapting 
and implementing these recommendations. At 
the country level, much more detailed analysis 
will be needed to ensure relevance to local cir-
cumstances and allow for political realities and 
practical constraints. 

5.1 The core package 
We  will  now  explore  the  policy  entry  points 
outlined above. Our focus is limited to selected 
aspects out of the much broader menu of op-
tions that have been discussed and implemented 
around the world.2 In defining a priority agenda 
we have been motivated by a focus on the disad-
vantaged, a realistic consideration of the political 
constraints and an awareness that trade-offs are 
inevitable. Whenever possible, we illustrate with 
examples of good practice. 

5.1.1 Liberalizing and simplifying 
regular channels
Overly restrictive barriers to entry prevent many 
people from moving and mean that millions who 
do move have irregular status—an estimated one 
quarter of the total. This has created uncertainty 
and frustration, both in the migrant community 
and among the wider population, especially dur-
ing the current recession. 

When growth resumes, the demand for mi-
grant  labour  will  likewise  rebound,  since  the 
demographic and economic conditions that cre-
ated that demand in the first place will still be in 
place. The need for working-age people in devel-
oped countries has been largely structural, and 
is long-term—not temporary—in nature. This is 
true even for high-turnover jobs in such sectors as 
care, construction, tourism and food processing. 

If the demand for labour is long-term, then, from 
the perspective of both migrants and their desti-
nation communities and societies, it is better to 
allow people to come legally. And provided mi-
grants can find and keep jobs, it is better to offer 
them the option of extending their stay than to 
limit  them  to  temporary  permits.  The  longer 
people stay abroad, the greater the social and eco-
nomic mobility they and their children are likely 
to enjoy. When the presence of migrants is de-
nied or ignored by host governments, the risk of 
segmentation is greatly increased, not only in the 
labour market and economy but also in society 
more generally. This is one lesson that emerged 
clearly from the German guest-worker experi-
ence. We see it again today, in destinations as di-
verse as the GCC states, the Russian Federation, 
Singapore, South Africa and Thailand. 

So what would a liberalization and simplifi-
cation of migration channels look like? There are 
two broad avenues where reform appears both 
desirable and feasible: seasonal or circular pro-
grammes, and entry for unskilled people, with 
conditional  paths  to  extension.  The  difficult 
issue of what to do about people with irregular 
status is a third area in which various options 
for change are possible and should be consid-
ered.  In  each  case,  the  specific  design  of  new 
measures will need to be discussed and debated 
at the national level through political processes 
that permit the balancing of different interests 
(section 5.2). As high-skilled people are already 
welcomed  in  most  countries,  reforms  need  to 
focus on the movement of people without ter-
tiary degrees.

The first avenue, already explored by a num-
ber of countries, is to expand schemes for truly 
seasonal work in sectors such as agriculture and 
tourism. Key elements when planning and imple-
menting reforms include consultation with source 
country  governments,  union  and  employer  in-
volvement,  basic  wage  guarantees,  health  and 
safety protection, and provision for repeat visits. 
These  elements  are  the  basis  for  schemes  that 
have been successfully operating for decades in 
Canada, for example, and have more recently been 
introduced in New Zealand (box 5.1). Workers in 
formal schemes of this kind are typically accorded 
better protection than those with irregular status. 
From a human development point of view, that is 
one of their major advantages. 

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

5

Box 5.1

  Opening up regular channels—Sweden and New Zealand

Two countries have recently introduced reforms in line with the direc-
tions suggested by this report, although both are too new to evaluate 
in terms of impact.

In late 2008, Sweden introduced a major labour migration re-
form. The initiative came from the Swedish parliament and began 
with the appointment of a parliamentary committee with a mandate 
to  propose  changes.  This  was  during  a  period  of  rapid  economic 
growth and widespread labour shortages. Parliamentary and media 
debates focused on the risk of displacement of local workers and on 
whether unsuccessful asylum seekers could apply. A scheme was 
thus designed that met union concerns about undercutting of wages 
and labour standards.

Among the scheme’s key elements is the provision that employ-
ers are the primary judges of needs (self-assessment), with a role for 
the Swedish Migration Board to ensure consistency with collective 
agreements and allow for union comment. Portability across employ-
ers is allowed after two years, and if individuals change jobs during 
this initial period they must apply for a new work permit. The duration 
is initially for two years, extendable to four, after which permanent 
residence can be granted. During the first quarter of operation, there 
were 24,000 applications, representing about 15 percent of total ap-
plications to come to Sweden. 

New  Zealand’s  Recognised  Seasonal  Employer  Scheme  (RSE) 
was launched in April 2007 as part of the government’s growth and 

Sources: Government of Sweden (2008) and World Bank (2006a).

innovation agenda, to address the acute problems experienced by the 
horticulture and viticulture industries in finding workers during sea-
sonal labour peaks. It provides a number of seasonal jobs, set annually. 
RSE was designed to avoid some of the downsides of the low-
wage temporary work cycle, which was seen as unsustainable for 
both employers and workers, many of whom were irregular migrants. 
Transiting to RSE shook out existing irregular workers from the system 
and brought new employers into contact with the government. During 
the transition period employers were allowed to retain workers already 
in New Zealand for a limited period and under certain conditions.

Central to the objectives of both the New Zealand government 
and the union movement, and critical to public acceptance, was 
to  ensure  that  employers  recruit  and  train  New  Zealand  workers 
first,  before  they  recruit  offshore.  However,  the  scheme  allows 
Pacific Island countries to find a continuing market for their low-
skilled  labour, provided that they put in place appropriate selection 
and facilitation processes and help to ensure return. Their workers 
have the opportunity to be trained and properly remunerated, and 
to broaden their experience and contacts. So far, no serious prob-
lems have been reported. 

RSE is not a low-cost scheme. It will not be economically sus-
tainable unless the industries involved can realize productivity and 
quality gains in partnership with a known group of workers, who can 
be relied on to return to specific orchards and vineyards each year.

The  second  avenue,  which  involves  more 
fundamental reforms, is to expand the number 
of visas for low-skilled people—conditional on 
employer demand. As is currently the case, the 
visas can initially be temporary. Issuance can 
be made conditional on a job offer, or at least 
experience of, or willingness to work in, a sector 
that is known to face labour shortages. 

Expanding regular entry channels involves 

taking decisions on the following key issues:

Setting annual inflow numbers. These must 
be responsive to local conditions and there are 
several  ways  of  ensuring  this.  Numbers  can 
be based on employer demand—such that an 
individual is required to have a job offer prior 
to  arrival—or  on  the  recommendations  of 
a  technical  committee  or  similar  body  that 
considers projections of demand and submis-
sions from unions, employers and community 
groups.  The  United  Kingdom’s  Migration 
Advisory  Committee,  set  up  in  late  2007  to 
provide advice on the designation of so-called 

‘shortage occupations’, is a good example. The 
disadvantages of requiring a job offer are that 
the decision is effectively delegated to individ-
ual employers, transaction costs for individual 
migrants  may  be  higher,  and  portability  can 
become an issue. Caution should be exercised 
in relation to employers’ stated ‘needs’ for mi-
grants. These could arise because migrants are 
willing  to  work  longer  hours  and/or  because 
they are more skilled. Employers should not use 
migrant labour as a stratagem for evading their 
legal  obligations  to  provide  basic  health  and 
safety protection and to guarantee minimum 
standards in working conditions, which should 
be accorded to all workers, regardless of origin. 
Employer portability. Tying people to spe-
cific  employers  prevents  them  from  finding 
better opportunities and is therefore both eco-
nomically inefficient and socially undesirable. 
Our policy assessment found that governments 
typically  allow  employment  portability  for 
permanent high-skilled migrants, but not for 

97

5

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

temporary low-skilled workers. However, there 
are signs of change. The United Arab Emirates 
has  begun  to  offer  transferable  employment 
sponsorships in response to complaints of abuse 
from migrants.3 Sweden’s recent labour immi-
gration reform, described in box 5.1, is perhaps 
the  most  comprehensive  example  of  employ-
ment and benefits portability to date, as work 
permits are transferable and migrants who lose 
their  jobs—for  whatever  reason—have  three 
months to find work before the visa is revoked.4
An employer who has gone abroad to recruit 
will typically seek some period of non-porta-
bility—but even in these cases there are ways of 
building in a degree of flexibility: for example, 
allowing the migrant or another employer who 
wants to employ her to pay a fee reimbursing 
the original employer for recruitment costs. 

Box 5.2

Experience with regularization

Most European countries have operated some form of regularization programme, 
albeit for a range of motives and, in some cases, despite denying that regularization 
takes place (Austria and Germany). A recent study estimated that in Europe over 6 
million people have applied to transit from irregular to legal status over the decade to 
2007, with an approval rate of 80 percent. The numbers in each country vary hugely—
Italy having the highest (1.5 million), followed by Spain and Greece. 

Regularization programmes are not limited to the OECD. A regional agreement in 
Latin America, MERCOSUR, means that Argentina, for example, has legislated that 
any citizen of a MERCOSUR country without a criminal background can obtain legal 
residence. In South Africa efforts are underway to regularize irregular Zimbabweans, 
beginning with a temporary residence permit that grants them access to health care 
and education and the right to stay and work for at least six months. In Thailand 
135,000 migrants were regularized in early 2008, although in the past periods of regu-
larization were followed by stepped-up rates of deportation. 

The pros and cons of regularization have been hotly debated. The benefits for 
the destination country relate to security and the rule of law, while the individuals and 
families who are regularized may be better placed to overcome social and economic 
exclusion. Among the disadvantages are concerns about encouraging future flows, 
the undermining of formal admissions programmes and fraudulent applications. At 
the same time, the benefits of regularization are highly dependent on context. For 
example, in the United States many irregular immigrants already pay taxes, so the 
revenue benefits are much lower than in countries with large informal economies, 
where taxes are avoided on a much larger scale. Surveys of country experiences 
have  tended  to  conclude  that  the  socio-economic  impacts  of  regularization  have 
been mixed, with the expected positive impacts on wages, mobility and integration 
not always materializing. 

Source:  ICMPD (2009), Cerrutti (2009) and Martin (2009b).

98

Right  to  apply  for  extension  and  pathways 
to  permanence.  This  will  be  at  the  discretion 
of  the  host  government  and,  as  at  present,  is 
usually  subject  to  a  set  of  specific  conditions. 
Nevertheless,  extension  of  temporary  permits 
is  possible  in  many  developed  countries  (e.g. 
Canada,  Portugal,  Sweden,  United  Kingdom 
and United States), and some developing coun-
tries (e.g. Ecuador and Malaysia). Whether the 
permit is renewed indefinitely may depend on 
bilateral agreements. Some countries grant the 
opportunity for migrants to convert temporary 
into permanent status after several years of regu-
lar residence (e.g. in Italy after six years, and in 
Portugal and the United Kingdom after five). 
This may be conditional on, for example, the mi-
grant’s labour market record and lack of criminal 
convictions.5

Provisions to facilitate circularity. The free-
dom to move back and forth between host and 
source  country  can  enhance  benefits  for  mi-
grants and their origin countries. Again, this can 
be subject to discretion or to certain conditions. 
Portability of accumulated social security ben-
efits is a further advantage that can encourage 
circularity. 

The issue of irregular status inevitably crops 
up  in  almost  any  discussion  of  immigration. 
Various approaches have been used by govern-
ments  to  address  the  issue.  Amnesty  schemes 
are announced and remain open for a finite pe-
riod—these have been used in various European 
countries as well as in Latin America. Ongoing 
administrative mechanisms may grant some type 
of legal status on a discretionary basis—for ex-
ample, on the basis of family ties, as is possible in 
the United States. Forced returns to the country 
of origin have also been pursued. None of these 
measures is uncontroversial. Box 5.2 summarizes 
recent regularization experiences.6

So-called ‘earned regularizations’, as tried in 
a number of countries, may be the most viable 
way forward.7 These provide irregular migrants 
with a provisional permit to live and work in the 
host country, initially for a finite period, which 
can be extended or made permanent through the 
fulfilment of various criteria, such as language 
acquisition,  maintaining  stable  employment 
and  paying  taxes.  There  is  no  initial  amnesty 
but  rather  a  conditional  permission  to  transit 
to full residence status. This approach has the 

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

5

States,  for  example.  Formal  processes  to  de-
termine  whether  or  not  individuals  have  the 
legal right to stay in the country are clearly bet-
ter  than  summary  or  mass  expulsions,  which 
have been observed in the past (e.g. Malaysia’s 
expulsion  of  irregular  Indonesian  workers  in 
early  2005)11,  although  some  procedural  as-
pects, such as the right to counsel, may repre-
sent an unwelcome burden on the public purse 
in developing countries. The United Kingdom 
Prison Inspectorate has published Immigration 
Detention Expectations based on international 
human rights standards. But mere publication 
does not, of course, ensure that the standards 
are met. In some countries, NGOs work to im-
prove living conditions in detention camps—the 
Ukrainian Red Cross is an example. The recent 
European Union directive on the procedures for 
return appears to be a step towards transparency 
and harmonization of regulations, with an em-
phasis on standard procedures either to expel 
people with irregular status or to grant them 
definite legal status. The directive has, however, 
been criticized as inadequate in guaranteeing 
respect for human rights.12 

5.1.2  Ensuring basic rights for migrants
This report has focused on mobility through the 
lens of expanding freedoms. But not all migrants 
achieve all the freedoms that migration prom-
ises. Depending on where they come from and 
go to, people frequently find themselves having 
to trade off one kind of freedom against another, 
most often in order to access higher earnings by 
working in a country where one or more funda-
mental human rights are not respected. Migrants 
who lack resources, networks, information and 
avenues of recourse are more likely to lose out 
in some dimensions, as too are those who face 
racial or other forms of discrimination. Major 
problems can arise for those without legal status 
and for those in countries where governance and 
accountability structures are weak.

Refugees  are  a  distinct  legal  category  of 
migrants  by  virtue  of  their  need  for  interna-
tional protection. They have specific rights, set 
out in the 1951 Refugee Convention and 1967 
Protocols, which have been ratified by 144 states 
(figure 5.1).13 These agreements provide critical 
protection to those fleeing across international 
borders to escape persecution. 

Where individuals 
with irregular status 
are identified, 
enforcement 
procedures should 
follow the rule of 
law and basic rights 
should be respected

99

attraction of potentially garnering broad public 
acceptance. 

The varied European experience suggests that 
among the key ingredients of successful regular-
izations are the involvement of civil society or-
ganizations, migrant associations and employers 
in  planning  and  implementation;  guarantee 
against expulsion during the process; and clear 
qualifying criteria (for example, length of resi-
dence,  employment  record  and  family  ties).8
Among the challenges faced in practice are long 
delays. With locally administered schemes, as in 
France, variable treatment across locations may 
be an issue. 

Forced returns are especially controversial. 
Their number has been rising sharply in some 
countries,  surpassing  350,000  in  the  United 
States  and  300,000  in  South  Africa  in  2008 
alone.  Pushed  enthusiastically  by  rich  coun-
try governments, forced returns also feature in 
the  European  Union’s  mobility  partnerships.9 
Many origin states cooperate with destination 
countries  by  signing  readmission  agreements, 
although some, for example South Africa, have 
so far declined to sign. 

What should humane enforcement policies 
look like? Most people argue that there need to 
be some sanctions for breaches of border control 
and work rules and that, alongside discretionary 
regularization, forced returns have a place in the 
policy  armoury.  But  implementing  this  sanc-
tion raises major challenges, especially in cases 
where the individuals concerned have lived and 
worked in the country for many years and may 
have family members who are legally resident. 
For example, a recent survey of Salvadorian de-
portees found that one quarter had resided in 
the United States for more than 20 years, and 
that about four fifths were working at the time 
of their deportation, many with children born in 
the United States.10 In various countries, includ-
ing the United Kingdom, the media have occa-
sionally taken up cases of threatened deportation 
that have seemed particularly inhumane. 

It is clearly important that, where individu-
als with irregular status are identified, enforce-
ment procedures should follow the rule of law 
and basic rights should be respected. There is a 
need to establish the accountability of employ-
ers who engage workers with irregular status. 
This has been a topic of debate in the United 

5

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

More  generally,  the  six  core  international 
human rights treaties, which have been ratified 
by 131 countries around the globe, all contain 
strong non-discrimination clauses ensuring the 
applicability of many provisions to migrants.14
These  instruments  are  universal  and  apply  to 
both citizens and non-citizens, including those 
who have moved or presently stay, whether their 
status is regular or irregular. Of particular rel-
evance are the rights to equality under the law 
and to be free from discrimination on grounds 
of race, national origin or other status. These are 
important legal constraints on state action.15 

Recently,  protocols  against  the  trafficking 
and smuggling of people have rapidly garnered 
broad support, building on existing instruments 
with 129 ratifications.16 These protocols, which 
seek to criminalize trafficking, focus more on 
suppressing organized crime and facilitating or-
derly migration than on advancing the human 
rights  of  the  individuals  (mainly  women)  in-
volved.17 Many states have enacted these prin-
ciples into national legislation: of the 155 states 
surveyed in 2008, some 80 percent had intro-
duced a specific offence of trafficking in persons 
and more than half had created a special anti-
trafficking police unit.18 Progress on this front is 

Figure 5.1

Ratification of migrants’ rights convention has been limited
Ratification of selected agreements by HDI category, as of 2009

Convention on Status of Refugees (1951)

25

54 

34 

31

Six core human rights treaties (1965–1989)

19 

47 

33 

32

Protocol on Trafficking (2000)

16 

44 

41 

28

Convention on Rights of Migrant Workers and their Families (1990)

7 

22  12

| 
0 

| 
20 

| 
40 

| 
60 

| 
80 

| 

100 

| 

120 

| 

140 

|

160

Number of ratifying countries

Low HDI

Medium HDI

High HDI

Very high HDI

Source:  UNODC (2004) and UN (2009b).

100

clearly welcome, although some observers have 
noted that increasingly harsh immigration poli-
cies have also tended to promote trafficking and 
smuggling.19

By way of contrast, the series of ILO con-
ventions adopted throughout the 20th century, 
which seek to promote minimum standards for 
migrant  workers,  have  not  attracted  wide  en-
dorsement. The causes are several, including the 
scope and comprehensiveness of the conventions 
versus the desire for unfettered state discretion 
in such matters. In 1990, the UN International 
Convention  on  the  Protection  of  the  Rights 
of All Migrant Workers and Members of their 
Families (CMW) reiterated the core principles 
of the human rights treaties, but also went fur-
ther,  for  example  in  defining  discrimination 
more broadly, in providing stronger safeguards 
against collective and arbitrary expulsion and 
in ensuring the right of regular migrants to vote 
and be elected. However, there are only 41 sig-
natories to date, of which only five are net im-
migration countries and none belong to the very 
high-HDI category (figure 5.1). 

Looking behind figure 5.1 to examine the 
migration  profiles  of  ratifying  countries,  we 
found that most have immigration and emigra-
tion rates below 10 percent. Among the coun-
tries where the share of the population who are 
either migrants or emigrants exceeds 25 percent, 
the rates of signing are still low—only 3 out of 
64 have signed up to the CMW, for example, al-
though 22 have signed the six core human rights 
treaties.  Even  among  countries  with  net  out-
migration rates exceeding 10 percent of their 
population—which  have  strong  incentives  to 
sign in order to protect their workers abroad—
ratification  rates  of  the  CMW  are  low.  Only 
20 percent of high-emigration country govern-
ments have signed the CMW over the almost 
two decades of its existence, whereas half have 
ratified the six core human rights treaties and 59 
percent are signatories to the more recent traf-
ficking protocol. 

Countries that have not ratified the CMW 
are  still  obliged  to  protect  migrant  workers, 
through other core human rights treaties. Treaty 
Monitoring Bodies (TMBs) under existing con-
ventions are now supplemented by periodic re-
view by UNHCR. Recent analysis of a decade of 
deliberations by TMBs reveals that the relevant 

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

5

The prime responsibility for ensuring basic 
rights while abroad lies with host governments. 
Attempts  by  source  country  governments, 
such as India and the Philippines, to mandate 
minimum wages paid to emigrants have typi-
cally failed due to the lack of jurisdiction over 
this  matter.  Source  country  governments  can 
nonetheless provide support in terms of advis-
ing about migrants’ rights and responsibilities 
through  migrant  resource  centres  and  pre-de-
parture orientation about what to expect while 
abroad.

Consular services can play an important part 
in providing a channel for complaints and pos-
sible  recourse,  while  bilateral  agreements  can 
establish  key  principles.  However,  a  collective 
and coordinated effort by countries of origin to 
raise standards is more likely to be effective than 
isolated national efforts.

Employers, unions, NGOs and migrant as-
sociations  also  have  a  role.  Employers  are  the 
main source of breaches of basic rights—hence 
their behaviour is paramount. Some employers 
have sought to set a good example by develop-
ing codes of conduct and partnering with the 
Business for Social Responsibility programme 
for migrant workers’ rights, which focuses on sit-
uations where there are no effective mechanisms 
for enforcing existing labour laws.22 Among the 
measures  available  to  unions  and  NGOs  are: 
informing migrants about their rights, working 
more closely with employers and government of-
ficials to ensure that these rights are respected, 
unionizing  migrant  workers  and  advocating 
for  regularization.  One  active  NGO,  is  the 
Collectif  de  défense  des  travailleurs  étrangers 
dans l’agriculture (CODESTRAS), which seeks 
to improve the situation of seasonal workers in 
the South of France through awareness-raising, 
information, dissemination and legal support.23
The  role  of  trade  unions  is  particularly 
important.  Over  time,  unions  have  accorded 
greater attention to migrants’ rights. The World 
Values Survey of 2005/2006, covering 52 coun-
tries, suggests that rates of union membership 
are higher among people with a migrant back-
ground:  22  percent  of  those  who  have  a  mi-
grant parent are members of a labour union, 
compared to 17 percent of those who do not. 
This difference is especially large in low-HDI 
countries.24 

The prime 
responsibility for 
ensuring basic rights 
while abroad lies with 
host governments... 
Employers, unions, 
NGOs and migrant 
associations also 
have a role

101

provisions of other core human rights treaties 
can highlight problems and protect the rights 
of migrants, and have increasingly done so over 
time.20 Even if each country naturally seeks to 
portray its human rights record in the best light, 
TMBs  can,  despite  the  lack  of  enforcement 
mechanisms,  influence  through  ‘naming  and 
shaming’, highlighting egregious cases and seek-
ing moral or political suasion. 

Ensuring the rights of migrants has been a 
recurrent cry in all global forums, as exemplified 
by the statements made by civil society organiza-
tions at the 2008 Global Forum on Migration 
and Development in Manila. Yet it is also clear 
that the main challenge is not the lack of a legal 
framework for the protection of rights—as a se-
ries of conventions, treaties and customary law 
provisions already exist—but rather their effec-
tive implementation. In this spirit, in 2005 the 
ILO  developed  a  Multilateral  Framework  on 
Labour  Migration,  which  provides  guidelines 
and good practices within a non-binding frame-
work that recognizes the sovereign right of all 
states to determine their own migration policies. 
This ‘soft law’ type of approach accommodates 
the inherent differences between states and al-
lows for gradual implementation.21 

Even if there is no appetite to sign up to for-
mal conventions, there is no sound reason for any 
government to deny such basic migrant rights as 
the right to:
• Equal remuneration for equal work, decent 
working conditions and protection of health 
and safety; 

 • Organize and bargain collectively; 
• Not be  subject to arbitrary detention,  and 
be  subject  to  due  process  in  the  event  of 
deportation; 

 • Return to countries of origin. 
These should exist alongside basic human rights 
of  liberty,  security  of  person,  freedom  of  be-
lief  and  protection  against  forced  labour  and 
trafficking.

One argument against ensuring basic rights 
has been that this would necessarily reduce the 
numbers of people allowed to enter. However as 
we showed in chapter 2, this trade-off does not 
generally hold such and an argument is in any 
case not justifiable on moral grounds. 

 • Not be subject to cruel, inhumane or degrad-

ing treatment; and

5

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Rationalizing ‘paper 
walls’ in countries 
of origin is an 
important part of 
reducing the barriers  
to legal migration

Last but not least, migrants themselves can 
affect the way destination communities and soci-
eties perceive immigration. Sometimes, negative 
public opinion partly reflects past incidents of 
unlawful behaviour associated with migrants. 
By  supporting  more  inclusive  societies  and 
communities,  where  everyone—including  mi-
grants—understands and respects the law and 
pursues peaceful forms of participation and, if 
necessary, protest, migrants can alleviate the risk 
of such negative reactions. Civil society and local 
authorities can help by supporting migrant net-
works and communities.25 

5.1.3  Reducing transaction costs 
associated with movement
Moving across borders inevitably involves trans-
action costs. Distance complicates job matching, 
both within countries and, more acutely, across 
national borders, because of information gaps, 
language barriers and varying regulatory frame-
works.  This  creates  a  need  for  intermediation 
and facilitation services. Given the magnitude of 
income differences between low- and very high-
HDI countries, it is not surprising that there is 
a market for agents who can match individuals 
with jobs abroad and help navigate the adminis-
trative restrictions associated with international 
movement. 

Under current migration regimes, the major 
cost is typically the administrative requirement 
that a job offer be obtained from a foreign em-
ployer before departure. Especially in Asia, many 
migrant  workers  rely  on  commercial  agents  to 
organize the offer and make all the practical ar-
rangements. Most agents are honest brokers and 
act through legal channels, but some lack adequate 
information on the employers and/or the workers 
or smuggle people through borders illegally. 

This market for intermediation services can 
be problematic, however. In the worst cases it can 
result in trafficking and years of bondage, vio-
lent abuse and sometimes even death. A much 
more common problem is high fees, especially 
for  low-skilled  workers.  Intermediation  often 
generates surplus profits for recruiters, due to 
the  combination  of  restrictive  entry  and  high 
labour  demand  for  low-skilled  workers,  who 
frequently lack adequate information and have 
unequal bargaining power. The costs also appear 
to be regressive, rising as the level of skills falls, 

102

meaning that, for example, few migrant nurses 
pay recruitment fees but most domestic helpers 
do. Asian migrants moving to the Gulf states 
often  pay  25–35  percent  of  what  they  expect 
to earn over two or three years in recruitment 
and other fees.26 In some cases, corruption im-
poses additional costs. Extensive administrative 
regulation can be counterproductive in that it is 
more likely to expose migrants to corruption and 
creates rents for middlemen, officials and others 
who grease the wheels of the system.

Governments can help to reduce transaction 
costs for migrant workers in several ways. Six 
areas deserve priority consideration: 

Opening  corridors  and  introducing  re-
gimes  that  allow  free  movement.  Because  of 
MERCOSUR,  for  example,  Bolivian  work-
ers can travel relatively freely to Argentina, as 
well as learn about jobs and opportunities from 
friends and relatives through deepening social 
networks. The same dynamic was observed on 
an accelerated basis following European Union 
enlargement  in  2004.  Another  example  is  fa-
cilitated access for seasonal workers across the 
Guatemala–Mexico border.

Reducing the cost of and easing access to offi-
cial documents, such as birth certificates and pass-
ports. Rationalizing ‘paper walls’ in countries of 
origin is an important part of reducing the bar-
riers to legal migration.27 Analysis at the level of 
the country and migration corridor is needed to 
identify the types and amounts of upfront costs, 
which can range from travelling multiple times 
from the village to the capital to apply for a pass-
port, to the fees for other pre-departure require-
ments such as health checks, police clearances, 
insurance fees and bank guarantees. Prospective 
migrants  in  the  Mexico–Canada  programme 
go  to  the  capital  city  six  times  on  average—a 
requirement that prompted the government to 
offer  a  stipend  to  cover  travel  costs  (although 
rationalizing  the  administrative  requirements 
would have been more efficient).28 Some costs 
arise  from  destination  country  requirements. 
For  example,  the  Republic  of  Korea  requires 
that migrants learn the language before arrival: 
while language training increases earnings and 
promotes integration, it also increases pre-arrival 
debt.29 A number of countries have attempted to 
speed up paperwork for migrants, with varying 
degrees of success (box 5.3).

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

5

Box 5.3

Reducing paperwork: a challenge for governments 
and partners

A prime example of streamlined deployment despite extensive administrative re-
quirements is the Philippine Overseas Employment Administration, which regulates 
all aspects of recruitment and works closely with other agencies to ensure the pro-
tection of its workers abroad. Indonesia has attempted to follow suit, establishing 
the National Agency for the Placement and Protection of Indonesian Migrant Work-
ers (BNP2TKI) in 2006, although low bureaucratic capacity and weak intergovern-
mental coordination have reportedly compromised BNP2TKI’s effectiveness. Other 
countries have attempted to address issues related to delays and costs, but few 
have succeeded. In Gabon the government instituted a 3-day limit on the waiting 
time for passports, but the delays remain long and the process arduous. Similarly, 
the Myanmar government recently instituted a policy for passports to be issued 
within one week, but continuing complaints suggest that delays and demands for 
bribes remain common.

Development assistance programmes could support and finance administrative 
improvements for vital records registration with shorter processing times and lower 
costs. This would allow governments to offer their citizens proper travel documents 
at affordable prices. Bangladesh, which has a birth registration rate of below 10 per-
cent, has partnered with the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) on this front.

Source:  Agunias (2008), Tirtosudarmo (2009), United States Department of State (2009e), Koslowski (2009), and UNICEF (2007).

appropriate  role  for  government  agencies.  In 
most  poor  countries,  the  capacity  of  national 
employment  agencies  to  match  workers  with 
suitable jobs at home, let alone abroad, is very 
weak.35 Some bilateral agreements, such as those 
signed  by  the  Republic  of  Korea,  require  mi-
grants to use government agencies, prompting 
complaints from recruiters and workers about 
high  costs  and  lack  of  transparency.  The  fees 
charged by public recruiters are sometimes lower, 
but the costs in terms of time can be significant 
and can discourage prospective migrants from 
using regular channels.36 

Intergovernmental  cooperation.  This  can 
play an important role. The Colombo Process 
and  the  Abu  Dhabi  Dialogue  are  two  recent 
intergovernmental  initiatives  designed  to  co-
operatively address transactions costs and other 
issues.  This  process,  which  took  place  for  the 
first  time  in  January  2008,  involved  almost  a 
dozen source and several destination countries 
in the GCC states and South East Asia, with the 
United Arab Emirates and IOM serving as the 
co-hosts. It focuses on developing key partner-
ships between countries of origin and destina-
tion around the subject of temporary contractual 
labour to, among other things, develop and share 

103

Empowerment of migrants, through access to 
information, rights of recourse abroad and stron-
ger social networks. The latter, in particular, can 
do much to plug the information gap between 
migrant  workers  and  employers,  limiting  the 
need  for  costly  recruitment  agencies  and  en-
abling  migrants  to  pick  and  choose  among  a 
wider variety of employment opportunities.30 In 
Malaysia migrant networks allow Indonesians 
to  learn  about  new  job  openings  before  the 
news  even  reaches  local  residents.31  Similarly, 
improved  telecommunication  has  helped  pro-
spective migrants in Jamaica become better in-
formed.32 Information centres, such as the pilot 
launched by the European Union in Bamako, 
Mali in 2008, can provide potential migrants 
with  accurate  (if  disappointing!)  information 
about opportunities for work and study abroad.
Regulation  of  private  recruiters  to  prevent 
abuses and fraud. Prohibitions do not tend to 
work, in part because bans in destination places 
do not apply to recruiters in source areas.33 Yet 
some regulations can be effective, for example 
joint  liability  between  employers  and  recruit-
ers, which can help to avert fraud and deceit. In 
the Philippines recruitment agencies are treated 
as  ‘co-employers’,  liable  jointly  and  separately 
for failure to comply with a given contract. An 
agency found to be at fault risks having its license 
revoked, although suspension is often avoided by 
payment of a fine. Self-regulation through indus-
try associations and codes of conduct is another 
means of promoting ethical standards. Industry 
associations can collect and disseminate infor-
mation on high-risk agencies and best practices. 
Many such associations exist in South and East 
Asia, although none has emerged as a self-regu-
latory body similar to those found in developed 
countries, since most have focused on ensuring 
that government policy on migration is friendly 
to the recruitment industry—as, for example, 
in Bangladesh, the Philippines and Sri Lanka.34
Such associations could develop over time to play 
a more effective role in assuring the quality of 
services and, where necessary, censuring mem-
bers for lax standards.

Direct  administration  of  recruitment  by 
public agencies. In Guatemala, for example, the 
IOM administers a programme that sends sea-
sonal farm workers to Canada at no charge to 
the worker. However there is debate about the 

5

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Inclusion and 
integration are 
critical from a 
human development 
perspective

knowledge on labour market trends, prevent il-
legal  recruitment,  and  promote  welfare  and 
protection  measures  for  contractual  workers. 
The ministerial consultation is intended to take 
place every two years. A pilot project followed 
where under the initiative of the governments 
of India, the Philippines and the United Arab 
Emirates there will be a test and identification of 
best practices in different aspects of temporary 
and circular migration, beginning with a group 
of Filipino and Indian workers in the sectors of 
construction, health and hospitality.37

5.1.4 Improving outcomes for migrants 
and destination communities
While  the  weight  of  evidence  shows  that  the 
aggregate economic impact of migration in the 
long run is likely to be positive, local people with 
specific skills or in certain locations may expe-
rience  adverse  effects.  To  a  large  extent  these 
can  be  minimized  and  offset  by  policies  and 
programmes  that  recognize  and  plan  for  the 
presence of migrants, promoting inclusion and 
ensuring that receiving communities are not un-
duly burdened. It is important to recognize the 
actual and perceived costs of immigration at the 
community level, and consider how these might 
be shared. 

Inclusion and integration are critical from a 
human development perspective, since they have 
positive effects not only for individual movers 
and their families but also for receiving commu-
nities. The ways in which the status and rights of 
immigrants are recognized and enforced will de-
termine the extent of such integration. In some 
developing  countries,  support  for  integration 
could be an appropriate candidate for develop-
ment assistance.

Yet  institutional  and  policy  arrangements 
may often be more important than targeted mi-
grant integration policies. For example, the qual-
ity of state schooling in poor neighbourhoods is 
likely to be critical—and not only for migrants. 
Within this broader context, the policy priori-
ties for improving outcomes for migrants and 
destination communities are as follows:

Provide access to basic services—particularly 
schooling and health care. These services are not 
only critical to migrants and their families, but 
also have broader positive externalities. Here the 
key is equity of access and treatment. Our review 

104

suggests that access is typically most restricted 
for temporary workers and people with irregular 
status. Access to schooling should be provided 
on the same basis and terms as for locally born 
residents. The same applies for health care—both 
emergency care in the case of accidents or severe 
illness and preventive services such as vaccina-
tions, which are typically also in the best inter-
ests of the whole community and highly effective 
in the long term. Some developing countries, for 
example  Costa  Rica,  grant  migrants  access  to 
public health facilities regardless of status.38

Help newcomers acquire language proficiency. 
Services in this area can contribute greatly to 
labour market gains and inclusion more gener-
ally. They need to be designed with the living 
and working constraints faced by migrants in 
mind. The needs of adults vary, depending on 
whether  or  not  they  are  working  outside  the 
home,  while  children  can  access  school-based 
programmes.  Among  good  practice  examples 
are Australia, which provides advanced language 
training  to  migrants  and  indigenous  popula-
tions.39 Examples of targeted language learning 
for  children  include  the  Success  for  All  pro-
gramme in the United States, which combines 
group instruction and individual tutoring at the 
pre-school and primary school levels.40 Several 
European  countries  provide  language  courses 
for newcomers through programmes offered by 
central government, state schools, municipalities 
and NGOs, such as the Swedish for Immigrants 
programme that dates back to 1965, the Portugal 
Acolhe programme offered since 2001, and the 
Danish Labour Market programme introduced 
in 2007.

Allow people to work. This is the single most 
important  reform  for  improving  human  de-
velopment  outcomes  for  migrants,  especially 
poorer and more vulnerable migrants. Access to 
the labour market is vital not just because of the 
associated economic gains but also because em-
ployment greatly increases the prospects for so-
cial inclusion. Restrictions on seeking paid work, 
as have traditionally been applied to asylum seek-
ers and refugees in many developed countries, 
are damaging both to short- and medium-term 
outcomes,  since  they  encourage  dependency 
and  destroy  self-respect.  They  should  be  abol-
ished. Allowing people to move among employ-
ers is a further basic principle of well-designed 

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

5

Box 5.4

Recognition of credentials

Many migrants, especially from poorer countries, are well qualified yet unable to use 
their skills abroad. Accreditation of skills is rarely practised in Europe, for example, 
even where there are institutional arrangements in place that are supposed to facili-
tate recognition. 

There are reasons why immediate accreditation is not allowed. For example, it 
may be difficult to judge the quality of overseas qualifications, and there may be a 
premium on local knowledge (e.g. lawyers, with respect to applicable legislation).
Among the strategies available to promote the use of skills and qualifications held 

by foreigners are the following: 
•	 Mutual recognition agreements. These are most common between countries with 
similar systems of education and levels of economic development, as in the Euro-
pean Union. 

•	 Prior vetting. Both source and destination governments can vet the credentials 
of potential migrants before they leave. Australia has pioneered this approach. 
However, if an individual’s goal is to enhance her human development via migra-
tion, the wait for credential recognition may be more costly than trying her luck 
in some other country, especially if she is unable to practise her profession at 
home or works there for a low wage.

•	 Fast-track consideration. Governments can facilitate fast-track consideration of 
credentials and establish national offices to expedite recognition. Mentors and 
short courses abroad can help migrants fill any gaps. Some states in the United 
States have established ‘New Americans’ offices to help newcomers navigate 
what can be a maze, even for internal migrants. 

•	 Recognition of on-the-job skills. Many skills are learned on the job and mechanisms 
for recognizing such informally learned skills may be lacking. Developing the ca-
pacity to recognize and certify on-the-job skills could make it easier for workers to 
have their skills recognized abroad.

Source:  Iredale (2001).

costs, especially in social services, where there is a 
strong argument for equalization of access. Well-
designed transfer systems do not rely heavily on 
earmarking,  and  the  grants  should  be  made 
in as simple, reliable and transparent a way as 
possible.43

Address  discrimination  and  xenophobia. 
Appropriate interventions by governments and 
civil society can foster tolerance at the commu-
nity  level.  This  is  especially  important  where 
there is a risk of violence, although in practice 
policy responses tend to emerge ex post. In re-
sponse to violence in Côte d’Ivoire, for example, 
an Anti-Xenophobia Law was passed in August 
2008 to impose sanctions on conduct that incites 
such violence.44 Civil society can also work to en-
gender tolerance and protect diversity, as dem-
onstrated recently in South Africa, where the 
‘No  to  Xenophobia’  emergency  mobile  phone 

105

programmes, which are concerned with the in-
terests of migrants and not solely with those of 
employers. In many countries, high-skilled new-
comers also face problems in accreditation of the 
qualifications they bring from abroad (box 5.4). 
Support local government roles. Strong local 
government, accountable to local users, is essen-
tial for the delivery of services such as primary 
health and education. However, in some coun-
tries,  government  officials  implicitly  deny  the 
existence of migrants by excluding them from 
development plans and allowing systematic dis-
crimination to thrive. Improving individual and 
community outcomes associated with migration 
requires local governments that aim to41:
• Promote inclusive local governance structures 

to enable participation and accountability; 

• Avoid institutional practices that contribute 

to discrimination; 

• Ensure that law and order plays a facilitating 
role,  including  an  effective  and  responsive 
police service; 

 • Provide relevant information for the public 
and for civil society organizations, including 
migrants’ associations;42 and

• Ensure equitable land use planning, consis-
tent with the needs of the poor—for exam-
ple, options to alleviate tenure insecurity and 
related constraints. 
Address  local  budget  issues,  including  fiscal 
transfers to finance additional local needs. Often, 
responsibility for the provision of basic services 
such as schools and clinics lies with local authori-
ties, whose budgets may be strained by growing 
populations and who may lack the tax base to 
address their responsibilities for service delivery. 
Where subnational governments have an impor-
tant role in financing basic services, redistribu-
tive fiscal mechanisms can help offset imbalances 
between  revenue  and  expenditure  allocations. 
Intergovernmental transfers are typically made 
across states and localities on the basis of at least 
two criteria: need (such as population, poverty 
rates, and so on) and revenue-generating capacity 
(so as not to discourage local taxation efforts). 
Since circumstances and objectives differ from 
country to country, no single pattern of transfers 
is universally appropriate. Per capita grants re-
quire that all people present, including irregular 
migrants and their families, should be counted. 
Transfers may also be used to reimburse specific 

5

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

It is critical to ensure 
fair treatment of 
migrants during 
recessions

106

SMS network was initiated after the violence of 
May 2008.45 Another example is the Campaign 
for Diversity, Human Rights and Participation, 
organized by the Council of Europe in partner-
ship with the European Commission and the 
European Youth Forum. This emphasized the 
role of the media in combating prejudice against 
Muslim and Roma peoples, and offered awards 
for municipalities that actively advance protec-
tion and inclusion.46 Of course, where discrimi-
nation  and  tensions  are  deep-seated  and  have 
erupted in violence, and especially where the rule 
of law is weak, it will take time as well as much 
effort and goodwill for such efforts to bear fruit. 
Ensure fair treatment during recession. This 
has assumed some urgency in 2009, which has 
brought reports of backlashes and deportations 
around the world. Among the provisions that 
can protect migrant workers against undue hard-
ship are to47:
 • Allow those laid off to look for a new job, at 
least until their existing work and residence 
permits expire; 

• Ensure that those who are laid off before the 
end  of  their  contracts  can  claim  severance 
payments  and/or  unemployment  benefits 
when entitled to do so; 

• Step up labour law enforcement so as to mini-
mize abuses (e.g. wage arrears) where workers 
are fearful of layoffs; 

 • Ensure  continued  access  to  basic  services 
(health  and  education)  and  to  job  search 
services; 

• Support institutions in origin countries that 
help laid-off workers to return and provide 
training grants and support; and
Improve disaggregated data—including data 
on layoffs and wages, by sector and gender—
so that origin governments and communities 
can become aware of changes in employment 
prospects.
If governments take these types of measures, 
the  economic  crisis  could  become  an  oppor-
tunity to promote better treatment and avoid 
conflict. 

 •

It is important to give credit where it is due. 
There are examples where state and local govern-
ments have embraced migration and its broader 
social and cultural implications. The recent West 
Australian Charter on Multiculturalism is an 
interesting example of a state-level commitment 

to  the  elimination  of  discrimination  and  the 
promotion  of  cohesion  and  inclusion  among 
individuals and groups.48 Many of the foregoing 
recommendations are already standard policy in 
some OECD countries, although there tends to 
be plenty of variability in practice. The boldest 
reforms are needed in a number of major desti-
nation countries, including, for example, South 
Africa  and  the  United  Arab  Emirates,  where 
current efforts to enable favourable human de-
velopment outcomes for individuals and com-
munities fall far short of what is needed. 

5.1.5 Enabling benefits from internal 
mobility 
In terms of the number of people involved, in-
ternal migration far exceeds external migration. 
An estimated 136 million people have moved 
in China alone, and 42 million in India, so the 
totals for just these two countries approach the 
global stock of people who have crossed frontiers. 
This reflects the fact that mobility is not only a 
natural part of human history but a continuing 
dimension of development and of modern societ-
ies, in which people seek to connect to emerging 
opportunities and change their circumstances 
accordingly. 

Given  these  realities,  government  policies 
should  seek  to  facilitate,  not  hinder,  the  pro-
cess  of  internal  migration.  The  policies  and 
programmes  in  place  should  not  adversely  af-
fect those who move. By the same token, they 
should not require people to move in order to ac-
cess basic services and livelihood opportunities. 
These two principles lead to a series of recom-
mendations that are entirely within the jurisdic-
tion of all national governments to implement: 
Remove the barriers to internal mobility. To 
ensure full and equal civic, economic and social 
rights for all, it is vital to lift legal and admin-
istrative constraints to mobility and to combat 
discrimination against movers. As reviewed in 
chapter 2, administrative barriers are less com-
mon  since  the  demise  of  central  planning  in 
large parts of the world—but some are remark-
ably persistent, despite typically failing to curb 
mobility to any marked degree. Such barriers 
are contrary to international law. They are also 
costly and time-consuming to maintain for gov-
ernment and to negotiate for movers. Many opt 
to  travel  without  the  proper  documentation, 

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

5

and programmes to respond to people’s needs. 
Inclusive and accountable local government can 
play a central role not only in service provision 
but also in averting and alleviating social ten-
sions. Proactive urban planning, rather than de-
nial, is needed to avoid the social and economic 
marginalization of migrants. 

The  Millennium  Development  Goals 
(MDGs) call for action plans to create ‘Cities 
without Slums’ to, inter alia, improve sanitation 
and secure land tenure. However, progress has 
been slow: according to the most recent global 
MDG report, more than a third of the world’s 
urban population lives in slum conditions, ris-
ing to over 60 percent in sub-Saharan Africa.50 
Governments  sometimes  respond  to  con-
cerns about slums by seeking to curb inflows 
of migrants to cities, as revealed by the review 
of  PRSs  presented  in  chapter  4.  However,  a 
more constructive policy approach would be 
to  meet  the  needs  of  a  growing  and  shifting 
population  by  addressing  the  serious  water 
and sanitation challenges that tend to prevail 
in  slum  areas.  With  proactive  planning  and 
sufficient resources, it is possible to ensure that 
growing cities can provide decent living condi-
tions. Some cities, recognizing the importance 
of sustainable urban development, have come 
up  with  innovative  solutions  for  improving 
the lives of city dwellers. Singapore’s experi-
ence with urban renewal is widely cited as a 
best practice example: virtually all of its squat-
ter  settlements  were  replaced  with  high-rise 
public  housing,  complemented  by  expanded 
public transport and improved environmental 
management.  A  more  recent  example  comes 
from Alexandria, Egypt, where participatory 
approaches  have  been  used  to  develop  me-
dium- and long-term plans for economic de-
velopment, urban upgrading of slum areas and 
environmental regeneration.51

Last but not least, many rural migrants de-
scribe being pushed rather than pulled to urban 
areas because of inadequate public facilities in 
their  place  of  origin.  The  universal  provision 
of services and infrastructure should extend to 
places experiencing net out-migration. This will 
provide opportunities for people to develop the 
skills to be productive and to compete for jobs in 
their place of origin, while also preparing them 
for jobs elsewhere if they so choose. 

Inclusive and 
accountable local 
government can play  
a central role not 
only in service 
provision but also in 
averting and alleviating 
social tensions

107

only to find later that they cannot access key 
services.  Internal  migrants  should  have  equal 
access to the full range of public services and 
benefits,  especially  education  and  health,  but 
also pensions and social assistance where these 
are provided. 

Freedom of movement is especially impor-
tant for seasonal and temporary workers, who 
are typically among the poorest migrants and 
have often been neglected or actively discrimi-
nated  against.  These  types  of  migration  flows 
can present acute challenges for local authorities 
responsible for the provision of services, which 
need to learn to cater to more fluid populations. 
Partial reforms that allow migrants to work but 
not to access services on an equal basis (as is the 
case in China) are not enough. Reforms have 
been  introduced  in  some  states  in  India—for 
example, allowing seasonal migrants to obtain 
temporary  ration  cards—but  implementation 
has been slow.49 

Provide appropriate support to movers at des-
tination. Just as they should do for people com-
ing from abroad, governments should provide 
appropriate  support  to  people  who  move  in-
ternally. This may be done in partnership with 
local  communities  and  NGOs.  Some  people 
who  move  are  disadvantaged—due  to  lack  of 
education, prejudice against ethnic minorities 
and linguistic differences—and therefore need 
targeted support programmes. Support could be 
provided in areas ranging from job search to lan-
guage training. Access to social assistance and 
other  entitlements  should  be  ensured.  Above 
all, it is vital to ensure that basic health care and 
education needs are met. India has examples of 
NGO-run children’s hostels to help children of 
migrants access accommodation, schooling and 
extra classes to catch up. 

Redistribute tax revenues. Intergovernmental 
fiscal arrangements should ensure the redistri-
bution  of  revenues  so  that  poorer  localities, 
where internal migrants often live, do not bear 
a  disproportionate  burden  in  providing  ade-
quate local public services. The same principles 
as apply to fiscal redistribution to account for 
the location of international migrants also apply 
here. 

Enhance responsiveness. This may sound obvi-
ous and should by now go without saying, but it 
is vital to build the capacity of local government 

5

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Migration can be a  
vital strategy for 
households and 
families seeking to 
diversify and improve 
their livelihoods

108

5.1.6  Making mobility an integral part 
of national development strategies
A central theme of the 2009 Global Forum on 
Migration and Development, hosted by Greece, 
is  the  integration  of  migration  into  national 
development strategies. This raises the broader 
question of the role of mobility in strategies for 
improving human development. Our analysis 
of PRSs since 2000 helped to identify current 
policy attitudes and constraints, while recog-
nizing that migration has played a major role 
in national visions of development at different 
moments and periods in history. 

The  links  between  mobility  and  develop-
ment are complex, in large part because mobility 
is best seen as a component of human develop-
ment  rather  than  an  isolated  cause  or  effect 
of it. The relationship is further complicated 
by the fact that, in general, the largest devel-
opmental gains from mobility accrue to those 
who go abroad—and are thus beyond the realm 
of the territorial and place-focused approaches 
that tend to dominate policy thinking.

Migration can be a vital strategy for house-
holds and families seeking to diversify and im-
prove their livelihoods, especially in developing 
countries. Flows of money have the potential 
to  improve  well-being,  stimulate  economic 
growth and reduce poverty, directly and indi-
rectly. However, migration, and remittances in 
particular, cannot compensate for an institu-
tional environment that hinders economic and 
social development more generally. A critical 
point that emerges from experience is the im-
portance of national economic conditions and 
strong public-sector institutions in enabling the 
broader benefits of mobility to be reaped. 

We have seen that the mobility choices of 
the poor are often constrained. This can arise 
from  underlying  inequalities  in  their  skills, 
but  also  from  policy  and  institutional  barri-
ers. Needed now is country-specific identifica-
tion  of  the  constraints  surrounding  people’s 
choices, using quantitative and qualitative data 
and analysis. Improvements in data, alongside 
such  recent  initiatives  as  the  development  of 
migration profiles (supported by the European 
Commission and other partners), will be cru-
cial to this effort. This would highlight barri-
ers and inform attempts to improve national 
strategies. 

Some  development  strategies—8  of  the  84 
PRSs prepared between 2000 and 200852—raise 
concerns about the exit of graduates. There is broad 
agreement that coercive policies to limit exit, as 
well as being contrary to international law, are not 
the right way to proceed, for both ethical and eco-
nomic reasons.53 However, there is less agreement 
as to what alternative policies should look like. Box 
5.5 looks at the merits of different options.

Finally, while this topic is beyond the focus of 
this report, we underline the importance of sus-
tained  efforts  to  promote  human  development 
at home.54 A comprehensive investigation of the 
sources of human development success and fail-
ure and its implications for national development 
strategies will be a major theme of the next HDR, 
which marks the 20th anniversary of the global 
report.

5.2 The political feasibility of 
reform
Against a background of popular scepticism about 
migration, a critical issue is the political feasibility 
of our proposals. This section argues that reform is 
possible, but only if steps are taken to address the 
concerns of local people, so that they no longer 
view immigration as a threat, either to themselves 
individually or to their society.

While  the  evidence  on  mobility  points  to 
significant gains for movers and, in many cases, 
benefits  also  for  destination  and  origin  coun-
tries,  any  discussion  of  policy  must  recognize 
that  in  many  destination  countries,  both  de-
veloped  and  developing,  attitudes  among  the 
local population towards migration are at best 
mildly permissive and often quite negative. An 
array of opinion polls and other surveys suggest 
that  residents  see  controls  on  immigration  as 
essential and most would prefer to see existing 
rules  on  entry  tightened  rather  than  relaxed. 
Interestingly,  however,  attitudes  to  migration 
appear to be more positive in countries where 
the migrant population share in 1995 was large 
and where rates of increase over the past decade 
have been high.55 In terms of the treatment of 
migrants, the picture is more positive, as people 
tend to support equitable treatment of migrants 
already within their borders. 

We begin with the vexed issue of liberalizing 
entry. The evidence suggests that opposition to 
liberalization is widespread, but the picture is 

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

5

Box 5.5

  When skilled people emigrate: some policy options

Taxing  citizens  abroad—sometimes  termed  a  Bhagwati  tax—has 
been a longstanding proposal and is an established feature of the 
United States tax system. It can be justified by the notion that citizen-
ship implies responsibilities, including the payment of tax, especially 
by the better off. If entry barriers create a shortage of skilled labour 
in destination countries and hence higher incomes for those who do 
manage to move, taxing these rents is non-distortionary and would 
not affect the global allocation of labour. 

However, there are several arguments against imposing a sur-
charge on nationals abroad, who may already be paying tax to their 
new host countries. First, implementation would either be on a vol-
untary basis or through bilateral tax agreements. But people do not 
like paying taxes—and there is no consensus among governments 
as to the desirability of migrant taxation, largely because it is admin-
istratively costly. Second, while some emigrants will have benefited 
from  attending  a  public  university  at  home,  others  will  have  been 
educated abroad or privately. Third, through remittances, investment 
and other mechanisms, migrants often generate substantial benefits 
back home. Taxation could discourage these flows and persuade em-
igrants to relinquish their citizenship in favour of their new homeland. 
Hence implementation of such taxes has been very limited. The 
Philippines tried, but experience was very mixed and the approach 
was shelved nearly a decade ago. Today most governments, includ-
ing the Philippines, grant tax holidays to emigrants. 

An alternative way to compensate for skill losses could be direct 
transfers between governments. Whether self-standing or part of an 
official development aid package, these have the advantage of sim-
plicity and relatively low transaction costs. However, skill loss is hard 
to measure. And such transfers would not address the underlying is-
sues that stimulated exit in the first place, such as low-quality educa-
tional and health services and/or thin markets for skilled individuals. 
Aid is largely fungible, as many studies have shown, so even aid 
that is earmarked to support the higher education system mostly sup-
ports whatever the government is spending money on. 

There may still be a case for policy to address skilled emigration 
in those sectors, such as health and education, where there are po-
tentially large divergences between private and public benefits and 
costs. Which policy approach has merit depends on local circum-
stances. For example: 
•	 Targeted incentives in the form of wage supplements for public-
sector workers. Such an approach would have to be carefully 
calibrated, given its possible effects on labour supply. A major 
constraint here is that the wage differentials are often too great 
to lie within the fiscal capacity of poor governments.

•	 Training tailored to skills that are useful in origin countries but less 
tradable across borders. For example, while an international mar-
ket for doctors exists, training in paramedic skills may promote 
better retention of skilled people as well as being more relevant 
to local health care needs.

•	

•	 Reform of education financing. This would allow private-sector 
provision  so  that  people  seeking  training  as  a  way  of  moving 
abroad do not rely on public funding. The Philippines has been 
taking this route for training its nurses. 
Investment in alternative technologies. Distance services, dis-
pensed by cell-phone, internet telephony or websites, can allow 
skills that are in short supply to benefit larger numbers of people. 
•	 Targeted  development  assistance.  Where  loss  of  talent  is  as-
sociated with lack of innovation and investment—for example, 
in agriculture—development assistance could prioritize regional 
and national research institutions. 
Providing incentives for skilled migrants to return has also been 
tried, but experience has been mixed and it is not clear that this is 
the best use of scarce public funds. Effectiveness depends partly 
on the strength of the home institution to which the migrant would 
return but also, and perhaps more importantly, on the performance 
and prospects of the whole country. Evidence suggests that returns 
occur anyway when countries offer sufficiently attractive opportuni-
ties. China, India and Mauritius are recent cases in point. 

Sources:  Clemens (2009b), Bhagwati (1979), Clemens (2009a), Pomp (1989) and World Bank (1998).

not as monochrome as it initially appears. There 
are four main reasons why this is so. 

First, as mentioned in chapter 4, many peo-
ple are willing to accept immigration if jobs are 
available. Our proposal links future liberaliza-
tion to the demand for labour, such that inflows 
of migrants will respond to vacancy levels. This 
alleviates the risk that migrants will substitute 
for or undercut local workers. Indeed, conditions 
of this kind are already widely applied by govern-
ments, particularly in the developed economies, 

to the entry of skilled migrants. Our proposal 
is that this approach be extended to low-skilled 
workers, with an explicit link to the state of the 
national labour market, and sectoral needs. 

Second, our focus on improving the trans-
parency and efficiency of the pathways to per-
manence  for  migrants  can  help  address  the 
persistent  impression,  shared  by  many  local 
people,  that  a  significant  part  of  cross-border 
migration is irregular or illegal. Certainly, in the 
United States the size of the irregular migrant 

109

5

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Figure 5.2

Support for opportunity to stay permanently
Preferences for temporary versus permanent migration, 2008

Total

United States

Europe

of which

France

Germany

United Kingdom

Italy

Netherlands

Poland

| 
20 

| 
0 
Percent of respondents (%)

| 
40 

| 
60 

| 
80 

|

100

“Do you think immigrants should be:”

Allowed the opportunity to stay permanently
Only admitted temporarily, then required to return to their country of origin

Source: Transatlantic Trends (2008).

labour force is a major political issue, on which a 
policy consensus has yet to be reached. Irregular 
migration  is  also  prominent  in  other  destina-
tion countries, both developed and developing. 
Interestingly, recent data suggest that there is 
considerable support in developed countries for 
permanent migration, with over 60 percent of 
respondents feeling that legal migrants should 
be  given  an  opportunity  to  stay  permanently 
(figure 5.2). 

To translate this support into action will re-
quire the design of policies for legal migration 
that are explicitly linked to job availability—and 
the marketing of this concept to the public so 
as to build on existing levels of support. Parallel 
measures to address the problem of irregular mi-
gration will also need to be designed and imple-
mented, so that the policy vacuum in this area 
is no longer a source of concern to the public. 
Large-scale irregular migration, although often 
convenient  for  employers  and  skirted  around 
by  policy  makers,  tends  not  only  to  have  ad-
verse consequences for migrants themselves (as 
documented in chapter 3) but also to weaken 
the  acceptability  of—and  hence  the  overall 
case for—further liberalization of entry rules. 

110

Sustainable solutions would have to include in-
centives for employers to hire regular migrants, 
as well as incentives for migrants to prefer regu-
lar status.

Third, some of the resistance to migration is 
shaped by popular misperceptions of its conse-
quences. Many believe, for example, that immi-
grants have a negative impact on the earnings of 
existing residents or that they are responsible for 
higher crime levels. These concerns again tend 
to be more pronounced in relation to irregular 
migrants, not least because their status is asso-
ciated with an erosion of the rule of law. There 
are several broad approaches to these issues that 
have  promise.  Public  information  campaigns 
and awareness-raising activities are vital. Because 
migration is a contentious issue, information is 
often used selectively at present, to support the 
arguments  of  specific  interest  groups.  While 
this is a natural and usually desirable feature of 
democratic discussion, it can come at the cost of 
objectivity and factual understanding. For ex-
ample, a recent review of 20 European countries 
found that, in every case, the perceived number 
of immigrants greatly exceeded the actual num-
ber, often by a factor of two or more.56

To address such vast gaps between percep-
tions and reality, there is a need to provide the 
public with more impartial sources of informa-
tion and analysis on the scale, scope and con-
sequences of migration. A recurring feature of 
the migration debate is the pervasive mistrust 
of official statistics and interpretation. Because 
migration is so vexed a policy issue, more atten-
tion needs to be paid to informing public debate 
on it in ways that are recognized and respected 
for their objectivity and reliability. Governments 
can  benefit  significantly  from  technical  ad-
vice given by expert bodies, such as the United 
Kingdom’s  Migration  Advisory  Committee. 
These should be deliberately kept at arm’s length 
from the administration, so that they are seen 
as impartial. 

Fourth, migration policy is normally formed 
through  the  complex  interaction  of  a  multi-
tude  of  players,  who  form  different  interest 
groups  and  belong  to  different  political  par-
ties. Organized groups can and do mobilize to 
bring  about  reform,  often  forming  coalitions 
to pursue change in areas where their interests 
coincide.57 For example, employer groups have 

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

5

and individuals. Further, while the fiscal costs of 
migration are not generally significant (as shown 
in chapter 3), there may be a political case for 
measures  that  help  improve  the  perception  of 
burden sharing. For example, Canada has had 
administrative fees in place for over a decade; 
other countries, such as the United Kingdom, 
have followed this approach. 

Moreover, the design of policy has to address 
the  potential  costs  associated  with  migration. 
The suggested design of the reform package al-
ready ensures that the number of entrants is re-
sponsive to labour demand, and helps assure that 
migrants have regular status. Further measures 
could  include  compensation  for  communities 
and localities that bear a disproportionate share 
of the costs of migration in terms of providing ac-
cess to public services and welfare benefits. This 
will help to dispel resentments against migrants 
among specific groups and reduce the support 
for extremist political parties in areas where im-
migration is a political issue. An example of this 
can be found in the case of financial transfers to 
schools with high migrant pupil numbers, a mea-
sure taken in a number of developed countries. 
Another  important  measure  to  minimize 
disadvantages to local residents lies in the ob-
servance of national and local labour standards. 
This is a core concern of unions and also of the 
public, whose distress at the exploitation and 
abuse of migrants is commendable and a clear 
sign that progressive reform will prove accept-
able. Contemporary examples of union involve-
ment  in  scheme  design  and  implementation 
include Barbados, New Zealand and Sweden, 
which  have  thereby  improved  the  design  and 
acceptability of their programmes. 

Lastly,  it  should  go  without  saying  (but 
often does not) that participation in decision-
making increases the acceptance of reform. This 
is  perhaps  the  most  important  measure  that 
governments can take to ensure that changes 
to  migration  policy  are  negotiated  with  and 
agreed  by  different  stakeholder  groups.  The 
Netherlands is an example where the govern-
ment  has  undertaken  regular  consultations 
with migrant organizations. Similarly, in New 
Zealand,  ‘Kick-Start  Forums’  have  success-
fully been used to bring together stakeholders 
to resolve problems in the Recognised Seasonal 
Employment Scheme.59 

Equitable treatment 
of migrants not only 
accords with basic 
notions of fairness 
but can also bring 
instrumental benefits 
for destination 
communities

111

often been in the vanguard of calls for changes 
in entry rules in response to labour and/or skill 
shortages. Destination countries should decide 
on the design of migration policies and target 
numbers of migrants through political processes 
that permit public debate and the balancing of 
different interests. Further, what may be feasible 
at the national level needs to be discussed and 
debated locally, and the design further adapted 
to meet local constraints. Partly out of fear that 
debate over migration will take on racist over-
tones,  discussion  of  migration  among  main-
stream  political  parties  and  organizations  has 
often been more muted than might have been 
expected. While the reasons for caution are laud-
able, there is a danger that self-censorship will be 
counter-productive.

How migrants are treated is a further area of 
policy in which reform may turn out to be easier 
than  at  first  expected.  Equitable  treatment  of 
migrants not only accords with basic notions of 
fairness but can also bring instrumental benefits 
for  destination  communities,  associated  with 
cultural  diversity,  higher  rates  of  innovation 
and other aspects explored in chapter 4. Indeed, 
the available evidence suggests that people are 
generally quite tolerant of minorities and have a 
positive view of ethnic diversity. These attitudes 
suggest that there are opportunities for building 
a broad consensus around the better treatment 
of migrants. 

The  protection  of  migrants’  rights  is  in-
creasingly in the interest of the major destina-
tion countries that have large numbers of their 
own nationals working abroad.58 By 2005, more 
than 80 countries had significant shares of their 
populations—in excess of 10 percent—as either 
immigrants or emigrants. For these countries, 
observance of the rights of migrants is obviously 
an important policy objective. This suggests that 
bilateral or regional arrangements that enable 
reciprocity could have an important role to play 
in enacting reforms in a coordinated manner. 

While there is clear scope for improving the 
quality of public debates and of resulting poli-
cies, our proposals also recognize that there are 
very real and important choices and trade-offs to 
be made. In particular, our proposals have been 
designed in such a way as to ensure that the gains 
from further liberalization can be used in part 
to offset the losses suffered by particular groups 

5

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Mobility has  
the potential to 
enhance human 
development—among 
movers, stayers  
and the majority of 
those in destination 
societies

5.3  Conclusions 
We began this report by pointing to the extraor-
dinarily unequal global distribution of oppor-
tunities and how this is a major driver of the 
movement of people. Our main message is that 
mobility has the potential to enhance human de-
velopment—among movers, stayers and the ma-
jority of those in destination societies. However, 
processes and outcomes can be adverse, some-
times highly so, and there is therefore scope for 
significant improvements in policies and institu-
tions at the national, regional and international 
levels. Our core package calls for a bold vision 
and identifies an ambitious long-term agenda for 
capturing the large unrealized gains to human 
development from current and future mobility. 
Existing  international  forums—most  no-
tably  the  Global  Forum  on  Migration  and 
Development—provide  valuable  opportuni-
ties to review challenges and share experiences. 
Consultations at this level need to be matched 
by action at other levels. Even on a unilateral 
basis, governments can take measures to im-
prove outcomes for both international and in-
ternal movers. Most of the recommendations 

we have made are not conditional on new in-
ternational agreements. The key reforms with 
respect to the treatment of migrants and the 
improvement of destination community out-
comes are entirely within the jurisdiction of 
national governments. In some cases actions 
are needed at subnational levels—for example 
to  ensure  access  to  basic  services.  Unilateral 
action  needs  to  be  accompanied  by  progress 
in  bilateral  and  regional  arrangements.  Many 
governments, both at origin and destination, as 
well as countries of transit, have signed bilateral 
agreements. These are typically used to set quo-
tas, establish procedures and define minimum 
standards. Regional agreements can play an es-
pecially important role, especially in establishing 
free movement corridors. 

Our suggested reforms to government poli-
cies and institutions could bring about sizeable 
human  development  gains  from  mobility  at 
home and abroad. Advancing this agenda will 
require committed leadership, extensive consul-
tation with stakeholders and bold campaigning 
for changes in public opinion to move the de-
bates and policy discussions forward.

112

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Notes
Notes

Notes

Chapter 1
1 OECD (2009a).
2 Few developing countries have data on flows of 
migrants. However, the sum of the stock of 
internal migrants and international migrants in 
developing countries is considerably larger than 
the stock of migrants in developed countries (see 
section 2.1).

3 See the Statistical Tables for life expectancy and 
income, and Barro and Lee (2001) for years of 
education.

4 For a discussion of the reasons behind the poor living 

conditions in the Lower Rio Grande Valley, see 
Betts and Slottje (1994). Anderson and Gerber 
(2007b) provide an overview of living conditions 
along both sides of the border and their evolution 
over time. Comprehensive data and analysis on 
human development within the United States can 
be found in Burd-Sharps, Lewis, and Martins 
(2008).

5 The number of Chinese who changed their district 

of residence over the period 1979–2003 is 
estimated to exceed 250 million (Lu and Wang, 
2006). Inter-provincial flows (corresponding 
to the definition of internal migration we use in 
the report—see box 1.3) accounted for about a 
quarter of these movements. 

6 Clemens, Montenegro, and Pritchett (2008).
7 Clemens, Montenegro, and Pritchett (2008), Ortega 

(2009).

8 UNDP (2008d).
9 The practice of compulsory testing of immigrants 
is not unique to the Arab states. For example, 
the United States severely restricts the entry of 
HIV-positive travellers and bars HIV-positive non-
citizens from obtaining permanent residence. See 
U.S.Citizenship and Immigration Services (2008).

10 A search for scholarly articles on international 

migration using the Social Sciences Citation Index 
yielded only 1,441 articles—less than a fifth of 
those dealing with international trade (7,467) 
and less than one twentieth of those dealing with 
inflation (30,227).

11 Koslowski (2008).
12 IOM (2008b), World Bank (2006b), ILO (2004), 

and GFMD (2008). 

13 Aliran (2007).
14 Branca (2005).
15 In particular, questioning of the distinction between 
voluntary and involuntary migration led to terms 
like ‘mixed migration’ and the ‘migration–asylum 
nexus’. The use of some of these terms is not 
uncontroversial, as recognition of economic 
motives among asylum seekers can have 
implications for admissions and treatment. 
See Richmond (1994), van Hear (2003), van 
Hear, Brubaker, and Bessa (2009), and UNHCR 
(2001).

16 Bakewell (2008) shows that the return to Angola 
of many of these migrants since the end of the 
civil war in 2002 coincided with the attempt by 
many Zambians to move to Angola in order to 
participate in expected improvements in social 

and economic conditions. This suggests that 
economic motives were at least as important 
among expatriate Angolans as the desire to return 
to their country of origin.

17 Van Hear, Brubaker, and Bessa (2009) and Van 

Engeland and Monsutti (2005).

18 An interesting example of migration flows being 

disconnected from economic growth differentials 
was the 1985/86 recession, when Malaysian 
per capita GDP shrank by 5.4 percent while 
the Indonesian economy was unaffected, yet 
migration flows between the two countries 
continued unabated. See Hugo (1993).

19 This does not mean that migrants in Malaysia are 

free from discrimination. See Hugo (1993).

20 Attempts to develop a conceptual framework for 

understanding migration go back at least to 
Ravenstein (1885), who proposed a set of ‘laws 
of migration’ and emphasized the development of 
cities as ‘poles of attraction’. Within neoclassical 
economic theory, initial expositions include Lewis 
(1954), and Harris and Todaro (1970), while 
the tradition of Marxist studies was initiated by 
discussion of the ‘agrarian question’ by Kautsky 
(1899).

21 Stark and Bloom (1985), Stark (1991).
22 Mesnard (2004), Yang (2006).
23 Massey (1988).
24 Gidwani and Sivaramakrishnan (2003).
25 See Nussbaum (1993) on the origins of this idea. 
26 Huan-Chang (1911).
27 Plato (2009).
28 Nussbaum (2000). 
29 This definition is consistent with more conventional 
usage. For example, the Oxford English Dictionary 
defines mobility as “the ability to move or to be 
moved; capacity for movement or change of 
place; ... ” (Oxford University Press, 2009). The 
idea of labour mobility as indicating the absence 
of restrictions on movement, as distinguished 
from the action of movement itself, also has a 
long tradition in international economics; see 
Mundell (1968). 

30 Sainath (2004).
31 Sen (2006), p.4. 
32 UNDP (1990), p.89.
33 UNDP (1997).
34 UNDP (2004b).
35 See, for example, the idea of using international 

transfers to reduce emigration pressures in 
poor countries, which was featured in the 1994 
Human Development Report, UNDP (1994). 

Chapter 2
  1. Bell and Muhidin (2009).
  2. Less conservative definitions raise the estimates 

significantly. For example, while our estimate 
of 42 million internal migrants (4 percent of the 
population) in India includes all those who have 
moved between states, there are 307 million 
people (28 percent of the population) who live 
in a different city from where they were born 
(Deshingkar and Akter, 2009). Montenegro 

and Hirn (2008) use an intermediate zonal 
denomination and calculate an average internal 
migration rate of 19.4 percent for 34 developing 
countries. Seasonal migration is excluded 
from both of these estimates. To the best of 
our knowledge, no comparable cross-country 
estimates of seasonal migration exist, although 
country-specific research suggests that it is often 
high.

  3. Immigrants, for example, are defined on the basis 
of place of birth in 177 countries but on the basis 
of citizenship in 42 countries. A few countries 
(including China) do not have information on 
either their foreign-born or foreign citizens, which 
means that these countries must be dropped 
from the sample or that their immigrant share 
must be estimated. The UN (2009e) estimates 
used throughout this report do the latter.

  4. Migration DRC (2007).
  5. HDR team calculations based on Migration DRC 

(2007) and CEPII (2006).

  6. The destination country HDI is calculated 
as the weighted average of the HDI of all 
destination countries, where the weights are 
the shares in the population of migrants. The 
magnitude presented in figure 2.2 is only a rough 
approximation of the human development gains 
from international migration, because the human 
development of migrants may be different from 
the average of populations at both home and 
destination countries, and because the HDI itself 
is only a partial measure of human development. 
Box 1.1 and chapter 3 provide a more detailed 
discussion of the methodological problems 
inherent in estimating individual gains from 
migration.

  7. Ortega (2009).
  8. Cummins, Letouze, Purser, and Rodríguez 

(2009). These authors use the Migration DRC 
(2007) database on bilateral stocks of migrants 
to develop the first gravity (bilateral flows) model 
covering both OECD and non-OECD countries. 
Other findings include large and statistically 
significant effects of characteristics such as land 
area, population structures, a common border 
and geographic distance, as well as former 
colonial ties and having a common language. 
  9. Martin (1993) observed that development in 

poor countries typically went hand in hand 
with increasing rather than decreasing rates of 
emigration and hypothesized that there may be 
a non-linear inverted-U relationship between 
migration and development. The theory has since 
been discussed by several authors including 
Martin and Taylor (1996), Massey (various) and 
Hatton and Williamson (various). The first cross-
country test of the theory using data on bilateral 
flows was carried out by de Haas (2009). 

  10. A similar figure was first presented by de Haas 

(2009). 

  11. Cummins, Letouze, Purser, and Rodríguez 

(2009).

  12. Mobarak, Shyamal, and Gharad (2009). 

113
113

Notes

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

13. HDR team analysis based on UN (2009e), 

Migration DRC (2007) and CEPII (2006). These 
regressions control for a linear and quadratic 
term in HDI as well as for linear terms and a 
multiplicative interaction of size and remoteness. 
Remoteness is measured by the average 
distance to OECD countries, as calculated by 
the CEPII (2006). Size is measured by the log of 
population.

14. For example, female migrants accounted for less 
than a third of immigrants into the United States 
200 years ago (Hatton and Williamson (2005), 
p.33). 

15. See Ramírez, Domínguez, and Morais (2005) for 

a comprehensive discussion of the key issues. 

16. Nava (2006).
17. Rosas (2007). 
18. OECD (2008b).
19. Newland (2009) provides a comprehensive 
survey of the key issues involved in circular 
migration.

20. Sabates-Wheeler (2009).
21. OECD (2008b).
22. Passel and Cohn (2008).
23. Vogel and Kovacheva (2009).
24. Docquier and Marfouk (2004). If we use a 

broader definition of the labour force and count 
as economically active all individuals over the age 
of 15, we find that 24 percent of immigrants to 
the OECD have a tertiary degree, as opposed to 5 
percent of the population of non-OECD countries.

25. OECD (2009a).
26. Miguel and Hamory (2009).
27. Sun and Fan (2009).
28. Background research carried out by the HDR 

team in collaboration with the World Bank. This 
profile of internal migrants also found that those 
with lower levels of formal education were more 
likely to migrate in the upper middle-income 
countries of Latin America. This result suggests 
that when the average level of income of a 
country is sufficiently high, even relatively poor 
people are able to move.

29. King, Skeldon, and Vullnetari (2008).
30. Skeldon (2006) on India and Pakistan, and King, 

Skeldon, and Vullnetari (2008) on Italy, Korea 
and Japan. 

31. Clemens (2009b).
32. See Jacobs (1970) and Glaeser, Kallal, 
Scheinkman, and Shleifer (1992). For a 
comprehensive discussion of the relationship 
between agglomeration economies, economic 
development and flows of international and 
internal migration; see World Bank (2009e).

33. These guidelines are outlined in OECD (2008b).
34. Altman and Horn (1991).
35. Sanjek (2003).
36. In 1907 alone, almost 1.3 million people or 
1.5 percent of the population were granted 
permanent resident status in the United States; a 
century later, in 2007, both the absolute number 
and fraction were lower: 1.05 million and only 0.3 
percent of the population (DHS, 2007). Hatton 
and Williamson (2005) estimated for a sample of 
countries—Denmark, France, Germany, Norway, 
Sweden, United Kingdom and six ‘New World’ 
countries (Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Canada, 

New Zealand and United States)—that the stock 
of foreign-born migrants in 1910–1911 was 
around 23 million, or about 8 percent of their 
population.

37. Linz et al. (2007).
38. van Lerberghe and Schoors (1995).
39. Rahaei (2009). 
40. Bellwood (2005).
41. Williamson (1990).
42. Lucas (2004); 2008 figure from OECD (2008a).
43. By the late 19th century, the cost of steerage 

passage from the United Kingdom to the United 
States had fallen to one tenth of average annual 
income, making the trip feasible for many more 
people. However, the costs from elsewhere 
were much higher: for example, from China to 
California in 1880, it cost approximately six times 
Chinese per capita income. See Hatton and 
Williamson (2005) and Galenson (1984). 

44. Taylor and Williamson (1997) and Hatton and 

Williamson (2005). For the Ireland–Great Britain 
comparison the period is 1852–1913, while for 
Sweden–United States it is 1856–1913.

45. Magee and Thompson (2006) and Baines 

(1985). 

46. Gould (1980).
47. Cinel (1991), p.98.
48. Nugent and Saddi (2002).
49. Foner (2002).
50. For example, Canada’s open policy towards 

immigration following confederation was seen 
as a pillar of the national policy to generate 
economic prosperity through population growth. 
See Kelley and Trebilcock (1998).

51. See, e.g. Ignatiev (1995).
52. See Timmer and Williamson (1998), who find 

evidence of tightening between 1860 and 1930 
in Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Canada and the 
United States.

53. A report by the ILO counted 33 million foreign 
nationals in 1910, equivalent to 2.5 percent of 
the population covered by the study (which was 
76 percent of the world population at the time). 
In contrast to modern statistics, it counted those 
with a different nationality than their country 
of residence as foreigners, thereby probably 
underestimating the share of foreign-born people 
(International Labour Office (1936), p. 37). It is 
also important to note that, since the number of 
nations has increased significantly during the 
past century, the rate of international migration 
could be expected to have increased even if no 
genuine increases in movement has taken place. 
54. Since 1960, world trade as a share of global GDP 
has more than doubled, increasing at an average 
rate of 2.2 percent a year. 

55. García y Griego (1983). 
56. Appleyard (2001). 
57. The German restrictions appear to have started 
before the oil shock but gained intensity after it. 
See Martin (1994).

58. These percentages refer to the migrants in 

countries that are developed according to the 
most recent HDI (See box 1.3). We might expect 
these patterns to be different if we instead 
calculated the share of migrants in the countries 
that were developed in 1960, but in fact the 

share of migrants in the 17 most developed 
countries in 1960 (covering 15 percent of the 
world population, the same share covered by 
developed countries today) was 6.2 percent, not 
very different from our 5 percent figure. 

59. Czechoslovakia and the Soviet Union were not the 

only cases where new nations emerged during 
this period.  However, in background analysis 
carried out for this report, we studied the patterns 
of changes in the share of migrants that occurred 
after reunifications or break-ups since 1960 and 
in other cases (e.g. Germany, former Yugoslavia), 
the changes in the migrant share were not large 
enough to have a significant impact on aggregate 
trends.

60. The exception is the United Kingdom, where 
large shares of immigrants from developing 
Commonwealth countries took place during the 
1960s.

61. UN-HABITAT (2003). 
62. UN (2008c) and UN-HABITAT (2003). 
63. This divergence has not occurred for other 
dimensions of human development, such as 
health and education (school enrolment rates). 
These dimensions are critical, although income 
appears to have a larger impact on the propensity 
to move (see Cummins, Letouze, Purser, and 
Rodríguez, 2009).

64. Moreover, China was different from other 

developing regions during the 1960s because 
of the restrictions on exit, which also affect 
comparisons of migration flows over time.

65. Since our exercise compares countries classified 

according to their current HDI levels, it does 
not take into account the convergence of some 
fast-growing developing countries, which moved 
into the top HDI category. Our method seems 
better suited to understanding the growing 
concentration of migrants in the subset of 
countries that are developed today. Furthermore, 
if we do the comparison for the group of countries 
classed as developing in 1960, we get very 
similar patterns (see endnote 58).

66. For a comprehensive survey of this literature see 
UN (2006b). The debate on divergence is related 
to the discussion on whether world inequality has 
been increasing, although the latter depends also 
on the evolution of inequality within countries.

67. Doganis (2002).
68. Department of Treasury and Finance (2002).
69. Facchini and Mayda (2009) find that, while 

greater public opposition towards immigration is 
associated with higher policy restrictions, there is 
still a significant gap between the policies desired 
by most voters and those that are adopted by 
policy makers. See also Cornelius, Tsuda, Martin, 
and Hollifield (2004).

70. Hanson (2007).
71. The assessment evaluated several dimensions 

of migration policy, including admissions criteria, 
integration policies, the treatment of authorized 
migrants and the situation of irregular migrants. 
The openness of each regime was assessed 
through subjective evaluation by respondents as 
well as according to a set of objective criteria, 
such as the existence of numerical limits, entry 
requirements and international agreements 

114

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Notes

on free movement. The developing countries 
covered were Chile, China (internal mobility 
only), Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Ecuador, Egypt, 
India, Kazakhstan, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, 
Russian Federation, Thailand and Turkey. The 
developed countries were Australia, Canada, 
France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Portugal, Republic 
of Korea, Singapore, Spain, Sweden, United Arab 
Emirates, United Kingdom and United States. 
Further details of the assessment are provided in 
Klugman and Pereira (2009).

  72. Governments often differ in the criteria they use 
to classify workers as skilled. In order to achieve 
some degree of homogeneity across countries, 
we classified as skilled all workers coming under 
regimes requiring a university degree. When 
the classification was based on occupation, we 
tried to match the type of occupation with the 
education level typically required to perform the 
job. When there was no explicit distinction in visa 
regimes based on education level or occupation, 
we either made a distinction based on information 
on the most common workers in each visa class, 
or, in the case of clearly mixed flows, we treated 
the regulation as applying to both high-skilled and 
low-skilled workers.

  73. Ruhs (2005) and Singapore Government Ministry 

of Manpower (2009).

  74. Ruhs (2002) and OECD (2008b).
  75. This concept originated as a mechanism in Arab 
countries’ legislation—which typically does not 
recognize adoption—whereby adults pledged 
to take care of orphaned or abandoned children. 
See Global Legal Information Network (2009).

  76. Longva (1997), pp. 20–21.
  77. See, for example, Bahrain Center for Human 

Rights (2008) and UNDP (2008d). 

  78. Under the new regulation, the Labor Ministry 

will transfer the sponsorship of the workers from 
previous government contractors to new ones and 
the state will bear their iqama (residence permit) 
and sponsorship transfer fees. See Thaindian 
News (2009) and Arab News (2009).

  79. Khaleej Times (2009).
  80. Jasso and Rosenzweig (2009).
  81. Hanson and Spilimbergo (2001).
  82. Lawyers for Human Rights (2008). 
  83. Human Rights Watch (2007a).
  84. Ruhs and Martin (2008) and Ruhs (2009). 
  85. See Cummins and Rodríguez (2009). These 

authors also address potential issues of reverse 
causation by using the predicted immigration 
shares from a bilateral gravity model as an 
exogenous source of cross-national variation. 
Their results still point to a statistically 
insignificant correlation between numbers and 
rights; indeed, in most of their instrumental 
variable estimates the correlation turns positive, 
shedding further doubts on the numbers versus 
rights hypothesis.

  86 Muñoz de Bustillo and Antón (2009). 
  87 Adepoju (2005).
  88 Freedom House (2009).
  89 United States Department of State (2009b), 

Wang (2005), National Statistics Office (2006), 
Ivakhnyuk (2009), and Anh (2005).

  90. United States Department of State (2009d).

  91. Kundu (2009).
  92. McKenzie (2007).
  93. Tirtosudarmo (2009).
  94. On Cuba, see Human Rights Watch (2005a) and 
Amnesty International (2009). On the Democratic 
People’s Republic of Korea, see Freedom House 
(2005). For other countries, see United States 
Department of State (2009a), Immigration and 
Refugee Board of Canada (2008) and IATA 
(2006).

  95. Human Rights Watch (2007b).
  96. United States Department of State (2009a) and 

McKenzie (2007). 

  97. IMF (2009a).
  98. See IMF (2009c), Consensus Economics 
(2009a), Consensus Economics (2009c), 
Consensus Economics (2009d).

  99. Recessions in developed countries tend to last 

two years, after which trend economic growth is 
re-established: Chauvet and Yu (2006). However, 
the mean duration and intensity of recessions 
is much longer in developing countries. See 
Hausmann, Rodríguez, and Wagner (2008).

 100. See Perron (1989) and Perron and Wada (2005), 
who find evidence of persistent effects of the oil 
shock and the Great Depression on incomes.

 101. OECD (2009b).
 102. United States Bureau of Labor Statistics (2009). 
 103. INE (2009). 
 104. The correlation is statistically significant at 

5 percent. The Asian Development Bank has 
projected contractions in the key migrant 
destinations of the region, ranging up to 5 
percent in Singapore. In South Africa, home 
to 1.2 million migrants, the EIU expects the 
economy to contract by 0.8 percent in 2009, 
and the economy of the United Arab Emirates 
is projected to contract by 1.7 percent in 2009. 
Business Monitor International (2009).

 105. Betcherman and Islam (2001).
 106. Dustmann, Glitz, and Vogel (2006).
 107. OECD (2008a).
 108. Taylor (2009).
 109. Kalita (2009).
 110. The Straits Times (2009) and Son (2009).
 111. Local Government Association (2009). 
 112. Preston (2009).
 113. Timmer and Williamson (1998).
 114. de Haas (2009).
 115. See Martin (2003) and Martin (2009a).
 116. Skeldon (1999) and Castles and Vezzoli (2009). 
There were deportations in order to demonstrate 
support for local workers, but once governments 
realized that locals were not interested in 
migrants’ jobs, these restrictions were reversed.
 117. See for example Rodrik (2009) and Castles and 

Vezzoli (2009).

 118. While all forecasts are inherently uncertain, 

population projections tend to be quite accurate. 
The UN has produced 12 different estimates 
of the 2000 world population since 1950, 
and all but one of these estimates were within 
4 percentage points of the actual number 
(Population Reference Bureau, 2001). One recent 
study found average prediction errors of the 
order of 2 percent even for age sub-groups of the 
population.

 119. However, these alternative solutions are in 

themselves costly: technological innovation to 
substitute for a globally abundant factor uses 
up resources, and raising retirement ages or 
contributions reduces leisure or consumption. 

 120 Barnett and Webber (2009).
 121 IPCC (2007), chapter 9.
 122 Anthoff, Nicholls, Richard, and Vafeidis (2009).
 123 Revkin (2008).
 124 Myers (2005) and Christian Aid (2007).
 125 Barnett and Webber (2009).
 126 Stark (1991).
 127 Ezra and Kiros (2001).
 128 Black et al. (2008).
 129 Carvajal and Pereira (2009).
 130 UNDP (2007a) and UNDP (2008e).
 131 See Friedman (2005).
 132 Steinbeck (1939). On the Great Dust Bowl 
Migration see Worster (1979) and Gregory 
(1989). For the landmark 1941 US Supreme 
Court decision in the case of California vs. 
Edwards see ACLU (2003). 

Chapter 3
  1. Clemens, Montenegro, and Pritchett (2008).
  2. McKenzie, Gibson, and Stillman (2006).
  3. Chiswick and Miller (1995).
  4. Sciortino and Punpuing (2009). 
  5. Maksakova (2002).
  6. Commander, Chanda, Kangasniemi, and Winters 

(2008).

  7. Clemens (2009b).
  8. Harttgen and Klasen (2009). Migrants had 

lower income in two countries (Guatemala and 
Zambia) and there was no statistically significant 
difference in one (Viet Nam). See section 3.6. 

  9. Del Popolo, Oyarce, Ribotta, and Rodríguez 

(2008).

  10. Srivastava and Sasikumar (2003), Ellis and Harris 

(2004) and ECLAC (2007).

  11. See Deshingkar and Akter (2009) on India and 
MOSWL, PTRC, and UNDP (2004) on Mongolia.

  12. Ghosh (2009). 
  13. Gilbertson (1995).
  14. Zhou and Logan (1989). 
  15. Cerrutti (2009). 
  16. UNDP (2008d).
  17. Castles and Miller (1993) and ICFTU (2009).
  18. Bursell (2007) and Bovenkerk, Gras, Ramsoedh, 

Dankoor, and Havelaar (1995).

  19. Clark and Drinkwater (2008) and Dustmann and 

Fabbri (2005).
  20. Iredale (2001).
  21. Chiswick and Miller (1995). 
  22. Reitz (2005).
  23. The social transfer programmes included in this 

analysis are all forms of universal and social 
insurance benefits, minus income and payroll 
taxes and social assistance (including all forms 
of targeted income-tested benefits). The poverty 
line is defined as half the median income. See 
Smeeding, Wing, and Robson (2009).

  24. These estimates may over- or underestimate 
the effect of transfers on poverty because the 
endogenous response of labour supply decisions 
to transfers is not factored in. 

  25. Martin (2005) and Kaur (2007). 

115

Notes

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

26. UNICEF (2005a). 
27. Koslowski (2009).
28. McKenzie (2007) and United States Department 

of State (2006).

29. United States Department of State (2009a).
30. Agunias (2009) and Martin (2005).
31. Martin (2005).
32. Agunias (2009) and Martin (2005).
33. UNFPA (2006). 
34. Ivakhnyuk (2009).
35. Martin (2009b). 
36. Martin (2009b).
37. Gibson and McKenzie (2009).
38. The so-called ‘healthy migrant effect’ has been 

well documented; see, for example, Fennelly 
(2005).

39. Rossi (2008).
40. Jasso, Massey, Rosenzweig, and Smith (2004), 

using the US Citizenship and Immigration 
Service’s New Immigrant Survey.

41. Ortega (2009).
42. Brockerhoff (1990).
43. Brockerhoff (1995) and Harttgen and Klasen 

(2009).

44. See Chiswick and Lee (2006), and Antecol and 
Bedard (2005). Another factor clouding these 
estimates is the possibility that ‘regression to 
the mean’ may account for part of the apparent 
deterioration in health. In particular, if not being 
ill is an important condition enabling migration, 
then those who migrate may include people who 
are not inherently healthier but who nevertheless 
have had the good luck not to fall ill. These people 
will also be more likely to fall ill after migrating 
than those whose lack of illness is due truly to 
good health.

not significantly different in 4 and lower in 2 
countries.

60. UNICEF (2008). Other studies find similar 
returns. For a comprehensive review of the 
evidence on early childhood interventions, see 
Heckman (2006). 

61. Clauss and Nauck (2009).
62. For example, Norwegian authorities are obliged to 
inform refugee families about the importance and 
availability of ECD within three months of arrival.

63. For further information on undocumented 
migrants in Sweden, see PICUM (2009).

64. PICUM (2008a).
65. PICUM (2008a).
66. Landau and Wa Kabwe-Segatti (2009).
67. Rossi (2008).
68. Government of Azad Jammu and Kashmir (2003) 

and Poverty Task Force (2003).

69. Poverty Task Force (2003).
70. The Programme for International Student 

Assessment is a triennial survey of pupils aged 
15 years. 

71. OECD (2007). The Programme for International 
Student Assessment study focuses on science 
but also assesses reading and mathematics, 
which yielded similar comparisons.

72. Australia, France, Germany, Italy, Netherlands, 
Switzerland, United Kingdom and United States. 
See Hernandez (2009).

73. Portes and Rumbaut (2001).
74. Karsten et al. (2006), Nordin (2006) and Szulkin 

and Jonsson (2007).

75. Sen (1992). 
76. Rawls (1971).
77. Hugo (2000). 
78. Petros (2006), Zambrano and Kattya (2005) and 

45. Garcia-Gomez (2007) on Catalonia, Spain; 

Mills (1997).

Barros and Pereira (2009) on Portugal. 

46. Stillman, McKenzie, and Gibson (2006), Steel, 
Silove, Chey, Bauman, and Phan T. (2005) and 
Nazroo (1997).  

47. McKay, Macintyre, and Ellaway (2003).
48. Benach, Muntaner, and Santana (2007).
49. Whitehead, Hashim, and Iversen (2007).
50. Tiwari (2005).
51. Deshingkar and Akter (2009).
52. Some migrants gain access to services over 
time. For example, in many countries, asylum 
seekers who apply for refugee status often do 
not have access unless and until their application 
is successful. In other countries, Australia for 
example, payment of limited income support is 
available to some asylum seekers living in the 
community who have reached a certain stage in 
visa processing and meet other criteria (such as 
passing a means test). 

53. Carballo (2007) and Goncalves, Dias, Luck, 

Fernandes, and Cabral (2003).

54. PICUM (2009).
55. Kaur (2007).
56. Landau and Wa Kabwe-Segatti (2009).
57. Hashim (2006) and Pilon (2003)
58. OECD (2008b).
59. Our commissioned research of HDI differences 

between internal migrants and non-migrants 
in 16 countries found that the educational 
level of migrants was higher in 10 countries, 

79. Içduygu (2009).
80. Piper (2005). 
81. Ghosh (2009) and Kabeer (2000).
82. Del Popolo, Oyarce, Ribotta, and Rodríguez 

(2008).

83. Cerrutti (2009).
84. Uhlaner, Cain, and Kiewiet (1989), Cho (1999), 
Rosenstone and Hansen (1993), Wolfinger and 
Rosenstone (1980) and Ramakrishnan and 
Espenshade (2001).

85. A standard deviation increase of 1 in destination 

country democracy, as measured by the Polity 
IV index, leads to an 11 log point increase 
in immigration, significant at 1 percent. See 
Cummins, Letouze, Purser, and Rodríguez 
(2009).

86. Landau (2005). 
87. Ministry of Social Welfare and Labour, United 

Nations Population Fund, and Mongolian 
Population and Development Association (2005).

88. Crush and Ramachandran (2009).
89. Misago, Landau, and Monson (2009). 
90. Pettigrew and Tropp (2005) and Pettigrew 

(1998).

91. Human Security Centre (2005) and Newman and 

van Selm (2003).

92. UNHCR (2008). There is no reliable estimate of 
the share of internally displaced people living in 
camps, but 70 percent are estimated to live with 
host-country relatives, families and communities. 

93. IDMC (2008).
94. Bakewell and de Haas (2007). 
95. van Hear, Brubaker, and Bessa (2009) and Crisp 

(2006).

96. Camps located in Bangladesh, Kenya, Nepal, 

Tanzania, Thailand and Uganda: de Bruijn 
(2009). 

97. ECOSOC (1998). Presented to the UN 
Commission on Human Rights by the 
Representative of the Secretary General in 1998, 
the Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement 
set the basic standards and norms to guide 
governments, international organizations and 
all other relevant actors in providing assistance 
and protection to internally displaced persons 
in internal conflict situations, natural disasters 
and other situations of forced displacement 
worldwide.

98. Estimates in this paragraph come from IDMC 

(2008). 

99. IDMC (2008) lists Azerbaijan, Bosnia and 

Herzegovina, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Georgia, 
Lebanon, Liberia, Turkey and Uganda in this 
category. Noteworthy efforts include financial 
compensation as part of Turkey’s return 
programme and specific efforts towards property 
restitution across the Balkans, which had largely 
been completed by 2007.

100. Ghosh (2009). 
101. UNRWA (2008).
102. Gibney (2009) and Hatton and Williamson (2005). 

In the United Kingdom, for example, only 19 out 
of every 100 people who applied for asylum in 
2007 were recognized as refugees and had their 
applications granted, while another nine who applied 
for asylum but did not qualify were given permission 
to stay for humanitarian or other reasons. 

103. UNHCR (2008).
104. UNRWA-ECOSOC (2008). 
105. UNHCR (2002). 
106. See, for example, UNECA (2005).
107. Robinson (2003). 
108. Bartolome, de Wet, Mander, and Nagraj (2000), 

p. 7. 

109. See IIED and WBCSD (2003), Global IDP Project 

and Norwegian Refugee Council (2005) and 
Survival International (2007).

110. La Rovere and Mendes (1999). 
111. For World Bank, CIEL (2009); there are other 

examples: for ADB, see Asian Development Bank 
(2009); for IDB, see IDB (2009).

112. UNDP (2007b).
113. UNODC (2009).
114. Clert, Gomart, Aleksic, and Otel (2005).
115. See, for example, Carling (2006).
116. USAID (2007).
117. Laczko and Danailova-Trainor (2009) . 
118. Koser (2008).
119. Ortega (2009).
120. Harttgen and Klasen (2009).
121. These numbers are taken from the 2005/2006 

World Values Survey. The survey records whether 
at least one parent is a migrant, which we use 
as a proxy for migrant status. These particular 
results are consistent with data from the 1995 
World Values Survey, which show whether or not 
the respondent is foreign-born.

116

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Notes

Chapter 4
  1. Sarreal (2002).
  2. Yang (2009).
  3. UNDP (2008b). 
  4. For a list of least and most costly international 

Vullnetari (2008).

  47. Cordova and Hiskey (2009). The countries 

covered were Dominican Republic, El Salvador, 
Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico and Nicaragua.

  48. See the review of this literature in Clemens 

corridors, see World Bank (2009c). 

(2009b).

  5. Stark (1991).
  6. Savage and Harvey (2007).
  7. Yang (2008a).
  8. Yang and Choi (2007).
  9. Halliday (2006).
  10. Ratha and Mohapatra (2009a). This is the 

‘base case’ scenario, which assumes that new 
migration flows to major destination countries 
will be zero, implying that the stock of existing 
migrants will remain unchanged.

  11. Fajnzylber and Lopez (2007).
  12. Schiff (1994).
  13. Kapur (2004).
  14. Zhu and Luo (2008).
  15. Lucas and Chappell (2009).
  16. Deshingkar and Akter (2009).
  17. Rayhan and Grote (2007).
  18. Beegle, De Weerdt, and Dercon (2008).
  19. Deb and Seck (2009).
  20. Murison (2005). For example, Bangladeshi 

women working in the Middle East remit up to 
72 percent of their earnings on average, and 
Colombian women working in Spain remit more 
than men (68 versus 54 percent).

  49. Lipton (1980) and Rubenstein (1992).
  50. Tirtosudarmo (2009).
  51. World Bank (2009e), p. 165.
  52. Docquier and Rapoport (2004) and Dumont, 

Martin, and Spielvogel (2007).

  53. An analogy can be drawn with the sharp decline 
in the skills and qualifications of schoolteachers 
in the United States over the past half century, 
which is attributed to the fact that skilled 
women now have a much broader range of 
career choices available to them than teaching 
(Corcoran, William, and Schwab, 2004).

  54. Saxenian (2002).
  55. Commander, Chanda, Kangasniemi, and Winters 

(2008).

  56. Saxenian (2006).
  57. The World Bank, which has been closely tracking 
flows, estimates that unrecorded flows would add 
at least 50 percent to the total remittance figure. 

  58. Chami, Fullenkamp, and Jahjah (2005) and 

Leon-Ledesma and Piracha (2004).
  59. Eckstein (2004) and Ahoure (2008).
  60. World Bank (2006b) and Kireyev (2006).
  61. Buch, Kuckulenz, and Le Manchec (2002) and de 

  21. Docquier, Rapoport, and Shen (2003) and Stark, 

Haas and Plug (2006).

  62. Taylor, Moran-Taylor and Ruiz (2006).
  63. de Haas (2006).
  64. Levitt (1998) and Levitt (2006).
  65. Quirk (2008).
  66. World Bank (2009a).
  67. World Bank (2009a).
  68. Massey, Arango, Hugo, Kouaouci, Pellegrino and 

Taylor (1993) and Thomas-Hope (2009).

  69. Adesina (2007). 
  70. Ali (2009).
  71. Bakewell (2009).
  72. Ba, Awumbila, Ndiaye, Kassibo, and Ba (2008).
  73. Jonsson (2007).
  74. Black, Natali and Skinner (2005).
  75. If the incomes and consumption of those abroad 

were included in these measures of inequality 
the distribution would widen considerably, since 
incomes abroad are so much higher.

  90. Black and Sward (2009).
  91. These countries are Australia, Austria, Belgium, 
Canada, France, Germany, Ireland, Luxembourg,  
Netherlands, New Zealand, Spain, Sweden, 
Switzerland and United States; see Statistical 
Table A. The share of foreign-born migrants in 
the United Kingdom was estimated at about 9 
percent at that time. 

  92. Van der Mensbrugghe and Roland-Holst (2009). 

These simulations extend and update those 
presented in World Bank (2006b). 

  93. Ortega and Peri (2009).
  94. See Barrell, Fitzgerald, and Railey (2007). In 

the United States, Borjas (1999) estimated the 
aggregate effect to be positive but small, at 0.1 
percent of GDP.

  95. Hunt and Gauthier-Loiselle (2008). 
  96. See, for example, the Council of the European 

Union (2009).

  97. See, inter alia, Baumol, Litan, and Schramm 

(2007) and Zucker and Darby (2008).

  98. OECD (2008b). 
  99. EurActiv.com News (2008). 
 100. Martin (2009b).
 101. This finding must be qualified because of 

the inability to distinguish the labour supply 
(immigrants tend to work in these restaurants) 
from labour demand effects (if they consume 
there); see Mazzolari and Neumark (2009).

 102. For example, 38 percent of Britons believe this 

is the case: Dustmann, Frattini, and Preston 
(2008a).

 103. For instance, see Longhi, Nijkamp, and Poot 

(2005), Ottaviano and Peri (2008), and Münz, 
Straubhaar, Vadean, and Vadean (2006).

 104. For Spain, see Carrasco, Jimeno, and Ortega 
(2008), for France, Constant (2005), for the 
United Kingdom, Dustmann, Frattini, and Preston 
(2008).

 105. See, for example, Borjas (1995). A substitute is 

when an increased supply of one input lowers the 
price of the other input, while a complement is 
when an increased supply raises the price of the 
other input.

 106. For example, in the United States, workers with 

less than high-school education may in most 
respects be perfect substitutes for high-school 
graduates, throwing doubt on the assumption that 
completion per se matters; see Card (2009).

Taylor, and Yitzhaki (1986).

  22. Adelman and Taylor (1988) and Durand, Kandel, 

Emilio, and Massey (1996).

  23. Yang (2009). 
  24. Massey et al. (1998), Taylor et al. (1996) and 

Berriane (1997).

  25. Behrman et al. (2008). 
  26. Adelman and Taylor (1988), Durand, Kandel, 
Emilio, and Massey (1996) and Stark (1980)
(1980).

  27. Adams Jr. (2005), Cox Edwards and Ureta 

(2003) and Yang (2008b).

  28. Adams Jr. (2005).
  29. Mansuri (2006).
  30. Deb and Seck (2009).
  31. Fan and Stark (2007) and Stark, Helmenstein, 

and Prskawetz (1997).

  32. Chand and Clemens (2008).
  33. Castles and Delgado Wise (2008).
  34. McKenzie and Rapoport (2006). 
  35. Ha, Yi, and Zhang (2009a).
  36. Frank and Hummer (2002).
  37. Hildebrandt, McKenzie, Esquivel, and 

Schargrodsky (2005).

  38. Wilson (2003).
  39. Cerrutti (2009). 
  40. Bowlby (1982), Cortes (2008), Smith, Lalaonde, 

and Johnson (2004) and Suarez-Orozco, 
Todorova, and Louie (2002).

  41. For a review of gender empowerment and 

migration see Ghosh (2009). 

  42. King and Vullnetari (2006). 
  43. See Deshingkar and Grimm (2005).
  44. Fargues (2006).
  45. Beine, Docquier, and Schiff (2008).
  46. Hampshire (2006) and King, Skeldon, and 

  76. Taylor, Mora, Adams, and Lopez-Feldman (2005) 

 107. Kremer and Watt (2006) and Castles and Miller 

for Mexico; Yang (2009) for Thailand.

(1993).

  77. Ha, Yi, and Zhang (2009b).
  78. Goldring (2004) and Lacroix (2005).
  79. Orozco and Rouse (2007) and Zamora (2007).
  80. HDR team estimates based on figures cited in 

Anonuevo and Anonuevo (2008). 

  81. Tabar (2009). 
  82. Spilimbergo (2009).
  83. Iskander (2009).
  84. Castles and Delgado Wise (2008).
  85. Massey et al. (1998).
  86. Eckstein (2004), Massey et al. (1998), Newland 

and Patrick (2004) and van Hear, Pieke, and 
Vertovec (2004).

  87. Gamlen (2006) and Newland and Patrick (2004).
  88. IMF and World Bank (1999).
  89. Jobbins (2008) and Martin (2008).

 108. For a survey, see Münz, Straubhaar, Vadean, and 

Vadean (2006).
 109. Reyneri (1998).
 110. The first estimate comes from Borjas (2003), for 
the period 1980–2000, while the second comes 
from Ottaviano and Peri (2008) and refers to the 
1990–2006 period. Using Borjas’s methodology 
for the 1990–2006 period gives an estimate 
of -7.8 percent (Ottaviano and Peri (2008), p. 
59). The approaches differ in their assumptions 
regarding the substitutability between high-
school dropouts and high-school graduates. 
See also Card (1990) and Borjas, Grogger, and 
Hanson (2008). 

 111. Peri, Sparber, and Drive (2008); Amuedo-
Dorantes and de la Rica (2008) for Spain.

117

Notes

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

112. Manacorda, Manning, and Wadsworth (2006).
113. Angrist and Kugler (2003).
114. Jayaweera and Anderson (2009). 
115. Bryant and Rukumnuaykit (2007).
116. Suen (2002). 
117. A comprehensive discussion of this issue can be 

found in World Bank (2009e).

118. Henderson, Shalizi, and Venables (2001). 
119. Amis (2002). 
120. The Cities Alliance (2007).
121. Dreze and Sen (1999). 
122. Kundu (2009). 
123. See Hossain, Khan, and Seeley (2003) and Afsar 

(2003).

124. Hanson (2009). 
125. For example, Borjas (1995) and Lee and Miller 

(2000).

126. IMF (2009b).
127. Hanson, Scheve, and Slaughter (2007). 
128. Facchini and Mayda (2008).
129. Brucker et al. (2002). Countries with greater 

migrant dependence on welfare included 
Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France and 
Netherlands, while those with less dependence 
included Germany, Greece, Spain, Portugal and 
United Kingdom. 

130. Vasquez, Alloza, Vegas, and Bertozzi (2009).
131. Rowthorn (2008).
132. Alternative estimates could be derived by 

considering the entire future stream of taxes and 
spending associated with immigrants and their 
dependents, plus future generations. However, 
estimating the net present value would be very 
difficult given all the assumptions needed about 
people’s future behaviour (fertility, schooling, 
employment prospects, and so on), so in practice 
a static approach is used: see Rowthorn (2008). 
Some authors have estimated the net present 
fiscal value of an immigrant in the United States 
and have found largely positive estimates; see 
Lee and Miller (2000). 

133. Lucassen (2005).
134. IPC (2007).
135. Butcher and Piehl (1998).
136. Australian Institute of Criminology (1999).
137. Savona, Di Nicola, and Da Col (1996).
138. However, particularly in medium-HDI countries 

(such as Egypt, Indonesia, Islamic Republic 
of Iran, Jordan, South Africa and Thailand), a 
significant proportion did favour more restrictions 
on access. Similarly, in countries with higher 
income inequality, people were more likely to 
favour limiting migration and said that employers 
should give priority to local people when jobs are 
scarce. See Kleemans and Klugman (2009).

139. Zimmermann (2009).
140. Massey and Sánchez R. (2009). 
141. O’Rourke and Sinnott (2003). 
142. Earnest (2008).
143. Several studies have investigated the long-run 
effects of immigration on political values, with 
differing results. Bueker (2005) finds significant 
differences in turnout and participation among US 
voters of different immigrant backgrounds, while 

Rodríguez and Wagner (2009) find that the well-
documented  patterns of civic engagement and 
attitudes towards redistribution across different 
regions of Italy are not reflected in the political 
behaviour of Italians from these regions who are 
living in Venezuela. 

144. Castles and Miller (1993).
145. Kleemans and Klugman (2009).

Chapter 5

1. Scheve and Slaughter (2007).
2. This chapter does not provide a comprehensive 
review of policies that are relevant to migration, 
since these have been well documented 
elsewhere: see OECD (2008b), IOM (2008a), 
Migration Policy Group and British Council (2007) 
and ILO (2004).

3. Agunias (2009) and Klugman and Pereira (2009).
4. Government of Sweden (2008).
5. Khoo, Hugo, and McDonald (2008) and Klugman 

and Pereira (2009).

6. See ICMPD (2009) for an excellent review.
7. Papademetriou (2005).
8. ICMPD (2009), p. 47.
9. For example, in the United Kingdom the Foreign 

and Commonwealth Office team working on 
promoting the return of irregular migrants and 
failed asylum seekers is currently five times 
larger than the team focused on migration and 
development in the Department for International 
Development. See Black and Sward (2009).

10. Hagan, Eschbach, and Rodriguez (2008).
11. Migrant Forum in Asia (2006) and Human Rights 

Watch (2005b).

12. See European Parliament (2008); on criticisms, 
see, for example, Amnesty International (2008). 

13. UNHCR (2007).
14. See international conventions on Economic, 

Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR 1966), on 
Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR 1966), on the 
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination 
(ICERD 1966), on the Elimination of All Forms of 
Discrimination against Women (CEDAW 1979), 
Against Torture, and Other Cruel, Inhuman or 
Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CAT 1984), 
and on the Rights of the Child (CRC 1989). The 
ratification rates are lowest among Asian and 
Middle Eastern states (47 percent) and stand at 
58 and 70 percent for Latin America and Africa 
respectively. While 131 countries have ratified 
all six core human rights treaties, some of these 
treaties have more than 131 signatories. The total 
number of parties for individual treaties can be 
found in the Statistical Annex.

15. ICCPR Art 2, 26; ICESCR Art 2; see Opeskin 

(2009).

16. The European Community, which is listed as a 

separate signatory, is not included here. 

17. IOM (2008b), p. 62.
18. UNODC (2009).
19. See for example Carling (2006) (on trafficking 

from Nigeria) and de Haas (2008). 

20. December 18 vzw (2008).
21. Alvarez (2005) and Betts (2008).

22. Martin and Abimourchad (2008).
23. PICUM (2008b).
24. Kleemans and Klugman (2009).
25. For examples of such activities, see the Joint 
Initiative of the European Commission and the 
United Nations (EC-UN Joint Migration and 
Development Initiative, 2008). The joint initiative 
has at its heart a knowledge management 
platform of activities related to remittances, 
communities, capacities and rights led by civil 
society and local authorities. See GFMD (2008).

26. Martin (2009b) and Agunias (2009).
27. McKenzie (2007).
28. Martin (2005), p. 20.
29. Martin (2009a), p. 47.
30. Hamel (2009).
31. Martin (2009a).
32. Horst (2006).
33. The 1997 ILO Convention on Private Employment 

Agencies prohibits the charging of fees to 
workers, but this has been ratified by only 21 
countries. 

34. Agunias (2008), Ruhunage (2006) and Siddiqui 

(2006).

35. Betcherman, Olivas, and Dar (2004) review 

the effectiveness of active labour market 
programmes, drawing on 159 evaluations in 
developing and developed countries.

36. Martin (2009b) and Sciortino and Punpuing 

(2009).

37. See Colombo Process (2008).
38. Marquette (2006).
39. Christensen and Stanat (2007).
40. Success for All Foundation (2008).
41. Misago, Landau, and Monson (2009). 
42. This might include, for example, leaflets 

explaining who does what and where to go to 
complain. 

43. World Bank (2002).
44. Zamble (2008).
45. One World Net (2008).
46. Council of Europe (2006).
47. Martin (2009a).
48. Government of Western Australia (2004).
49. Deshingkar and Akter (2009), pp. 38-40.
50. UN (2008a). 
51. The Cities Alliance (2007).
52. Black and Sward (2009).
53. For example, in Myanmar, college graduates must 

reimburse the government for the cost of their 
education before they can receive a passport; 
United States Department of State (2009c).

54. As Ranis and Stewart (2000) note, while there 

are many paths to good human development 
performance, in general successes have been 
characterized by initiatives that give priority to 
girls and women (education, incomes), effective 
expenditure policies (e.g. Chile) and good 
economic performance (e.g. Viet Nam).

55. Kleemans and Klugman (2009).
56. Sides and Citrin (2007).
57. Facchini and Mayda (2009).
58. Ghosh (2007).
59. Bedford (2008).

118

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Bibliography

Bibliography

ACLU (American Civil Liberties Union). 2003. “Edwards v. 

Alvarez, J. E. 2005. International Organizations as Law-Makers. 

California.” www.aclu.org. Accessed July 2009. 

New York: Oxford University Press.

ActionAid International. 2004. “Participatory Poverty 

Amin, M. and A. Mattoo. 2005. “Does Temporary Migration 

Assessment (PPA) Lower Songkhram River Basin, Thailand”. 
Bangkok: ActionAid International and Mekong Wetlands 
Biodiversity Programme.

Adams Jr., R. H. 2005. “Remittances, Household Expenditure and 
Investment in Guatemala”. Policå Research Working Paper No. 
3532. Washington DC: World Bank.

Adelman, I. and J. E. Taylor. 1988. “Life in a Mexican Village: 
A SAM Perspective.” Journal of Development Studies 25 (1): 
5-24.

Adepoju, A. 2005. Migration in West Africa. Geneva: Global 

Commission on International Migration.

Adesina, O. A. 2007. “’Checking out’: Migration, Popular Culture, 

and the Articulation and Formation of Class Identity”. Paper 
presented at African Migrations Workshop on Understanding 
Migration Dynamics in the Continent, 18-21 September 2007, 
Accra, Ghana.

Afsar, R. 2003. “Internal Migration and the Development Nexus: The 
Case of Bangladesh”. Paper presented at Regional Conference 
on Migration and Pro-Poor Policy Changes in Asia, 22-24 June 
2003, Dhaka, Bangladesh.

Agunias, D. R. 2008. Managing Temporary Migration: Lessons from 
the Philippine Model. Washington DC: Migration Policy Institute.
Agunias, D. R. 2009. “Migration Intermediaries: Agents of Human 
Development?” Human Development Research Paper No. 22. 
New York: United Nations Development Programme, Human 
Development Report Office.

Ahoure, A. A. E. 2008. “Transferts, Gouvernance et 

Développement Economique dans les Pays de l’Afrique Sub-
saharienne: Une Analyse à Partir de Données de Panel”. Paper 
presented at African Migration Workshop, 26-29 November 
2008, Rabat, Morocco.

have to be Permanent?” Policy Research Working Paper 
Series No. 3582. Washington DC: World Bank.

Amis, P. 2002. “African Urban Poverty and What is the Role of 
Local Government in its Alleviation?”. Unpublished report. 
Washington DC: World Bank.

Amnesty International. 2008. “Amnesty International 
EU Office reaction to Return Directive Vote.” http://
www.amnesty-eu.org/static/html/pressrelease.
asp?cfid=7&id=366&cat=4&l=1. Accessed June 2009.
. 2009. “Urgent Action: Cuba UA 115/09.” http://www.
amnestyusa.org/actioncenter/actions/uaa11509.pdf. 
Accessed June 2009.

Amuedo-Dorantes, C. and S. de la Rica. 2008.

“Complements or Substitutes? Immigrant and Native Task 
Specialization in Spain”. Discussion Paper Series No. 16/08.
London: Centre for Research and Analysis of Migration.
Anderson, J. B. and J. Gerber. 2007a. “Data Appendix 
to Fifty Years of Change on the U.S.-Mexico Border: 
Growth, Development, and Quality of Life.” http://
latinamericanstudies.sdsu.edu/BorderData.html. Accessed 
June 2009a.
. 2007b. Fifty Years of Change on the U.S.-Mexico Border: 
Growth, Development, and Quality of Life. Austin: University 
of Texas Press.

Andrienko, Y. and S. Guriev. 2005. “Understanding Migration 
in Russia”. Policy paper series No. 23. Moscow: Center for 
Economic and Financial Research.

Angrist, J. D. and A. D. Kugler. 2003. “Protective or Counter-

Productive? Labour Market Institutions and The Effect of 
Immigration on EU Natives.” The Economic Journal 113 
(488): 302-331.

Ali, S. N. 2009. “Education as a Means of Rural Transformation 

Anh, D. N. 2005. “Enhancing the Development Impact of 

through Smooth Rural-Urban Migration: Some Evidence from 
Ethiopia”. Paper presented at the 7th International Conference 
on the Ethiopian Economy, 25-27 June 2009, Addis Ababa, 
Ethiopia.

Aliran. 2007. “Chin Asylum Seekers Detained in Rela 

Raid.” http://www.aliran.com/index.php?option=com_
content&view=article&id=184:chin-asylum-seekers-detained-
in-rela-raid&catid=32:2006-9&Itemid=10. Accessed May 
2009.

Altman, I. and J. Horn (Eds.). 1991. To Make America: European 

Migrant Remittances and Diasporas: The Case of Viet Nam.” 
Asia Pacific Population Journal 20 (3): 111-122.

Anonuevo, E. and A. T. Anonuevo. 2008. “Diaspora Giving: 
An Agent of Change in Asia Pacific Communities”. Paper 
presented at Diaspora Giving: An Agent of Change in Asia 
Pacific Communities?, 21-23 May 2008, Ha Noi, Viet Nam.

Antecol, H. and K. Bedard. 2005. “Unhealthy Assimilation: 
Why do Immigrants Converge to American Health Status 
Levels”. Discussion Paper Series No. 1654. Bonn: Institut zur 
Zukunft der Arbeit.

Emigration in the Early Modern Period. Berkeley: University of 
California Press.

Anthoff, D., R. J. Nicholls, S. J. T. Richard and A. T. 

Vafeidis. 2009. “Global and Regional Exposure to Large 

119

Bibliography

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Rises in Sea-Level: A Sensitivity Analysis”. Working Paper No. 
96. Norwich: Tyndall Centre for Climate Change Research.
Appleyard, R. 2001. “International Migration Policies: 1950-

Barro, R. J. and J.-W. Lee. 2001. “International Data on 

Educational Attainment: Updates and Implications.” Oxford 
Economic Papers 53 (3): 541-563.

2000.” International Migration 39 (6): 7-20.

Arab News. 2009. “Cabinet Passes Regulations Simplifying 

Iqama Transfer.” Arab News, 21 April.

Asian Development Bank. 2009. “About the Safeguard 

Policy Update.” http://www.adb.org/Safeguards/about.asp. 
Accessed June 2009.

Australian Institute of Criminology. 1999. Ethnicity and 

Crime: An Australian Research Study. Canberra: Department 
of Immigration and Multicultural Affairs.

Barros, P. P. and I. M. Pereira. 2009. “Access to Health 
Care and Migration: Evidence from Portugal.” Human 
Development Research Paper No. 28. New York: United 
Nations Development Programme, Human Development 
Report Office.

Bartolome, L. J., C. de Wet, H. Mander and V. K. Nagraj. 

2000. “Displacement, Resettlement, Rehabilitation, 
Reparation, and Development”. Working paper. Cape Town: 
Secretariat of the World Commission on Dams.

Avenarius, C. 2007. “Cooperation, Conflict and Integration 

Baumol, W. J., R. Litan and C. Schramm. 2007. Good 

among Sub-ethnic Immigrant Groups from Taiwan.” 
Population, Space and Place 13 (2): 95-112.

Azcona, G. 2009. “Migration in Participatory Poverty 

Assessments: A Review.” Human Development Research 
Paper No. 56. New York: United Nations Development 
Programme, Human Development Report Office.

Ba, C. O., M. Awumbila, A. I. Ndiaye, B. Kassibo and D. Ba. 
2008. Irregular Migration in West Africa. Dakar: Open Society 
Initiative for West Africa.

Bahrain Center for Human Rights. 2008. “The Situation 

of Women Migrant Domestic Workers in Bahrain”. Report 
submitted to the 42nd session of the CEDAW Committee. 
Manama: Bahrain Center for Human Rights.

Baines, D. 1985. Migration in a Mature Economy: Emigration 
and Internal Migration in England and Wales, 1861-1900. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Bakewell, O. 2008. “Research Beyond the Categories: The 

Importance of Policy Irrelevant Research into Forced 
Migration.” Journal of Refugee Studies 21: 432-453.
. 2009. “South-South Migration and Human Development: 
Reflections on African Experiences.” Human Development 
Research Paper No. 7. New York: United Nations 
Development Programme, Human Development Report 
Office.

Bakewell, O. and H. de Haas. 2007. “African Migrations: 

Continuities, Discontinuities and Recent Transformations.” 
In L. de Haan, U. Engel, and P. Chabal (Eds.), African 
Alternatives: 95-117. Leiden: Brill.

Banerjee, A. and E. Duflo. 2006. “Addressing Absence.” 

Journal of Economic Perspectives 20 (1): 117-132.

Barnett, J. and M. Webber. 2009. “Accommodating Migration 

to Promote Adaptation to Climate Change”. Melbourne: 
Commission on Climate Change and Development, University 
of Melbourne.

Barrell, R., J. Fitzgerald and R. Railey. 2007. “EU 

Capitalism, Bad Capitalism. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Bedford, R. 2008. “Migration Policies, Practices and Cooperation 

Mechanisms in the Pacific”. Paper presented at United 
Nations Expert Group Meeting on International Migration 
and Development in Asia and the Pacific, 20-21 September 
2008, Bangkok, Thailand: Department of Social and 
Economic Affairs.

Beegle, K., J. De Weerdt and S. Dercon. 2008. “Migration 

and Economic Mobility in Tanzania: Evidence from a 
Tracking Survey”. Policy Research Working Paper No. 4798. 
Washington DC: World Bank.

Behrman, J. R., J. Hoddinott, J. A. Maluccio, E. Soler-
Hampejsek, E. L. Behrman, R. Martorell, Ramírez 
M. and A. D. Stein. 2008. What Determines Adult Skills? 
Impacts of Preschool, School-Years, and Post-School 
Experiences in Guatemala. Philadelphia: University of 
Pennsylvania.

Beine, M., F. Docquier and M. Schiff. 2008. “International 

Migration, Transfers of Norms and Home Country Fertility”. 
Discussion Paper No. 3912. Bonn: Institut zur Zukunft der 
Arbeit.

Bell, M. and S. Muhidin. 2009. “Cross-National Comparisons 
of Internal Migration.” Human Development Research Paper 
No. 30. New York: United Nations Development Programme, 
Human Development Report Office.

Bellwood, P. 2005. First Farmers: The Origins of Agricultural 

Societies. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing.

Benach, J., C. Muntaner and V. Santana. 2007. “Employment 
Conditions and Health Inequalities”. Final Report to the WHO 
Commission on Social Determinants of Health. Geneva: 
Employment Conditions Knowledge Network. 

Berriane, M. 1997. “Emigration Internationale du Travail et 

Micro-Urbanisation dans le Rif Oriental: Cas du Centre de 
Toauima”. Migration Internationale et Changements Sociaux 
dans le Maghreb: 75-97. Tunis: Université de Tunis.

Enlargement and Migration: Assessing the Macroeconomic 
Consequences”. Discussion Paper No. 292. London: National 
Institute of Economic and Social Research.

Betcherman, G. and R. Islam (Eds.). 2001. East Asian Labor 

Markets and the Economic Crisis: Impacts Responses and 
Lessons. Washington DC: World Bank.

120

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Bibliography

Betcherman, G., K. Olivas and A. Dar. 2004. “Impacts of 
Active Labour Market Programmes: New Evidence from 
Evaluations with Particular Attention to Developing and 
Transition Countries”. Social Protection Discussion Paper 
Series No. 0402. Washington DC: World Bank.

Betts, A. 2008. Towards a ‘Soft Law’ Framework for the 
Protection of Vulnerable Migrants. Geneva: UNHCR.

Betts, D. C. and D. J. Slottje. 1994. Crisis on the Rio-Grande: 
Poverty, Unemployment, and Economic Development on the 
Texas-Mexico Border. Boulder: Westview Press.

Bhabha, J. 2008. “Independent Children, Inconsistent Adults: 

International Child Migration and the Legal Framework”. 
Discussion Paper  No. 2008-02. Florence: Innocenti 
Research Centre, UNICEF.

A. Venturini and K. Zimmermann. 2002. “Managing 
Migration in the European Welfare State.” In T. Boeri, G. 
Hanson, and B. McCormick (Eds.), Immigration Policy and the 
Welfare System: 1-168. New York: Oxford University Press.
Bryant, J. and P. Rukumnuaykit. 2007. “Labor Migration in 

the Greater Mekong Sub-region: Does Migration to Thailand 
Reduce the Wages of Thai Workers?” Working Paper No. 
40889. Washington DC: World Bank.

Buch, C. M., A. Kuckulenz and M.-H. Le Manchec. 2002. 

“Worker Remittances and Capital Flows”. Working Paper No. 
1130. Kiel: Kiel Institute for World Economics.

Bueker, C. S. 2005. “Political Incorporation among Immigrants 
from Ten Areas of Origin: The Persistence of Source Country 
Effects.” International Migration Review 39 (1): 103-140.

Bhagwati, J. N. 1979. “International Migration of the Highly 

Burd-Sharps, S., K. Lewis and E. Martins. 2008. The 

Skilled: Economics, Ethics and Taxes.” Third World Quarterly 
1 (3): 17-30.

Measure of America: American Human Development Report, 
2008-2009. New York: Columbia University Press.

Black, R., D. Coppard, D. Kniveton, A. Murata, K. Schmidt-

Bursell, M. 2007. “What’s in a Name? A Field Experiment 

Verkerk and R. Skeldon. 2008. “Demographics and 
Climate Change: Future Trends and their Policy Implications 
for Migration”. Globalisation and Poverty Working Paper No. 
T27. Brighton: Development Research Centre on Migration.
Black, R. and J. Sward. 2009. “Migration, Poverty Reduction 
Strategies and Human Development.” Human Development 
Research Paper No. 38. New York: United Nations 
Development Programme, Human Development Report Office.
Borjas, G. J. 1995. “The Economic Benefits from Immigration.” 

The Journal of Economic Perspectives 9 (2): 3-22.
. 1999. “Immigration and Welfare Magnets.” Journal of 
Labor Economics 17 (4): 607-637.
. 2003. “The Labor Demand Curve is Downward Sloping: 
Reexamining the Impact of Immigration on the Labor 
Market.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (4): 
1335-1374.

Borjas, G. J., J. T. Grogger and G. H. Hanson. 2008. 

“Imperfect Substitution Between Immigrants and Natives: 
A Reappraisal”. Working Paper No. W13887. Cambridge: 
National Bureau of Economic Research.

Bovenkerk, F., M. J. I. Gras, D. Ramsoedh, M. Dankoor 

and A. Havelaar. 1995. “Discrimination Against Migrant 
Workers and Ethnic Minorities in Access to Employment 
in the Netherlands”. Labor Market Papers No. 4. Geneva: 
International Labour Organization.

Bowlby, J. 1982. Attachment. New York: Basic Books.
Branca, M. 2005. Border Deaths and Arbitrary Detention of 

Migrant Workers. Berkeley: Human Rights Advocates.

Test for the Existence of Ethnic Discrimination in the Hiring 
Process”. Working Paper No. 2007-7. The Stockholm 
University Linnaeus Center for Integration Studies.

Business Monitor International. 2009. “Downturn Raises 
Employment Questions.” Business Monitor International 
Forecasts. March.

Butcher, K. F. and A. M. Piehl. 1998. “Recent Immigrants: 

Unexpected Implications for Crime and Incarceration.” 
Industrial and Labor Relations Review 51 (4): 654-679.
Cai, F., Y. Du and M. Wang. 2009. «Migration and Labor 

Mobility in China.» Human Development Research Paper 
No. 9. New York: United Nations Development Programme, 
Human Development Report Office.

Carballo, M. 2007. “The Challenge of Migration and Health.” 
World Hospitals and Health Services: The Official Journal of 
the International Hospital Federation 42 (4): 9-18.

Card, D. 1990. “The Impact of the Mariel Boat Lift on the Miami 
Labor Market.” Industrial and Labor Relation Review 43 (2): 
245-257.
. 2009. “Immigration and Inequality”. Working Paper No. 
14683. Cambridge: National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Carling, J. 2006. “Migration, Human Smuggling and Trafficking 
from Nigeria to Europe”. Geneva: International Organization 
for Migration.

Carrasco, R., J. F. Jimeno and A. C. Ortega. 2008. “The 

Impact of Immigration on the Wage Structure: Spain 1995-
2002”. Economics Working Papers No. 080603. Universidad 
Carlos III, Departamento de Economía.

Brockerhoff, M. 1990. “Rural to Urban Migration and Child 

Carvajal, L. and I. M. Pereira. 2009. “Evidence on the 

Survival in Senegal.” Demography 27 (4): 601-616.
. 1995. “Child Survival in Big Cities: The Disadvantages of 
Migrants.” Social Science and Medicine 40 (10): 1371-1383.

Link between Migration, Climate Disasters and Adaptive 
Capacity”. Human Development Report Office Working Paper. 
New York: United Nations Development Programme.

Brucker, H., G. S. Epstein, B. McCormick, G. Saint-Paul, 

Castles, S. and R. Delgado Wise (Eds.). 2008. Migration 

121

Bibliography

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

and Development: Perspectives from the South. Geneva: 
International Organization for Migration.

Castles, S. and M. Miller. 1993. The Age of Migration. New 

York: The Guilford Press.

Castles, S. and S. Vezzoli. 2009. “The Global Economic 

Crisis and Migration: Temporary Interruption or Structural 
Change?”. Unpublished Manuscript for Paradigmes (Spain).
CEPII (Research Center in International Economics). 2006.
“Distance Database.” http://www.cepii.fr/anglaisgraph/bdd/
distances.htm. Accessed July 2009.

Cerrutti, M. 2009. “Gender and Intra-regional Migration in 

South America.” Human Development Research Paper No. 
12. New York: United Nations Development Programme, 
Human Development Report Office.

Chami, R., C. Fullenkamp and S. Jahjah. 2005. “Are 
Immigrant Remittance Flows a Source of Capital for 
Development?” IMF Staff Papers 52 (1): 55-81.

Chan, Liu and Yang. 1999. “Hukou and Non-Hukou Migration 
in China: Comparisons and Contrasts.” International Journal 
of Population Geography 5: 425-448.

Chand, S. and M. A. Clemens. 2008. “Skilled Emigration 

and Skill Creation: A Quasi-experiment”. International 
and Development Economics Working Paper No. 08-05. 
Canberra: Crawford School of Economics and Government.

Charnovitz, S. 2003. “Trade Law Norms on International 

Migration.” In T. Aleinikoff and V. Chetail (Eds.), Migration 
and International Legal Norms: 241-253. The Hague: TMC 
Asser Press.

Chauvet, M. and C. Yu. 2006. “International Business Cycles: 

G7 and OECD Countries”. Economic Review, First Quarter 
2006. Atlanta: Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta.

Chiswick, B. and Y. L. Lee. 2006. “Immigrant Selection 

Systems and Immigrant Health”. Discussion Paper No. 2345. 
Bonn: Institut zur Zukunft der Arbeit.

Chiswick, B. and P. Miller. 1995. “The Endogenity Between 
Language and Earnings: An International Analysis.” Journal 
of Labour Economics 13: 201-246.

Cho, W. K. T. 1999. “Naturalization, Socialization, Participation: 
Immigrants and Non-Voting.” The Journal of Politics 61 (4): 
1140-1155.

Christensen, G. and P. Stanat. 2007. “Language Policies and 

Cinel, D. 1991. The National Integration of the Italian Return 
Migration, 1870-1929. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.

Clark, K. and S. Drinkwater. 2008. “The Labour-Market 

Performance of Recent Migrants.” Oxford Review of 
Economic Policy 24 (3): 495-516.

Clauss, S. and B. Nauck. 2009. “The Situation Among 

Children of Migrant Origin in Germany”. Working Paper.
Forthcoming. Florence: Innocenti Research Centre, UNICEF.

Clemens, M. 2009a. “Should Skilled Emigrants be Taxed? 

New Data on African Physicians Abroad”. Working 
Paper. Forthcoming. Washington DC: Center for Global 
Development.
. 2009b. “Skill Flow: A Fundamental Reconsideration 
of Skilled-Worker Mobility and Development.” Human 
Development Research Paper No. 8. New York: United 
Nations Development Programme, Human Development 
Report Office.

Clemens, M., C. Montenegro and L. Pritchett. 2008. “The 

Place Premium: Wage Differences for Identical Workers 
Across the U.S. Border”. Policy Research Working Paper No. 
4671. Washington DC: World Bank and Center For Global 
Development.

Clemens, M. and L. Pritchett. 2008. “Income Per Natural: 
Measuring Development as if People Mattered More than 
Places”. Working Paper No. 143. Washington DC: Center for 
Global Development.

Clert, C., E. Gomart, I. Aleksic and N. Otel. 2005. “Human 
Trafficking in South Eastern Europe: Beyond Crime Control, 
an Agenda for Social Inclusion and Development”. Processed 
Paper. Washington DC: World Bank.

Colombo Process. 2008. “Ministerial Consultation on Overseas 
Employment and Contractual Labour for Countries of Origin 
and Destination in Asia (Abu Dhabi Dialogue)”. Ministerial 
Consultation on Overseas Employment and Contractual 
Labour for Countries of Origin and Destination in Asia (Abu 
Dhabi Dialogue), 21-22 January 2008, Abu Dhabi, UAE.

Comelatto, P. A., A. E. Lattes and C. M. Levit. 2003.

“Migración Internacional y Dinámica Demográfica en la 
Argentina Durante la Segunda Mitad del Siglo XX.” Estudios 
Migratorios Latinoamericanos 17 (50): 69-110.

Practices for Helping Immigrants and Second-Generation 
Students Succeed”. Unpublished Report of The Transatlantic 
Task Force on Immigration and Integration. Migration Policy 
Institute and Bertelsmann Stiftung.

Commander, S., R. Chanda, M. Kangasniemi and L. A. 
Winters. 2008. “The Consequences of Globalisation: 
India’s Software Industry and Cross-border Labour Mobility.” 
The World Economy 31 (2): 187-211.

Christian Aid. 2007. “Human Tide: The Real Migration Crisis”. 

Consensus Economics. 2009a. “Asia Pacific Consensus 

A Christian Aid Report.

CIEL (Center for International and Environmental Law). 

2009. “The World Bank’s Involuntary Resettlement Policy.” 
http://www.ciel.org/Ifi/wbinvolresettle.html. Accessed 
June 2009.

Forecasts.” Consensus Economics: 1-36.
. 2009b. “Consensus Forecasts.” Consensus Economics: 
1-32.
. 2009c. “Eastern Europe Consensus Forecasts.” 
Consensus Economics: 1-24.

122

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Bibliography

. 2009d. “Latin American Consensus Forecasts.” 
Consensus Economics: 1-31.

Constant, A. 2005. “Immigrant Adjustment in France and 

Impacts on the Natives.” In K. F. Zimmermann (Ed.), 
European Migration: What Do We Know?: 263-302. New 
York: Oxford University Press.

Corcoran, S. P., E. N. William and R. M. Schwab. 2004. 
“Changing Labor-Market Opportunities for Women and 
the Quality of Teachers, 1957-2000.” American Economic 
Review 94 (2): 230-235.

Cordova, A. and J. Hiskey. 2009. “Migrant Networks and 

Democracy in Latin America”. Unpublished Working Paper. 
Nashville: Vanderbilt University.

Cornelius, W. A., T. Tsuda, P. L. Martin and J. Hollifield 

(Eds.). 2004. Controlling immigration: A Global Perspective 
(Second Edition). Stanford: Stanford University Press.

Cortes, R. 2008. “Children and Women Left Behind in 

Labour Sending Countries: An Appraisal of Social Risks”. 
Unpublished Working Paper. New York: UNICEF, Division of 
Policy and Practice.

Council of Europe. 2006. “Roma Campaign Dosta.” http://
www.coe.int/t/dg3/romatravellers/documentation/youth/
Romaphobia_en.asp. Accessed May 2009.

Council of the European Union. 2009. Council Directive on the 
Conditions of Entry and Residence of Third-country Nationals 
for the Purpose of Highly Qualified Employment 17426/08. 
Brussels: Council of the European Union.

New York: United Nations Development Programme, Human 
Development Report Office.

de Bruijn, B. J. 2009. “The Living Conditions and Well-Being 
of Refugees.” Human Development Research Paper No. 25. 
New York: United Nations Development Programme, Human 
Development Report Office.

de Haas, H. 2007. The Myth of Invasion: Irregular Migration from 
West Africa to the Maghreb and the European Union. Oxford: 
International Migration Institute (IMI), James Martin 21st 
Century School, University of Oxford.
. 2008. “The Myth of Invasion: The Inconvenient Realities of 
African Migration to Europe.” Third World Quarterly 29 (7): 
1305-1322.
. 2009. “Mobility and Human Development.” Human 
Development Research Paper No. 1. New York: United Na-
tions Development Programme, Human Development Report 
Office.

de Haas, H. and R. Plug. 2006. “Cherishing the Goose with the 

Golden Eggs: Trends in Migrant Remittances from Europe 
to Morocco 1970-2004.” International Migration Review 40 
(3): 603-634.

Deb, P. and P. Seck. 2009. “Internal Migration, Selection Bias 

and Human Development: Evidence from Indonesia and 
Mexico.” Human Development Research Paper No. 31. New 
York: United Nations Development Programme, Human 
Development Report Office.

December 18 vzw. 2008. The UN Treaty Monitoring Bodies and 

Cox Edwards, A. and M. Ureta. 2003. “International Migration 

Migrant Workers: A Samzidat. Geneva: December 18 vzw.

Remittances, and Schooling: Evidence from El Salvador.” 
Journal of Development Economics 72 (2): 429-461.

Crisp, J. 2006. “Forced Displacement in Africa: Dimensions, 

Difficulties and Policy Directions”. Research Paper No. 126. 
Geneva, Switzerland: United Nations High Commissioner for 
Refugees.

Crul, M. 2007. “Pathways to Success for the Children of 

Immigrants”. Unpublished Report of The Transatlantic Task 
Force on Immigration and Integration. Migration Policy 
Institute and Bertelsmann Stiftung.

Crush, J. and S. Ramachandran. 2009. “Xenophobia, 

International Migration, and Human Development.” Human 
Development Research Paper No. 47. New York: United 
Nations Development Programme, Human Development 
Report Office.

Cummins, M., E. Letouzé, M. Purser and F. Rodríguez. 
2009. “Revisiting the Migration-Development Nexus: A 
Gravity Model Approach.” Human Development Research 
Paper No. 44. New York: United Nations Development 
Programme, Human Development Report Office.

Del Popolo, F., A. M. Oyarce, B. Ribotta and J. Rodríguez. 
2008. Indigenous Peoples and Urban Settlements: Spatial 
Distribution, Internal Migration and Living Conditions. 
Santiago: United Nations Economic Commission for Latin 
America and the Caribbean.

Department of Treasury and Finance. 2002. “Globalisation 
and the Western Australian Economy”. Economic Research 
Paper. Perth: Government of Western Australia.

Deshingkar, P. and S. Akter. 2009. “Migration and Human 

Development in India.” Human Development Research Paper 
No. 13. New York: United Nations Development Programme, 
Human Development Report Office.

Deshingkar, P. and S. Grimm. 2005. “Internal Migration and 

Development: A Global Perspective”. Migration Research 
Series No. 19. Geneva: International Organization for 
Migration.

DHS (Department of Homeland Security). 2007. “Yearbook 

of Immigration Statistics: 2007, Table 1.” http://www.dhs.
gov/ximgtn/statistics/publications/LPR07.shtm. Accessed 
June 2009.

Cummins, M. and F. Rodríguez. 2009. “Is There a Numbers 

Docquier, F. and A. Marfouk. 2004. “International Migration 

Versus Rights Trade-Off in Immigration Policy? What the 
Data Say.” Human Development Research Paper No. 21. 

by Educational Attainment (1990-2000) - Release 1.1”. 
Unpublished Working Paper.

123

Bibliography

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Docquier, F., H. Rapoport and I. L. Shen. 2003. “Remittances 

EurActiv.com News. 2008. “Divided Parliament 

and Inequality: A Dynamic Migration Model”. Discussion 
Paper No. 808. Bonn: Institut zur Zukunft der Arbeit.
Doganis, R. 2002. Flying Off Course. London: Routledge.
Drèze, J. and A. Sen. 1999. The Political Economy of Hunger 

Approves EU Blue Card System.” http://
www.euractiv.com/en/socialeurope/divided-
parliament-approves-eu-blue-card-system/
article-177380.

Volume 1: Entitlement and Well-Being. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

European Parliament. 2008. “European Parliament 

Dumont, J.-C., J. P. Martin and G. Spielvogel. 2007. 

“Women on the Move: The Neglected Gender Dimension of 
the Brain Drain”. Discussion Paper No. 2920. Bonn: Institut 
zur Zukunft der Arbeit.

Durand, J., W. Kandel, A. P. Emilio and D. S. Massey. 

1996. “International Migration and Development in Mexican 
Communities.” Demography 33 (2): 249-264.

Dustmann, C. and F. Fabbri. 2005. “Immigrants in the British 

Labour Market.” Fiscal Studies 26 (4): 423-470.

Dustmann, C., T. Frattini and I. Preston. 2008. “The Effect 
of Immigration Along the Distribution of Wages”. Discussion 
Paper No. 0803. London: Centre for Research and Analysis 
of Migration.

Dustmann, C., A. Glitz and T. Vogel. 2006. “Employment, 

Wage Structure, and the Economic Cycle: Difference 
Between Immigrants and Natives in Germany and the UK”. 
Discussion Paper No. 0906. London: Centre for Research 
and Analysis of Migration.

Legislative Resolution of 18 June 2008 on the Proposal for 
a Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council 
on Common Standards and Procedures in Member States 
for Returning Illegally Staying Third-Country Nationals 
P6_TA(2008)0293.” http://www.europarl.europa.eu/
sides/getDoc.do?pubRef=-//EP//TEXT+TA+P6-TA-2008-
0293+0+DOC+XML+V0//EN&language=EN#BKMD-5. 
Accessed June 2009.

Ezra, M. and G. E. Kiros. 2001. “Rural Out-Migration in the 
Drought Prone Areas of Ethiopia: A Multilevel Analysis.” 
International Migration Review 35 (3): 749-771.

Facchini, G. and A. M. Mayda. 2008. “From Individual 

Attitudes Towards Migrants to Migration Policy Outcomes: 
Theory and Evidence.” Economic Policy 23 (56): 651-713.
. 2009. “The Political Economy of Immigration Policy.” 
Human Development Research Paper No. 3. New York: 
United Nations Development Programme, Human 
Development Report Office.

Earnest, D. C. 2008. Old Nations, New Voters: Nationalism, 

Fajnzylber, P. and J. H. Lopez. 2007. Close to Home: The 

Transnationalism and Democracy in the Era of Global 
Migration. Albany: State University of New York Press.

Development Impact of Remittances in Latin America. 
Washington DC: World Bank Publications.

EC-UN Joint Migration and Development Initiative. 2008. 

Fan, C. C. 2002. “The Elite, the Natives, and the Outsiders: 

“Migrant Communities.” In Migration for Development: 
Knowledge Fair Handbook: 39-53. Brussels: EC-UN Joint 
Migration and Development Initiative.

Eckstein, S. 2004. “Dollarization and its Discontents: 

Remittances and the Remaking of Cuba in the Post-Soviet 
Era.” Comparative Politics 36 (3): 313-330.

ECLAC (Economic Commission for Latin America and the 
Caribbean). 2007. “Internal Migration and Development in 
Latin America and the Caribbean: Continuity, Changes and 
Policy Challenges.” In Social Panorama of Latin America: 
195-232. Santiago: United Nations.

ECOSOC (Economic and Social Council of the United 
Nations, Commission on Human Rights). 1998. 
“Further Promotion and Encouragement of Human Rights 
and Fundamental Freedoms Including the Question of the 
Programme and Methods of Work of the Commission: 
Human Rights, Mass Exoduses, and Displaced Persons”. 
Commission on Human Rights, Fifth-fourth session. UN Doc. 
No. E/CN.4/1998/53/Add.2.

Ellis, F. and N. Harris. 2004. “Development Patterns, 

Mobility and Livelihood Diversification”. Paper presented 
at Department for International Development Sustainable 
Development Retreat, 13 July 2004, Guildford, UK.

Migration and Labor Market Segmentation in Urban China.” 
Annals of the Association of American Geographers 92 (1): 
103-124.

Fan, C. S. and O. Stark. 2007. “The Brain Drain, ‘Educated 
Unemployment’, Human Capital Formation, and Economic 
Betterment.” Economics of Transition 15 (4): 629-660.

Fang, C. and D. Wang. 2008. “Impacts of Internal Migration on 

Economic Growth and Urban Development in China.” In J. 
DeWind and J. Holdaway (Eds.), Migration and Development 
Within and Across Borders: Research and Policy Perspectives 
on Internal and International Migration: 245-272. Geneva: 
International Organization for Migration.

Fang, Z. Z. 2009. “Potential of China in Global Nurse Migration.” 

Health Services Research 42 (1): 1419-1428.

Fargues, P. 2006. “The Demographic Benefit of International 

Migration: Hypothesis and Application to Middle Eastern and 
North African Contexts”. Policy Research Working Paper No. 
4050. Washington DC: World Bank.

Felbermayr, G. J. and F. Toubal. 2008. “Revisiting the 

Trade-Migration Nexus: Evidence from New OECD Data”. 
Unpublished Working Paper.

Fennelly, K. 2005. “The ‘Healthy Migrant’ Effect.” Healthy 

Generations 5 (3): 1-4.

124

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Bibliography

Findlay, A. M. and B. L. Lowell. 2001. Migration of Highly 

Skilled Persons from Developing Countries: Impact and Policy 
Responses. Geneva: International Labour Office.

Foner, N. 2002. From Ellis Island to JFK. New Haven: Yale 

Determinants of Emigration and Return Migration of the Best 
and Brightest: Evidence from the Pacific”. Discussion Paper 
Series No. 03/09. London: Centre for Research and Analysis 
of Migration.

University Press.

Frank, R. and R. A. Hummer. 2002. “The Other Side of the 

Paradox: The Risk of Low Birth Weight Among Infants 
of Migrant and Nonmigrant Households within Mexico.” 
International Migration Review 36 (3): 746-765.

Freedom House. 2005. Freedom in the World 2005: The Annual 
Survey of Political Rights and Civil Liberties. Boston: Rowman 
& Littlefield Publishers.
. 2009. “Freedom in the World Survey”. Washington DC: 
Freedom House.

Gidwani, V. and K. Sivaramakrishnan. 2003. “Circular 

Migration and the Spaces of Cultural Assertion.” Annals of 
the Association of American Geographers 93 (1): 186-213.

Gilbertson, G. A. 1995. “Women’s Labor and Enclave 

Employment: The Case of Dominican and Colombian Women 
in New York City.” International Migration Review 29 (3): 
657-670.

Glaeser, E. L., H. D. Kallal, J. A. Scheinkman and A. 

Shleifer. 1992. “Growth in Cities.” Journal of Political 
Economy 100 (6): 1126-1152.

Friedman, B. M. 2005. The Moral Consequences of Economic 

Global IDP Project and Norwegian Refugee Council. 

Growth. New York: Knopf.

Gaige. 2006. Zhongguo nongmingong wenti yanjiu zongbaogao 
(Report on the Problems of Chinese Farmer-Turned Workers) 
(Rep. No. 5).

Galenson, D. W. 1984. “The Rise and Fall of Indentured 

Servitude in the Americas: An Economic Analysis.” Journal 
of Economic History 44 (1): 1-26.

2005. Internal Displacement: Global Overview of Trends and 
Developments in 2004. Geneva: Global IDP Project.

Global Legal Information Network. 2009.

“Kafala.” http://www.glin.gov/subjectTermIndex.
action?search=&searchDetails.
queryType=BOOLEAN&searchDetails.queryString=mt%3A
^%22Kafala%22%24. Accessed June 2009.

Gamlen, A. 2006. “Diasporas Engagement Policies: What are 

Goldring, L. 2004. “Family and Collective Remittances to 

They, and What Kinds of States Use Them?”. Working Paper 
No. 32. Oxford: Centre on Migration, Policy and Society.

Mexico: A Multi-Dimensional Typology.” Development and 
Change 35: 799-840.

García y Griego, M. 1983. “The Importation of Mexican 
Contract Laborers to the United States, 1942-1964: 
Antecedents, Operation and Legacy.” In P. Brown and H. 
Shue (Eds.), The Border that Joins: Mexican Migrants and US 
Responsibility: 49-98. New Jersey: Rowman and Littlefield.

Goncalves, A., S. Dias, M. Luck, M. J. Fernandes and 
J. Cabral. 2003. “Acesso aos Cuidados de Saúde de 
Comunidades Migrantes: Problemas e Perspectivas e 
Intervenção.” Revista Portuguesa de Saude Publica 21 (1): 
55-64.

Garcia-Gomez, P. 2007. “Salud y Utilización de Recursos 

Gould, J. D. 1980. “European Inter-Continental Emigration. The 

Sanitarios: Un Análisis de las Diferencias y Similitudes Entre 
Población Inmigrante y Autóctona.” Presupuesto y Gasto 
Publico 49: 67-85.

Road Home: Return Migration from the USA.” Journal of 
European Economic History 9: 41-112.

Government of Azad Jammu and Kashmir. 2003. Between 

GFMD (Global Forum on Migration and Development). 

2008. “Report of the Proceedings”. Prepared for the Global 
Forum on Migration and Development, 29-30 October 2008, 
Manila, Philippines.

Ghosh, B. 2007. “Restrictions in EU Immigration and Asylum 

Policies in the Light of International Human Rights 
Standards.” Essex Human Rights Review 4 (2).

Ghosh, J. 2009. “Migration and Gender Empowerment: Recent 
Trends and Emerging Issues.” Human Development Research 
Paper No. 4. New York: United Nations Development 
Programme, Human Development Report Office.

Gibney, M. J. 2009. “Precarious Residents: Migration Control, 

Membership and the Rights of Non-Citizens.” Human 
Development Research Paper No. 10. New York: United 
Nations Development Programme, Human Development 
Report Office.

Hope and Despair: Pakistan Participatory Poverty Assessment 
Azad Jammu and Kashmir Report. Islamabad: Planning 
Commission, Government of Pakistan.

Government of Lesotho. 2004. “Kingdom of Lesotho Poverty 
Reduction Strategy 2004/2005 - 2006/2007.” http://www.
lesotho.gov.ls/documents/PRSP_Final.pdf. Accessed June 
2009.

Government of Sweden. 2008. “Swedish Code of Statutes.” 

http://www.sweden.gov.se/. Accessed June 2009.

Government of Western Australia. 2004. “WA Charter of 

Multiculturalism.” http://www.omi.wa.gov.au/Publications/
wa_charter_multiculturalism.pdf. Accessed June 2009.

Gregory, J. N. 1989. American Exodus: The Dust Bowl Migration 

and Okie Culture in California. New York: Oxford University 
Press.

Ha, W., J. Yi and J. Zhang. 2009a. “Brain Drain, Brain Gain, 

Gibson, J. and S. D. McKenzie. 2009. “The Microeconomic 

and Economic Growth in China.” Human Development 

125

Bibliography

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Research Paper No. 37. New York: United Nations 
Development Programme, Human Development Report 
Office.
. 2009b. “Internal Migration and Inequality in China: 
Evidence from Village Panel Data.” Human Development 
Research Paper No. 27. New York: United Nations 
Development Programme, Human Development Report 
Office.

Hagan, J., K. Eschbach and N. Rodriguez. 2008. “US 

Deportation Policy, Family Separation, and Circular 
Migration.” International Migration Review 42 (1): 64-88.

Halliday, T. 2006. “Migration, Risk, and Liquidity Constraints in 
El Salvador.” Economic Development and Cultural Change 54 
(4): 893-925.

Hamel, J. Y. 2009. “Information and Communication 

Technologies and Migration.” Human Development Research 
Paper No. 39. New York: United Nations Development 
Programme, Human Development Report Office.

Hampshire, K. 2006. “Flexibility in Domestic Organization and 
Seasonal Migration Among the Fulani of Northern Burkina 
Faso.” Africa 76: 402-426.

Hanson, G. 2007. “The Economic Logic of Illegal Immigration”. 

Working Paper No. 26. New York: Council on Foreign 
Relations.
 2009. “The Governance of Migration Policy.” Human 
Development Research Paper No. 2. New York: United 
Nations Development Programme, Human Development 
Report Office.

Hanson, G., K. F. Scheve and M. J. Slaughter. 2007. “Public 

Finance and Individual Preferences Over Globalization 
Strategies.” Economics and Politics 19 (1): 1-33.

Hanson, G. and A. Spilimbergo. 2001. “Political Economy, 

Terms of Trade, and Border Enforcement.” Canadian Journal 
of Economics 34 (3): 612-638.

Harris, J. R. and M. P. Todaro. 1970. “Migration, 

Unemployment, and Development: A Two-Sector Analysis.” 
The American Economic Review 60 (1): 126-142.

Harttgen, K. and S. Klasen. 2009. “A Human Development 
Index by Internal Migration Status.” Human Development 
Research Paper No. 54. New York: United Nations 
Development Programme, Human Development Report 
Office.

Hashim, I. M. 2006. “The Positives and Negatives of Children’s 

Independent Migration: Assessing the Evidence and the 
Debates”. Working Paper No. T16. Brighton: Development 
Research Centre on Migration.

Hatton, T. J. and J. G. Williamson. 1998. The Age of Mass 
Migration: Causes and Economic Impact. New York: Oxford 
University Press.
. 2005. Global Migration and the World Economy: Two 
Centuries of Policy Performance. Cambridge: MIT Press.

Hausmann, R., F. Rodríguez and R. Wagner. 2008. “Growth 

Collapses.” In C. M. Reinhart, C. A. Végh, and A. Velasco 
(Eds.), Money, Crises, and Transition: Essays in Honor of 
Guillermo A. Calvo: 377-428. Cambridge: MIT Press.

He, Y. 2004. “Hukou and Non-Hukou Migrations in China: 1995-

2000”. Working Paper Series No. C2004016. China Center for 
Economic Research.

Heckman, J. J. 2006. “Skill Formation and the Economics of 
Investing in Disadvantaged Children.” Science 312 (5782): 
1900-1902.

Heleniak, T. 2009. “Migration Trends and Patterns in the Former 
Soviet Union and Czechoslovakia 1960-1990”. Commissioned 
by the Human Development Report Office. New York: United 
Nations Development Programme.

Henderson, J. V., Z. Shalizi and A. J. Venables. 2001. 
“Geography and Development.” Journal of Economic 
Geography (1): 81-105.

Hernandez, D. 2009. “Children in Immigrant Families in Eight 
Affluent Societies”. Florence: Innocenti Research Centre, 
UNICEF.

Heston, A., R. Summers and B. Aten. 2006. “Penn World 
Table Version 6.2”. Philadelphia: Center for International 
Comparisons of Production, Income and Prices at the 
University of Pennsylvania.

Hildebrandt, N., D. J. McKenzie, G. Esquivel and E. 

Schargrodsky. 2005. “The Effects of Migration on Child 
Health in Mexico.” Economia 6 (1): 257-289.

Horst, H. 2006. “The Blessings and Burdens of Communication: 
Cell Phones in Jamaican Transnational Social Fields.” Global 
Networks 6 (2): 143-159.

Hossain, M. I., I. A. Khan and J. Seeley. 2003. “Surviving 

on their Feet: Charting the Mobile Livelihoods of the Poor in 
Rural Bangladesh”. Paper presented at Staying Poor: Chronic 
Poverty and Development Policy, 7-9 April 2003, Manchester, 
UK.

Huan-Chang, C. 1911. The Economic Principles of Confucius and 

his School. Whitefish: Kessinger Publishing.

Huang, Q. 2006. “Three Government Agencies Emphasize the 

Need to Pay Close Attention to the Safety and Health of 
Migrant Workers (Sanbumen Kaizhan Guanai Nongmingong 
Shenming Anquan Yu Jiankang Tebie Xingdong).” Xinhua 
News Agency.

Hugo, G. 2000. “Migration and Women’s Empowerment.” In H. 
B. Presser and G. Sen (Eds.), Women’s Empowerment and 
Demographic Processes. Oxford, U.K.: Oxford University Press.
Hugo, G. 1993. “Indonesian Labour Migration to Malaysia: Trends 

and Policy Implications.” Southeast Asian Journal of Social 
Science 21 (1): 36-70.

Human Rights Watch. 2005a. Families Torn Apart: The High 

Cost of U.S. and Cuban Travel Restrictions. New York: Human 
Rights Watch.

126

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Bibliography

. 2005b. “Malaysia: Migrant Workers Fall Prey to Abuse.” 
Human Rights Watch News Release, 16 May.
. 2007a. “Forced Apart.” http://www.hrw.org/en/
reports/2007/07/16/forced-apart. Accessed June 2009.
. 2007b. “World Report 2007”. New York: Human Rights 
Watch.

Human Security Centre. 2005. Human Security Report 2005: 

War and Peace in the 21st Century. New York: Oxford 
University Press.

Hunt, J. and M. Gauthier-Loiselle. 2008. “How Much Does 
Immigration Boost Innovation?” Working Paper No. 14312. 
Cambridge: National Bureau of Economic Research.

IATA (International Air Transport Association). 2006. 

Travel Information Manual. Badhoevedorp: IATA.

. 2009b. “LABORSTA database.” http://laborsta.ilo.org/. 
Accessed July 2009.

IMF (International Monetary Fund). 2009a. “Global 

Economic Policies and Prospects”. Executive Summary of 
the Meeting of the Ministers and Central Bank Governors of 
the Group of Twenty, 13-14 March, London.
. 2009b. “Government Finance Statistics Online.” http://
www.imfstatistics.org/gfs/. Accessed July 2009.
. 2009c. World Economic Outlook Update: Global Economic 
Slump Challenges Policies. Washington DC: International 
Monetary Fund.

IMF (International Monetary Fund) and World Bank. 1999.

“Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers--Operational Issues.” 
http://www.imf.org/external/np/pdr/prsp/poverty1.htm.

Içduygu, A. 2009. “International Migration and Human 

Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada. 2008. 

Development in Turkey.” Human Development Research 
Paper No. 52. New York: United Nations Development 
Programme, Human Development Report Office.

“Responses to Information Requests (CHN102869.E).” 
http://www2.irb-cisr.gc.ca/en/research/rir/?action=record.
viewrec&gotorec=451972. Accessed July 2009.

ICFTU (International Confederation of Free Trade Unions). 

INE (Instituto Nacional de Estadística). 2009. “Encuesta de 

2009. “International Confederation of Free Trade Unions.” 
http://www.icftu.org/default.asp?Language=EN. Accessed 
July 2009.

ICMPD (International Centre for Migration Policy 

Development). 2009. “Regularisations in Europe: Study 
on Practices in the Area of Regularisation of Illegally Staying 
Third-Country Nationals in the Member States of the EU”. 
Vienna: ICMPD.

IDB (Inter-American Development Bank). 2009. “Sectoral 
Operational Policies: Involuntary Resettlement.” http://www.
iadb.org/aboutus/pi/OP_710.cfm. Accessed June 2009.
IDMC (Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre). 2008. 

Internal Displacement: Global Overview of Trends and 
Developments in 2007. Geneva: IDMC.
. 2009a. “Global Statistics on IDPs.” http://www.internal-
displacement.org. Accessed February 2009.
. 2009b. Internal Displacement: Global Overview of Trends 
and Developments in 2008. Geneva: IDMC.

Ignatiev, N. 1995. How the Irish Became White. New York: 

Routledge.

IIED and WBCSD (International Institute for Environment 

and Development and World Business Council for 
Sustainable Development). 2003. Breaking New Ground: 
Mining, Minerals and Sustainable Development. Virginia: 
Earthscan.

ILO (International Labour Organization). 2004. “Towards 

a Fair Deal for Migrant Workers in the Global Economy.” 
International Labour Conference, 92nd Session, 1-12 June 
2004, Geneva, Switzerland.
. 2009a. “Economically Active Population Estimates and 
Projections.” http://laborsta.ilo.org/applv8/data/EAPEP/
eapep_E.html. Accessed July 2009.

Población Activa: Primer Trimestre”. Madrid: Government 
of Spain.

International Labour Office. 1936. World Statistics of Aliens: 
A Comparative Study of Census Returns, 1910-1920-1930. 
Westminster: P.S. King & Son Ltd.

IOM (International Organization for Migration). 2008a. 
“The Diversity Initiative: Fostering Cultural Understanding 
in Ukraine.” http://www.iom.int/jahia/Jahia/facilitating-
migration/migrant-integration/pid/2026. Accessed June 
2009.
. 2008b. World Migration 2008: Managing Labour Mobility 
in the Evolving Global Economy. Geneva: International 
Organization for Migration.

IPC (Immigration Policy Center). 2007. The Myth of 

Immigrant Criminality and the Paradox of Assimilation: 
Incarceration Rates Among Native and Foreign-Born Men. 
Washington DC: IPC.

IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). 

2007. “Climate Change 2007: The Physical Science Basis. 
Contribution of Working Group I to the Fourth Assessment 
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.” 
In S. Solomon, D. Qin, M. Manning, Z. Chen, M. Marquis, 
K. B. Averyt, M. Tignor, and H. L. Miller (Eds.). New York: 
Cambridge University Press.

IPU (Inter-Parliamentary Union). 2009. Correspondence 
on year women received the right to vote and to stand for 
election and year first woman was elected or appointed to 
parliament. June. Geneva. 

Iredale, R. 2001. “The Migration of Professionals: Theories and 
Typologies.” International Migration 39 (5, Special Issue 1): 
7-26.

Iskander, N. 2009. “The Creative State: Migration, Development 

127

Bibliography

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

and the State in Morocco and Mexico, 1963-2005”. New 
York: New York University. Forthcoming.

Ivakhnyuk, I. 2009. “The Russian Migration Policy and its 

Impact on Human Development: The Historical Perspective.” 
Human Development Research Paper No. 14. New 
York: United Nations Development Programme, Human 
Development Report Office.

Kautsky, K. 1899. The Agrarian Question. London: Zwan 

Publications.

Kelley, N. and M. Trebilcock. 1998. The Making of the Mosaic: 
A History of Canadian Immigration Policy. Toronto: University 
of Toronto Press.

Khaleej Times. 2009. “Bahrain Commerce Body Denies 

Abolition of Sponsorship.” Khaleej Times Online, 15 June.

Jack, B. and T. Suri. 2009. “Mobile Money: The Economics 

Khoo, S. E., G. Hugo and P. McDonald. 2008. “Which Skilled 

of Kenya’s M-PESA”. Cambridge: MIT Sloan School of 
Business, Forthcoming.

Temporary Migrants Become Permanent Residents and 
Why?” International Migration Review 42 (1): 193-226.

Jacobs, J. 1970. The Economy of Cities. New York: Vintage 

King, R., R. Skeldon and J. Vullnetari. 2008. “Internal and 

Books.

Jasso, G., D. Massey, M. Rosenzweig and J. Smith. 2004. 

“Immigrant Health - Selectivity and Acculturation.” In N. 
B. Anderson, R. A. Bulatao, and B. Cohen (Eds.), Critical 
Perspectives on Racial and Ethnic Differences in Health in Late 
Life: 227-266. Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press.
Jasso, G. and M. Rosenzweig. 2009. “Selection Criteria and 
the Skill Composition of Immigrants: A Comparative Analysis 
of Australian and US Employment Immigration.” In J. N. 
Bhagwati and G. Hanson (Eds.), Skilled Immigration Today: 
Prospects, Problems and Policies: 153-183. New York: 
Oxford University Press.

Javorcik, B. S., C. Ozden, M. Spatareanu and C. Neagu. 
2006. “Migrant Networks and Foreign Direct Investment”. 
Working Paper No. 3. Newark: Rutgers University.

Jayaweera, H. and B. Anderson. 2009. “Migrant Workers 
and Vulnerable Employment: A Review of Existing Data”. 
Project Undertaken by Compas for the TUC Comission on 
Vulnerable Employment. Oxford: Centre on Migration, Policy, 
and Society.

Jobbins, M. 2008. “Migration and Development: Poverty 

Reduction Strategies.” Prepared for the Global Forum on 
Migration and Development, 29-30 October 2008, Manila, 
Philippines.

International Migration: Bridging the Theoretical Divide”. 
Paper presented at Theories of Migration and Social Change 
Conference, 1-3 July 2008, Oxford University, Oxford, UK.

King, R. and J. Vullnetari. 2006. “Orphan Pensioners and 

Migrating Grandparents: The Impact of Mass Migration on 
Older People in Rural Albania.” Ageing and Society 26 (5): 
783-816.

Kireyev, A. 2006. “The Macroeconomics of Remittances: 
The Case of Tajikistan”. IMF Working Paper No. 06/2. 
Washington D.C.: International Monetary Fund.

Kleemans, M. and J. Klugman. 2009. “Public Opinions 

towards Migration.” Human Development Research Paper 
No. 53. New York: United Nations Development Programme, 
Human Development Report Office.

Klugman, J. and I. M. Pereira. 2009. “Assessment of National 

Migration Policies.” Human Development Research Paper 
No. 48. New York: United Nations Development Programme, 
Human Development Report Office.

Koettl, J. 2006. “The Relative Merits of Skilled and Unskilled 

Migration, Temporary, and Permanent Labor Migration, and 
Portability of Social Security Benefits”. Working Paper Series 
No. 38007. Washington DC: World Bank.

Koser, K. 2008. “Why Migrant Smuggling Pays.” International 

Migration 46 (2): 3-26.

Kabeer, N. 2000. The Power to Choose: Bangladeshi Women 

Koslowski, R. 2008. “Global Mobility and the Quest for an 

and Labour Market Decisions in London and Dhaka. London: 
Verso.

Kalita, M. 2009. “U.S. Deters Hiring of Foreigners as 

Joblessness Grows.” The Wall Street Journal, 27 March.

Kapur, D. 2004. “Remittances: The New Development Matra?” 

G-24 Discussion Paper Series No. 29. Geneva: United 
Nations Conference on Trade and Development.

International Migration Regime.” In J. Chamie and L. 
Dall’Oglio (Eds.), International migration and development: 
Continuing the dialogue: Legal and policy perspectives: 103-
144. Geneva: International Organization for Migration.
. 2009. “Global Mobility Regimes: A Conceptual Reframing”. 
Paper presented at International Studies Association Meet-
ing, 15 February 2009, New York, US.

Karsten, S., C. Felix, G. Ledoux, W. Meijnen, J. Roeleveld 
and E. Van Schooten. 2006. “Choosing Segregation or 
Integration?: The Extent and Effects of Ethnic Segregation in 
Dutch Cities.” Education and Urban Society 38 (2): 228-247.

Kremer, M. and S. Watt. 2006. “The Globalisation of 

Household Production”. Working Paper No. 2008-0086. 
Cambridge: Weatherhead Center for International Affairs, 
Harvard University.

Kaur, A. 2007. “International Labour Migration in Southeast 

Kundu, A. 2009. “Urbanisation and Migration: An Analysis of 

Asia: Governance of Migration and Women Domestic 
Workers.” Intersections: Gender, History and Culture in the 
Asian Context (15).

Trends, Patterns and Policies in Asia.” Human Development 
Research Paper No. 16. New York: United Nations 
Development Programme, Human Development Report 

128

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Bibliography

Office.

Kutnick, B., P. Belser and G. Danailova-Trainor. 2007. 

“Methodologies for Global and National Estimation of Human 
Trafficking Victims: Current and Future Approaches”. 
Working Paper No. 29. Geneva: International Labour 
Organization.

2007. “An African Origin for the Intimate Association 
Between Humans and Helicobacter Pylori.” Nature 445: 
915-918.

Lipton, M. 1980. “Migration from Rural Areas of Poor Countries: 

The Impact on Rural Productivity and Income Distribution.” 
World Development 8 (1): 1-24.

La Rovere, E. L. and F. E. Mendes. 1999. “Tucuruí 

Hydropower Complex Brazil”. Working Paper. Cape Town: 
World Commission on Dams.

LIS (Luxembourg Income Study). 2009. “Key Figures.” 
http://www.lisproject.org/key-figures/key-figures.htm. 
Accessed June 2009.

Lacroix, T. 2005. “Les Réseaux Marocains du Développement: 

Local Government Association. 2009. “The Impact of the 

Géographie du Transnational et Politiques du Territorial”. 
Paris: Presses de Sciences Po.

Laczko, F. and G. Danailova-Trainor. 2009. “Trafficking 
in Persons and Human Development: Towards a More 
Integrated Policy Response.” Human Development Research 
Paper No. 51. New York: United Nations Development 
Programme, Human Development Report Office.

Landau, L. B. 2005. “Urbanization, Nativism and the Rule 
of Law in South Africa’s ‘Forbidden Cities’.” Third World 
Quarterly 26 (7): 1115-1134.

Landau, L. B. and A. Wa Kabwe-Segatti. 2009. “Human 

Development Impacts of Migration: South Africa Case 
Study.” Human Development Research Paper No. 5. New 
York: United Nations Development Programme, Human 
Development Report Office.

Lawyers for Human Rights. 2008. “Monitoring Immigration 

Detention in South Africa”. Pretoria: Lawyers for Human 
Rights.

Leal-Arcas, R. 2007. “Bridging the Gap in the Doha Talks: A 

Look at Services Trade.” Journal of International Commercial 
Law and Technology 2 (4): 241-249.

Lee, R. and T. Miller. 2000. “Immigration, Social Security, and 
Broader Fiscal Impacts.” American Economic Review: Papers 
and Proceedings 90 (2): 350-354.

Leon-Ledesma, M. and M. Piracha. 2004. “International 

Migration and the Role of Remittances in Eastern Europe.” 
International Migration 42 (4): 65-83.

Levitt, P. 1998. “Social Remittances: Migration Driven Local-
Level Forms of Cultural Diffusion.” International Migration 
Review 32 (4): 926-948.
. 2006. “Social Remittances - Culture as a Development 
Tool”. Unpublished Working Paper. Santo Domingo: United 
Nations International Research and Training Institute for the 
Advancement of Women.

Lewis, W. A. 1954. “Economic Development with Unlimited 
Supplies of Labor.” Manchester School of Economic and 
Social Studies 22 (2): 139-191.

Linz, B., F. Balloux, Y. Moodley, A. Manica, H. Liu, P. 

Roumagnac, D. Falush, C. Stamer, F. Prugnolle, S. W. 
van der Merwe, Y. Yamaoka, D. Y. Graham, E. Perez-
Trallero, T. Wadstrom, S. Suerbaum and M. Achtman. 

Recession on Migrant Labour”. London: Local Government 
Association.

Longhi, S., P. Nijkamp and J. Poot. 2005. “A Meta-Analytic 

Assessment of the Effect of Immigration on Wages.” Journal 
of Economic Surveys 19 (3): 451-477.

Longva, A. N. 1997. Walls Built on Sand: Migration, Exclusion 

and Society in Kuwait. Boulder: Westview Press.

Lu, X. and Y. Wang. 2006. “’Xiang-Cheng’ Renkou Qianyi 

Guimo De Cesuan Yu Fenxi (1979-2003) (Estimation and 
Analysis on Chinese Rural-Urban Migration Size).” Xibei 
Renkou (Northwest Population) 1: 14-16.

Lucas, R. E. B. 2004. “Life Earnings and Rural-Urban 

Migration.” The Journal of Political Economy 112 (1): 
S29-S59.

Lucas, R. E. B. and L. Chappell. 2009. “Measuring Migration’s 
Development Impacts: Preliminary Evidence from Jamaica”. 
Working Paper. Global Development Network and Institute 
for Public Policy Research.

Lucassen, L. 2005. The Immigrant Threat: The Integration 
of Old and New Migrants in Western Europe since 1890.
Champaign: University of Illinois Press.

Luthria, M. 2009. “The Importance of Migration to Small Fragile 

Economies.” Human Development Research Paper No. 55. 
New York: United Nations Development Programme, Human 
Development Report Office.

Magee, G. B. and A. S. Thompson. 2006. “Lines of Credit, 

Debts of Obligation: Migrant Remittances to Britain, C.1875-
1913.” Economic History Review 59 (3): 539-577.

Maksakova, L. P. 2002. “Migratsia I Rinok Truda V Stranakh 

Srednei Azii [Migration and Labor Market in the Middle Asian 
Countries]”. Proceedings of the Regional Seminar, 11-12 
October 2001, Tashkent, Uzbekistan.

Malek, A. 2008. “Training for Overseas Employment”. 

Paper presented at International Labour Organization 
Symposium on Deployment of Workers Overseas: A Shared 
Responsibility, 15-16 July 2008, Dhaka, Bangladesh.

Manacorda, M., A. Manning and J. Wadsworth. 2006. “The 

Impact of Immigration on the Structure of Male Wages: 
Theory and Evidence from Britain”. Discussion Paper Series 
No. 0608. London: Centre for Research and Analysis of 
Migration.

129

Bibliography

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Mansuri, G. 2006. “Migration, Sex Bias, and Child Growth in 
Rural Pakistan”. Policy Research Working Paper No. 3946.
Washington, D.C.: World Bank.

Marcelli, E. A. and P. M. Ong. 2002. “2000 Census Coverage 

of Foreign Born Mexicans in Los Angeles Country: 
Implications for Demographic Analysis”. Paper presented at 
the 2002 Annual Meeting of the Population Association of 
America, 9-11 May 2002, Atlanta, US.

Marquette, C. M. 2006. “Nicaraguan Migrants in Costa Rica.” 

Poblacion y Salud en Mesoamerica 4 (1).

Martin, P. 1993. Trade and Migration: NAFTA and Agriculture. 

Washington DC: Institute for International Economics.
. 1994. “Germany: Reluctant Land of Immigration.” In W. 
Cornelius, P. Martin, and J. Hollifield (Eds.), Controlling 
Immigration: A Global Perspective: 189-225. Stanford: 
Stanford University Press.
. 2003. Promise Unfulfilled: Unions, Immigration, and Farm 
Workers. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
. 2005. “Merchant of Labor: Agents of the Evolving 
Migration Infrastructure”. Discussion Paper No. 158. 
Geneva: International Institute for Labour Studies.
. 2009a. “Demographic and Economic Trends: Implications 
for International Mobility.” Human Development Research 
Paper No. 17. New York: United Nations Development 
Programme, Human Development Report Office.
. 2009b. “Migration in the Asia-Pacific Region: Trends, 
Factors, Impacts.” Human Development Research Paper No. 
32. New York: United Nations Development Programme, 
Human Development Report Office.

Martin, P. and J. E. Taylor. 1996. “The Anatomy of a 
Migration Hump.” In J. E. Taylor (Ed.), Development 
Strategy, Employment, and Migration: Insights from Models: 
43-62. Paris: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development (OECD).

Martin, S. F. 2008. “Policy and Institutional Coherence at the 
Civil Society Days of the GFMD”. Prepared for the Global 
Forum on Migration and Development, 29-30 October 2008, 
Manila, Philippines.

Understanding International Mgiration at the End of the 
Milliennium. New York: Oxford University Press.

Massey, D. S. and M. Sánchez R. 2009. “Restrictive 

Immigration Policies and Latino Immigrant Identity in the 
United States.” Human Development Research Paper No. 43. 
New York: United Nations Development Programme, Human 
Development Report Office.

Matsushita, M., T. J. Schoenbaum and P. C. Mavroidis 

(Eds.). 2006. The World Trade Organization: Law, Practice, 
and Policy. New York: Oxford University Press.

Mattoo, A. and M. Olarreaga. 2004. “Reciprocity across 
Modes of Supply in the WTO: A Negotiating Formula.” 
International Trade Journal 18: 1-24.

Mazzolari, F. and D. Neumark. 2009. “The Effects of 

Immigration on the Scale and Composition of Demand: A 
Study of California Establishments.” Human Development 
Research Paper No. 33. New York: United Nations 
Development Programme, Human Development Report 
Office.

McKay, L., S. Macintyre and A. Ellaway. 2003. “Migration 

and Health: A Review of the International Literature”. 
Occasional Paper No. 12. Glasgow: Medical Research 
Council Social and Public Health Sciences Unit.

McKenzie, D. 2007. “Paper Walls are Easier to Tear Down: 
Passport Costs and Legal Barriers to Emigration.” World 
Development 35 (11): 2026-2039.

McKenzie, D., J. Gibson and S. Stillman. 2006. “How 

Important is Selection? Experimental versus Non-
Experimental Measures of the Income Gains from Migration”. 
Policy Research Working Paper Series No. 3906. Washington 
DC: World Bank.

Meng, X. and J. Zhang. 2001. “The Two-Tier Labor Market 

in Urban China: Occupational Segregation and Wage 
Differentials Between Urban Residents and Rural Migrants 
in Shanghai.” Journal of Comparative Economics 29 (3): 
485-504.

Mesnard, A. 2004. “Temporary Migration and Capital Market 

Imperfections.” Oxford Economic Paper 56: 242-262.

Martin, S. F. and R. Abimourchad. 2008. “Promoting the 

Meza, L. and C. Pederzini. 2006. “Condiciones Laborales 

Rights of Migrants”. Prepared for the Civil Society Days of 
the Global Forum on Migration and Development, 27-30 
October 2008, Manila, Philippines.

Massey, D. S. 1988. “International Migration and Economic 

Development in Comparative Perspective.” Population and 
Development Review 14: 383-414.
. 2003. “Patterns and Processes of International Migration 
in the 21st Century”. Paper prepared for Conference on 
African Migration in Comparative Perspective, 4-7 June 
2003, Johannesburg, South Africa.

Massey, D. S., J. Arango, G. Hugo, A. Kouaouci, A. 

Pellegrino and J. E. Taylor. 1998. Worlds in Motion: 

Familiares y la Decision de Migracion: El Caso de México”. 
Documento de apoyo del Informe sobre Desarrollo Humano 
México 2006-2007. Mexico City: Programa de las Naciones 
Unidas para el Desarrollo.

Migrant Forum in Asia. 2006. “Asylum Seekers and Migrants 

at Risk of Violent Arrest, Overcrowded Detention Centers 
and Inhumane Deportation.” Migrant Forum in Asia, Urgent 
Appeal, 2 November.

Migration DRC (Development Research Centre). 2007.

“Global Migrant Origin Database (Version 4).” Development 
Research Centre on Migration, Globalisation and Poverty, 
University of Sussex. 

130

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Bibliography

Migration Policy Group and British Council. 2007. “Migrant 

Muñoz de Bustillo, R. and J.-I. Antón. 2009. “Health Care 

Integration Policy Index.” http://www.integrationindex.eu/. 
Accessed June 2009.

Miguel, E. and J. Hamory. 2009. “Individual Ability and 

Selection into Migration in Kenya.” Human Development 
Research Paper No. 45. New York: United Nations 
Development Programme, Human Development Report 
Office.

Utilization and Immigration in Spain”. Munich Personal RePEc 
Archive Paper No. 12382. Munich: University Library of 
Munich.

Münz, R., T. Straubhaar, F. Vadean and N. Vadean. 2006. 

“The Costs and Benefits of European Immigration”. Hamburg 
Institute of International Economics (HWWI) Policy Report No. 
3. Hamburg: HWWI Research Program.

Mills, M. B. 1997. “Contesting the Margins of Modernity: 

Murillo C., A. M. and J. Mena. 2009. “Informe de las 

Women, Migration, and Consumption in Thailand.” American 
Ethnologist 24 (1): 37-61.

Ministry of Social Welfare and Labour, United Nations 

Migraciones Colombianas”. Special Tabulation for the 
Human Development Report 2009. New York: Grupo de 
Investigación en Movilidad Humana, Red Alma Mater.

Population Fund and Mongolian Population 
and Development Association. 2005. Status and 
Consequences of Mongolian Citizens Working Abroad. 
Ulaanbaatar: Mongolian Population and Development 
Association.

Murison, S. 2005. “Evaluation of DFID Development Assistance: 

Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment: Phase II 
Thematic Evaluation: Migration and Development”. Working 
Paper No. 13. London: British Government’s Department for 
International Development.

Minnesota Population Center. 2008. “Integrated Public Use 

Myers, N. 2005. “Environmental Refugees: An Emergent 

Microdata Series - International: Version 4.0.” University 
of Minnesota. http://www.ipums.umn.edu/. Accessed July 
2009.

Misago, J. P., L. B. Landau and T. Monson. 2009. Towards 

Tolerance, Law and Dignity: Addressing Violence Against 
Foreign Nationals in South Africa. Arcadia: International 
Organization for Migration, Regional Office for Southern 
Africa.

Mitchell, T. 2009. “An Army Marching to Escape Medieval 

China.” Financial Times, 15 April.

Mobarak, A. M., C. Shyamal and B. Gharad. 2009. 

“Migrating away from a Seasonal Famine: A Randomized 
Intervention in Bangladesh.” Human Development Research 
Paper No. 41. New York: United Nations Development 
Programme, Human Development Report Office.

Molina, G. G. and E. Yañez. 2009. “The Moving Middle: 
Migration, Place Premiums and Human Development in 
Bolivia.” Human Development Research Paper No. 46. New 
York: United Nations Development Programme, Human 
Development Report Office.

Montenegro, C. E. and M. L. Hirn. 2008. “A New Set of 

Security Issue”. Paper presented at 13th Economic Forum, 
23-27 May 2005, Prague, Czech Republic.

Narayan, D., L. Pritchett and S. Kapoor. 2009. Moving Out of 
Poverty: Success from the Bottom Up (Volume 2). New York: 
Palgrave Macmillan.

National Statistics Office. 2006. Participatory Poverty 

Assessment in Mongolia. Ulaanbaatar: National Statistics 
Office.

Nava, A. 2006. “Spousal Control and Intra-Household Decision 
Making: An Experimental Study in the Philippines”. American 
Economic Review. Forthcoming.

Nazroo, J. Y. 1997. Ethnicity and Mental Health: Findings from a 
National Community Survey. London: Policy Studies Institute.

Neumayer, E. 2006. “Unequal Access to Foreign Spaces: 

How States Use Visa Restrictions to Regulate Mobility in 
a Globalized World.” Transactions of the Institute of British 
Geographers 31 (1): 72-84.

Newland, K. 2009. “Circular Migration and Human 

Development.” Human Development Research Paper No. 42. 
New York: United Nations Development Programme, Human 
Development Report Office.

Disaggregated Labor Market Indicators Using Standardized 
Household Surveys from Around the World”. World 
Development Report Background Paper. Washington DC: 
World Bank.

Newland, K. and E. Patrick. 2004. Beyond Remittances: The 

Role of Diaspora in Poverty Reduction in the their Countries of 
Origin. Washington D.C.: Migration Policy Institute.

Newman, E. and J. van Selm. 2003. Refugees and Forced 

MOSWL, PTRC and UNDP (Ministry of Labour and Social 
Welfare, Population Teaching and Research Center, 
National University of Mongolia and United Nations 
Development Programme). 2004. Urban Poverty and In-
Migration Survey Report on Mongolia. Ulaanbaatar: MOSWL, 
PRTC and UNDP.

Mundell, R. A. 1968. International Economics. New York: 

Macmillan.

Displacement: International Security, Human Vulnerability and 
the State. Tokyo: United Nations University Press.

Nordin, M. 2006. “Ethnic Segregation and Educational 

Attainment in Sweden”. Unpublished Working Paper. Lund: 
Department of Economics, Lund University.

Nugent, J. B. and V. Saddi. 2002. “When and How Do Land 
Rights Become Effective? Historical Evidence from Brazil”. 
Unpublished paper. Los Angeles: Department of Economics, 

131

Bibliography

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

University of Southern California.

Nussbaum, M. 1993. “Non-Relative Virtues: An Aristotelian 

Approach.” In M. Nussbaum and A. Sen (Eds.), Quality of Life: 
242-269. New York: Oxford University Press.
. 2000. Women and Human Development: The Capabilities 
Approach. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

O’Rourke, K. H. and R. Sinnott. 2003. “Migration Flows: 

Political Economy of Migration and the Empirical Challenges”. 
Discussion Paper Series No. 06. Dublin: Institute for 
International Integration Studies.

OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 

Development). 2007. PISA 2006: Science Competencies for 
Tomorrow’s World Executive Summary. Paris: OECD.
. 2008a. A Profile of Immigrant Populations in the 21st 
Century: Data from OECD Countries. Paris: OECD Publishing.
. 2008b. International Migration Outlook. Paris: OECD 
Publishing.
. 2009a. “OECD Database on Immigrants in OECD 
Countries.” http://stats.oecd.org/index.aspx?lang=en. 
Accessed March 2009.
. 2009b. “OECD Economic Outlook, Interim Report March 
2009”. Paris: OECD.
. 2009c. “OECD.Stat Extracts database.” http://stats.oecd.
org/index.aspx. Accessed July 2009.

1980-2005.” Human Development Research Paper No. 6. 
New York: United Nations Development Programme, Human 
Development Report Office.

Ottaviano, G. I. P. and G. Peri. 2008. “Immigration and 

National Wages: Clarifying the Theory and the Empirics”. 
Working Paper No. 14188. Cambridge: National Bureau of 
Economic Research.

Oxford University Press. 2009. “Oxford English 

Dictionary Online.” http://dictionary.oed.com/cgi/
entry/00312893?query_type=word&querywor
d=mobility&first=1&max_to_show=10&sort_
type=alpha&result_place=1&search_id=ofqh-nRqx5O-
11785&hilite=00312893. Accessed June 2006.

Papademetriou, D. 2005. “The ‘Regularization’ Option in 

Managing Illegal Migration More Effectively: A Comparative 
Perspective”. Policy Brief No. 4. Washington DC: Migration 
Policy Institute.

Passel, J. S. and D. Cohn. 2008. “Trends in Unauthorized 

Immigration: Undocumented Inflow Now Trails Legal Inflow”. 
Washington DC: Pew Hispanic Center.

Peri, G., C. Sparber and O. S. Drive. 2008. “Task 

Specialisation, Immigration and Wages.” American Economic 
Journal: Applied Economics. Forthcoming.

Perron, P. 1989. “The Great Crash, the Oil Price Shock, and the 

OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 

Unit Root Hypothesis.” Econometrica 57 (6): 1361-1401.

Development) and Statistics Canada. 2000. “Literacy 
in the Information Age: Final Report of the International Adult 
Literacy Survey”. Paris: OECD Publishing.
. 2005. Learning a Living: First Results of the Adult Literacy 
and Life Skills Survey. Paris: OECD.

OECD-DAC (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development, Development Assistance Committee). 
2009. “Creditor Reporting System (CRS) Database.” http://
www.oecd.org/dataoecd/50/17/5037721.htm. Accessed 
July 2009.

Perron, P. and T. Wada. 2005. “Let’s Take a Break: Trends and 
Cycles in US Real GDP”. Working Paper. Boston: Department 
of Economics, Boston University.

Petros, K. 2006. “Motherhood, Mobility and the Maquiladora 
in Mexico: Women’s Migration from Veracruz to Reynosa”. 
Summer Funds Research Report. Austin: Center for Latin 
American Social Policy, Lozano Long Institute of Latin 
America Studies, The University of Texas at Austin.

Pettigrew, T. 1998. “Intergroup Contact Theory.” Annual Review 

of Psychology 49: 65-85.

One World Net. 2008. “South Africans Text No To Xenophobia.” 

Pettigrew, T. and L. Tropp. 2005. “Allport’s Intergroup Contact 

http://us.oneworld.net/places/southern-africa/-/article/
south-africans-text-no-xenophobia. Accessed July 2009.
Opeskin, B. 2009. “The Influence of International Law on the 
International Movement of Persons.” Human Development 
Research Paper No. 18. New York: United Nations 
Development Programme, Human Development Report Office.

Orozco, M. and R. Rouse. 2007. “Migrant Hometown 

Associations and Opportunities for Development: A Global 
Perspective.” Migration Information Source, February.

Ortega, D. 2009. “The Human Development of Peoples.” Human 

Development Research Paper No. 49. New York: United 
Nations Development Programme, Human Development 
Report Office.

Hypothesis: Its History and Influence.” In J. F. Dovidio, P. 
Glick, and L. Rudman (Eds.), On the Nature of Prejudice: 
Fifty Years after Allport: 262-277. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell 
Publishing.

PICUM (Platform for International Cooperation on 
Undocumented Migrants). 2008a. “Platform for 
International Cooperation on Undocumented Migrants.” 
http://www.picum.org/. Accessed July 2009.
. 2008b. Undocumented Children in Europe: Invisible Victims 
of Immigration Restrictions. Belgium: PICUM.
. 2009. “Human rights of Undocumented Migrants: 
Sweden.” http://www.picum.org/?pid=51. Accessed July 
2009.

Ortega, F. and G. Peri. 2009. “The Causes and Effects of 

Pilon, M. 2003. “Schooling in West Africa”. Background paper 

International Labor Mobility: Evidence from OECD Countries 

prepared for the UNESCO 2003 Education for All Global 

132

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Bibliography

Monitoring Report 2003/2004. Paris: United Nations 
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization.

Ratha, D. and S. Mohapatra. 2009b. “Revised Outlook for 

Remittances Flows 2009-2011.”

Piper, N. 2005. “Gender and Migration”. Paper presented for 
the Policy Analysis and Research Programme of the Global 
Commission on International Migration. Switzerland: Global 
Commission on International Migration.

Ratha, D. and W. Shaw. 2006. “South-South Migration and 

Remittances (The Bilateral Remittances Matrix Version 4)”. 
Washington DC: World Bank.

Rauch, J. E. 1999. “Networks versus Markets in International 

Plato. 2009. The Socratic Dialogues. New York, NY: Kaplan 

Trade.” Journal of International Economics 48 (1): 7-35.

Publishing.

Pomp, R. D. 1989. “The Experience of the Philippines in Taxing 
its Nonresident Citizens.” In J. N. Bahagwati and J. D. Wilson 
(Eds.), Income Taxation and International Mobility: 43-82. 
Cambridge: MIT Press.

Population Reference Bureau. 2001. “Understanding and 
Using Population Projections”. Measure Communication 
Policy Brief. Washington DC: Population Reference Bureau.
Portes, A. and R. G. Rumbaut. 2001. Ethnicities: Children of 

Immigrants in America. Berkeley: University of California 
Press and Russell Sage Foundation.

Ravenstein, E. G. 1885. “The Laws of Migration.” Journal of the 

Statistical Society of London 48 (2): 167-235.

Rawls, J. 1971. A Theory of Justice. Cambridge: Harvard 

University Press.

Rayhan, I. and U. Grote. 2007. “1987-94 Dynamics of Rural 
Poverty in Bangladesh.” Journal of Identity and Migration 
Studies 1 (2): 82-98.

Reitz, J. G. 2005. “Tapping Immigrants’ Skills: New Directions 

for Canadian Immigration Policy in the Knowledge Economy.” 
Law and Business Review of the Americas 11: 409.

Revkin, A. C. 2008. “Maldives Considers Buying Dry Land if 

Portes, A. and m. Zhou. 2009. “The New Second Generation: 

Seas Rise.” New York Times, 10 November.

Segmented Assimilation and its Variants.” Annals of the 
American Academy of Political and Social Science 530 (1): 
74-96.

Reyneri, E. 1998. “The Role of the Underground Economy in 
Irregular Migration to Italy: Cause or Effect?” Journal of 
Ethnic and Migration Studies 24 (2): 313-331.

Poverty Task Force. 2003. “Ninh Thuan Participatory Poverty 

Richmond, A. 1994. Global Apartheid: Refugees, Racism, and 

Assessment”. Ha Noi: CRP and World Bank.

the New World Order. Toronto: Oxford University Press.

Preston, J. 2009. “Mexican Data Say Migration to U.S. has 

Robinson, C. W. 2003. “Risks and Rights: The Causes, 

Plummeted.” New York Times, 15 May.

Pritchett, L. 2006. Let the People Come: Breaking the Gridlock 
on International Labor Mobility. Washington DC: Center for 
Global Development.

Quirk, M. 2008. “How to Grow a Gang.” The Atlantic Monthly, 

May.

Rahaei, S. 2009. “Islam, Human Rights and Displacement.” 

Forced Migration Review Supplement: 1-12.

Rajan, S. I. and K. C. Zachariah. 2009. “Annual Migration 
Survey 2008: Special Tabulation”. Trivandrum: Centre for 
Development Studies.

Ramakrishnan, S. and T. J. Espenshade. 2001. “Immigrant 

Incorporation and Political Participation in the United States.” 
International Migration Review 35 (3): 870-909.

Ramírez, C., M. G. Domínguez and J. M. Morais. 2005.

“Crossing Borders: Remittances, Gender and Development”. 
Working paper. Santo Domingo: United Nations International 
Training and Research Institute for the Advancement of 
Women.

Ranis, G. and F. Stewart. 2000. “Strategies for Success in 

Human Development.” Journal of Human Development 1 (1): 
49-70.

Ratha, D. and S. Mohapatra. 2009a. “Revised Outlook for 

Remittance Flows 2009-2011: Remittances Expected to Fall 
by 5 to 8 Percent in 2009”. Migration and Development Brief
9. Washington DC: World Bank.

Consequences, and Challenges of Development-Induced 
Displacement”. Occasional Paper. Washington DC: The 
Brookings Institution-SAIS Project on Internal Displacement.

Rodríguez, F. and R. Wagner. 2009. “How Would your Kids 

Vote if I Open my Doors? Evidence from Venezuela.” Human 
Development Research Paper No. 40. New York: United 
Nations Development Programme, Human Development 
Report Office.

Rodrik, D. 2009. “Let Developing Nations Rule.” http://www.
voxeu.org/index.php?q=node/2885. Accessed July 2009.
Rosas, C. 2007. “¿Migras tú, Migro yo o Migramos Juntos? Los 

Condicionantes de Género en las Decisiones Migratorias 
de Parejas Peruanas Destinadas en Buenos Aires”. Paper 
presented at IX Jornadas Argentinas de Estudios de 
Población (AEPA), 31 October-2 November 2007, Córdoba, 
Spain.

Rosenstone, S. J. and J. M. Hansen. 1993. Mobilization, 

Participation, and Democracy in America. New York: 
Macmillan.

Rossi, A. 2008. “The Impact of Migration on Children Left 
Beyond in Developing Countries”. Paper presented at 
Building Migration into Development Strategies Conference, 
28-29 April 2008, London, UK.

Rowthorn, R. 2008. “The Fiscal Impact of Immigration on the 

Advanced Economies.” Oxford Review of Economic Policy 24 
(3): 560-580.

133

Bibliography

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Rubenstein, H. 1992. “Migration, Development and 

Remittances in Rural Mexico.” International Migration 30 (2): 
127-153.

Ruhs, M. and P. Martin. 2008. “Numbers vs Rights: Trade-offs 
and Guest Worker Programs.” International Migration Review 
42 (1): 249-265.

Ruhs, M. 2002. “Temporary Foreign Workers Programmes: 
Policies, Adverse Consequences, and the Need to Make 
them Work”. Working Paper No. 56. San Diego: The Center 
for Comparative Immigration Studies, University of California, 
San Diego.
. 2005. “The Potential of Temporary Migration Programmes 
in Future International Migration Policy”. Paper prepared 
for the Policy Analysis and Research Programme. Geneva: 
Global Commission on International Migration.
. 2009. “Migrant Rights, Immigration Policy and Human 
Development.” Human Development Research Paper No. 23. 
New York: United Nations Development Programme, Human 
Development Report Office.

Ruhunage, L. K. 2006. “Institutional Monitoring of Migrant 

Recruitment in Sri Lanka.” In C. Kuptsch (Ed.), Merchants of 
Labour: 53-62. Geneva: International Labour Organization.
Sabates-Wheeler, R. 2009. “The Impact of Irregular Status 
on Human Development Outcomes for Migrants.” Human 
Development Research Paper No. 26. New York: United 
Nations Development Programme, Human Development 
Report Office.

Sainath, P. 2004. “The Millions who Cannot Vote.” The Hindu, 

15 March.

Sanjek, R. 2003. “Rethinking Migration, Ancient to Future.” 

Global Networks 3 (3): 315-336.

Sarreal, N. 2002. “A Few Degrees.” In J. Son (Ed.), Risk and 
Rewards: Stories from the Philippine Migration Trail: 153. 
Bangkok: Inter Press Service Asia-Pacific.

Schiff, M. 1994. “How Trade, Aid and Remittances Affect 
International Migration”. Policy Research Working Paper 
Series No. 1376. Washington DC: World Bank.

Sciortino, R. and S. Punpuing. 2009. International Migration in 

Thailand. Bangkok: International Organization for Migration.
Seewooruthun, D. C. R. 2008. “Migration and Development: 

The Mauritian Perspective”. Paper presented at the 
workshop on Enhancing the Role of Return Migration 
in Fostering Development, 7-8 July 2008, Geneva, 
International Organization for Migration.

Sen, A. 1992. Inequality Reexamined. Oxford: Oxford University 

Press.
. 2006. Identity and Violence: The Illusion of Destiny. New 
York: W.W. Norton and Co.

Siddiqui, T. 2006. “Protection of Bangladeshi Migrants through 

Good Governance.” In C. Kuptsch (Ed.), Merchants of 
Labour: 63-90. Geneva: International Labour Organization.

Sides, J. and J. Citrin. 2007. “European Opinion About 

Immigration: The Role of Identities, Interests and 
Information.” B.J.Pol.S. 37: 477-504.

Singapore Government Ministry of Manpower. 2009. “Work 

Permit.” http://www.mom.gov.sg/publish/momportal/en/
communities/work_pass/work_permit.html. Accessed July 
2009.

Skeldon, R. 1999. “Migration in Asia after the Economic Crisis: 
Patterns and Issues.” Asia-Pacific Population Journal 14 (3): 
3-24.
. 2005. “Globalization, Skilled Migration and Poverty 
Alleviation: Brain Drains in Context”. Working Paper No. 
T15. Sussex: Development Research Centre on Migration, 
Globalisation and Poverty.
. 2006. “Interlinkages between Internal and International 
Migration and Development in the Asian Region.” Population 
Space and Place 12 (1): 15-30.

Savage, K. and P. Harvey. 2007. “Remittance during Crises: 

Smeeding, T., C. Wing and K. Robson. 2009. “Differences 

Implications for Humanitarian Response”. Briefing Paper No. 
26. London: Overseas Development Institute.

Savona, E. U., A. Di Nicola and G. Da Col. 1996. “Dynamics 

in Social Transfer Support and Poverty for Immigrant 
Families with Children: Lessons from the LIS”. Unpublished 
tabulation.

of Migration and Crime in Europe: New Patterns of an 
Old Nexus”. Working Paper No. 8. Trento: School of Law, 
University of Trento.

Saxenian, A. 2002. “The Silicon Valley Connection: 

Transnational Networks and Regional Development in 
Taiwan, China and India.” Science Technology and Society 7 
(1): 117-149.
. 2006. International Mobility of Engineers and the Rise of 
Entrepreneurship in the Periphery. Helsinki: United Nations 
University - World Institute for Development Economics 
Research.

Scheve, K. F. and M. J. Slaughter. 2007. “A New Deal for 

Globalization.” Foreign Affairs 86 (4): 34-46.

Smeeding, T. 1997. “Financial Poverty in Developed Countries: 

The Evidence from the Luxembourg Income Study”. 
Background Paper for UNDP, Human Development Report 
1997. United Nations Development Programme.

Smith, A., R. N. Lalaonde and S. Johnson. 2004. “Serial 

Migration and Its Implications for the Parent-Child 
Relationship: A Retrospective Analysis of the Experiences of 
the Children of Caribbean Immigrants.” Cultural Diversity and 
Ethnic Minority Psychology 10 (2): 107-122.

Solomon, M. K. 2009. “GATS Mode 4 and the Mobility of 

Labor.” In R. Cholewinski, R. Perruchoud, and E. MacDonald 
(Eds.), International migration Law: Developing Paradigms 
and Key Challenges: 107-128. The Hague: TMC Asser 

134

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Bibliography

Press.

Son, G. Y. 2009. “Where Work is the Only Bonus.” Bangkok 

Post, 16 March.

Spilimbergo, A. 2009. “Democracy and Foreign Education.” 

American Economic Review 99 (1): 528-543.

Srivastava, R. and S. Sasikumar. 2003. “An Overview of 

Migration in India, its Impacts and Key Issues”. Paper 
presented at the Regional Conference on Migration 
Development and Pro-Poor Policy Choices in Asia, 22-24 
June 2003, Dhaka, Bangladesh.

Stark, O. 1980. “On the Role of Urban-to-Rural Remittances in 
Rural Development.” Journal of Development Studies 16 (3): 
369-374.
. 1991. The Migration of Labor. Cambridge: Basil Blackwell.
Stark, O. and D. Bloom. 1985. “The New Economics of Labour 

Migration.” American Economic Review 75 (2): 173-178.

Stark, O., C. Helmenstein and A. Prskawetz. 1997. “A Brain 

Gain with a Brain Drain.” Economics Letters 55: 227-234.
Stark, O., J. E. Taylor and S. Yitzhaki. 1986. “Remittances 
and Inequality.” The Economic Journal 96 (383): 722-740.

STATEC (Central Service for Statistics and Economic 

Studies). 2008. Correspondence on gross enrolment ratio 
for Luxembourg. May. Luxembourg. 

Steel, Z., D. Silove, T. Chey, A. Bauman and Phan T. 2005.

“Mental Disorders, Disability and Health Service Use 
Amongst Vietnamese Refugees and the Host Australian 
Population.” Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica 111 (4): 
300-309.

Steinbeck, J. 1939. The Grapes of Wrath. New York: Viking 

Working Paper No. 2. Stockholm: The Stockholm University 
Linnaeus Centre for Integration Studies.

Tabar, P. 2009. “Immigration and Human Development: 

Evidence from Lebanon.” Human Development Research 
Paper No. 35. New York: United Nations Development 
Programme, Human Development Report Office.

Taylor, A. M. and J. G. Williamson. 1997. “Convergence in 
the Age of Mass Migration.” European Review of Economic 
History 1: 27-63.

Taylor, E. J., J. Arango, G. Hugo, A. Kouaouci, D. S. 

Massey and A. Pellegrino. 1996. “International Migration 
and Community Development.” Population Index 62 (3): 
397-418.

Taylor, J. E., J. Mora, R. Adams and A. Lopez-Feldman. 

2005. “Remittances, Inequality and Poverty: Evidence from 
Rural Mexico”. Working paper No. 05-003. Davis: University 
of California, Davis.

Taylor, R. 2009. “Australia Slashes Immigration as Recession 

Looms.” Reuters UK, 16 March.

Thaindian News. 2009. “New Law in Saudi Arabia to Benefit 
Two Mn Bangladeshi Workers.” Thaindian News, 24 April.

The Cities Alliance. 2007. Liveable Cities: The Benefits of 

Urban Environmental Planning. Washington DC: The Cities 
Alliance.

The Economist Intelligence Unit. 2008. “The Global 

Migration Barometer.” http://www.eiu.com. Accessed July 
2009.
. 2009. “Economist Intelligence Unit.” http://www.eiu.com. 
Accessed July 2009.

Press-James Lloyd.

The Institute for ECOSOC Rights. 2008. “Kebijakan Ilegal 

Stillman, S., D. McKenzie and J. Gibson. 2006. “Migration 
and Mental Health: Evidence from a Natural Experiment”. 
Department of Economics Working Paper in Economics. 
University of Waikato.

Suarez-Orozco, C., I. L. G. Todorova and J. Louie. 2002. 

“Making Up for Lost Time: The Experience of Separation and 
Reunification Among Immigrant Families.” Family Process 41 
(4): 625-643.

Success for All Foundation. 2008. “About SFAF: Our 

Approach to Increasing Student Achievement and History.” 
http://www.successforall.net/. Accessed June 2009.

Suen, W. 2002. Economics: A Mathematical Analysis. Boston: 

McGraw-Hill.

Sun, M. and C. C. Fan. 2009. “China’s Permanent and 

Temporary Migrants: Differentials and Changes, 1990-
2000”. Forthcoming.

Survival International. 2007. “Progress Can Kill: How Imposed 
Development Destroys the Health of Tribal Peoples”. London: 
Survival International.

Migrasi Buruh Migran dan Mitos Pembaharuan Kebijakan: 
Antara Malaysia-Singapura” (Migrant Worker Illegal Policy 
and the Myth of Policy Reform: Between Malaysia and 
Singapore)”. Research Draft Report. Jakarta: Institute of 
ECOSOC Rights.

The Straits Times. 2009. “No Visas for 55,000 Workers.” The 

Straits Times, 11 March.

Thomas-Hope, E. (Ed.). 2009. Freedom and Constraint in 
Caribbean: Migration and Diaspora. Kingston: Ian Randle 
Publishers.

Timmer, A. and J. G. Williamson. 1998. “Racism, Xenophobia 

or Markets? The Political Economy of Immigration Policy 
Prior to the Thirties.” Population and Development Review 24 
(4): 739-771.

Tirtosudarmo, R. 2009. “Mobility and Human Development in 

Indonesia.” Human Development Research Paper No. 19.
New York: United Nations Development Programme, Human 
Development Report Office.

Tiwari, R. 2005. “Child Labour in Footwear Industry: Possible 

Szulkin, R. and J. O. Jonsson. 2007. “Ethnic Segregation and 
Educational Outcomes in Swedish Comprehensive Schools”. 

Occupational Health Hazards.” Indian Journal of Occupational 
and Environmental Medicine 9 (1): 7-9.

135

Bibliography

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Transatlantic Trends. 2008. Transatlantic Trends 2008: 

Immigration. Brussels: Transatlantic Trends.

TWC2 (Transient Workers Count Too). 2006. “Debt, Delays, 

Deductions: Wage Issues Faced by Foreign Domestic 
Workers in Singapore”. Singapore: TWC2.

U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services. 2008. “Issuance 
of a Visa and Authorization for Temporary Admission into the 
United States for Certain Nonimmigrant Aliens Infected with 
HIV [73 FR 58023] [FR 79-08].” http://www.uscis.gov/
propub/ProPubVAP.jsp?dockey=c56119ee231ea5ba9dac1a
0e9b277bc6. Accessed June 2009.

Uhlaner, C., B. Cain and R. Kiewiet. 1989. “Political 

Participation of the Ethnic Minorities in the 1980s.” Political 
Behaviour 11 (3): 195-231.

UN (United Nations). 1998. “Recommendations on Statistics 

of International Migration”. Statistical Paper Series M No. 58. 
New York: Department of Economic and Social Affairs.
. 2002. “Trends in Total Migrant Stock: The 2001 Revision.” 
New York: Department of Social and Economic Affairs. 
. 2006a. “Trends in the Total Migrant Stock: The 2005 
Revision.” New York: Department of Economic and Social 
Affairs. 
. 2006b. “World Economic and Social Survey 2006: 
Diverging Growth and Development”. New York: Department 
of Economic and Social Affairs.
. 2008a. The Millennium Development Goals Report 2008. 
New York: Department of Economic and Social Affairs.
. 2008b. “World Population Policies: 2007”. New York: 
Department of Social and Economic Affairs.
. 2008c. “World Urbanization Prospects: The 2007 Revision 
CD-ROM Edition”. New York: UN.
. 2009a. “Millennium Development Goals Indicators 
Database.” http://mdgs.un.org. Accessed July 2009.
. 2009b. “Multilateral Treaties Deposited with the Secretary-
General.” http://untreaty.un.org. Accessed July 2009.
. 2009c. “National Accounts Main Aggregates Database.” 
http://unstats.un.org/unsd/snaama/SelectionCountry.asp. 
Accessed July 2009.
.2009d. “Trends in Total Migrant Stock: The 2008 Revision.” 
New York: Department of Social and Economic Affairs. 
. 2009e. “World Population Prospects: The 2008 Revision”. 
New York: Department of Social and Economic Affairs.

UN-HABITAT (United Nations Human Settlements 

Programme). 2003. Global Report on Human Settlements 
2003: The Challenge of Slums. London: Earthscan.
UNDP (United Nations Development Programme). 

1990. Human Development Report 1990: Concept and 
Measurement of Human Development. New York: Oxford 
University Press.
. 1994. Human Development Report 1994: New Dimensions 
of Human Security. New York: Oxford University Press.

. 1997. Human Development Report 1997: Human 
Development to Eradicate Poverty. New York: Oxford 
University Press.
. 2000. Albania Human Development Report 2000: 
Economic and Social Insecurity, Emigration and Migration. 
Tirana: UNDP.
. 2004a. Côte d’Ivoire Human Development Report 2004: 
Social Cohesion and National Reconstruction. Abidjan: UNDP.
. 2004b. Human Development Report 2004: Cultural Liberty 
in Today’s Diverse World. New York: UNDP.
. 2005a. China Human Development Report 2005: Towards 
Human Development with Equity. Beijing: UNDP.
. 2005b. El Salvador Human Development Report 2005: Una 
Mirada al Nuevo Nosotros, El Impacto de las Migraciones. 
San Salvador: UNDP.
. 2006a. Moldova Human Development Report 2006: Quality 
of Economic Growth and its Impact on Human Development. 
Chisinau: UNDP.
. 2006b. Timor-Leste: Human Development Report 2006: 
The Path Out of Poverty. Dili: UNDP.
. 2007a. Human Development Report 2007/2008: Fighting 
Climate Change: Human Solidarity in a Divided World. New 
York: Palgrave Macmillan.
. 2007b. Human Trafficking and HIV: Exploring Vulnerabilities 
and Responses in South Asia. Colombo: UNDP Regional HIV 
and Development Programme for Asia Pacific.
. 2007c. Mexico Human Development Report 2006/2007: 
Migracion y Desarrollo Humano. Mexico City: UNDP.
. 2007d. National Human Development Report 2007: Social 
Inclusion in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Sarajevo: UNDP.
. 2007e. Uganda Human Development Report 2007: 
Rediscovering Agriculture for Human Development. Kampala: 
UNDP.
. 2008a. China Human Development Report 2007/08: Basic 
Public Services for 1.3 Billion People. Beijing: UNDP.
. 2008b. Crisis Prevention and Recovery Report 2008: Post-
Conflict Economic Recovery, Enabling Local Ingenuity. New 
York: UNDP.
. 2008c. Egypt Human Development Report 2008: Egypt’s 
Social Contract; The Role of Civil Society. Cairo: UNDP.
. 2008d. “HIV Vulnerabilities of Migrant Women: From Asia 
to the Arab States”. Colombo: Regional Centre in Colombo.
. 2008e. “The Bali Road Map: Key Issues Under 
Negotiation”. New York: Environment and Energy Group.

UNECA (United Nations Economic Commission for Africa). 

2005. Africa’s Sustainable Development Bulletin 2005: 
Assessing Sustainable Development in Africa. Addis Ababa: 
SDD (The Sustainable Development Division), UNECA The 
United Nations  Economic Commission for Africa.
UNESCO Institute for Statistics (United Nations 

Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization). 

136

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Bibliography

1999. Statistical Yearbook. Paris: UNESCO.
. 2003. Correspondence on adult and youth literacy rates. 
March. Montreal. 
. 2007. Correspondence on gross and net enrolment 
ratios. April. Montreal. 
. 2008a. “Data Centre Education Module.” UNESCO. 
. 2008b. “Global Education Digest 2008: Comparing 
Education Statistics Across the World.” UNESCO. 
. 2009a. Correspondence on adult and youth literacy 
rates. February. Montreal. 
. 2009b. Correspondence on education indicators. 
February. Montreal. 
. 2009c. “Data Centre Education Module.” UNESCO. 

UNFPA (United Nations Population Fund). 2006. “State of 
World Population 2006: A Passage to Hope - Women and 
International Migration”. New York: UNFPA.

UNHCR (United Nations High Commission for Refugees). 
2001. “The Asylum-Migration Nexus: Refugee Protection 
and Migration Perspectives from ILO”. Paper presented at 
Global Consultations on International Protection, 28 June 
2001, Geneva, Switzerland.
. 2002. “Local Integration EC/GC/02/6”. Paper presented 
at Global Consultations on Internal Protection, 25 April, 
Geneva, Switzerland.
. 2007. “1951 Convention Relating to the Status of 
Refugees, Text of the 1967 Protocol, Relating to the Status 
of Refugees, Resolution 2198 (XXI) adopted by the United 
Nations General Assembly.” http://www.unhcr.org/protect/
PROTECTION/3b66c2aa10.pdf.
. 2008. Statistical yearbook 2007: Trends in Displacement, 
Protection and Solutions. Geneva: UNHCR.
. 2009a. Correspondence on asylum seekers. Marcha. 
Geneva. 
. 2009b. Correspondence on refugees. March. Geneva. 

UNICEF (United Nations Children’s Fund). 2004. The State 

of the World’s Children 2005. New York: UNICEF.
. 2005a. “The ‘Rights’ Start to Life: A Statistical Analysis 
of Birth Registration”. New York: UNICEF.
. 2005b. The State of the World’s Children 2006. New 
York: UNICEF.
. 2007. “Birth Registration Day Helps Ensure Basic 
Human Rights in Bangladesh.” http://www.unicef.org/
infobycountry/bangladesh_40265.html. Accessed June 
2009.
. 2008. “The Child Care Transition: Innocenti Report Card 
8. A League Table of Early Childhood Education and Care 
in Economically Advanced Countries”. Florence: Innocenti 
Research Centre, UNICEF.

United States Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2009. “The 
Employment Situation: May 2009.” http://www.bls.gov/
news.release/empsit.nr0.htm. Accessed June 2009.

United States Department of State. 2006. 2005 Human 

Rights Report: Democratic Republic of the Congo. 
Washington: Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and 
Labor, United States Department of State.
. 2009a. “2008 Country Reports on Human Rights 
Practices”. Washington DC: Bureau of Democracy, Human 
Rights and Labor, United States Department of State.
. 2009b. “2008 Country Reports on Human Rights 
Practices: Belarus”. Washington DC: Bureau of Democracy, 
Human Rights and Labor, United States Department of State.
. 2009c. “2008 Country Reports on Human Rights 
Practices: Burma”. Washington DC: Bureau of Democracy, 
Human Rights and Labor, United States Department of State.
. 2009d. “2008 Country Reports on Human Rights 
Practices: Côte d’Ivoire”. Washington DC: Bureau of 
Democracy, Human Rights and Labor, United States 
Department of State.
. 2009e. “2008 Country Reports on Human Rights 
Practices: Gabon”. Washington DC: Bureau of Democracy, 
Human Rights and Labor, United States Department of State.
UNODC (United Nations Office of Drugs and Crime). 2004. 
“United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized 
Crime and the Protocols Thereto.” http://www.unodc.
org/documents/treaties/UNTOC/Publications/TOC%20
Convention/TOCebook-e.pdf. Accessed June 2009.
. 2009. Global Report on Trafficking in Persons. Vienna: 
UNODC.

UNRWA (United Nations Relief and Works Agency). 

2008. “UNRWA in Figures.” http://www.un.org/unrwa/
publications/pdf/uif-dec08.pdf. Accessed May 2009.

UNRWA-ECOSOC (United Nations Relief and Works Agency 

- United Nations Economic and Social Council). 
2008. “Assistance to the Palestinian People: Report of 
the Secretary-General”. Economic and Social Council 
Substantive Session of 2008, 30 June - 25 July 2008, New 
York City.

USAID (United States Agency for International 

Development). 2007. “Anti-Trafficking in Persons 
Programs in Africa: A Review”. Washington DC: USAID.
van der Mensbrugghe, D. and D. Roland-Holst. 2009. 
“Global Economic Prospects for Increasing Developing 
Country Migration into Developed Countries.” Human 
Development Research Paper No. 50. New York: United 
Nations Development Programme, Human Development 
Report Office.

van Engeland, A. and A. Monsutti. 2005. War and Migration: 

Social Networks and Economic Strategies of the Hazaras of 
Afghanistan. London: Routledge.

van Hear, N. 2003. “From Durable Solutions to Transnational 

Relations: Home and Exile Among Refugee Diasporas”. New 
Issues in Refugee Research Working Paper No. 83. Geneva: 

137

Bibliography

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.

New Haven: Yale University Press.

van Hear, N., R. Brubaker and T. Bessa. 2009. “Managing 
Mobility for Human Development: The Growing Salience of 
Mixed Migration.” Human Development Research Paper No. 
20. New York: United Nations Development Programme, 
Human Development Report Office.

van Hear, N., F. Pieke and S. Vertovec. 2004. “The 

Contribution of UK-Based Diasporas to Development and 
Poverty Reduction”. Oxford: Centre on Migration, Policy, and 
Society (COMPAS).

van Lerberghe, K. and A. Schoors (Eds.). 1995. Immigration 
and Emigration within the Ancient Near East. Leuven: Peeters 
Publishers.

van Thanh, T. 2008. “Exportation of Migrants as a Development 

Strategy in Viet Nam”. Paper presented at Workshop on 
Migrants, Migration and Development in the Greater Mekong 
Subregion, 15-16 July 2008, Vientiane, Laos.

Vasquez, P., M. Alloza, R. Vegas and S. Bertozzi. 2009.

“Impact of the Rise in Immigrant Unemployment on Public 
Finances”. Working Paper No. 2009-15. Madrid: Fundación 
de Estudios De Economía Aplicada.

Vijayani, M. 2008. “No Plans to Disband Rela, Says Syed 

Hamid.” The Star, 8 December.

Vogel, D. and V. Kovacheva. 2009. “Calculation Table 2005: 
A Dynamic Aggregate Country Estimate of Irregular Foreign 
Residents in the EU in 2005.” http://irregular-migration.
hwwi.net/Europe.5248.0.html. Accessed June 2009.

Wang, F.-L. 2005. Organizing Through Division and Exclusion: 
China’s Hukou System. Stanford: Stanford University Press.

World Bank. 1998. Assessing Aid: What Works, What Doesn’t, 

and Why. New York: Oxford University Press.
. 2000. “Voices of the Poor.” http://go.worldbank.org/
H1N8746X10. Accessed June 2009.
. 2002. “Governance.” In J. Klugman (Ed.), A Sourcebook 
for Poverty Reduction Strategies. Volume 1: Core Techniques 
and Cross-Cutting Issues: 269-300. Washington DC: World 
Bank.
. 2003. “Participatory Poverty Assessment Niger”. 
Washington DC: World Bank.
. 2006a. At Home and Away: Expanding Job Opportunities 
for Pacific Islanders Through Labor Mobility. Washington DC: 
World Bank.
. 2006b. Global Economic Prospects: Economic Implications 
of Remittances and Migration 2006. Washington DC: World 
Bank.
. 2009a. “Crime and Violence in Central America”. 
Washington DC: Central America Unit and Poverty Reduction 
and Economic Management Unit, World Bank.
. 2009b. “Migration and Remittances Factbook 2008: 
March 2009 Update”. Washington DC: World Bank.
. 2009c. “Remittance Prices Worldwide.” http://
remittanceprices.worldbank.org/. Accessed June 2009.
. 2009d. “World Development Indicators”. Washington DC: 
World Bank.
. 2009e. World Development Report 2009: Reshaping 
Economic Geography. Washington DC: World Bank.

Worster, D. 1979. Dust Bowl. New York: Oxford University 

Whitehead, A., I. Hashim and V. Iversen. 2007. “Child 

Press.

Migration, Child Agency and Inter-Generational Relations in 
Africa and South Asia”. Working Paper No. T24. Brighton: 
Development Research Centre on Migration, Globalisation 
and Poverty.

WHO (World Health Organization). 2009. “World Health 

Statistics.” http://www.who.int/whosis/whostat/2009/en/
index.html. Accessed July 2009.

Williamson, J. G. 1990. Coping with City Growth During the 

British Industrial Revolution. New York: Cambridge University 
Press.

Wilson, M. E. 2003. “The Traveller and Emerging Infections: 

Sentinel, Courier, Transmitter.” Journal of Applied 
Microbiology 94 (Suppl 1): S1-S11.

Winters, L. A. and P. Martin. 2004. “When Comparative 

Advantage is Not Enough: Business Costs in Small Remote 
Economies.” World Trade Review 3 (3): 347-384.

Winters, L. A., T. L. Walmsley, Z. K. Wang and R. Grynberg. 

2003. “Liberalising the Temporary Movement of Natural 
Persons: An Agenda for the Development Round.” The World 
Economy 26 (8): 1137-1161.

Wolfinger, R. E. and S. J. Rosenstone. 1980. Who Votes? 

WVS (World Values Survey). 2006. “World Values Survey 

2005/6.”

                http://www.worldvaluessurvey.org/.
Yang, D. 2006. “Why Do Migrants Return to Poor Countries? 

Evidence from Philippine Migrants’ Responses to Exchange 
Rate Shocks.” Review of Economics and Statistics 88 (4): 
715-735.
. 2008a. “Coping with Disaster: The Impact of Hurricanes on 
International Financial Flows, 1970-2002.” The B.E.Journal 
of Economic Analysis & Policy 8 (1 (Advances), Article 13): 
1903-1935.
. 2008b. “International Migration, Remittances, and 
Household Investment: Evidence from Philippine Migrants’ 
Exchange Rate Shocks.” The Economic Journal 118 (528): 
591-630.
. 2009. “International Migration and Human Development.” 
Human Development Research Paper No. 29. New 
York: United Nations Development Programme, Human 
Development Report Office.

Yang, D. and H. Choi. 2007. “Are Remittances Insurance? 
Evidence from Rainfall Shocks in the Philippines.” World 

138

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Bibliography

Bank Economic Review 21 (2): 219-248.

Yaqub, S. 2009. “Independent Child Migrants in Developing 

in Ethnic Enclaves: New York City’s Chinatown.” American 
Sociological Review 54: 809-820.

Countries: Unexplored Links in Migration and Development”. 
Working Paper 1. Florence: Innocenti Research Centre, 
UNICEF.

Zhu, N. and X. Luo. 2008. “The Impact of Remittances on Rural 

Poverty and Inequality in China”. Policy Research Working 
Paper Series No. 4637. World Bank.

Zamble, F. 2008. “Politics Côte d’Ivoire: Anti-Xenophobia 

Zimmermann, R. 2009. “Children in Immigrant Families in 

Law Gets Lukewarm Reception.” Inter Press News Service 
Agency, 21 August.

Zambrano, G. C. and H. B. Kattya. 2005. “My Life Changed: 
Female Migration, Perceptions and Impacts”. Quito: Centro 
de Planificación y Estudios Sociales Ecuador and UNIFEM.
Zamora, R. G. 2007. “El Programa Tres por uno de Remesas 
Colectivas en México: Lecciones y Desafíos.” Migraciones 
Internacionales 4 (001): 165-172.

Zhou, M. and J. R. Logan. 1989. “Returns on Human Capital 

Seven Affluent Societies: Overview, Definitions and Issues”. 
Working Paper, Special Series on Children in Immigrant 
Families in Affluent Societies. Florence: Innocenti Research 
Center, UNICEF.

Zlotnik, H. 1998. “International Migration 1965-96: An 

Overview.” Population and Development Review 24: 429-468.

Zucker, L. G. and M. R. Darby. 2008. “Defacto and Deeded 

Intellectual Property Rights”. Working Paper No. 14544. 
Cambridge: National Bureau of Economic Research.

139

Statistical 
annex

TABLE

A

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009

Human movement: snapshots and trends

International migration  

Immigration

Emigration

A

Internal migration

Lifetime internal 

migrationb

Stock of

immigrants 

(000)

Annual rate 
of growth 

(%)

Share of
population

(%)

Proportion

Emigration 

female

(%)

rate
(%)

International
movement 

rate
(%)

Total 

migrants 

(000)

Migration 

rate
(%)

HDI rank

1960

1990

2005

2010a

1960–2005

1960

2005

1960

2005

2000–2002 2000–2002 1990–2005 1990–2005

1  Norway 
2  Australia 
3  Iceland 
4  Canada 
5  Ireland 
6  Netherlands 
7  Sweden 
8  France 
9  Switzerland 

VERY HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  10  Japan 
  11  Luxembourg 
  12  Finland 
  13  United States 
  14  Austria 
  15  Spain 
  16  Denmark 
  17  Belgium 
  18  Italy 
  19  Liechtenstein 
  20  New Zealand 
  21  United Kingdom 
  22  Germany 
  23  Singapore 
  24  Hong Kong, China (SAR) 
  25  Greece 
  26  Korea (Republic of) 
  27  Israel 
  28  Andorra 
  29  Slovenia 
  30  Brunei Darussalam 
  31  Kuwait 
  32  Cyprus 
  33  Qatar 
  34  Portugal 
  35  United Arab Emirates 
  36  Czech Republic 
  37  Barbados 
  38  Malta 

61.6  
1,698.1  
3.3  
2,766.3  
73.0  
446.6  
295.6  
3,507.2  
714.2  
692.7  
46.4  
32.1  

195.2  
3,581.4  
9.6  
4,497.5  
228.0  
1,191.6  
777.6  
5,897.3  
1,376.4  
1,075.6  
113.8  
63.3  

370.6  
4,335.8  
22.6  
6,304.0  
617.6  
1,735.4  
1,112.9  
6,478.6  
1,659.7  
1,998.9  
156.2  
171.4  

1,156.3  
4,607.9  
420.8  
882.1  
3,067.7  
11.9  
857.6  
5,837.8  

485.4  
 
4,711.5  
 
37.2  
 
7,202.3  
 
898.6  
 
1,752.9  
 
1,306.0  
 
6,684.8  
 
1,762.8  
 
2,176.2  
 
173.2  
 
 
225.6  
  10,825.6   23,251.0   39,266.5   42,813.3  
806.6  
1,310.2  
 
793.2  
210.9  
6,377.5  
 
829.7  
94.0  
483.7  
 
235.2  
441.6  
 
974.8  
891.5  
459.6  
4,463.4  
 
1,428.2  
4.1  
12.5  
 
10.9  
962.1  
333.9  
 
523.2  
3,716.3  
 
1,661.9  
6,451.7  
  2,002.9 d 
5,936.2   10,597.9   10,758.1  
1,966.9  
519.2  
 
2,741.8  
1,627.5  
 
1,132.8  
52.5  
 
534.8  
135.6  
 
 
1,185.6  
2,940.5  
55.8  
2.5  
 
163.9  
..   
 
148.1  
20.6  
 
2,097.5  
90.6  
 
154.3  
29.6  
 
 
14.4  
1,305.4  
918.6  
38.9  
 
3,293.3  
2.2  
 
453.0  
60.1 e 
 
28.1  
9.8  
 
 
1.7  
15.5  

1,494.0  
2,721.1  
975.0  
551.2  
2,661.3  
50.3  
167.3  
124.2  
1,869.7  
116.2  
712.9  
763.7  
2,863.0  
453.3  
26.2  
11.7  

727.3  
2,218.5  
412.1  
572.1  
1,632.7  
38.9  
178.1  
73.2  
1,585.3  
43.8  
369.8  
435.8  
1,330.3  
424.5  
21.4  
5.8  

 HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 
  39  Bahrain 
  40  Estonia 
  41  Poland 
  42  Slovakia 
  43  Hungary 
  44  Chile 
  45  Croatia 
  46  Lithuania 
  47  Antigua and Barbuda 
  48  Latvia 
  49  Argentina 
  50  Uruguay 
  51  Cuba 
  52  Bahamas 
  53  Mexico 
  54  Costa Rica 
  55  Libyan Arab Jamahiriya 
  56  Oman 
  57  Seychelles 
  58  Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) 
  59  Saudi Arabia 

 
26.7  
..   
2,424.9  
..   
518.1  
104.8  
..   
..   
4.9  
..   
2,601.2  
192.2  
143.6  
11.3  
223.2  
32.7  
48.2  
43.7  
0.8  
509.5  
63.4  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
173.2  
382.0  
1,127.8  
41.3  
347.5  
107.5  
475.4  
349.3  
12.0  
646.0  
1,649.9  
98.2  
34.6  
26.9  
701.1  
417.6  
457.5  
423.6  
3.7  
1,023.8  
4,743.0  

 

278.2  
201.7  
825.4  
124.4  
333.0  
231.5  
661.4  
165.3  
18.2  
379.6  
1,494.1  
84.1  
15.3  
31.6  
604.7  
442.6  
617.5  
666.3  
8.4  
1,011.4  
6,336.7  

 

315.4  
182.5  
827.5  
130.7  
368.1  
320.4  
699.9  
128.9  
20.9  
335.0  
1,449.3  
79.9  
15.3  
33.4  
725.7  
489.2  
682.5  
826.1  
10.8  
1,007.4  
7,288.9  

4.0  
2.1  
4.3  
1.8  
4.7  
3.0  
2.9  
1.4  
1.9  
2.4  
2.7  
3.7  
2.9  
0.8  
6.9  
3.3  
1.5  
4.2  
2.4  
2.1  
2.8  
3.7  
2.3  
1.1  
6.5  
3.1  
1.8  
6.7  
..   
4.0  
6.7  
3.0  
8.7  
6.6  
15.9  
4.5  
2.2  
4.3  

 
5.2  
..   
-2.4  
..   
-1.0  
1.8  
..   
..   
2.9  
..   
-1.2  
-1.8  
-5.0  
2.3  
2.2  
5.8  
5.7  
6.1  
5.1  
1.5  
10.2  

1.7  
16.5  
1.9  
15.4  
2.6  
3.9  
4.0  
7.7  
13.4  
0.7  
14.8  
0.7  
5.8  
11.5  
0.7  
2.1  
4.8  
0.9  
24.6  
14.1  
3.2  
2.8 d 
31.8  
52.9  
0.6  
0.5  
56.1  
18.7  
..   
25.1  
32.6  
5.2  
32.0  
0.4  
2.4  
0.4 e 
4.2  
0.5  

 
17.1  
..   
8.2  
..   
5.2  
1.4  
..   
..   
8.9  
..   
12.6  
7.6  
2.0  
10.3  
0.6  
2.5  
3.6  
7.7  
1.9  
6.7  
1.6  

8.0  
21.3  
7.6  
19.5  
14.8  
10.6  
12.3  
10.6  
22.3  
1.6  
33.7  
3.3  
13.0  
14.0  
10.7  
7.8  
8.5  
5.2  
34.2  
20.9  
9.7  
12.9  
35.0  
39.5  
8.8  
1.2  
39.8  
63.1  
8.4  
33.6  
69.2  
13.9  
80.5  
7.2  
70.0  
4.4  
10.4  
2.9  

 

38.2  
15.0  
2.2  
2.3  
3.3  
1.4  
14.9  
4.8  
21.8  
16.6  
3.9  
2.5  
0.1  
9.7  
0.6  
10.2  
10.4  
25.5  
10.2  
3.8  
26.8  

54.3  
44.3  
52.3  
48.1  
51.7  
58.8  
55.1  
44.5  
53.3  
46.0  
53.8  
56.3  
51.1  
56.6  
52.2  
64.3  
45.1  
57.3  
53.8  
47.1  
48.7  
35.1  d 
44.0  
48.0  
46.1  
47.7  
49.5  
44.2  
..   
42.0  
25.6  
50.3  
25.8  
58.4  
15.0  
59.5 e 
59.8  
59.7  

 

27.9  
..   
53.9  
..   
53.1  
43.7  
..   
..   
50.2  
..   
45.4  
47.8  
30.6  
43.7  
46.2  
44.2  
49.0  
21.2  
35.4  
37.9  
36.4  

51.1 
 
50.9   
52.0   
52.0   
49.9   
51.6   
52.2   
51.0   
49.7   
54.0   
50.3   
50.6   
50.1 
 
51.2   
47.7   
51.9   
48.9   
53.5   
48.8   
51.9   
53.2   
46.7   
55.8   
56.5   
45.1 
 
51.4   
55.9   
47.4   
46.8   
44.8   
30.0   
57.1 
 
25.8   
50.6   
27.7   
53.8   
60.1 
 
51.6   

 

31.9   
59.6   
59.0   
56.0   
56.1 
 
52.3   
53.0   
56.6   
55.1 
 
59.0   
53.4   
54.0   
29.0   
48.5   
49.4   
49.8   
35.5   
20.8   
42.5   
49.9   
30.1 
 

3.9  
2.2  
10.6  
4.0  
20.0  
4.7  
3.3  
2.9  
5.6  
0.7  
9.5  
6.6  
0.8  
5.5  
3.2  
4.3  
4.4  
5.4  
12.6  
11.8  
6.6  
4.7  
6.3  
9.5  
7.8  
3.1  
13.1  
9.7  
5.2  
4.9  
16.6  
18.4  
2.3  
16.1  
3.3  
3.5  
29.8  
22.3  

 
15.9  
12.2  
5.1  
8.2  
3.9  
3.3  
12.0  
8.6  
45.3  
9.1  
1.6  
7.0  
8.9  
10.8  
9.0  
2.6  
1.4  
0.7  
17.0  
1.4  
1.1  

11.0  
22.5  
16.4  
21.5  
28.1  
14.2  
15.0  
13.1  
26.0  
1.7  
38.3  
9.0  
12.4  
17.2  
8.3  
10.7  
14.6  
8.1  
42.0  
27.3  
14.3  
15.3  
19.1  
45.6  
17.2  
3.4  
40.3  
79.6  
7.6  
33.4  
54.5  
23.4  
60.7  
21.4  
55.1  
7.7  
36.6  
24.0  

 
47.3  
28.5  
7.1  
10.3  
6.6  
4.5  
23.8  
13.9  
56.1  
33.0  
5.6  
9.5  
9.6  
19.3  
9.5  
9.7  
11.5  
28.0  
21.6  
5.3  
24.8  

..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
44,400 c 
..  
8,600 c 
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
1,200 c 
..  
..  
90 f 
..  

 
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
3,100 c 
800 g 
..  
24,000 f 
..  
6,700 c 
800 f 
1,800 f 
..  
17,800 c 
700 c 
..  
..  
..  
5,200 c 
..  

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
17.8 c
.. 
22.4 c
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
12.8 c
.. 
.. 
31.1  f
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
21.3 c
26.6 g
.. 
28.4 f
.. 
19.9 c
24.1  f
15.2  f
.. 
18.5 c
20.0 c
.. 
.. 
.. 
23.8 c

..

143

A

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009

Human movement: snapshots and trends

International migration   

Immigration

Emigration

Internal migration

Lifetime internal 

migrationb

Stock of

immigrants 

(000)

Annual rate 
of growth 

(%)

Share of
population

(%)

Proportion
female 

(%)

Emigration 

International
movement 

rate 
(%)

rate
(%)

Total 

migrants 

(000)

Migration 

rate
(%)

HDI rank

1960

1990

2005

2010a

1960–2005

1960

2005

1960

2005

2000–2002 2000–2002 1990–2005 1990–2005

60  Panama 
61  Bulgaria 
62  Saint Kitts and Nevis 
63  Romania 
64  Trinidad and Tobago 
65  Montenegro 
66  Malaysia 
67  Serbia 
68  Belarus 
69  Saint Lucia 
70  Albania 
71  Russian Federation 
72  Macedonia (the Former Yugoslav Rep. of) 
73  Dominica 
74  Grenada 
75  Brazil 
76  Bosnia and Herzegovina 
77  Colombia 
78  Peru 
79  Turkey 
80  Ecuador 
81  Mauritius 
82  Kazakhstan 
83  Lebanon 

MEDIUM HUMAN DEVELOPMENT

84  Armenia 
85  Ukraine 
86  Azerbaijan 
87  Thailand 
88  Iran (Islamic Republic of) 
89  Georgia 
90  Dominican Republic 
91  Saint Vincent and the Grenadines 
92  China 
93  Belize 
94  Samoa 
95  Maldives 
96  Jordan 
97  Suriname 
98  Tunisia 
99  Tonga 
100  Jamaica 
101  Paraguay 
102  Sri Lanka 
103  Gabon 
104  Algeria 
105  Philippines 
106  El Salvador 
107  Syrian Arab Republic 
108  Fiji 
109  Turkmenistan 
110  Occupied Palestinian Territories 
111  Indonesia 
112  Honduras 
113  Bolivia 
114  Guyana 
115  Mongolia 
116  Viet Nam 
117  Moldova 
118  Equatorial Guinea 

144

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

68.3  
20.3  
3.5  
330.9  
81.0  
..   
56.9  
155.4 e 
..   
2.4  
48.9  

102.2  
104.1  
4.5  
133.5  
37.8  
54.6  
2,029.2  
674.6  
1,106.9  
8.7  
82.7  

121.0  
107.2  
5.0  
132.8  
34.3  
42.5  
2,357.6  
525.4  
1,090.4  
10.2  
89.1  
2,941.7 e  11,524.9   12,079.6   12,270.4  
129.7  
5.5  
12.6  
688.0  
27.8  
110.3  
37.6  
1,410.9  
393.6  
42.9  
3,079.5  
758.2  

120.3  
4.5  
10.8  
686.3  
35.1  
110.0  
41.6  
1,333.9  
123.6  
40.8  
2,973.6  
721.2  

..   
2.4  
4.0  
1,397.1  
..   
58.7  
66.5  
947.6  
24.1  
10.2  
..   
151.4  

61.7  
21.5  
3.2  
142.8  
50.5  
..  h 
1,014.2  
99.3  
1,249.0  
5.3  
66.0  

95.1  
2.5  
4.3  
798.5  
56.0  
104.3  
56.0  
1,150.5  
78.7  
8.7  
3,619.2  
523.7  

..   
..   
..   
484.8  
48.4  
..   
144.6  
2.5  
245.7  
7.6  
3.4  
1.7  
385.8  
22.5  
169.2  
0.1  
21.9  
50.0  
1,005.3  
20.9  
430.4  
219.7  
34.4  
276.1  
20.1  
..   
490.3  
1,859.5  
60.0  
42.7  
14.0  
3.7  
4.0  
..   
19.4  

658.8  
6,892.9  
360.6  
387.5  
4,291.6  
338.3  
291.2  
4.0  
376.4  
30.4  
3.2  
2.7  
1,146.3  
18.0  
38.0  
3.0  
20.8  
183.3  
458.8  
127.7  
274.0  
159.4  
47.4  
690.3  
13.7  
306.5  
910.6  
465.6  
270.4  
59.6  
4.1  
6.7  
29.4  
578.5  
2.7  

492.6  
5,390.6  
254.5  
982.0  
2,062.2  
191.2  
393.0  
7.4  
590.3  
40.6  
7.2  
3.2  
2,345.2  
34.0  
34.9  
1.2  
27.2  
168.2  
366.4  
244.6  
242.4  
374.8  
35.9  
1,326.4  
17.2  
223.7  
1,660.6  
135.6  
26.3  
114.0  
10.0  
9.1  
54.5  
440.1  
5.8  

324.2  
5,257.5  
263.9  
1,157.3  
2,128.7  
167.3  
434.3  
8.6  
685.8  
46.8  
9.0  
3.3  
2,973.0  
39.5  
33.6  
0.8  
30.0  
161.3  
339.9  
284.1  
242.3  
435.4  
40.3  
2,205.8  
18.5  
207.7  
1,923.8  
122.9  
24.3  
145.8  
11.6  
10.0  
69.3  
408.3  
7.4  

0.9  
3.6  
0.5  
-2.0  
-1.7  
..   
7.9  
3.3  
..   
2.8  
1.2  
3.1  
..   
1.4  
2.2  
-1.6  
..   
1.4  
-1.0  
0.8  
3.6  
3.1  
..   
3.5  

..   
..   
..   
1.6  
8.3  
..   
2.2  
2.4  
1.9  
3.7  
1.6  
1.4  
4.0  
0.9  
-3.5  
5.0  
0.5  
2.7  
-2.2  
5.5  
-1.3  
1.2  
0.1  
3.5  
-0.3  
..   
2.7  
-5.8  
-1.8  
2.2  
-0.8  
2.0  
5.8  
..   
-2.7  

6.1  
0.3  
6.9  
1.8  
9.6  
..   
0.7  
0.9 e 
..   
2.7  
3.0  
1.4 e 
..   
4.0  
4.5  
1.9  
..   
0.4  
0.7  
3.4  
0.5  
1.6  
..   
8.0  

..   
..   
..   
1.8  
0.2  
..   
4.3  
3.1  
0.0  
8.2  
3.1  
1.7  
43.1  
7.7  
4.0  
0.2  
1.3  
2.6  
10.0  
4.3  
4.0  
0.8  
1.2  
6.0  
5.1  
..   
44.5  
2.0  
3.0  
1.3  
2.5  
0.4  
0.0  
..   
7.7  

3.2  
1.3  
9.2  
0.6  
2.9  
8.7  
7.9  
6.8  
11.3  
5.3  
2.7  
8.4  
5.9  
6.7  
10.6  
0.4  
0.9  
0.3  
0.1  
1.9  
0.9  
3.3  
19.6  
17.7  

16.1  
11.5  
3.0  
1.5  
2.9  
4.3  
4.1  
6.8  
0.0  
14.4  
4.0  
1.1  
42.1  
6.8  
0.4  
1.1  
1.0  
2.8  
1.9  
17.9  
0.7  
0.4  
0.6  
6.9  
2.1  
4.6  
44.1  
0.1  
0.4  
1.2  
1.3  
0.4  
0.1  
11.7  
1.0  

42.7  
57.9  
48.6  
54.8  
49.8  
..   
42.2  
56.9 e 
..   
50.1  
53.7  
47.9 e 
..   
50.9  
51.2  
44.4  
..   
43.9  
44.3  
48.1  
45.5  
39.3  
..   
49.2  

..   
..   
..   
36.5  
50.6  
..   
25.9  
50.6  
47.3  
46.1  
45.9  
46.3  
49.2  
47.4  
51.0  
45.5  
48.4  
47.4  
46.6  
42.9  
50.1  
43.9  
72.8  
48.7  
37.6  
..   
49.2  
48.0  
45.4  
43.4  
42.2  
47.4  
46.4  
..   
30.2  

50.2   
57.9   
46.3   
52.1 
 
53.9   
60.9   
45.0   
56.1 
 
54.2   
51.3   
53.1 
 
57.8   
58.3   
46.2   
53.3   
46.4   
49.8   
48.3   
52.4   
52.0   
49.1 
 
63.3   
54.0   
49.1 
 

58.9   
57.2   
57.0   
48.4   
39.7   
57.0   
40.1 
 
51.8   
50.0   
50.5   
44.9   
44.8   
49.1 
 
45.6   
49.5   
48.7   
49.4   
48.1 
 
49.8   
42.9   
45.2   
50.1 
 
52.8   
48.9   
47.9   
57.0   
49.1 
 
46.0   
48.6   
48.1 
 
46.5   
54.0   
36.6   
56.0   
47.0   

5.7  
10.5  
44.3  
4.6  
20.2  
..  h 
3.1  
13.6  
15.2  
24.1  
21.0  
7.7  
11.3  
38.3  
40.3  
0.5  
25.1  
3.9  
2.7  
4.2  
5.3  
12.5  
19.4  
12.9  

20.3  
10.9  
14.3  
1.3  
1.3  
18.3  
9.1  
34.4  
0.5  
16.5  
37.2  
0.4  
11.6  
36.0  
5.9  
33.7  
26.7  
6.9  
4.7  
4.3  
6.2  
4.0  
14.3  
2.4  
15.0  
5.3  
23.9  
0.9  
5.3  
4.3  
33.5  
0.3  
2.4  
14.3  
14.5  

8.2  
11.6  
49.3  
5.0  
22.8  
..  h 
10.1  
18.7  
26.1  
27.9  
21.4  
15.3  
12.8  
41.6  
45.0  
0.8  
27.0  
4.1  
2.9  
6.0  
5.9  
13.1  
35.8  
27.1  

28.1  
23.8  
15.8  
2.0  
4.7  
22.1  
10.4  
39.0  
0.5  
27.4  
39.4  
1.5  
45.3  
36.9  
6.3  
34.7  
27.0  
9.8  
6.6  
22.8  
6.9  
5.6  
14.6  
7.4  
16.6  
9.8  
61.3  
1.0  
5.9  
5.3  
33.6  
0.6  
2.4  
24.6  
14.7  

600 c 
800 g 
..  
2,300 g 
..  
..  
4,200 c 
..  
900 c 
30 f 
500 g 
..  
..  
..  
..  
17,000 c 
1,400 g 
8,100 c 
6,300 f 
..  
2,400 c 
..  
1,000 g 
..  

500 g 
..  
1,900 g 
..  
..  
..  
1,700 f 
..  
73,100 c 
40 f 
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
1,600 f 
..  
..  
..  
6,900 c 
1,200 f 
..  
..  
..  
..  
8,100 c 
1,200 f 
1,500 f 
..  
200 g 
12,700 g 
..  
..  

20.6 c
14.3 g
.. 
15.1  g

.. 
.. 
20.7 c
.. 
10.8 c
18.5 f
24.1  g
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
10.1  c
52.5 g
20.3 c
22.4 f
.. 
20.2  c
.. 
9.3 g
.. 

24.5 g
.. 
33.2 g
.. 
.. 
.. 
17.7 f
.. 
6.2 c
14.2 f
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
26.4 f
.. 
.. 
.. 
11.7 c
16.7 f
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
4.1  c
17.2  f
15.2  f
.. 
9.7 g
21.9 g
.. 
.. 

TABLE

International migration   

Immigration

Emigration

A

Internal migration

Lifetime internal 

migrationb

Stock of

immigrants 

(000)

Annual rate 
of growth 

(%)

Share of
population

(%)

Proportion

Emigration 

female

(%)

rate
(%)

International
movement 

rate
(%)

Total 

migrants 

(000)

Migration 

rate
(%)

HDI rank

1960

1990

2005

2010a

1960–2005

1960

2005

1960

2005

2000–2002 2000–2002 1990–2005 1990–2005

 119  Uzbekistan 
 120  Kyrgyzstan 
 121  Cape Verde 
 122  Guatemala 
 123  Egypt 
 124  Nicaragua 
 125  Botswana 
 126  Vanuatu 
 127  Tajikistan 
 128  Namibia 
 129  South Africa 
 130  Morocco 
 131  Sao Tome and Principe 
 132  Bhutan 
 133  Lao People’s Democratic Republic 
 134  India 
 135  Solomon Islands 
 136  Congo 
 137  Cambodia 
 138  Myanmar 
 139  Comoros 
 140  Yemen 
 141  Pakistan 
 142  Swaziland 
 143  Angola 
 144  Nepal 
 145  Madagascar 
 146  Bangladesh 
 147  Kenya 
 148  Papua New Guinea 
 149  Haiti 
 150  Sudan 
 151  Tanzania (United Republic of) 
 152  Ghana 
 153  Cameroon 
 154  Mauritania 
 155  Djibouti 
 156  Lesotho 
 157  Uganda 
 158  Nigeria 

 
..   
 
..   
 
6.6  
 
43.3  
 
212.4  
 
12.4  
 
7.2  
 
2.8  
 
..   
 
27.2  
 
927.7  
 
394.3  
 
7.4  
 
9.7  
 
19.6  
 
9,410.5  
 
3.7  
 
26.3  
 
381.3  
 
286.6  
 
1.5  
 
159.1  
  6,350.3  
16.9  
 
122.1  
 
337.6  
 
 
126.3  
661.4  
 
59.3  
 
20.2  
 
14.5  
 
242.0  
 
 
477.0  
529.7  
 
175.4  
 
12.1  
 
11.8  
 
 
3.2  
771.7  
 
 
94.1  

LOW HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
 159  Togo 
 160  Malawi 
 161  Benin 
 162  Timor-Leste 
 163  Côte d’Ivoire 
 164  Zambia 
 165  Eritrea 
 166  Senegal 
 167  Rwanda 
 168  Gambia 
 169  Liberia 
 170  Guinea 
 171  Ethiopia 
 172  Mozambique 
 173  Guinea-Bissau 
  174  Burundi 
 175  Chad 
 176  Congo (Democratic Republic of the) 
 177  Burkina Faso 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

101.3  
297.7  
34.0  
7.1  
767.0  
360.8  
7.7  
168.0  
28.5  
31.6  
28.8  
11.3  
393.3  
8.9  
11.6  
126.3  
55.1  
1,006.9  
62.9  

1,653.0  
623.1  
8.9  
264.3  
175.6  
40.8  
27.5  
2.2  
425.9  
112.1  
1,224.4  
57.6  
5.8  
23.8  
22.9  
7,493.2  
4.7  
129.6  
38.4  
133.5  
14.1  
343.5  
6,555.8  
71.4  
33.5  
430.7  
46.1  
881.6  
163.0  
33.1  
19.1  
1,273.1  
576.0  
716.5  
265.3  
93.9  
122.2  
8.2  
550.4  
447.4  

162.6  
1,156.9  
76.2  
9.0  
1,816.4  
280.0  
11.8  
268.6  
72.9  
118.1  
80.8  
241.1  
1,155.4  
121.9  
13.9  
333.1  
74.3  
754.2  
344.7  

1,267.8  
288.1  
11.2  
53.4  
246.7  
35.0  
80.1  
1.0  
306.4  
131.6  
1,248.7  
51.0  
5.4  
37.3  
20.3  
5,886.9  
6.5  
128.8  
303.9  
93.2  
13.7  
455.2  
3,554.0  
38.6  
56.1  
818.7  
39.7  
1,031.9  
790.1  
25.5  
30.1  
639.7  
797.7  
1,669.3  
211.9  
66.1  
110.3  
6.2  
652.4  
972.1  

182.8  
278.8  
187.6  
11.9  
2,371.3  
287.3  
14.6  
220.2  
435.7  
231.7  
96.8  
401.2  
554.0  
406.1  
19.2  
81.6  
358.4  
480.1  
772.8  

1,175.9  
222.7  
12.1  
59.5  
244.7  
40.1  
114.8  
0.8  
284.3  
138.9  
1,862.9  
49.1  
5.3  
40.2  
18.9  
5,436.0  
7.0  
143.2  
335.8  
88.7  
13.5  
517.9  
4,233.6  
40.4  
65.4  
945.9  
37.8  
1,085.3  
817.7  
24.5  
35.0  
753.4  
659.2  
1,851.8  
196.6  
99.2  
114.1  
6.3  
646.5  
1,127.7  

185.4  
275.9  
232.0  
13.8  
2,406.7  
233.1  
16.5  
210.1  
465.5  
290.1  
96.3  
394.6  
548.0  
450.0  
19.2  
60.8  
388.3  
444.7  
1,043.0  

..   
..   
1.2  
0.5  
0.3  
2.3  
5.4  
-2.2  
..   
3.5  
0.7  
-4.5  
-0.7  
3.0  
0.1  
-1.0  
1.2  
3.5  
-0.5  
-2.5  
4.9  
2.3  
-1.3  
1.8  
-1.7  
2.0  
-2.6  
1.0  
5.8  
0.5  
1.6  
2.2  
1.1  
2.6  
0.4  
3.8  
5.0  
1.5  
-0.4  
5.2  

1.3  
-0.1  
3.8  
1.1  
2.5  
-0.5  
1.4  
0.6  
6.1  
4.4  
2.7  
7.9  
0.8  
8.5  
1.1  
-1.0  
4.2  
-1.6  
5.6  

..   
..   
3.4  
1.0  
0.8  
0.7  
1.4  
4.4  
..   
4.5  
5.3  
3.4  
11.6  
4.3  
0.9  
2.1  
3.1  
2.6  
7.0  
1.4  
0.8  
3.0  
13.0  
4.9  
2.4  
3.5  
2.5  
1.2  
0.7  
1.0  
0.4  
2.1  
4.7  
7.8  
3.2  
1.4  
13.9  
0.4  
11.4  
0.2  

6.5  
8.4  
1.5  
1.4  
22.3  
11.9  
0.5  
5.5  
1.0  
9.9  
2.7  
0.4  
1.7  
0.1  
2.0  
4.3  
1.9  
6.5  
1.3  

4.8  
5.5  
2.3  
0.4  
0.3  
0.6  
4.4  
0.5  
4.7  
6.6  
2.6  
0.2  
3.5  
5.7  
0.3  
0.5  
1.4  
3.8  
2.2  
0.2  
2.2  
2.2  
2.1  
3.4  
0.3  
3.0  
0.2  
0.7  
2.2  
0.4  
0.3  
1.7  
2.0  
7.6  
1.2  
2.2  
13.7  
0.3  
2.3  
0.7  

3.1  
2.0  
2.4  
1.2  
12.3  
2.4  
0.3  
2.0  
4.8  
15.2  
2.9  
4.4  
0.7  
1.9  
1.3  
1.1  
3.6  
0.8  
5.6  

..   
..   
50.4  
48.3  
47.8  
46.6  
43.8  
39.0  
..   
36.9  
29.0  
51.5  
46.4  
18.5  
48.9  
46.0  
45.6  
51.6  
48.3  
44.9  
46.6  
38.3  
46.4  
48.5  
41.7  
64.1  
49.2  
46.4  
37.1  
43.3  
50.5  
47.2  
45.0  
36.4  
44.3  
41.1  
41.8  
50.5  
41.3  
36.2  

51.8  
51.2  
48.5  
46.0  
40.8  
47.0  
41.9  
41.7  
53.9  
42.7  
37.8  
48.0  
41.9  
43.6  
50.0  
46.0  
44.0  
49.8  
52.3  

57.0   
58.2   
50.4   
54.4   
46.7   
48.8   
44.3   
46.5   
57.0   
47.3   
41.4   
49.9   
47.9   
18.5   
48.1 
 
48.6   
44.0   
49.6   
51.3   
47.7   
53.1 
 
38.3   
44.8   
47.4   
 
51.1 
 
69.1 
46.1 
 
13.9   
50.8   
37.6   
43.2   
48.3   
50.2   
41.8   
45.6   
42.1 
 
46.5   
45.7   
49.9   
46.5   

50.4   
51.6   
46.0   
52.6   
45.1 
 
49.4   
46.5   
51.0   
53.9   
48.7   
45.1 
 
52.8   
 
47.1 
52.1 
 
50.0   
53.7   
48.0   
52.9   
51.1 
 

8.5  
10.5  
30.5  
4.9  
2.9  
9.1  
0.9  
2.0  
11.4  
1.3  
1.7  
8.1  
13.5  
2.2  
5.9  
0.8  
1.0  
14.7  
2.3  
0.7  
7.7  
3.0  
2.2  
1.1  
5.5  
3.9  
0.9  
4.5  
1.4  
0.9  
7.7  
1.7  
0.8  
4.5  
1.0  
4.1  
2.2  
2.6  
0.7  
0.8  

3.7  
1.2  
7.5  
2.6  
1.0  
2.2  
12.5  
4.4  
2.7  
3.6  
2.7  
6.3  
0.4  
4.2  
8.6  
5.4  
3.2  
1.5  
9.8  

13.4  
20.6  
32.1  
5.2  
3.1  
9.6  
3.8  
2.7  
16.1  
8.7  
3.9  
8.5  
17.9  
3.8  
6.2  
1.4  
1.7  
20.0  
3.9  
0.9  
10.7  
4.3  
4.8  
4.8  
5.8  
6.2  
1.3  
5.1  
2.3  
1.3  
8.0  
3.8  
3.3  
7.3  
1.9  
6.3  
5.8  
2.8  
2.7  
1.4  

6.8  
3.4  
8.8  
3.2  
13.8  
5.6  
12.8  
7.0  
3.7  
16.4  
7.8  
14.3  
1.4  
6.0  
9.9  
6.5  
3.7  
2.9  
17.9  

..  
600 g 
..  
1,500 f 
..  
800 f 
..  
..  
400 g 
..  
6,700 c 
6,800 g 
..  
..  
..  
42,300 c 
..  
..  
1,300 c 
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
1,000 g 
..  
3,500 c 
..  
1,000 g 
..  
..  
3,300 c 
..  
400 g 
..  
..  
1,300 c 
..  

..  
200 g 
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
800 c 
..  
..  
..  
..  
900 g 
..  
..  
..  
8,500 g 
..  

.. 
16.2 g
.. 
11.1  f
.. 
13.3 f
.. 
.. 
9.9 g
.. 
15.4 c
33.4 g
.. 
.. 
.. 
4.1  c
.. 
.. 
11.7 c
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
9.3 g
.. 
12.6 c
.. 
17.5 g
.. 
.. 
17.8 c
.. 
24.2 g
.. 
.. 
5.2 c
.. 

.. 
2.7 g
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
10.4 c
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
8.1  g
.. 
.. 
.. 
27.1  g
.. 

145

A

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009

Human movement: snapshots and trends

International migration   

Immigration

Emigration

Internal migration

Lifetime internal 

migrationb

Stock of

immigrants 

(000)

Annual rate 
of growth 

(%)

Share of
population

(%)

Proportion

Emigration 

female

(%)

rate
(%)

International
movement 

rate
(%)

Total 

migrants 

(000)

Migration 

rate
(%)

HDI rank

1960

1990

2005

2010a

1960–2005

1960

2005

1960

2005

2000–2002 2000–2002 1990–2005 1990–2005

178  Mali 
179  Central African Republic 
180  Sierra Leone 
181  Afghanistan 
182  Niger 

 

OTHER UN MEMBER STATES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  Iraq 
  Kiribati 
  Korea (Democratic People’s Rep. of)   
  Marshall Islands 
  Micronesia (Federated States of) 
  Monaco 
  Nauru 
  Palau 
  San Marino 
  Somalia 
  Tuvalu 
  Zimbabwe 

 

167.6  
43.1  
45.9  
46.5  
55.0  

 
87.8  
0.6  
25.1  
0.8  
5.8  
15.4  
0.4  
0.3  
7.5  
11.4  
0.4  
387.2  

165.3  
62.7  
154.5  
57.7  
135.7  

 
83.6  
2.2  
34.1  
1.5  
3.7  
20.1  
3.9  
2.9  
8.7  
633.1  
0.3  
627.1  

165.4  
75.6  
152.1  
86.5  
183.0  

 

128.1  
2.0  
36.8  
1.7  
2.9  
22.6  
4.9  
6.0  
11.4  
21.3  
0.2  
391.3  

162.7  
80.5  
106.8  
90.9  
202.2  

 

83.4  
2.0  
37.1  
1.7  
2.7  
23.6  
5.3  
5.8  
11.7  
22.8  
0.2  
372.3  

 

 

6,151.4 T 

  Africa 
  Asia 
  Europe 
  Latin America and the Caribbean   
  Northern America 
  Oceania 
   
  OECD 
  European Union (EU27) 
  GCC 
   
  Very high human development 
      Very high HD: OECD 
      Very high HD: non-OECD 
  High human development 
  Medium human development 
  Low human development 
   
  World (excluding the former Soviet 
              Union and Czechoslovakia) 
  World 

 

241.0T 
 

 

5,516.3 T 
 

4,365.0 T 
 

7,130.3 T  6,869.4 T 

9,175.9 T  15,957.6 T  17,678.6 T  19,191.4 T 
 
  28,494.9T  50,875.7 T  55,128.5 T  61,324.0 T 
  17,511.7 T  49,360.5 T  64,330.1  T  69,744.5 T 
7,480.3 T 
  13,603.5 T  27,773.9 T  45,597.1  T  50,042.4 T 
6,014.7 T 
2,142.6 T 
 
 
 
 
61,824.3 T  97,622.8  T  108,513.7 T 
  31,574.9 T 
46,911.3 T 
  13,555.3 T  26,660.0 T  41,596.8  T 
15,126.6 T 
 
8,625.2 T  12,726.6  T 
 
 
 
  31,114.9 T  66,994.9 T  107,625.9  T  120,395.2 T 
  27,461.0 T  58,456.2 T  94,401.4  T  105,050.9 T 
8,538.7 T  13,224.6  T  15,344.3 T 
 
  13,495.1 T  34,670.2 T  38,078.0  T  40,383.6 T 
  28,204.2 T  44,870.0 T  40,948.6  T  44,206.5 T 
8,812.0 T 
 
 
 
74,078.1 T  125,389.2 T  168,780.5  T  187,815.1  T 
 
77,114.7 Ti  155,518.1  Ti  195,245.4  Ti  213,943.8  Ti 

8,928.0 T 
 

8,467.5  T 
 

4,265.7 T 
 

3,653.8 T 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

0.0  
1.2  
2.7  
1.4  
2.7  

 
0.8  
2.6  
0.9  
1.5  
-1.6  
0.9  
5.5  
6.5  
0.9  
1.4  
-1.6  
0.0  

1.7  
0.7  
2.9  
0.2  
2.8  
1.7  
 
 
2.6  
2.8  
10.2  
 
 
3.1  
3.1  
4.7  
1.1  
0.6  
1.6  
 
 
1.1  
 
 
1.1  

3.3  
2.9  
2.0  
0.5  
1.7  

 
1.2  
1.8  
0.2  
5.8  
13.1  
69.5  
9.3  
3.3  
48.9  
0.4  
6.1  
10.3  

3.2  
1.7  
3.0  
2.8  
6.7  
13.5  
 
 
4.1  
3.5  
4.9  
 
 
4.6  
4.1  
41.5  
2.8  
1.7  
3.9  
 
 
2.7  
 
 
2.6 i 

1.4  
1.8  
3.0  
0.4  
1.4  

 

0.5  
2.2  
0.2  
2.9  
2.6  
69.8  
48.7  
30.0  
37.7  
0.3  
1.9  
3.1  

1.9  
1.4  
8.8  
1.2  
13.6  
16.4  
 
 
8.4  
8.5  
37.1  
 
11.1  
10.0  
46.5  
3.8  
0.8  
2.3  
 
 
2.7  
 
 
3.0 i 

 

50.0  
49.6  
35.6  
43.6  
50.0  

 

40.9  
38.2  
47.3  
41.0  
40.9  
57.5  
5.1  
34.9  
53.5  
41.9  
42.2  
24.1  

47.8   
46.6   
45.7   
43.6   
53.6   

 
31.1 
 
48.8   
52.0   
41.0   
46.4   
51.3   
45.0   
40.2   
53.5   
46.5   
45.4   
37.8   

 

43.1  
46.6  
49.0  
44.6  
50.8  
44.3  
 
48.7  
49.1  
33.5  
 
48.6  
48.6  
47.4  
47.2  
46.1  
45.0  
 
46.8  
 
47.0 i 

 

 

 

 

47.8   
47.1 
 
52.9   
48.4   
50.3   
48.2   
 
51.1 
 
51.4   
 
29.1 
 
50.9   
50.9   
50.3   
50.5   
46.8   
48.9   
 
47.8   
 
i 

49.2 

 

 

 

12.5  
2.7  
2.0  
10.6  
4.0  

4.1  
4.0  
2.0  
17.7  
18.6  
39.3  
9.3  
39.3  
18.1  
6.5  
15.4  
2.3  

2.9  
1.7  
7.3  
5.0  
1.1  
4.9  
 
 
3.9  
5.7  
3.2  
 
 
3.4  
3.2  
11.6  
6.0  
1.9  
3.9  
 
 
2.4  
 
 
3.0 i 

12.9  
4.2  
3.0  
10.8  
5.0  

4.6  
6.7  
2.2  
20.1  
21.0  
82.6  
50.4  
58.7  
45.0  
6.7  
18.2  
7.4  

..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
 
 
..   
..   
..   
 
 
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
 
 
..   
 
 
..   

..  
..  
600 g 
..  
..  

..  
..  
..  
..  
1 g 
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  

..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
  
..  
..  
..  
  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
  
..  
 
..  

.. 
.. 
19.0 g
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
1.2 g
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
..

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 

.. 

SOURCES
Columns 1–4 and 6–9: UN (2009d).
Column 5: calculated based on data from UN (2009d). 
Column 10: calculated based on data from Migration 
DRC 2007 and population data from UN (2009e).
Column 11: calculated based on data from Migration 
DRC (2007). 
Column 12–13: various (as indicated).

NOTES

a  2010 projections are based on long-run tendencies 

e  Estimates for 1960 for the Czech Republic, the 

and may not accurately predict the effect of 
unexpected short-term fluctuations such as the 2009 
economic crisis. See UN (2009d) for further details.

Russian Federation and Serbia refer to the former 
states of Czechoslovakia, the Soviet Union and 
Yugoslavia respectively. 

b Due to differences in definition of the underlying data, 

f  Data are estimates based on censuses from ECLAC 

cross country comparisons should be made with 
caution. Data are from different censuses and surveys 
and refer to different time periods and so are not 
strictly comparable.

c  Data are estimates based on censuses from Bell and 
Muhidin (2009). Internal migrants are expressed as a 
percentage of the total population. 

(2007). Internal migrants are expressed as a 
percentage of the total population.

g Data are estimates based on household surveys 
from the World Bank (2009e). Internal migrants 
are expressed as a percentage of the working age 
population only.

h Data for Montenegro are included with those for 

d Estimates for 1960 for Germany refer to the former 

Serbia.

Federal Republic of Germany and the former German 
Democratic Republic.

i  Data are aggregates from original data source.

146

TABLE
TABLE

B

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009

International emigrants by area of residence

B

Continent of residence

2000–2002

(% of total emigrant stocks)

Areas of residence

Human develoment category of 

countries of residencea

2000–2002

Share of continents’ immigrants from country 

2000–2002

(% of total emigrant stocks)

(% of total immigrant stocks in the continent)

HDI rank

Africa

Asia

Europe

Latin 

America 
and the
Caribbean

1  Norway 
2  Australia 
3  Iceland 
4  Canada 
5  Ireland 
6  Netherlands 
7  Sweden 
8  France 
9  Switzerland 

VERY HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  10  Japan 
  11  Luxembourg 
  12  Finland 
  13  United States 
  14  Austria 
  15  Spain 
  16  Denmark 
  17  Belgium 
  18  Italy 
  19  Liechtenstein 
  20  New Zealand 
  21  United Kingdom 
  22  Germany 
  23  Singapore 
  24  Hong Kong, China (SAR) 
  25  Greece 
  26  Korea (Republic of) 
  27  Israel 
  28  Andorra 
  29  Slovenia 
  30  Brunei Darussalam 
  31  Kuwait 
  32  Cyprus 
  33  Qatar 
  34  Portugal 
  35  United Arab Emirates 
  36  Czech Republic 
  37  Barbados 
  38  Malta 

HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
  39  Bahrain 
  40  Estonia 
  41  Poland 
  42  Slovakia 
  43  Hungary 
  44  Chile 
  45  Croatia 
  46  Lithuania 
  47  Antigua and Barbuda 
  48  Latvia 
  49  Argentina 
  50  Uruguay 
  51  Cuba 
  52  Bahamas 
  53  Mexico 
  54  Costa Rica 
  55  Libyan Arab Jamahiriya 
  56  Oman 
  57  Seychelles 
  58  Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) 
  59  Saudi Arabia 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
9.3 
  10.9 
4.3 
 
5.8 
3.4 
7.1 
6.3 
6.5 
6.9 
12.9 
3.2 
4.4 
  20.1 
9.1 
3.4 
6.9 
6.3 
3.5 
3.1 
6.6 
9.9 
17.0 
  51.2 
3.9 
  14.4 
  35.7 
  76.1 
3.2 
 
3.4 
  25.3 
  84.1 
  10.8 
  59.3 
3.2 
  71.9 
7.1 
3.4 
3.4 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1.7 
2.5 
1.7 
1.3 
1.6 
2.0 
3.3 
16.0 
2.5 
1.3 
1.6 
1.8 
2.7 
1.9 
1.8 
2.1 
2.0 
2.0 
1.5 
1.1 
2.2 
2.3 
0.9 
1.0 
1.9 
0.9 
1.0 
10.2 
1.7 
1.4 
5.0 
1.0 
7.6 
5.6 
6.6 
2.0 
1.1 
1.8 

 

 

 

 

 

4.7 
1.6 
1.7 
1.7 
1.7 
1.1 
1.6 
1.7 
1.0 
1.6 
1.1 
1.1 
1.1 
1.1 
1.1 
1.1 
  16.3 
8.6 
  39.7 
1.0 
8.3 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  86.1 
6.7 
8.9 
4.7 
6.7 
3.6 
3.2 
8.7 
  46.6 
7.8 
  10.6 
3.5 
3.5 
3.5 
3.9 
3.8 
  39.8 
  60.4 
 
2.7 
3.4 
  66.5 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  62.1 
  46.9 
  61.4 
  15.2 
  69.2 
  46.5 
  65.5 
  54.5 
  68.4 
  13.4 
  87.2 
  80.5 
  28.3 
  63.0 
  61.2 
  63.8 
  75.6 
  51.1 
  92.0 
  16.6 
  22.1 
  41.0 
  21.9 
  20.5 
  42.6 
7.4 
 
 
6.8 
  84.4 
  68.6 
  31.9 
 
3.6 
  68.1 
  12.6 
  59.6 
 
8.3 
  66.9 
  25.6 
  35.9 

 
5.3 
  81.1 
  53.3 
  83.1 
  48.6 
  20.2 
  72.2 
  76.4 
 
8.4 
  71.6 
  28.6 
  17.2 
9.0 
 
 
8.2 
1.6 
 
 
6.2 
  26.7 
  17.6 
  32.1 
  37.1 
 
8.0 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
1.0 
0.9 
0.7 
2.2 
0.6 
2.3 
1.7 
4.6 
2.7 
8.6 
0.7 
0.7 
  32.2 
1.8 
  23.5 
1.1 
 
1.6 
  10.7 
0.6 
 
0.3 
1.2 
1.6 
0.2 
0.4 
1.0 
1.6 
0.7 
0.8 
0.8 
0.2 
0.2 
0.2 
0.2 
12.1 
0.2 
0.8 
4.7 
0.5 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

0.2 
0.2 
1.4 
0.6 
 
1.5 
  50.1 
0.5 
 
0.4 
  11.4 
0.3 
  34.6 
61.4 
4.2 
1.9 
 
0.8 
  16.7 
0.4 
 
0.2 
0.2 
 
  22.5 
 
0.8 

 

 

 

 

Northern 
America

 
  23.3 

 

21.9   

  30.3 
  72.7   
  19.4 
  28.6   
  20.6 

 

15.9   

  16.4 
  59.5   
 

6.9 
10.2   

  12.6 

 

19.8   
9.1 
21.7   

 

 

 

  13.3 
  26.0   
 

2.5 
6.9   

 

  34.6 
  35.2   
  12.3 
  63.2   
  27.4 
  50.3   
  14.6 

 

1.2   

  19.1 
  28.3   
 

6.5 
9.0   

 

  18.4 
  18.7   
  11.5 

 

21.0   

  64.9 
  16.5   

 

3.1 
9.1 
  31.8 

 

9.2   

 

 

  35.6 
  20.6   
  13.4 

 

 

 

11.6   

  32.5 

15.7   

  23.3 

13.0   

  82.2 
  84.7   
  92.5 

 

71.9   

  14.7 
  10.7   
  10.4 
  35.6   
  15.5 

Oceania

Very high

High

Medium

Low

Africa

Asia

Europe

Latin 

America 
and the
Caribbean

Northern 
America

Oceania

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2.6 
17.1 
1.6 
2.7   
5.8 
13.5   
2.6 
2.4   
3.2 
4.3   
0.4 
2.4   
4.2 
4.4   
1.0 
4.4   
1.2 
6.7   
0.2 
68.6   

  30.0 

  87.0 

83.4   

  92.4 

91.6   

  93.4 

88.0   

  87.2 

70.4   

  86.8 

78.8   

  92.9 

91.2   

  45.7 

 

 

 

5.1 
3.6   
2.7 
3.0   
2.6 
7.0   
6.3 
13.0   
7.1 
10.9   
3.3 
4.1 
  35.7 

 

 

 

 

84.7   

8.8   

  70.4 

  24.8 

88.3   

  88.4 

82.9   

  93.1 
92.1 
  87.2 

 

 

 

 

5.2   
6.1 
12.4   
3.2 
1.6   
3.7 
17.2   

2.9   

75.6   

  13.5 

  49.1 

  34.4 

11.0   

94.8   

1.5   

  12.7 

  83.4 

  10.5 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

4.2   
0.8 
0.2   
6.3 
12.9   
0.6 
10.9   
1.9 
0.8   
1.5 
2.1 
0.4 
42.0   

 

0.7 
1.4   
2.9 
0.7   
5.9 
4.5   
9.0 
1.2   
0.0 
3.0   
1.8 
3.8   
0.0 
0.6   
0.0 
0.3   
2.0 
2.5   

  14.9 

0.4   
0.8 

 

86.5   

  24.8 

84.5   

  72.1 

 

2.4   
4.3 
3.1 
  23.9 

 

73.3   

1.5   

  13.4 

  28.1 

87.6   

  35.2 

78.3   

  21.6 

69.2   

  90.7 

 

 

 

93.9   

8.2   
7.3 
13.8   
6.2 
26.0   
5.0 
1.9   

  11.4 

 

47.2   

5.4 
42.0   

  74.8 

  18.0 

84.9   

  86.6 

45.3   

  87.0 

 

 

28.2   

10.7   
8.8 
49.5   
9.1 
62.0   

  41.1 

  11.7 

35.3   

52.2   

  59.1 

  21.2 

34.0   

  91.3 

93.7   

  94.8 

78.8   

  68.1 
33.1 
  57.0 

 

72.7   

 

 

 

 

60.4   
3.8 
2.5   
1.2 
10.0   
7.7 
8.6   
1.6 
21.6   

  26.8 

  10.4 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

7.1 
12.1 
4.1 
4.8 
3.3 
4.2 
4.7 
9.7 
5.3 
9.7 
3.1 
4.0 
  17.3 
5.7 
3.9 
5.8 
4.6 
3.9 
3.0 
5.7 
8.1 
6.4 
  16.0 
3.2 
5.3 
10.6 
  70.4 
11.3 
3.2 
24.7 
  58.2 
3.8 
  57.2 
3.3 
  71.6 
4.0 
3.7 
3.4 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  82.8 
10.1 
6.4 
3.5 
3.8 
4.7 
3.2 
9.0 
  46.7 
11.8 
  19.1 
5.1 
4.3 
3.2 
3.4 
10.8 
  18.9 
57.9 
  30.7 
5.2 
  62.3 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
0.8 
  0.9 
0.8 
  0.7 
0.8 
  0.9 
1.9 
  6.9 
0.9 
  0.6 
0.7 
  0.8 
1.4 
  0.8 
0.8 
  0.8 
0.9 
  0.8 
0.7 
  0.5 
1.0 
  0.9 
0.5 
  0.5 
0.8 
  0.5 
0.4 
  1.1 
0.8 
  0.4 
0.3 
  0.5 
0.4 
  4.5 
0.5 
  0.8 
0.5 
  0.8 

 

 

 

 

 

 

0.4 
  0.7 
0.8 
  0.8 
0.8 
  0.5 
0.8 
  0.8 
0.5 
  0.8 
0.5 
  0.5 
0.5 
  0.5 
0.5 
  0.5 
5.3 
  0.3 
  10.7 
  0.5 
0.4 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

0.02 
  0.07 
0.00 
  0.11 
0.10 
  0.10 
0.06 
  1.79 
0.07 
  0.07 
0.00 
  0.04 
0.38 
  0.06 
0.15 
  0.03 
0.06 
  0.42 
0.00 
  0.03 
0.57 
  0.59 
0.02 
  0.04 
0.11 
  0.09 
0.06 
  0.00 
0.01 
  0.00 
0.15 
  0.01 
0.01 
  0.70 
0.05 
  0.05 
0.01 
  0.01 

0.04 
  0.02 
0.22 
  0.05 
0.04 
  0.04 
0.06 
  0.03 
0.00 
  0.02 
0.04 
  0.02 
0.07 
  0.00 
0.68 
  0.01 
0.08 
  0.01 
0.04 
  0.02 
0.13 

 
  0.19 

0.35   

  0.04 

0.34   

  1.16 

0.62   

  0.34 

1.67   

  0.50 

0.20   

  0.07 

0.50   

  1.08 

0.50   

  1.43 

0.26   

  0.61 

2.86   

  0.01 
0.15 
  1.58 

 

2.85   

  0.10 

0.25   

  0.68 
0.19 
  0.11 

 

0.01   

  0.13 

0.01   

  0.03 

0.21   

  0.00 

 

2.01   

  0.02 

0.42   

  0.05 

0.07   

 

 

 

0.24   

0.23   

0.03   

0.09   

0.03   

0.23   

0.07   

  0.03 
 
0.10 
  0.00 
 
0.15 
  0.07 
 
0.11 
  0.04 
 
  0.06 
 
  0.00 
 
  0.91 
 
  0.09 
 
  0.06 
 
  0.00 
 
  0.84 
 
  0.29 
 
  0.27 
 
  1.47 
 
  0.01 
 
  0.83 
 
  0.02 
 
0.13 
  0.18 
 
  0.01 
 

0.00   

0.01   

0.04   

0.05   

0.01   

0.06   

1.08   

1.40   

  0.03 
0.06 
  0.00 
0.48 
  0.10 
0.30 
  0.09 
1.37 
  0.19 
1.26 
  0.01 
0.04 
  11.97 
0.14 
  5.34 
0.05 
  0.12 
5.81 
  0.00 
0.03 
  0.87 
1.07 
  0.01 
0.05 
  0.15 
0.38 
  0.12 
0.00 
  0.01 
0.00 
  0.01 
0.01 
  0.00 
3.97 
  0.00 
0.05 
  0.08 
0.01 

0.04   

0.06   

0.03   

0.05   

0.04   

  0.22 
 
  0.37 
 
  0.05 
 
  0.04 
 
  0.06 
 
  0.13 
 
  0.08 
 
  0.80 
 
  0.06 
 
  0.00 
 
  0.33 

0.01   

0.02   

0.02   

0.02   

0.00   

  0.01 

0.26   

  1.88 

0.68   

  0.34 
0.19 
  0.75 

 

0.42   

  0.01 

0.29   

  0.30 

0.07   

  0.17 

0.01   

  0.28 

0.01   

  0.04 

0.01   

  0.01 

0.22   

  0.03 

  0.00 
0.01 
  0.46 
0.05 
  0.10 
4.49 
  0.05 
0.02 
  0.13 
0.01 
  3.58 
2.55 
  0.75 
0.01 
  1.39 
0.31 
  0.01 
0.00 
  0.00 
1.32 
  0.03 

 

 

 

 

 

0.24   

2.35   

0.56   

0.71   

1.30   

0.09   

0.23   

  0.11 
 
  0.03 
 
  0.47 
 
  0.15 
 
  0.18 
 
  0.01 
 
  0.70 
 
  0.31 
 
0.13 
  0.16 
 
2.12 
  0.00 
 
  3.60 
 
  0.09 
 
1.12 
  0.63 
 
  0.35 
 
  0.05 
 
  0.08 
 
  0.01 
 
  0.04 
 
0.19 
  0.17 
 

0.00   

0.01   

0.04   

0.92   

0.09   

3.55   

0.05   

1.86   

0.04   

0.28   

0.09   

0.09   

  0.01 
 
  1.63 
 
0.11 
  0.36 
 
  0.20 
 
  0.05 
 
  0.36 
 
  2.21 
 
  23.24 
 
  0.03 
 
  0.00 
 
  0.09 

0.20   

0.00   

0.08   

0.08   

0.31   

  0.10
1.47
  0.01
0.70
  1.13
2.10
  0.16
0.85
  0.27
0.76
  0.00
0.17
  1.89
0.41
  0.27
0.21
  0.11
4.38
  0.00
7.17
  24.92
2.35
  0.74
1.55
  2.33
1.23
  0.14
0.00
  0.14
0.05
  0.06
0.39
  0.01
0.32
  0.04
0.15
  0.01
0.94

  0.02
0.05
  1.20
0.07
  0.47
0.48
  1.08
0.08
  0.00
0.14
  0.22
0.19
  0.01
0.00
  0.07
0.01
  0.03
0.01
  0.05
0.02
  0.04

147

B

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009

International emigrants by area of residence

Continent of residence

2000–2002

(% of total emigrant stocks)

Areas of residence

Human develoment category of 

countries of residencea

2000–2002

Share of continents’ immigrants from country 

2000–2002

(% of total emigrant stocks)

(% of total immigrant stocks in the continent)

HDI rank

Africa

Asia

Europe

Latin 

America 
and the
Caribbean

Northern 
America

Oceania

Very high

High

Medium

Low

Africa

Asia

Europe

Latin 

America 
and the
Caribbean

Northern 
America

Oceania

  80.6 

4.9   

  37.3 

19.0   

  81.4 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

10.8b   
9.4 
10.8b   
2.6 

 
  33.8   
 

5.6 
3.4   

 

  10.2 
  45.5   
  56.9 
  25.3   
  10.0 
  33.0   
  41.3 

 

 

 

3.7   

  45.3 

 

4.9   
0.4 
31.2   

 

 

9.2 
5.9   
1.2 

 
  22.3   
  39.6 

 

 

1.2   

  77.9 

51.9   

  23.3 
  83.3   
  16.6 

 

 

 

4.8   
8.2 
2.7   
2.3 

 
  35.8   
  73.0 

4.6   

  12.7 

1.7   
1.8 

 
  49.9   
  86.8 

17.0   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

0.0   
0.2 
0.6   
2.0 
0.3   
0.8 
1.0   
0.2 
9.8   
0.0 
12.5   

 

 

 

0.1 
0.3   
0.0 
3.4   
2.3 
0.1 
0.0 
0.1 
3.5 
0.1 
  75.3 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

19.8   
0.6 
0.0   
0.1 
54.8   
0.1 
0.1 
6.5 
0.0   
0.1 
4.9   
1.0 
1.7   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

60  Panama 
61  Bulgaria 
62  Saint Kitts and Nevis 
63  Romania 
64  Trinidad and Tobago 
65  Montenegro 
66  Malaysia 
67  Serbia 
  68  Belarus 
  69  Saint Lucia 
  70  Albania 
  71  Russian Federation 
  72  Macedonia (the Former Yugoslav Rep. of)  
  73  Dominica 
  74  Grenada 
  75  Brazil 
  76  Bosnia and Herzegovina 
  77  Colombia 
  78  Peru 
  79  Turkey 
  80  Ecuador 
  81  Mauritius 
  82  Kazakhstan 
  83  Lebanon 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

MEDIUM HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
  84  Armenia 
  85  Ukraine 
  86  Azerbaijan 
  87  Thailand 
  88  Iran (Islamic Republic of) 
  89  Georgia 
  90  Dominican Republic 
  91  Saint Vincent and the Grenadines 
  92  China 
  93  Belize 
  94  Samoa 
  95  Maldives 
  96  Jordan 
  97  Suriname 
  98  Tunisia 
  99  Tonga 
 100  Jamaica 
 101  Paraguay 
 102  Sri Lanka 
 103  Gabon 
 104  Algeria 
 105  Philippines 
 106  El Salvador 
 107  Syrian Arab Republic 
 108  Fiji 
 109  Turkmenistan 
 110  Occupied Palestinian Territories 
  111  Indonesia 
  112  Honduras 
  113  Bolivia 
  114  Guyana 
  115  Mongolia 
 116  Viet Nam 
  117  Moldova 
  118  Equatorial Guinea 

148

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

1.1 
1.5 
1.0 
1.7 
1.1 
1.6b 
1.4 
1.6b 
1.8 
1.1 
1.6 
1.9 
1.6 
1.0 
1.1 
1.0 
1.7 
1.1 
1.0 
0.9 
1.0 
32.8 
1.0 
10.3 

1.0 
1.8 
1.0 
1.0 
5.1 
1.0 
1.1 
1.1 
1.1 
1.1 
0.8 
1.4 
5.9 
1.0 
9.3 
0.8 
1.1 
1.1 
0.9 
69.9 
9.5 
0.9 
1.1 
7.7 
0.8 
1.0 
11.1 
1.0 
1.1 
1.1 
1.1 
0.9 
0.9 
1.8 
77.9 

 

 

 

 

 

 
3.5 
  68.3 
3.1 
 
19.7 
3.4 
11.3b 
  66.8 
11.3b 
8.6 
3.3 
3.9 
 
  35.3 
  17.9 
3.6 
 
3.4 
  30.4 
 
3.5 
3.5 
 
9.4 
  10.2 
3.3 
 
2.6 
  13.6 
  18.6 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  11.3 
12.1 
  23.3 
  60.1 
  17.9 
15.7 
3.8 
3.4 
  64.0 
3.5 
 
5.4 
  38.9 
  81.3 
3.1 
9.9 
5.5 
3.4 
3.9 
  54.1 
2.1 
 
6.8 
  35.4 
 
3.5 
  49.5 
5.0 
 
12.1 
  85.4 
77.5 
3.6 
4.9 
3.4 
21.0 
  15.1 
7.7 
 
 
3.0 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
4.5 
  24.3 
  29.1 
  57.4 
 
9.7 
  72.3b 
  10.7 
  72.3b 
  86.8 
  21.3 
  88.2 
  58.9 
  52.8 
  25.9 
  18.4 
  23.8 
  82.7 
  18.9 
  20.0 
  84.0 
  41.7 
  49.7 
  84.8 
  22.7 

  78.2 
  79.7 
  74.3 
  13.0 
  34.9 
  81.8 
  10.7 
  16.5 
7.2 
 
4.4 
 
 
1.5 
  34.5 
 
3.7 
  82.2 
  78.3 
 
2.2 
  19.8 
 
2.9 
  25.7 
  26.1 
  81.6 
 
8.7 
 
2.4 
  19.5 
 
4.4 
  86.2 
 
2.3 
  13.7 
3.4 
 
8.2 
 
 
8.8 
  40.7 
  18.3 
  86.7 
  18.3 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  10.2 
0.6 
  29.4 
1.0 
4.0 
0.4b 
0.2 
0.4b 
 
0.2 
  40.4 
 
0.5 
0.3 
 
0.4 
  23.9 
  20.1 
  18.9 
 
0.3 
  43.3 
  27.4 
0.2 
8.5 
0.2 
0.2 
4.8 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

0.2 
0.2 
0.2 
0.2 
0.3 
0.2 
6.4 
27.1 
0.9 
7.6 
0.3 
0.7 
0.3 
11.0 
0.2 
0.9 
2.6 
87.4 
0.2 
0.2 
0.2 
0.2 
5.1 
4.6 
0.3 
0.2 
0.3 
0.2 
  10.8 
  70.5 
8.0 
 
0.4 
0.2 
0.2 
0.2 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  38.0 

  51.6 

  92.5 

 

0.5   
0.6 
4.8   

 

 

 

  81.1 
15.1 
  78.6 
  35.1 
  57.4 
3.5 
 
 
0.6 

0.0   
0.3 
2.9   
0.1 
0.2   
0.2 
1.8   
8.0 
0.1 
0.0 

 

 

 

 
 
 

  85.5 

  10.0 

24.2   

57.8   

  66.2 

  30.0 

0.1 
0.4   
0.1 
1.3   
0.4 
3.5b   

74.9   

  91.6 

76.2b   

 

 

19.2   
3.9 
19.0b   
1.0 
19.0b   

  67.4 

38.5   
6.2 
31.7   

  11.6 

  78.8 

 

 

3.5b   
0.1 
0.1 
0.2 
0.2   

 

76.2b   

 

7.7 
55.1 
  89.6 

 

 

13.0   

  17.1 

  75.7 

  18.8 

 

 

 

 

4.0 
17.2 
3.3 
5.1 
3.9 
4.0b 
  19.6 
4.0b 
  24.1 
5.8 
3.4 
54.5 
4.8 
3.7 
4.0 
21.4 
3.2 
3.5 
6.2 
4.4 
3.2 
24.4 
  19.7 
11.6 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  16.4 
8.1 
  24.9 
25.5 
  10.1 
20.5 
4.3 
3.4 
  13.5 
7.3 
  21.9 
35.8 
  56.3 
12.0 
8.7 
7.7 
3.1 
4.2 
  35.1 
59.8 
7.6 
7.6 
6.1 
19.8 
5.9 
17.6 
  78.3 
13.7 
  10.9 
4.4 
4.2 
6.3 
  11.8 
  37.1 
  72.0 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

0.5 
  0.7 
0.5 
  0.8 
0.6 
  0.8b 
0.5 
  0.8b 
0.8 
  0.5 
0.7 
  0.8 
0.8 
  0.5 
0.5 
  0.5 
0.8 
  0.5 
0.5 
  0.5 
0.5 
  10.2 
0.5 
  4.4 

0.5 
  0.8 
0.5 
  0.5 
0.5 
  0.5 
0.5 
  0.5 
0.5 
  0.5 
0.5 
  0.5 
0.5 
  0.5 
3.4 
  0.5 
0.5 
  0.5 
0.5 
  11.4 
3.5 
  0.5 
0.5 
  1.0 
0.5 
  0.5 
0.4 
  0.5 
0.5 
  0.5 
0.6 
  0.4 
0.5 
0.8 
8.2 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

0.01 
  0.09 
0.00 
  0.11 
0.02 

1.28   

  0.01 
 
  0.00 
 
  0.02 

0.42   

  0.01 

0.38   

  0.02 

1.03   

  0.05 

  0.31 
0.09 
  0.18 
0.17 
  0.22 

  0.37 
 
0.11  
  0.03 
 
  0.67 

0.50   

  0.17b   

0.38b  

2.07b   

0.12b   

0.45b  

0.07 
  0.17b 
0.20 
  0.00 
0.08 
  1.44 
0.03 
  0.00 
0.00 
  0.06 
0.13 
  0.11 
0.05 
  0.17 
0.04 
  0.36 
0.22 
  0.37 

0.05 
  0.65 
0.08 
  0.06 
0.30 
  0.06 
0.06 
  0.00 
0.41 
  0.00 
0.01 
  0.00 
0.25 
  0.02 
0.35 
  0.00 
0.06 
  0.03 
0.05 
  0.25 
1.23 
  0.20 
0.07 
  0.20 
0.01 
  0.02 
0.74 
  0.11 
0.02 
  0.03 
0.03 
  0.00 
0.12 
0.07 
0.46 

  1.23 
8.63    12.14 
  0.23 

0.00   

0.00   

  1.06 
 
0.38b   
  0.31 
 
  0.06 
 
  0.09 
 
  0.00 
 
  0.09 
 
0.12 
  0.14 
 
  0.05 
 
  0.99 
 

0.22   

0.59   

0.01   

0.62   

 

  0.14 

2.07b   
  2.64 

 

0.02   

0.02   

  0.03 
0.12b 
  0.05 
0.34 
  0.06 
0.51 
  0.02 
0.17 
  0.23 
3.00 
  0.05 
0.53    11.80 
  3.36 
0.11 
  0.99 
0.01 
  0.11 
0.46 

4.32   

0.39   

0.22   

 

  0.25 

  0.50 
0.15 
  5.19 

  0.02 

  1.78 

1.44   

1.04   

0.33   

0.00   

0.00   

0.00   

0.02   

0.01   

  0.18 
 
  0.65 
 
  0.33 
 
  0.07 
 
  7.53 
 
  0.01 
 
  1.10 
 
  0.12 
 
  0.07 
 
  1.02 
 
  0.28 
 
  0.07 
 
  0.01 
 
  1.84 
 
  0.03 
 
  0.03 
 
  0.61 
  0.10 
  0.01 

0.03   

0.00   

2.43   

0.06   

2.87   

0.04   

0.00   

0.42   

  1.04 

7.98   

  1.73 
0.19 
  0.55 

 

1.44   

  0.17 

0.02   

  0.71 

0.00   

  0.00 

0.00   

  0.04 

0.38   

  0.81 

0.00   

  0.32 

0.02   

  0.41 

0.03   

  2.88 

0.50   

  0.04 
0.14 
  0.01 

 

0.38   

  0.04 

0.43   

  0.02 

0.05   

  0.06 

0.01   

  0.63 
  0.98 
  0.03 

  0.03 
0.21 
  0.04 
0.03 
  0.04 
0.03 
  0.97 
0.25 
  0.89 
0.07 
  0.00 
0.00 
  0.03 
0.49 
  0.02 
0.01 
  0.41 
5.99 
  0.03 
0.00 
  0.06 
0.14 
  0.84 
0.32 
  0.01 
0.01 
  0.06 
0.07 
  0.65 
4.56 
  0.51 
0.00 
  0.07 
  0.02 
  0.00 

  0.18 

 

0.45b   

1.03   

0.05   

0.60   

0.04   

  0.11 
 
  0.11 
 
  0.07 
 
  0.10 
 
  0.31 
 
  0.76 
 
  0.79 
 
  0.04 
 

0.27   

0.02   

0.45   

1.35   

 

0.47   

0.86   

0.03   

0.07   

0.00   

0.02   

0.04   

0.05   

0.00   

  0.18 
 
  0.04 
 
  0.91 
 
  1.75 
 
  3.35 
 
0.11 
  0.04 
 
  0.14 
 
  0.03 
 
  1.72 
 
  0.29 
 
  0.09 
 
  2.15 
 
0.18 
  0.13 
 
  0.02 
 
  0.73 
 
0.15 
  0.74 
 
  2.86 
  0.06 
  0.00 

0.22   

0.00   

0.01   

4.20   

 

 

  0.00
0.07
  0.00
0.28
  0.03
1.16
  1.79
1.16
  0.04
0.00
  0.04
0.45
  0.87
0.00
  0.00
0.11
  0.49
0.09
  0.12
0.61
  0.03
0.34
  0.03
1.42

  0.02
0.34
  0.01
0.57
  0.41
0.01
  0.00
0.00
  3.99
0.00
  1.57
0.00
  0.07
0.00
  0.01
0.55
  0.02
0.01
  1.18
0.00
  0.02
3.30
  0.19
0.14
  1.46
0.00
  0.06
1.04
  0.00
0.02
  0.01
0.00
  3.16
  0.02
  0.00

71.5   

24.3   

  75.4 

  20.0 

69.3   

8.8   

  57.1 

  38.9 

52.2   

43.8   

  66.6 

  26.7 

85.4   

  86.7 

 

 

63.7   
6.2 
67.2   

9.8   
9.6 
1.7   

  73.6 

16.7   

  17.7 

  65.4 

 

14.5   
6.9 
43.7   

  82.8 

15.5   

  88.8 

68.5   

  79.5 
88.1 
  76.5 

 

60.6   

  15.8 

83.7   

  81.1 

90.2   

  92.9 

8.2   

  46.4 

27.6   

  83.7 

66.5   

  90.5 

40.9   

 

10.2   
6.4 
25.5   

  84.9 

 

24.4   

76.6   

  67.6 

 

 

30.3   
6.6 
63.5   
6.3 
27.5   
6.5 
4.0   
1.1 
3.1 
  27.5 

 

 

 

 

3.9   
6.8 
1.6   
3.5 
87.1 
  18.0 

 

 

 

 

 

1.2   
5.2 
25.4   
2.9 
38.3   
1.1 
71.7   

  14.9 

60.3   
3.7 
70.7   

  87.6 

75.8   

  85.0 
  12.0 
  18.7 

 

7.7 
17.4   
2.7 
 
  50.1 
 
1.1 

TABLE

B

Continent of residence

2000–2002

(% of total emigrant stocks)

Areas of residence

Human develoment category of 

countries of residencea

2000–2002

Share of continents’ immigrants from country 

2000–2002

(% of total emigrant stocks)

(% of total immigrant stocks in the continent)

HDI rank

Africa

Asia

Europe

Latin 

America 
and the
Caribbean

Northern 
America

Oceania

Very high

High

Medium

Low

Africa

Asia

Europe

Latin 

America 
and the
Caribbean

Northern 
America

Oceania

 

8.5 
6.9   

  62.3 

 

86.4   

  49.9 

80.7   
1.7 
5.6   

  21.8 

  54.5 

47.3   

46.0   

  36.6 

 

1.3 
1.6   

 

 

 

 

  50.3 
1.1 
1.6 
5.8   
2.0 
0.9   
1.3 
20.4   
1.3 
1.1 
1.5 
0.9   
4.5 
65.9   

 

 

 

 

 

57.2   
6.3 
19.5   

  57.5 

82.8   

  68.5 

10.5   

  84.2 

47.9   

17.5   

  86.5 
23.1 
  52.2 

 

17.5   

  77.3 

  60.4 

 119  Uzbekistan 
 120  Kyrgyzstan 
 121  Cape Verde 
 122  Guatemala 
 123  Egypt 
 124  Nicaragua 
 125  Botswana 
 126  Vanuatu 
 127  Tajikistan 
 128  Namibia 
 129  South Africa 
 130  Morocco 
 131  Sao Tome and Principe 
 132  Bhutan 
 133  Lao People’s Democratic Republic 
 134  India 
 135  Solomon Islands 
 136  Congo 
 137  Cambodia 
 138  Myanmar 
 139  Comoros 
 140  Yemen 
 141  Pakistan 
 142  Swaziland 
 143  Angola 
 144  Nepal 
 145  Madagascar 
 146  Bangladesh 
 147  Kenya 
 148  Papua New Guinea 
 149  Haiti 
 150  Sudan 
 151  Tanzania (United Republic of) 
 152  Ghana 
 153  Cameroon 
 154  Mauritania 
 155  Djibouti 
 156  Lesotho 
 157  Uganda 
 158  Nigeria 

LOW HUMAN DEVELOPMENT  
 159  Togo 
 160  Malawi 
 161  Benin 
 162  Timor-Leste 
 163  Côte d’Ivoire 
 164  Zambia 
 165  Eritrea 
 166  Senegal 
 167  Rwanda 
 168  Gambia 
 169  Liberia 
 170  Guinea 
 171  Ethiopia 
 172  Mozambique 
 173  Guinea-Bissau 
  174  Burundi 
 175  Chad 
 176  Congo (Dem. Republic of the) 
 177  Burkina Faso 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1.0 
1.0 
  33.8 
1.1 
  10.5 
1.1 
  60.3 
0.8 
1.0 
77.8 
  38.6 
9.1 
27.2 
0.7 
0.9 
1.7 
0.9 
80.1 
0.9 
0.8 
  42.0 
6.1 
1.4 
72.5 
  65.8 
0.7 
  28.2 
0.7 
41.5 
0.8 
1.1 
42.9 
67.5 
74.8 
  48.9 
75.9 
41.7 
93.5 
37.5 
62.3 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  83.8 
83.7 
91.6 
0.8 
47.7 
78.3 
  78.2 
55.7 
  85.2 
44.7 
  34.9 
90.3 
8.6 
83.8 
  65.0 
90.8 
  90.7 
79.7 
  94.0 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  39.7 
  10.4 
3.0 
 
3.7 
  70.5 
3.5 
2.7 
5.3 
  42.8 
2.5 
3.3 
13.2 
 
3.0 
  89.3 
  15.6 
  72.0 
 
5.6 
2.1 
  13.1 
77.6 
 
4.8 
  85.4 
  72.5 
3.2 
 
3.8 
  95.0 
 
3.0 
  92.4 
4.2 
 
8.9 
 
3.4 
  45.9 
 
2.8 
3.4 
3.2 
4.5 
5.0 
2.3 
3.7 
4.4 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2.7 
2.5 
 
3.1 
  39.5 
3.1 
 
2.9 
  11.5 
3.0 
3.2 
2.9 
4.4 
3.0 
  37.5 
2.5 
2.8 
3.2 
5.5 
2.6 
3.0 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  57.9 
  87.8 
  49.1 
3.0 
 
9.7 
 
 
2.5 
  21.3 
  25.4 
  55.6 
  11.3 
  30.5 
  74.5 
  69.0 
 
6.4 
  17.4 
 
9.7 
  11.4 
  16.5 
  26.3 
 
5.9 
  52.4 
 
4.6 
  16.4 
  14.9 
  28.6 
 
2.4 
  65.8 
 
4.7 
  37.9 
4.9 
 
5.5 
 
 
5.7 
  17.4 
  12.2 
  38.8 
  17.1 
  48.0 
 
2.8 
  43.9 
  18.1 

  11.3 
  11.6 
 
4.6 
  18.2 
  43.4 
  13.2 
 
5.6 
  38.1 
 
9.1 
  39.7 
  11.5 
 
5.1 
  21.4 
  12.8 
  31.3 
4.6 
 
 
3.1 
  15.3 
 
2.4 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

0.2 
0.2 
0.2 
9.1 
 
0.3 
  48.4 
0.2 
 
0.3 
0.2 
0.2 
0.3 
0.2 
0.2 
0.2 
0.2 
0.2 
0.3 
0.2 
0.2 
0.2 
0.2 
0.2 
0.2 
0.2 
0.8 
0.2 
0.5 
0.2 
0.2 
0.3 
  25.7 
0.2 
0.2 
0.2 
0.2 
0.2 
0.2 
0.1 
0.2 
0.2 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

0.2 
0.2 
0.2 
0.2 
0.2 
0.2 
0.2 
0.2 
0.2 
0.2 
0.2 
0.2 
0.2 
0.3 
0.2 
0.2 
0.2 
0.2 
0.2 

 

 

1.2 
0.6   

  14.0 
  83.0   
 
  44.4   
  10.8 

7.4 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2.8   
0.4 
5.4   

  13.8 

 

2.8   
0.6 
2.8   

  62.9 

 

15.0   
4.5 
1.1 
  50.5 

 

 

 

 

 

11.8   
0.6 
3.6   
9.1 
7.1 
1.0 
1.3   
2.4 
1.8   

 

  14.4 

4.4   

  64.3 

4.6   

 

 

  11.4 
9.1 
8.9 
2.3   
4.7 
1.1 
  13.9 

 

 

14.8   

2.0 
1.7   
0.5 
0.2   
5.6 
3.8   
4.3 
2.9   
2.3 
12.4   

 

 

 

 

 

  48.8 

1.4   

  30.7 

 

0.6   
0.6 
1.1 
0.5 
2.2   
0.3 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

0.0 
0.0   
0.0 
0.1 
1.6 
0.1 
4.7 
65.4   
0.0 
2.7   

 

 

 

  13.5 
0.1 
0.0 
0.5   
3.0 
1.3   

 

 

 

0.0   
8.9 
3.7   
0.0 
0.1 
0.4 
2.1 
0.0 
0.3   
0.1 
0.2   
1.8 
80.7   
0.0 
0.8   
0.7 
0.2   
0.1 
0.0   
0.5 
0.2   
0.9 
0.2   

0.0 
0.4   
0.0 
41.0   
0.1 
1.6   
0.3 
0.0   
0.0 
0.1 
0.2 
0.0   
1.5 
0.1 
0.0 
0.0   
0.0 
0.0   
0.0 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  27.7 

  24.1 

24.0   

  29.2 

 

5.6   

1.9   
2.0 
2.2   

  67.2 

  15.3 

7.7   

  53.6 
59.1 
  70.0 

 

12.5   

  29.4 

21.6   

  47.2 

19.3   

  52.4 

4.2   

  58.1 

33.0   

  13.2 

 

13.6   
5.2 
59.8   

  48.4 

18.5   

  10.4 

40.6   

  11.4 

51.6   

  60.4 

6.6   

 

8.4   
1.6 
1.1 
  12.1 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

38.8   
1.3 
1.0   
1.5 
3.6   
4.5 
0.9   
1.6 
2.3   

 

 

0.9 
1.1 
0.8 
1.2   
1.6 
1.1 
9.4 
1.5   
1.0 
1.5   
1.1 
0.8   

  75.1 

  10.0 

13.3   

  31.5 

5.8   
3.8 
17.4   
2.9 

 

 

 

 

 

1.2   
1.3 
0.9   
3.7 
1.1 
0.8 

 

  41.1 
11.9 
  10.8 
7.5 
  20.3 
6.2 
  43.2 
40.8 
  42.9 
36.6 
  12.5 
7.8 
  20.1 
87.9 
  14.0 
30.7 
  37.9 
73.8 
  11.5 
75.4 
  37.8 
16.2 
  47.4 
25.8 
  33.7 
91.6 
8.7 
83.2 
  39.8 
39.3 
  17.3 
42.0 
  45.7 
16.5 
  36.7 
18.9 
  11.5 
23.6 
  31.8 
44.5 

 

  51.4 
43.4 
  43.5 
38.5 
  10.4 
53.8 
  13.1 
24.7 
  79.7 
16.5 
  24.9 
10.2 
  10.5 
50.1 
  13.1 
84.2 
  74.3 
48.6 
8.9 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

0.5 
  0.5 
  25.2 
  0.5 
3.5 
  0.5 
  18.9 
  0.4 
0.5 
  42.8 
  28.4 
  3.5 
9.4 
  0.6 
0.5 
  1.0 
0.4 
  7.6 
0.5 
  0.5 
5.5 
  0.4 
0.9 
  48.4 
  35.2 
  0.6 
8.9 
  0.6 
5.0 
  0.5 
0.5 
  6.7 
  23.7 
  60.8 
  14.6 
  58.2 
  31.5 
  71.3 
8.5 
  20.2 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  34.5 
  41.9 
  50.4 
  0.4 
  39.6 
  26.5 
  67.1 
  33.2 
8.0 
  30.4 
  13.6 
  82.4 
4.4 
  35.4 
  54.1 
  9.1 
  18.1 
  32.8 
  87.5 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

0.14 
  0.04 
0.42 
  0.04 
1.43 
  0.04 
0.06 
  0.00 
0.05 
  0.12 
1.89 
  1.48 
0.04 
  0.00 
0.02 
  0.97 
0.00 
  2.74 
0.02 
  0.02 
0.13 
  0.23 
0.30 
  0.05 
3.62 
  0.05 
0.27 
  0.31 
1.18 
  0.00 
0.05 
  1.72 
1.21 
  4.48 
0.52 
  0.55 
0.04 
  0.30 
0.40 
  4.06 

1.12 
  0.79 
3.30 
  0.00 
0.53 
  1.21 
2.78 
  1.67 
1.28 
  0.14 
0.19 
  3.29 
0.15 
  4.44 
0.52 
  2.21 
1.72 
  4.09 
7.93 

 

 

0.04   

0.05   

0.02   

0.49   

0.00   

0.00   

0.02   

0.69   

  1.88 
 
0.13 
  0.01 
 
  3.10 
 
  0.00 
 
  0.70 
 
  0.05 
 
  0.00 
 
  0.11 
  13.18 
  0.00 
 
  0.08 
 
  0.00 
 
  5.02 
 
  0.07 
 
  0.01 
  12.76   
  0.04 
 
  0.05 
 
  0.02 
 
  0.01 
 
  0.00 
 
  0.01 
 

0.07   

0.09   

0.00   

0.01   

0.00   

0.60   

0.01   

1.99   

1.04   

0.01   

0.01   

0.02   

  0.01 
 
  0.04 
 
  0.01 
 
  0.13 
 
  0.02 
 
  0.01 
 
  0.22 
 
  0.01 
 
  0.03 
 
  0.08 

0.03   

0.00   

0.04   

0.04   

0.03   

0.04   

  2.31 

0.89   

  0.17 

0.03   

  0.36 

0.02   

  0.01 

0.00   

  0.77 

0.00   

  0.41 

3.29   

  0.03 

0.00   

  0.10 

1.49   

  0.00 
0.15 
  0.14 

 

0.03   

  0.04 

0.05   

  0.96 

0.00   

  0.43 

0.04   

  0.17 

0.55   

  0.29 

0.00   

  0.07 

0.06   

  0.09 

0.20   

  0.11 

0.03   

  0.01 

0.00   

  0.13 

0.32   

  0.08 
0.02 
  0.01 
0.91 
  0.11 
4.23 
  0.00 
0.00 
  0.03 
0.00 
  0.04 
0.09 
  0.00 
0.00 
  0.01 
0.35 
  0.00 
0.02 
  0.01 
0.01 
  0.00 
0.02 
  0.11 
0.00 
  0.11 
0.03 
  0.01 
0.17 
  0.02 
0.00 
  3.19 
0.02 
  0.01 
0.03 
  0.01 
0.00 
  0.00 
0.00 
  0.01 
0.04 

  0.04 

0.03   

  0.05 

0.01   

  0.13 

0.06   

  0.05 

0.31   

  0.04 

0.03   

  0.02 

0.05   

  0.10 
0.18 
  0.07 

 

0.03   

  0.02 

0.21   

  0.06 

  0.01 
0.00 
  0.02 
0.00 
  0.01 
0.01 
  0.02 
0.02 
  0.01 
0.00 
  0.00 
0.02 
  0.01 
0.04 
  0.00 
0.01 
  0.01 
0.02 
  0.04 

0.01   

1.25   

0.58   

0.00   

0.00   

 

0.00   

3.37   

  0.07 
 
  0.07 
 
  0.40 
 
  0.00 
 
  0.01 
 
  0.27 
 
0.18 
  0.00 
 
  0.55 
 
  0.00 
 
  0.39 
 
  0.00 
 
  0.78 
 
  0.02 
 
  0.01 
 
  0.16 
 
  1.20 
 
  0.08 
 
  0.04 
 
  0.00 
 
  0.06 
 

0.07   

0.22   

0.01   

0.00   

0.38   

0.01   

0.09   

0.05   

0.00   

0.03   

0.30   

0.01   

0.02   

0.01   

0.00   

  0.01 
 
  0.01 
 
  0.02 
 
  0.06 
 
  0.01 
 
  0.10 
 
  0.22 
 
  0.00 
 
  0.00 
 
  0.01 

0.03   

0.02   

0.02   

0.01   

0.01   

0.04   

  0.02
0.00
  0.00
0.01
  0.69
0.02
  0.02
0.05
  0.00
0.01
  2.09
0.03
  0.00
0.00
  0.21
2.41
  0.06
0.00
  0.55
0.23
  0.00
0.01
  0.28
0.00
  0.01
0.07
  0.00
0.25
  0.16
0.81
  0.00
0.10
  0.04
0.05
  0.00
0.00
  0.00
0.00
  0.03
0.04

  0.00
0.01
  0.00
0.19
  0.00
0.08
  0.03
0.00
  0.00
0.00
  0.00
0.00
  0.08
0.01
  0.00
0.00
  0.00
0.01
  0.00

149

 

 

 

 

 

  0.00
0.00
  0.01
0.25
  0.00

  0.59
0.04
  0.00
0.01
  0.20
0.00
  0.01
0.05
  0.00
0.11
  0.03
0.29

0.2 
0.3 
0.9 
1.0 
1.1 
0.6 
4.2 
1.6 
1.1 
0.2 
0.3 
0.2 

 

 

 

  10.7 
  28.6   
  48.6 
  64.2   
  30.4 

2.7 
57.0   
0.0 
5.4   

  40.7 

3.4   

0.2   

  11.1 

  71.5 

  44.2 

62.6   

  85.9 
69.1 
  35.7 
90.1 
  86.3 

 

 

17.6   
8.0 

 
  10.8   
 

1.6 
5.7   

 

21.6   
0.1 
1.0   

22.3   

  92.9 

39.2   

  75.3 
5.1 

  83.0 

 

34.7   

6.6 
1.2   
1.5 
4.0   

  30.2 

 

 

 

2.9   
4.7 
12.7   
3.4 
8.2   
4.3 
1.5   

  48.7 
35.8 
  12.2 
26.4 
  33.6 
6.3 
8.7 
64.5 
3.0 
11.7 
  12.3 
28.2 

 

 

0.2 
 
0.5 
 
 
2.5 
  13.4 
  21.0 
 
0.6 

4.8 
4.4 
0.3 
 
 
6.3 
7.0 
0.6 
4.4 
2.1 
0.2 
 
 
4.2 

 
4.9 
  16.4 
  15.4 
  69.8 
  34.9 
  22.5 

  41.2 
  24.6 
9.1 
 
 
  28.2 
  28.5 
  25.3 
  32.4 
  17.6 
3.2 
 
 
  27.4 

0.9 
 
2.2 
 
4.6 
 
0.3 
 
 
3.7 
  46.7 

6.2 
8.0 
0.8 

9.0 
9.3 
6.3 
1.3 
1.8 
0.4 

3.5 

 

 

  35.9 
  41.7 
  52.6 
  81.7 
  62.8 
  84.3 

  83.1 
  77.4 
  18.0 
 
  76.7 
  79.4 
  53.8 
  56.4 
  42.6 
  15.0 
 
  59.6 

 

 

 
8.3 
  23.2 
  28.1 
  12.1 
  23.5 
 
2.8 

 
9.7 
  14.9 
  17.6 
 
  11.9 
  12.1 
  10.4 
  23.9 
  25.3 
 
2.6 

 
  13.3 

  25.7 
  34.5 
  18.1 
 
5.6 
  12.6 
  12.3 

6.0 
 
 
6.2 
  63.9 

 

 
 
9.9 
 
7.0 
  35.3 
  18.9 
  28.9 
  40.8 

 

 

  21.1 

 

 

 

 

 

 

0.4 
  0.4 
0.5 
  0.5 
0.5 
  0.7 
0.4 
  0.5 
0.7 
  41.0 
0.3 
  35.7 

  30.0 
 
0.6 
1.2 
 
0.5 
 
1.1 
 
 
0.6 

 

 
 
 

1.2 
1.5 
0.4 
 
1.4 
 
1.5 
 
0.5 
 
0.7 
 
 
3.2 
  41.6 

 

 

 

 

 

 

0.35 
  0.00 
0.03 
  0.00 
0.00 
  0.00 
0.00 
  0.00 
0.00 
  1.71 
0.00 
  1.12 

0.00   

0.00   

0.01   

  1.33 
 
  0.46 
 
  0.01 
 
  0.00 
 
  0.00 
 
0.10 
  0.00 
 

  0.42 

0.00   

  0.02 

0.00   

  0.00 

0.03   

  0.00 

0.00   

  0.01 

 

0.25   

  0.00 
0.12 

 

  0.03 
0.00 
  0.07 
0.00 
  0.00 
0.00 
  0.00 
0.00 
  0.00 
0.02 
  0.00 
0.01 

0.01   

0.02   

0.00   

0.00   

0.02   

  0.29 
 
  0.58 
 
  0.02 
 
  0.00 
 
  0.00 
 
0.14 
  0.00 
 

0.01   

0.04   

 

0.97T 
27.34T    5.62T 

  82.39T    6.31T    12.34T 
 
 
 
 
 

3.07T 
4.41
6.83T    72.37T 
26.57T    28.68
8.39T    17.25T    53.66T    21.75T    20.39T    48.18
4.69T 
1.77T    2.73T 
1.70
0.49T    1.07T 
1.44T     12.46T     3.09T    2.60
  0.28T    0.54T    0.16T    0.87T     14.44
0.13T 

  59.05T    46.01T 

 

 
 
 

6.84T    8.22T    28.10T    35.99T    46.29T    55.89
43.70
5.47T    6.04T    23.25T    20.41T 
0.39T    1.60T    0.10T    0.05T 
0.17

16.91T 
0.23T 

 

 

 

 

  

 
 
9.43T 
6.08T 
6.32T 
5.68T 
3.11T 
0.39T 
5.53T    17.75T 

 
  34.20T 
22.75T    57.60
 
  33.87T     20.67T    53.47
 
0.33T    2.08T    4.14
 
38.67T    42.85T    13.42
 
  33.33T    27.88
  35.37T 
  53.02T    5.85T    2.29T    0.42T    1.07T    1.10

21.71T 
20.60T 
  1.11T 
39.74T 

  66.96T    36.26T    26.71T 

 

 
6.0 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

  96.81T    84.39T    60.44T    98.72T    97.03T    98.57

5.0 

  100.00T   100.00T   100.00T 

 100.00T   100.00T 

 100.00

 

 

 

9.1 

  28.2 

  33.4 

3.4 

  23.0 

2.9 

  51.1 

  20.7 

  23.3 

B

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009

International emigrants by area of residence

Continent of residence

Areas of residence

Human develoment category of 

countries of residencea

2000–2002                                                                                                                                  

2000–2002

Share of continents’ immigrants from country 

2000–2002                                                                                                                         

(% of total emigrant stocks)

(% of total emigrant stocks)

(% of total immigrant stocks in the continent)

HDI rank

Africa

Asia

Europe

Latin 

America 
and the
Caribbean

Northern 
America

Oceania

Very high

High

Medium

Low

Africa

Asia

Europe

Latin 

America 
and the
Caribbean

Northern 
America

Oceania

91.1 
84.1 
40.9 
0.8 
93.3 

 

 

 

 

 

3.1 
2.1 
3.0 
91.4 
3.0 

 
5.1 
  13.0 
  31.5 
4.4 
 
 
3.0 

0.2 
0.2 
0.2 
0.2 
0.2 

 

 

 

0.5 
0.6   

  24.0 

2.7   
0.5 

 

 

0.0 
0.1 
0.5 
0.5   
0.0 

 

5.7 
13.5   

  55.4 

11.0   
3.6 

 

0.9 
1.0   
1.4 
4.6   
0.8 

  17.5 
70.9 
  11.1 
84.0 
  20.6 

  76.0 
  14.6 
  32.1 
  0.4 
  75.0 

 

 

 

8.99 
  0.58 
0.24 
  0.14 
2.90 

0.00   

  0.10 
 
  0.01 
 
  0.03 

4.82   

  0.14 

0.02   

  0.05 

0.20   

  0.02 

  0.05 
0.00 
  0.00 
0.08 
  0.02 

0.00   

  0.02 
 
  0.06 
 
0.17 
  0.01 

 

178  Mali 
179  Central African Republic 
180  Sierra Leone 
181  Afghanistan 
182  Niger 

OTHER UN MEMBER STATES
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  Iraq 
  Kiribati 
  Korea (Dem. People’s Rep. of) 
  Marshall Islands 
  Micronesia (Federated States of) 
  Monaco 
  Nauru 
  Palau 
  San Marino 
  Somalia 
  Tuvalu 
  Zimbabwe 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

5.1 
0.8 
0.9 
0.8 
0.8 
2.0 
0.7 
0.7 
1.5 
50.8 
0.7 
61.8 

 

 

  59.2 
5.5 
  47.5 
  25.1 
  23.1 
5.9 
 
5.6 
  55.3 
3.1 
 
9.6 
5.1 
3.0 

 

 

 

  Africa 
  52.6 
  Asia 
 
1.7 
  Europe 
2.5 
 
  Latin America and the Caribbean   
1.1 
  Northern America 
2.2 
 
  Oceania 
 
1.4 

  OECD 
  European Union (EU27) 
  GCC 
   
  Very high human development 
     Very high HD: OECD 
     Very high HD: non-OECD 
  High human development 
  Medium human development 
  Low human development 
   
  World (excluding the former Soviet 
              Union and Czechoslovakia)
  World 

2.4 
3.1 
6.1 

 
 
 
 
3.0 
 
3.1 
 
1.9 
 
1.7 
 
 
7.4 
  64.1 
 
  10.8 

 

 

  12.5 
  54.7 
  16.0 
 
5.1 
  14.7 
 
8.7 

 
9.0 
  10.7 
  77.9 
 
  14.3 
  10.7 
  46.4 
  16.5 
  43.3 
  21.9 
 
  29.2 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

  22.1 
7.9 
 
2.0 
 
 
3.5 
 
3.9 
  87.9 
6.9 
 
 
3.3 
  86.2 
  27.5 
  17.0 
  24.1 

  28.9 
  24.5 
  59.0 
  10.3 
  23.6 
  20.1 

  36.4 
  49.1 
5.9 
 
 

 
  39.2 
  41.4 
  19.6 
  43.8 
  27.8 
  10.2 
 
  24.8 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

NOTES

a  Percentages may not sum to 100% due to movements 

to areas not classified by human development 
categories.

b Data refer to Serbia and Montenegro prior to its 

separation into two independent states in June 2006.

SOURCES
All columns: calculated based on data from Migration 
DRC (2007).

150

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009

Education and employment of international migrants in OECD countries 
(aged 15 years and above)  

 

 

 

 

C

TABLE

C

Educational attainment levels of 

international migrantsa 

Stock of 

international 
migrants in

Low

less than 

upper

OECD countries

secondary

Medium

upper

secondary or
post-secondary 
non-tertiary

High

tertiary

HDI rank

(thousands)

(% of all migrants)

1  Norway 
2  Australia 
3  Iceland 
4  Canada 
5  Ireland 
6  Netherlands 
7  Sweden 
8  France 
9  Switzerland 

VERY HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  10  Japan 
  11  Luxembourg 
  12  Finland 
  13  United States 
  14  Austria 
  15  Spain 
  16  Denmark 
  17  Belgium 
  18  Italy 
  19  Liechtenstein 
  20  New Zealand 
  21  United Kingdom 
  22  Germany 
  23  Singapore 
  24  Hong Kong, China (SAR) 
  25  Greece 
  26  Korea (Republic of) 
  27  Israel 
  28  Andorra 
  29  Slovenia 
  30  Brunei Darussalam 
  31  Kuwait 
  32  Cyprus 
  33  Qatar 
  34  Portugal 
  35  United Arab Emirates 
  36  Czech Republic 
  37  Barbados 
  38  Malta 

HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
  39  Bahrain 
  40  Estonia 
  41  Poland 
  42  Slovakia 
  43  Hungary 
  44  Chile 
  45  Croatia 
  46  Lithuania 
  47  Antigua and Barbuda 
  48  Latvia 
  49  Argentina 
  50  Uruguay 
  51  Cuba 
  52  Bahamas 
  53  Mexico 
  54  Costa Rica 
  55  Libyan Arab Jamahiriya 
  56  Oman 
  57  Seychelles 
  58  Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) 
  59  Saudi Arabia 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

123.3 
291.9 
22.7 
1,064.1 
788.1 
583.4 
201.5 
1,135.6 
427.2 
565.4 
31.3 
257.2 
840.6 
383.1 
757.6 
159.5 
350.8 
2,357.1 
3.5 
413.1 
3,241.3 
3,122.5 
106.6 
388.4 
685.8 
975.3 
162.7 
3.4 
78.4 
8.9 
37.1 
140.5 
3.3 
1,260.2 
14.4 
242.5 
88.4 
98.0 

7.2 
36.0 
2,112.6 
361.5 
331.5 
207.9 
488.9 
134.4 
24.3 
54.8 
322.3 
74.4 
924.6 
30.1 
8,327.9 
75.7 
64.8 
2.6 
8.1 
233.3 
34.1 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

21.7 
16.6 
15.3 
18.3 
37.8 
25.9 
18.0 
32.0 
34.6 
10.4 
39.0 
30.4 
19.6 
23.4 
51.7 
20.3 
34.5 
57.5 
27.5 
30.6 
25.7 
26.6 
19.7 
27.9 
55.3 
16.4 
18.3 
46.3 
47.3 
19.1 
16.7 
41.0 
16.1 
67.2 
21.0 
22.6 
30.0 
53.2 

15.8 
26.6 
30.6 
40.7 
25.6 
25.1 
45.7 
35.8 
29.7 
19.5 
31.1 
34.7 
40.8 
23.3 
69.6 
31.5 
44.3 
13.6 
42.6 
27.0 
22.8 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

38.1 
36.1 
39.0 
40.7 
25.3 
36.6 
37.5 
30.7 
40.0 
38.9 
32.4 
42.5 
29.3 
45.0 
26.8 
38.3 
32.4 
26.3 
46.9 
34.7 
36.7 
43.0 
32.2 
31.4 
26.0 
39.3 
37.0 
27.2 
39.1 
41.1 
36.9 
28.4 
37.0 
23.4 
50.2 
51.6 
40.2 
24.5 

40.6 
36.6 
46.2 
45.5 
44.1 
41.8 
39.4 
39.6 
41.4 
36.1 
34.8 
37.0 
35.1 
46.9 
24.7 
43.7 
30.6 
44.6 
31.5 
35.8 
38.8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

31.7 
42.3 
33.5 
39.4 
22.4 
31.8 
36.8 
32.2 
24.0 
49.0 
23.7 
23.5 
46.6 
27.3 
17.6 
33.3 
30.8 
11.5 
19.5 
26.5 
33.1 
27.4 
43.5 
37.9 
15.1 
43.6 
42.7 
25.6 
11.4 
37.7 
44.2 
23.0 
43.9 
6.2 
24.2 
23.7 
26.3 
13.5 

40.2 
30.6 
21.1 
12.9 
27.4 
29.9 
12.4 
21.8 
26.6 
35.8 
32.6 
26.3 
23.9 
29.4 
5.7 
24.4 
23.6 
37.5 
17.3 
36.7 
35.8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Economic activity status of international migrants

Unemployment rates of international migrants

By level of educational attainmenta

Low

Medium

upper

High

less than

upper

secondary

secondary or
post-secondary 
non-tertiary

tertiary

(% of labour force)

Total

unemployment

rateb

(both sexes) 

Labour force 
participation

rateb

(both sexes)
(% of all 
migrants)

45.1 
73.4 
65.2 
58.3 
55.2 
55.7 
62.4 
60.2 
60.3 
57.7 
50.4 
53.6 
60.3 
55.3 
52.7 
54.2 
54.7 
48.4 
59.6 
76.4 
59.7 
57.2 
63.9 
61.7 
49.6 
58.8 
65.6 
47.7 
39.1 
63.3 
53.8 
54.4 
45.7 
71.0 
40.8 
55.9 
66.0 
54.0 

61.7 
37.2 
59.5 
48.8 
46.6 
65.8 
56.7 
28.9 
68.0 
39.7 
62.8 
67.3 
52.5 
63.8 
60.1 
64.8 
51.2 
34.4 
60.3 
64.3 
43.5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

5.7 
6.1 
4.8 
4.1 
5.1 
4.5 
7.2 
7.7 
10.4 
4.4 
8.8 
4.7 
5.7 
3.2 
7.5 
5.0 
8.7 
8.0 
3.7 
6.9 
5.4 
7.9 
5.9 
6.8 
6.3 
5.5 
6.2 
11.9 
6.3 
6.3 
9.6 
6.8 
10.7 
7.7 
14.9 
11.0 
6.3 
4.9 

7.9 
11.4 
10.7 
15.7 
6.5 
8.8 
8.4 
11.6 
8.1 
6.5 
9.9 
9.5 
8.0 
9.7 
9.4 
6.6 
7.6 
7.7 
9.7 
11.3 
11.8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

8.5 
10.7 
9.0 
7.9 
7.7 
6.8 
15.4 
13.2 
14.8 
8.5 
13.2 
5.8 
9.6 
5.1 
9.4 
7.8 
14.4 
11.0 
5.1 
10.4 
9.5 
14.2 
7.0 
7.1 
8.8 
8.8 
11.2 
12.8 
7.4 
5.8 
18.9 
8.9 
14.5 
8.5 
18.8 
30.5 
9.2 
5.8 

6.1 
15.4 
15.8 
34.8 
11.1 
12.6 
15.9 
19.3 
12.8 
11.0 
13.6 
12.5 
12.0 
16.8 
10.6 
10.4 
8.0 
7.5 
12.6 
15.0 
18.4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

6.8 
7.5 
4.4 
5.1 
4.8 
4.5 
8.8 
7.6 
9.9 
5.3 
8.9 
5.0 
7.8 
3.0 
7.6 
5.5 
9.8 
6.5 
3.4 
6.5 
5.6 
7.9 
7.4 
9.0 
3.9 
6.1 
7.4 
11.9 
6.2 
9.2 
12.3 
7.0 
15.8 
6.7 
17.1 
10.9 
6.5 
4.6 

10.1 
13.8 
11.1 
10.8 
6.2 
9.2 
3.6 
13.6 
8.9 
7.3 
9.8 
9.4 
7.5 
11.2 
7.7 
6.1 
6.9 
10.4 
8.4 
12.7 
13.2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

3.8
3.7
3.9
2.5
3.0
3.4
3.9
4.6
6.3
3.2
4.8
3.3
3.9
2.3
4.7
3.7
4.6
3.6
2.8
3.7
3.3
4.6
4.4
5.4
4.6
4.3
4.0
10.8
4.5
4.3
6.3
4.7
6.9
5.3
10.6
3.6
4.0
3.2

6.7
7.5
6.1
3.9
5.0
6.1
3.6
6.1
3.9
5.2
7.6
6.6
5.2
4.6
5.2
3.8
7.4
6.1
7.4
8.1
8.2

Tertiary

emigration 

rate

(%)

4.5 
2.5 
18.0 
3.0 
22.1 
6.2 
4.6 
4.2 
9.8 
1.1 
..  
6.1 
0.4 
9.8 
2.4 
6.3 
5.8 
3.8 
..  
8.2 
10.3 
7.1 
12.9 
16.8 
7.9 
..  
5.4 
..  
.. 
..  
6.5 
24.8 
..  
6.3 
..  
..  
47.3 
..  

5.3 
.. 
12.3 
..  
8.4 
3.8 
.. 
.. 
..  
.. 
2.0 
5.1 
..  
..  
6.5 
3.9 
..  
..  
..  
3.8 
..  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

151

C

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009

Education and employment of international migrants in OECD countries 
(aged 15 years and above)  

 

 

 

 

Economic activity status of international migrants

Unemployment rates of international migrants

By level of educational attainmenta

Low

Medium

upper

High

less than

upper

secondary

secondary or
post-secondary 
non-tertiary

tertiary

(% of labour force)

Tertiary

emigration 

Labour force 
participation

Total

unemployment

rateb                                        

rateb                                 

(both sexes) 

(both sexes)
(% of all 
migrants)

Educational attainment levels of 

international migrantsa 

Stock of 

international 
migrants in

Low

less than 

upper

OECD countries

secondary

Medium

upper

secondary or
post-secondary 
non-tertiary

High

tertiary

HDI rank

(thousands)

(% of all migrants)

 

 

 

 

 

 

60  Panama 
61  Bulgaria 
62  Saint Kitts and Nevis 
63  Romania 
64  Trinidad and Tobago 
65  Montenegro 
66  Malaysia 
67  Serbia 
68  Belarus 
69  Saint Lucia 
70  Albania 
71  Russian Federation 
72  Macedonia (the Former Yugoslav Rep. of)  
73  Dominica 
74  Grenada 
75  Brazil 
76  Bosnia and Herzegovina 
77  Colombia 
78  Peru 
79  Turkey 
80  Ecuador 
81  Mauritius 
82  Kazakhstan 
83  Lebanon 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

MEDIUM HUMAN DEVELOPMENT

84  Armenia 
85  Ukraine 
86  Azerbaijan 
87  Thailand 
88  Iran (Islamic Republic of) 
89  Georgia 
90  Dominican Republic 
91  Saint Vincent and the Grenadines 
92  China 
93  Belize 
94  Samoa 
95  Maldives 
96  Jordan 
97  Suriname 
98  Tunisia 
99  Tonga 
100  Jamaica 
101  Paraguay 
102  Sri Lanka 
103  Gabon 
104  Algeria 
105  Philippines 
106  El Salvador 
107  Syrian Arab Republic 
108  Fiji 
109  Turkmenistan 
110  Occupied Palestinian Territories 
111  Indonesia 
112  Honduras 
113  Bolivia 
114  Guyana 
115  Mongolia 
116  Viet Nam 
117  Moldova 
118  Equatorial Guinea 

152

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

139.8 
604.4 
20.0 
1,004.6 
274.2 
..c 
214.3 
1,044.4 
151.1 
24.5 
524.1 
1,524.4 
175.7 
25.7 
46.4 
544.1 
569.9 
691.7 
415.1 
2,085.5 
503.7 
91.4 
415.7 
335.5 

79.4 
773.0 
30.1 
269.7 
616.0 
84.7 
695.3 
34.8 
2,068.2 
42.6 
71.5 
0.4 
63.9 
7.1 
427.5 
40.9 
789.7 
20.1 
316.9 
10.8 
1,313.3 
1,930.3 
835.6 
130.2 
119.0 
4.9 
15.5 
339.4 
275.6 
76.8 
303.6 
4.3 
1,518.1 
41.4 
12.1 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

16.9 
51.0 
33.0 
32.7 
23.3 
52.1d 
18.4 
52.1d 
37.1 
37.9 
54.0 
33.9 
57.1 
40.4 
34.2 
30.6 
44.3 
33.9 
24.7 
69.0 
48.8 
42.9 
35.1 
33.8 

27.3 
36.8 
25.2 
34.8 
17.2 
35.8 
53.2 
34.4 
31.0 
30.5 
31.1 
25.8 
20.0 
23.9 
55.5 
34.6 
33.1 
37.1 
32.7 
29.9 
55.4 
17.4 
62.9 
33.0 
30.8 
25.4 
23.5 
24.8 
57.2 
24.9 
31.0 
16.5 
40.7 
26.8 
52.0 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

50.0 
31.3 
35.5 
43.9 
46.2 
30.2d 
28.8 
30.2d 
37.3 
37.0 
34.6 
37.9 
24.4 
34.0 
39.6 
38.8 
42.0 
40.5 
44.8 
21.6 
35.8 
27.9 
48.0 
31.6 

41.5 
34.8 
33.0 
31.9 
34.4 
35.4 
34.2 
38.6 
25.1 
48.7 
44.1 
40.5 
37.8 
43.2 
27.8 
44.8 
39.6 
37.5 
34.4 
33.1 
27.8 
35.1 
29.2 
30.3 
41.5 
48.4 
28.2 
38.3 
32.2 
44.1 
42.9 
35.1 
34.8 
37.4 
25.5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

32.9 
13.0 
26.6 
22.3 
29.7 
10.6d 
47.6 
10.6d 
25.0 
20.3 
8.7 
27.1 
7.4 
21.7 
23.3 
25.9 
9.6 
24.8 
28.6 
6.7 
15.0 
24.4 
16.6 
30.9 

30.3 
27.0 
39.8 
27.6 
45.9 
24.8 
12.3 
24.5 
39.4 
20.4 
8.7 
30.0 
41.0 
30.9 
15.9 
9.5 
24.2 
23.9 
26.4 
35.9 
16.4 
45.9 
7.7 
33.3 
21.4 
24.8 
40.5 
34.5 
10.6 
29.4 
25.0 
45.7 
22.9 
34.6 
22.4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

rate

(%)

11.1 
..  
..  
..  
66.4 
  .. 
11.3 
.. 
.. 
..  
..  
.. 
.. 
..  
..  
1.6 
.. 
5.8 
3.0 
3.2 
5.8 
48.5 
.. 
..  

.. 
.. 
.. 
1.5 
8.3 
.. 
9.8 
..  
3.0 
..  
..  
..  
4.6 
..  
14.3 
..  
72.6 
1.9 
19.4 
..  
15.4 
7.4 
14.1 
3.8 
38.3 
.. 
..  
1.8 
12.0 
3.3 
76.9 
..  
..  
.. 
..  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

65.5 
59.2 
66.8 
59.8 
70.2 
55.9d 
65.7 
55.9d 
29.1 
65.6 
68.8 
58.0 
59.6 
64.3 
69.0 
70.9 
68.3 
63.9 
67.7 
58.1 
69.8 
69.3 
60.0 
56.9 

56.6 
36.1 
57.1 
58.7 
62.5 
58.6 
56.7 
68.1 
58.5 
66.0 
62.0 
30.0 
61.9 
61.0 
57.0 
62.0 
68.9 
69.3 
67.8 
49.7 
53.0 
68.7 
64.7 
55.3 
69.9 
45.8 
46.7 
48.8 
63.7 
66.6 
68.6 
58.6 
64.6 
63.7 
63.3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

6.1 
9.3 
6.6 
8.8 
7.1 
13.6d 
6.2 
13.6d 
10.4 
9.0 
10.0 
15.7 
10.0 
9.9 
8.3 
6.8 
11.0 
11.5 
8.4 
19.6 
10.9 
11.7 
13.0 
10.4 

14.4 
9.8 
16.9 
9.0 
8.6 
16.9 
13.3 
8.9 
6.1 
8.4 
13.5 
13.1 
7.9 
6.9 
20.6 
11.3 
7.9 
6.9 
10.5 
23.1 
21.9 
4.9 
8.4 
10.5 
7.5 
16.3 
12.1 
4.4 
10.0 
8.5 
6.6 
9.7 
7.7 
12.3 
22.3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

13.3 
8.9 
10.5 
12.1 
11.5 
16.3d 
8.3 
16.3d 
14.7 
12.6 
10.3 
19.6 
11.0 
13.1 
12.3 
9.0 
14.2 
16.3 
12.0 
23.2 
12.6 
16.2 
17.9 
15.3 

21.4 
12.3 
21.2 
13.5 
19.4 
19.6 
17.1 
11.8 
7.8 
11.2 
15.9 
18.2 
12.0 
15.6 
26.4 
14.1 
11.9 
7.5 
13.5 
32.6 
29.0 
8.9 
9.6 
13.7 
9.6 
17.3 
13.9 
3.4 
12.0 
11.0 
10.2 
9.2 
10.5 
16.9 
26.9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

6.8 
10.1 
6.1 
8.8 
7.6 
12.2d 
9.0 
12.2d 
13.9 
8.4 
9.3 
15.7 
8.1 
9.9 
7.9 
6.2 
9.0 
10.2 
8.0 
15.9 
9.9 
12.6 
12.4 
11.0 

13.8 
10.9 
16.8 
8.5 
9.5 
16.1 
11.3 
9.5 
6.9 
8.5 
12.6 
4.7 
8.5 
6.2 
18.8 
9.9 
7.9 
6.9 
10.9 
24.3 
20.3 
5.6 
6.9 
10.5 
7.4 
17.0 
13.6 
4.4 
8.5 
8.9 
6.4 
7.6 
7.2 
11.4 
20.9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

3.3
8.7
4.2
5.9
4.1
7.8d
4.3
7.8d
6.4
5.5
10.6
13.0
8.0
6.4
4.7
5.7
7.8
8.3
6.8
5.2
8.1
4.8
8.9
6.9

11.4
7.9
14.8
5.3
6.2
15.1
7.2
5.5
4.9
5.7
7.8
14.5
6.2
3.5
10.3
6.5
4.3
6.3
7.0
17.2
11.7
3.5
5.7
8.6
5.3
14.6
10.9
4.5
5.5
6.3
4.0
11.3
4.7
10.3
15.0

C

Economic activity status of international migrants

Unemployment rates of international migrants

By level of educational attainmenta

Low

Medium

upper

High

less than

upper

secondary

secondary or
post-secondary 
non-tertiary

tertiary

(% of labour force)

Tertiary

emigration 

Labour force 
participation

Total

unemployment

rateb                                        

rateb                                 

(both sexes) 

(both sexes)
(% of all 
migrants)

TABLE

Educational attainment levels of 

international migrantsa 

Stock of 

international 
migrants in

Low

less than 

upper

OECD countries

secondary

Medium

upper

secondary or
post-secondary 
non-tertiary

High

tertiary

HDI rank

(thousands)

(% of all migrants)

 119  Uzbekistan 
 120  Kyrgyzstan 
 121  Cape Verde 
 122  Guatemala 
 123  Egypt 
 124  Nicaragua 
 125  Botswana 
 126  Vanuatu 
 127  Tajikistan 
 128  Namibia 
 129  South Africa 
 130  Morocco 
 131  Sao Tome and Principe 
 132  Bhutan 
 133  Lao People’s Democratic Republic 
 134  India 
 135  Solomon Islands 
 136  Congo 
 137  Cambodia 
 138  Myanmar 
 139  Comoros 
 140  Yemen 
 141  Pakistan 
 142  Swaziland 
 143  Angola 
 144  Nepal 
 145  Madagascar 
 146  Bangladesh 
 147  Kenya 
 148  Papua New Guinea 
 149  Haiti 
 150  Sudan 
 151  Tanzania (United Republic of) 
 152  Ghana 
 153  Cameroon 
 154  Mauritania 
 155  Djibouti 
 156  Lesotho 
 157  Uganda 
 158  Nigeria 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 LOW HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
 159  Togo 
 160  Malawi 
 161  Benin 
 162  Timor-Leste 
 163  Côte d’Ivoire 
 164  Zambia 
 165  Eritrea 
 166  Senegal 
 167  Rwanda 
 168  Gambia 
 169  Liberia 
 170  Guinea 
 171  Ethiopia 
 172  Mozambique 
 173  Guinea-Bissau 
  174  Burundi 
 175  Chad 
 176  Congo (Democratic Republic of the)  
 177  Burkina Faso 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

45.2 
34.1 
87.9 
485.3 
308.7 
221.0 
4.1 
1.7 
8.9 
3.1 
351.7 
1,505.0 
11.6 
0.7 
264.2 
1,952.0 
1.8 
68.7 
239.1 
61.2 
17.6 
31.9 
669.0 
1.8 
196.2 
23.9 
76.6 
285.7 
198.1 
25.9 
462.9 
42.1 
70.2 
165.6 
58.5 
15.2 
5.4 
0.9 
82.1 
261.0 

18.4 
14.9 
14.4 
11.1 
62.6 
34.9 
48.0 
133.2 
14.8 
20.9 
41.0 
21.3 
124.4 
85.7 
30.0 
10.6 
5.8 
100.7 
8.3 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

25.0 
33.5 
73.7 
63.6 
18.8 
40.7 
12.3 
27.8 
30.4 
15.3 
14.6 
61.1 
72.2 
39.1 
49.5 
25.5 
25.3 
27.1 
52.4 
25.0 
63.6 
47.0 
43.6 
19.8 
52.9 
21.3 
33.3 
46.2 
26.0 
28.0 
39.3 
23.4 
25.1 
26.5 
23.3 
63.1 
34.1 
18.3 
27.4 
15.5 

27.9 
32.5 
25.8 
57.1 
38.1 
14.2 
36.0 
56.6 
25.4 
47.9 
20.6 
49.6 
24.3 
44.2 
66.3 
24.3 
22.7 
25.0 
46.9 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

40.0 
47.9 
19.1 
27.9 
30.7 
41.1 
46.3 
39.1 
45.1 
34.8 
34.6 
23.1 
16.9 
30.6 
35.7 
19.5 
29.5 
34.2 
30.8 
26.2 
25.6 
30.2 
21.4 
32.9 
26.5 
33.0 
34.6 
22.3 
32.7 
33.8 
40.6 
32.9 
30.4 
38.4 
32.3 
19.1 
34.7 
31.6 
29.0 
28.4 

34.1 
28.5 
30.5 
23.4 
34.2 
34.4 
39.3 
23.6 
32.6 
30.9 
44.8 
25.4 
43.6 
28.8 
20.5 
28.7 
33.1 
32.5 
22.6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

33.9 
18.4 
5.9 
8.4 
47.3 
18.1 
37.1 
27.2 
24.1 
45.9 
44.8 
13.9 
10.7 
23.7 
14.2 
51.2 
36.8 
34.9 
15.2 
40.9 
10.7 
19.3 
30.3 
42.9 
19.5 
39.2 
31.7 
27.2 
36.9 
31.2 
20.0 
39.7 
40.7 
31.3 
41.9 
17.2 
29.7 
45.8 
39.0 
53.1 

35.8 
34.8 
42.2 
12.4 
26.4 
47.9 
20.7 
19.1 
34.9 
16.5 
33.5 
22.4 
29.2 
26.4 
12.8 
38.0 
42.2 
35.5 
28.5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

rate

(%)

.. 
.. 
..  
11.2 
3.7 
14.3 
4.2 
..  
.. 
..  
6.8 
..  
..  
..  
..  
3.5 
..  
25.7 
..  
2.5 
..  
..  
9.8 
3.2 
..  
3.0 
..  
3.2 
27.2 
15.1 
67.5 
4.6 
15.6 
33.7 
12.5 
..  
..  
3.8 
24.2 
..  

11.8 
15.5 
11.3 
..  
..  
15.5 
..  
18.6 
20.8 
44.6 
24.7 
..  
..  
53.6 
71.5 
..  
..  
9.6 
..  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

59.0 
58.8 
70.5 
63.5 
59.9 
61.6 
45.3 
63.4 
57.5 
70.3 
74.2 
60.9 
73.7 
57.4 
63.0 
66.6 
63.5 
72.4 
62.2 
61.7 
66.8 
56.3 
55.2 
69.6 
77.0 
72.0 
67.2 
54.8 
73.6 
70.3 
66.2 
59.4 
69.9 
75.7 
68.9 
72.0 
56.5 
62.5 
72.9 
75.4 

71.9 
70.4 
70.9 
62.6 
70.7 
77.1 
65.2 
74.8 
59.0 
67.9 
73.7 
68.2 
68.4 
77.9 
76.5 
60.5 
73.5 
66.5 
72.3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

12.5 
12.8 
9.4 
8.2 
8.3 
8.7 
14.3 
12.6 
12.4 
6.0 
5.5 
19.8 
9.3 
14.1 
9.6 
5.9 
10.8 
26.4 
11.2 
5.8 
40.8 
9.1 
10.9 
7.4 
9.7 
6.3 
17.7 
12.5 
6.1 
8.7 
11.3 
16.2 
5.9 
9.6 
21.8 
22.2 
24.9 
6.0 
6.9 
11.2 

21.3 
7.2 
19.7 
12.1 
22.7 
6.3 
11.3 
18.5 
26.4 
15.0 
9.3 
24.6 
9.5 
6.7 
16.7 
24.5 
20.5 
21.8 
15.3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

16.0 
17.3 
9.7 
9.1 
12.9 
12.0 
10.6 
16.6 
18.0 
10.6 
10.1 
22.6 
9.8 
13.4 
12.4 
9.8 
18.3 
37.4 
14.6 
8.2 
45.4 
8.8 
15.1 
12.2 
11.4 
6.2 
25.0 
17.9 
8.2 
13.2 
15.2 
25.1 
8.1 
14.2 
32.6 
23.1 
37.4 
.. 
9.0 
20.7 

28.0 
10.2 
26.9 
14.8 
28.0 
11.9 
14.8 
20.4 
37.4 
20.3 
20.8 
31.6 
14.9 
8.9 
18.0 
37.0 
30.6 
31.9 
16.8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

12.7 
12.3 
9.7 
7.4 
9.7 
8.0 
17.6 
10.1 
12.3 
6.1 
6.6 
19.0 
9.9 
12.7 
8.4 
7.0 
15.0 
28.3 
9.5 
6.5 
36.1 
10.6 
10.6 
6.6 
10.2 
7.2 
18.3 
12.0 
7.0 
9.5 
10.8 
14.8 
7.4 
9.7 
24.5 
24.8 
23.2 
9.9 
8.1 
13.9 

22.2 
7.7 
22.8 
11.6 
22.9 
7.7 
10.3 
19.2 
27.3 
12.1 
9.2 
20.2 
8.9 
7.0 
16.3 
26.5 
20.6 
24.4 
13.9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

10.5
9.7
5.1
5.4
6.5
5.2
10.6
12.1
8.5
4.8
3.7
12.2
5.8
14.1
6.0
4.3
5.7
18.5
6.4
4.5
25.7
6.8
7.3
6.1
4.9
5.8
11.9
7.5
4.1
4.9
6.6
13.9
4.2
6.4
15.9
15.8
16.8
3.8
5.0
7.9

16.2
4.7
14.3
4.5
16.1
4.1
7.8
12.3
21.5
7.5
5.0
15.7
7.0
3.5
11.2
18.1
16.5
15.1
13.8

153

C

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009

Education and employment of international migrants in OECD countries 
(aged 15 years and above)  

 

 

 

 

Educational attainment levels of 

international migrantsa 

Stock of 

international 
migrants in

Low

less than 

upper

OECD countries

secondary

Medium

upper

secondary or
post-secondary 
non-tertiary

High

tertiary

HDI rank

(thousands)

(% of all migrants)

178  Mali 
179  Central African Republic 
180  Sierra Leone 
181  Afghanistan 
182  Niger 

 

 

 

 

OTHER UN MEMBER STATES
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  Iraq 
  Kiribati 
  Korea (Democratic People’s Rep. of)   
  Marshall Islands 
  Micronesia (Federated States of) 
  Monaco 
  Nauru 
  Palau 
  San Marino 
  Somalia 
  Tuvalu 
  Zimbabwe 

 

 

 

 

 

45.2 
9.8 
40.2 
141.2 
4.8 

335.5 
1.7 
1.2 
5.3 
6.5 
12.3 
0.5 
2.1 
2.8 
125.1 
0.9 
77.4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  Africa 
 
  Asia 
 
  Europe 
 
  Latin America and the Caribbean   
  Northern America 
 
  Oceania 
 
   
 
  OECD 
 
  European Union (EU27) 
 
  GCC 
 
 
   
  Very high human development 
 
     Very high HD: OECD 
 
     Very high HD: non-OECD 
 
  High human development 
 
  Medium human development 
 
  Low human development 
 
   
 
  World (excluding the former Soviet 
 
              Union and Czechoslovakia) 
 
  World 
 
   
 

6,555.3T 
17,522.0T 
27,318.1T 
18,623.0T 
1,923.8T 
1,098.2T 

 

 

33,500.2T 
20,514.2T 
98.6T 
 

 

21,480.5T 
20,281.1T 
1,199.3T 
28,213.0T 
22,102.2T 
1,244.8T 

 

 

69,018.3T 

 

75,715.9Te 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

68.3 
33.4 
23.5 
44.7 
26.6 

38.9 
38.3 
21.7 
34.9 
26.9 
41.4 
35.3 
12.7 
61.6 
44.0 
38.9 
14.9 

44.6 
33.0 
38.6 
53.8 
18.8 
26.6 
 
44.5 
37.1 
19.2 
 
33.4 
33.5 
30.6 
49.4 
37.8 
37.7 
 
41.4 

 

41.0 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

18.7 
33.1 
37.4 
28.9 
34.3 

26.9 
33.9 
32.1 
54.1 
59.7 
35.1 
34.7 
58.9 
25.7 
30.6 
27.2 
39.9 

28.6 
29.8 
35.7 
31.9 
35.8 
38.7 

32.3 
35.9 
40.0 

34.5 
34.6 
33.2 
33.2 
30.4 
32.1 

32.3 

 

32.7 

 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

12.6 
32.7 
33.7 
19.4 
37.5 

26.6 
20.2 
38.6 
10.9 
13.3 
23.0 
21.6 
28.3 
12.4 
12.5 
6.2 
40.6 

24.5 
34.3 
21.6 
13.8 
42.5 
27.4 
 
20.3 
23.0 
37.9 
 
27.9 
27.6 
32.2 
15.7 
29.2 
25.8 
 
23.5 

 

23.5 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

Economic activity status of international migrants

Unemployment rates of international migrants

Tertiary

emigration 

Labour force 
participation

Total

unemployment

rateb                                        

rateb                                 

rate

(%)

14.6 
9.1 
34.5 
6.4 
5.8 

8.4 
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
9.4 

9.3 
3.6 
7.0 
6.0 
0.7 
4.0 
 
2.9 
7.0 
6.3 
 
2.7 
2.6 
12.2 
5.1 
5.2 
12.8 

 
3.7 
 
3.7 
 

 

 

 

(both sexes) 

(both sexes)
(% of all 
migrants)

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

74.9 
69.1 
71.8 
47.3 
68.1 

49.5 
57.5 
58.3 
58.1 
68.9 
50.8 
62.4 
71.5 
44.3 
42.0 
57.2 
73.4 

63.4 
60.9 
56.5 
61.4 
59.3 
71.4 

58.3 
56.7 
48.1 

57.9 
57.8 
59.3 
59.3 
61.8 
65.9 

60.3 

 

59.7 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

24.9 
24.2 
10.7 
13.6 
18.5 

17.8 
8.4 
6.5 
19.9 
11.5 
11.1 
8.2 
8.1 
4.3 
28.2 
16.1 
7.0 

16.5 
9.0 
8.8 
9.4 
4.8 
7.8 
 
8.5 
7.6 
11.0 
 
6.6 
6.6 
6.6 
10.9 
10.3 
16.1 
 
9.3 
 
9.5 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

By level of educational attainmenta

Low

Medium

upper

High

less than

upper

secondary

secondary or
post-secondary 
non-tertiary

tertiary

(% of labour force)

27.1 
35.6 
19.1 
13.9 
27.8 

27.4 
7.7 
8.3 
27.9 
17.9 
16.4 
22.2 
12.1 
6.2 
37.0 
19.2 
11.0 

22.8 
14.6 
12.6 
11.6 
8.6 
11.8 

12.2 
11.5 
17.6 

10.4 
10.5 
8.2 
14.0 
15.2 
21.5 

13.3 

 

13.6 

 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

24.4 
23.6 
10.5 
13.1 
17.8 

12.5 
11.6 
4.7 
20.5 
11.1 
12.3 
6.0 
9.2 
2.7 
24.0 
13.0 
8.6 

15.7 
8.6 
8.5 
8.3 
6.1 
7.9 

7.7 
7.6 
13.4 

6.7 
6.6 
7.9 
9.8 
9.9 
15.2 

8.7 

9.0 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

14.4
17.8
6.5
12.5
14.1

12.6
4.8
6.7
4.8
4.6
5.7
2.4
5.1
3.6
18.9
6.8
4.4

9.0
5.0
5.3
5.7
3.2
4.2

4.1
4.3
7.3

3.9
3.8
4.8
6.6
6.0
10.4

5.2

5.5

SOURCES
Columns 1–4 and 8–10: OECD (2009a). 
Columns 5: OECD (2008a). 
Columns 6 and 7: calculated based on data 
from OECD (2009a).

NOTES

a. Percentages may not sum to 100% as those whose 

educational attainment levels are unknown are 
excluded.

b. Persons whose economic activity status is unknown 

are excluded.

c. Data for Montenegro are included with those from 

Serbia.

d. Data refer to Serbia and Montenegro prior to its 

separation into two independent states in June 2006.

e. Data are aggregates from original data source.

154
154

TABLE

D

HDI rank

1  Norway 
2  Australia 
3  Iceland 
4  Canada 
5  Ireland 
6  Netherlands 
7  Sweden 
8  France 
9  Switzerland 

VERY HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  10  Japan 
  11  Luxembourg 
  12  Finland 
  13  United States 
  14  Austria 
  15  Spain 
  16  Denmark 
  17  Belgium 
  18  Italy 
  19  Liechtenstein 
  20  New Zealand 
  21  United Kingdom 
  22  Germany 
  23  Singapore 
  24  Hong Kong, China (SAR) 
  25  Greece 
  26  Korea (Republic of) 
  27  Israel 
  28  Andorra 
  29  Slovenia 
  30  Brunei Darussalam 
  31  Kuwait 
  32  Cyprus 
  33  Qatar 
  34  Portugal 
  35  United Arab Emirates 
  36  Czech Republic 
  37  Barbados 
  38  Malta 

HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
  39  Bahrain 
  40  Estonia 
  41  Poland 
  42  Slovakia 
  43  Hungary 
  44  Chile 
  45  Croatia 
  46  Lithuania 
  47  Antigua and Barbuda 
  48  Latvia 
  49  Argentina 
  50  Uruguay 
  51  Cuba 
  52  Bahamas 
  53  Mexico 
  54  Costa Rica 
  55  Libyan Arab Jamahiriya 
  56  Oman 
  57  Seychelles 
  58  Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) 
  59  Saudi Arabia 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009

Conflict and insecurity-induced movement 

 

 

 

D

By country of origin

International

Internal

By country of asylum

International

Stock of refugees      

Share of 

international 

emigrant 

stock                   
(%)

Share 
of world 
refugees                                             

(%)
2007

Total                               
(thousands)

2007

People in 
refugee-like 
situations

Stock of 
asylum 
seekers 

(pending cases)                                        

Internally 
displaced 
peopled 

Stock of refugees                                       

People in 
refugee-like 
situations

Stock of 
asylum 
seekers 

(pending cases)

Total                                                  
(thousands)

Total                                                  
(thousands)

Total                                            
(thousands)

Total                                                  
(thousands)

2007

2007

2008

2007

Share of 

international 
immigrant 
stock                   
(%)

Share 
of world 
refugees                                             

(%)
2007

Total                                                  
(thousands)

Total                                                  
(thousands)

2007

2007

0.0 
0.1 
0.0 
0.5 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.1 
0.0 
0.5 
0.0 
0.0 
2.2 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.1 
0.1 
0.0 
0.0 
0.2 
0.1 
0.1 
0.0 
0.1 
1.2 
1.5 
0.0 
0.1 
0.0 
0.7 
0.0 
0.1 
0.0 
0.3 
1.4 
0.0 
0.0 

0.1 
0.3 
2.9 
0.3 
3.4 
1.0 
100.4 
0.5 
0.0 
0.7 
1.2 
0.2 
7.1 
0.0 
5.6 
0.4 
2.0 
0.0 
0.1 
5.1 
0.8 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.1 
0.0 
0.0 
0.1 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.1 
0.2 
0.1 
0.0 
0.0 
0.2 
0.0 
0.4 
0.0 
0.2 
0.4 
0.0 
0.0 

0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
0.8 
0.2 
16.5 
0.1 
0.0 
0.3 
0.2 
0.1 
0.7 
0.0 
0.1 
0.3 
2.5 
0.2 
0.3 
1.4 
0.3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.7 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.4 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

0.0 
0.0 
.. 
0.1 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.1 
0.0 
0.0 
.. 
.. 
1.1 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
.. 
0.0 
0.0 
0.1 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.4 
0.9 
0.0 
0.0 
.. 
0.1 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.1 
0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.1 
0.2 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
.. 
0.0 
0.1 
0.0 
1.1 
0.0 
14.8 
0.1 
0.6 
0.0 
0.0 
1.8 
0.0 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
  150–420 b 
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
3 c 
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
6  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  

34.5 
22.2 
0.0 
175.7 
9.3 
86.6 
75.1 
151.8 
45.7 
1.8 
2.7 
6.2 
281.2 
30.8 
5.1 
26.8 
17.6 
38.1 
0.3 
2.7 
299.7 
578.9 
0.0 
0.1 
2.2 
0.1 
1.2 
.. 
0.3 
.. 
0.2 
1.2 
0.0 
0.4 
0.2 
2.0 
.. 
3.0 

0.0 
0.0 
9.8 
0.3 
8.1 
1.4 
1.6 
0.7 
.. 
0.0 
3.3 
0.1 
0.6 
.. 
1.6 
11.6 
4.1 
0.0 
.. 
0.9 
240.7 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

9.3 
0.5 
0.2 
2.8 
1.5 
5.0 
6.7 
2.3 
2.8 
0.1 
1.8 
3.6 
0.7 
2.7 
0.1 
6.4 
2.0 
1.2 
2.4 
0.3 
5.1 
5.5 
0.0 
0.0 
0.2 
0.0 
0.0 
.. 
0.2 
.. 
0.0 
1.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.4 
.. 
25.7 

0.0 
0.0 
1.2 
0.2 
2.4 
0.6 
0.2 
0.4 
.. 
0.0 
0.2 
0.2 
4.0 
.. 
0.3 
2.6 
0.7 
0.0 
.. 
0.1 
3.8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

0.2 
0.2 
0.0 
1.2 
0.1 
0.6 
0.5 
1.1 
0.3 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
2.0 
0.2 
0.0 
0.2 
0.1 
0.3 
0.0 
0.0 
2.1 
4.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
.. 
0.0 
.. 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
.. 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 
0.1 
0.0 
0.1 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
.. 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
.. 
0.0 
0.1 
0.0 
0.0 
.. 
0.0 
1.7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
.. 
0.0 
.. 
38.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
.. 
0.0 

0.0 
 
0.0 
 
0.0 
 
0.0 
 
0.0 
 
0.0 
 
0.0 
 
0.0 
 
.. 
 
0.0 
 
0.0 
 
0.0 
 
0.0 
 
.. 
 
0.0 
 
5.6 
 
0.0 
 
0.0 
 
.. 
 
  200.0 
 
0.0 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

6.7
1.5
0.0
37.5
4.4
5.8
27.7
31.1
10.7
1.5
0.0
0.7
83.9
38.4
0.0
0.6
15.2
1.5
0.0
0.2
10.9
34.1
0.0
1.9
28.5
1.2
5.8
..
0.1
..
0.7
11.9
0.0
0.0
0.1
2.2
..
0.9

0.0
0.0
5.9
0.6
1.6
0.5
0.1
0.0
..
0.0
1.1
0.0
0.0
..
0.0
0.5
2.8
0.0
..
9.6
0.3

155

D

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009

Conflict and insecurity-induced movement 

 

 

 

By country of origin

International

Internal

By country of asylum

International

Stock of refugees      

Share of 

international 

emigrant 

stock                   
(%)

Share 
of world 
refugees                                             

(%)
2007

Total                               
(thousands)

2007

People in 
refugee-like 
situations

Stock of 
asylum 
seekers 

(pending cases)                                        

Internally 
displaced 
peopled 

Stock of refugees                                       

People in 
refugee-like 
situations

Stock of 
asylum 
seekers 

(pending cases)

Total                                                  
(thousands)

Total                                                  
(thousands)

Total                                            
(thousands)

Total                                                  
(thousands)

2007

2007

2008

2007

Share of 

international 
immigrant 
stock                   
(%)

Share 
of world 
refugees                                             

(%)
2007

Total                                                  
(thousands)

Total                                                  
(thousands)

2007

2007

HDI rank

 

 

 

 

 

 

60  Panama 
61  Bulgaria 
62  Saint Kitts and Nevis 
63  Romania 
64  Trinidad and Tobago 
65  Montenegro 
66  Malaysia 
67  Serbia 
68  Belarus 
69  Saint Lucia 
70  Albania 
71  Russian Federation 
72  Macedonia (the Former Yugoslav Rep. of)  
73  Dominica 
74  Grenada 
75  Brazil 
76  Bosnia and Herzegovina 
77  Colombia 
78  Peru 
79  Turkey 
80  Ecuador 
81  Mauritius 
82  Kazakhstan 
83  Lebanon 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

MEDIUM HUMAN DEVELOPMENT

84  Armenia 
85  Ukraine 
86  Azerbaijan 
87  Thailand 
88  Iran (Islamic Republic of) 
89  Georgia 
90  Dominican Republic 
91  Saint Vincent and the Grenadines 
92  China 
93  Belize 
94  Samoa 
95  Maldives 
96  Jordan 
97  Suriname 
98  Tunisia 
99  Tonga 
100  Jamaica 
101  Paraguay 
102  Sri Lanka 
103  Gabon 
104  Algeria 
105  Philippines 
106  El Salvador 
107  Syrian Arab Republic 
108  Fiji 
109  Turkmenistan 
110  Occupied Palestinian Territories 
111  Indonesia 
112  Honduras 
113  Bolivia 
114  Guyana 
115  Mongolia 
116  Viet Nam 
117  Moldova 
118  Equatorial Guinea 

156

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

0.1 
3.3 
0.0 
5.3 
0.2 
0.6 
0.6 
165.6 
5.0 
0.2 
15.3 
92.9 
8.1 
0.1 
0.3 
1.6 
78.3 
70.1 
7.7 
221.9 
1.3 
0.1 
5.2 
13.1 

15.4 
26.0 
15.9 
2.3 
68.4 
6.8 
0.4 
0.6 
149.1 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
1.8 
0.1 
2.5 
0.0 
0.8 
0.1 
134.9 
0.1 
10.6 
1.5 
6.0 
13.7 
1.8 
0.7 
4,953.4g 
20.2 
1.2 
0.4 
0.7 
1.1 
327.8 
4.9 
0.4 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

0.1 
0.4 
0.0 
0.5 
0.1 
.. 
0.1 
9.8 
0.3 
0.4 
1.9 
0.8 
3.1 
0.1 
0.4 
0.2 
6.2 
4.3 
1.0 
7.4 
0.2 
0.0 
0.1 
2.3 

2.0 
0.4 
1.2 
0.3 
7.4 
0.7 
0.0 
1.1 
2.6 
0.0 
0.0 
1.6 
0.3 
0.0 
0.4 
0.0 
0.1 
0.0 
14.5 
0.2 
0.5 
0.0 
0.6 
3.2 
1.3 
0.3 
.. 
1.1 
0.3 
0.1 
0.2 
14.5 
16.3 
0.7 
0.4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
1.2 
0.0 
0.0 
0.1 
0.6 
0.1 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.5 
0.5 
0.1 
1.6 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.1 

0.1 
0.2 
0.1 
0.0 
0.5 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
1.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.9 
0.0 
0.1 
0.0 
0.0 
0.1 
0.0 
0.0 
34.6g 
0.1 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
2.3 
0.0 
0.0 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.1 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
481.6 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
5.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
6.0 
0.3 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

0.0 
0.4 
0.0 
0.6 
0.2 
0.3 
0.1 
14.2 
1.2 
0.2 
1.6 
17.6 
1.1 
0.0 
0.1 
0.3 
1.1 

..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
248 d 
..  
..  
..  
18–137 e 
1  
..  
..  
..  
125  
43.1      2,650-4,360  c 
3.1 
150 c 
  954-1,200  
9.2 
..  
0.3 
0.0 
..  
0.5 
..  
90–390 f 
2.6 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

4.0 
2.4 
1.9 
0.4 
10.4 
4.1 
0.1 
0.5 
15.5 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.7 
0.0 
0.3 
0.0 
0.2 
0.0 
6.0 
0.0 
1.4 
0.8 
18.6 
6.9 
0.2 
0.1 
2.4 
2.4 
0.7 
0.4 
0.2 
2.0 
1.8 
0.9 
0.0 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

8 c 
..  
573 h 
..  
..  
0 i 
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
500  
..  
.. j 
314 k 
..  
433  
..  
..  
25–115 c,l 
150–250 c 
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  

1.9 
4.8 
.. 
1.8 
0.0 
8.5 
32.2 
98.0 
0.6 
0.0 
0.1 
1.7 
1.2 
.. 
.. 
3.8 
7.4 
0.2 
1.0 
7.0 
14.9 
0.0 
4.3 
466.9g 

4.6 
2.3 
2.4 
125.6 
963.5 
1.0 
.. 
.. 
301.1 
0.4 
.. 
.. 
2,431.0g 
0.0 
0.1 
.. 
.. 
0.1 
0.2 
8.8 
94.1 
0.1 
0.0 
1,960.8g 
0.0 
0.1 
1,813.8g 
0.3 
0.0 
0.6 
.. 
0.0 
2.4 
0.2 
0.0 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1.8 
4.6 
.. 
1.3 
0.1 
15.6 
1.6 
14.5 
0.1 
0.0 
0.1 
0.0 
1.0 
.. 
.. 
0.6 
21.0 
0.2 
2.4 
0.5 
12.1 
0.0 
0.1 
64.7g 

0.9 
0.0 
0.9 
12.8 
46.7 
0.5 
.. 
.. 
51.0 
0.9 
.. 
.. 
.. 
0.0 
0.3 
.. 
.. 
0.0 
0.0 
3.6 
38.8 
0.0 
0.1 
.. 
0.0 
0.1 
.. 
0.2 
0.1 
0.6 
.. 
0.1 
4.3 
0.0 
0.0 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

0.0 
0.0 
.. 
0.0 
0.0 
0.1 
0.2 
0.7 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
.. 
.. 
0.0 
0.1 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.1 
0.0 
0.0 
3.3g 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.9 
6.7 
0.0 
.. 
.. 
2.1 
0.0 
.. 
.. 
17.0g 
0.0 
0.0 
.. 
.. 
0.0 
0.0 
0.1 
0.7 
0.0 
0.0 
13.7g 
0.0 
0.0 
12.7g 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
.. 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

15.0 
0.0 
.. 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.4 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.1 
.. 
.. 
17.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
250.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.1 

0.0 
5.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
.. 
.. 
0.0 
0.0 
.. 
.. 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
.. 
.. 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
.. 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

0.5
1.0
..
0.2
0.1
0.0
6.9
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
3.1
0.2
..
..
0.4
0.6
0.1
0.5
5.2
27.4
0.0
0.1
0.6

0.1
1.3
0.1
13.5
1.2
0.0
..
..
0.1
0.0
..
..
0.4
0.0
0.1
..
..
0.0
0.2
4.3
1.6
0.0
0.0
5.9
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.2
0.0
0.2
..
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.0

TABLE

D

By country of origin

International

Internal

By country of asylum

International

Stock of refugees      

Share of 

international 

emigrant 

stock                   
(%)

Share 
of world 
refugees                                             

(%)
2007

Total                               
(thousands)

2007

People in 
refugee-like 
situations

Stock of 
asylum 
seekers 

(pending cases)                                        

Internally 
displaced 
peopled 

Stock of refugees                                       

People in 
refugee-like 
situations

Stock of 
asylum 
seekers 

(pending cases)

Total                                                  
(thousands)

Total                                                  
(thousands)

Total                                            
(thousands)

Total                                                  
(thousands)

2007

2007

2008

2007

Share of 

international 
immigrant 
stock                   
(%)

Share 
of world 
refugees                                             

(%)
2007

Total                                                  
(thousands)

Total                                                  
(thousands)

2007

2007

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

5.7 
2.3 
0.0 
6.2 
6.8 
1.9 
0.0 
0.0 
0.5 
1.1 
0.5 
4.0 
0.0 
108.1 
10.0 
20.5 
0.0 
19.7 
17.7 
191.3 
0.1 
1.6 
31.9 
0.0 
186.2 
3.4 
0.3 
10.2 
7.5 
0.0 
22.3 
523.0 
1.3 
5.1 
11.5 
33.1 
0.6 
0.0 
21.3 
13.9 

22.5 
0.1 
0.3 
0.0 
22.2 
0.2 
208.7 
15.9 
81.0 
1.3 
91.5 
8.3 
59.8 
0.2 
1.0 
375.7 
55.7 
370.4 
0.6 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

0.2 
0.4 
0.0 
1.0 
0.3 
0.4 
0.1 
0.0 
0.1 
4.6 
0.1 
0.2 
0.1 
.. 
2.8 
0.2 
1.1 
3.6 
5.7 
60.8 
0.2 
0.3 
0.9 
0.2 
21.2 
0.3 
0.2 
0.1 
1.7 
0.1 
3.0 
81.4 
0.4 
0.5 
6.8 
28.3 
3.8 
0.0 
12.5 
1.3 

10.5 
0.1 
0.0 
0.0 
12.6 
0.1 
36.7 
3.3 
33.7 
2.5 
.. 
1.4 
21.0 
0.0 
0.8 
96.7 
18.4 
45.1 
0.0 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.8 
0.1 
0.1 
0.0 
0.1 
0.1 
1.3 
0.0 
0.0 
0.2 
0.0 
1.3 
0.0 
0.0 
0.1 
0.1 
0.0 
0.2 
3.7 
0.0 
0.0 
0.1 
0.2 
0.0 
0.0 
0.1 
0.1 

0.2 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.2 
0.0 
1.5 
0.1 
0.6 
0.0 
0.6 
0.1 
0.4 
0.0 
0.0 
2.6 
0.4 
2.6 
0.0 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.4 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
2.5 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.1 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1.8 
0.4 
0.0 
15.0 
1.6 
0.8 
0.1 
.. 
0.1 
0.0 
0.1 
0.5 
.. 
1.6 
0.2 
7.1 
0.0 
6.1 
0.4 
19.0 
0.0 
0.3 
8.6 
0.1 
0.8 
2.1 
0.0 
7.3 
1.7 
0.0 
10.3 
19.4 
2.9 
1.7 
3.0 
1.0 
0.0 
0.0 
3.2 
9.7 

1.3 
8.2 
0.2 
0.0 
7.4 
0.5 
12.2 
0.9 
8.2 
1.0 
3.5 
1.9 
29.5 
0.7 
0.3 
7.1 
2.7 
36.3 
0.3 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
500 k 
..  
8 c 
..  
503 m 
..  
25–35  
.. n 
..  
20 c,o 

50–70  
..  
500 c 
400 p 
..  
..  
6,000 q 
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
869 r 
..  

2 c 
..  
..  
30  
621  
..  
32 c 
10–70  
..  
..  
..  
..  
200 c 
..  
..  
100  
186  
1,400 s 
..  

1.1 
0.4 
.. 
0.4 
97.6 
0.2 
2.5 
0.0 
1.1 
6.5 
36.7 
0.8 
0.0 
.. 
0.0 
161.5 
.. 
38.5 
0.2 
0.0 
0.0 
117.4 
887.3 
0.8 
12.1 
128.2 
0.0 
27.6 
265.7 
10.0 
0.0 
222.7 
435.6 
35.0 
60.1 
1.0 
6.7 
0.0 
229.0 
8.5 

1.3 
2.9 
7.6 
0.0 
24.6 
112.9 
5.0 
20.4 
53.6 
14.9 
10.5 
25.2 
85.2 
2.8 
7.9 
24.5 
294.0 
177.4 
0.5 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

0.1 
0.1 
.. 
0.7 
39.5 
0.5 
3.1 
0.1 
0.4 
5.0 
2.9 
1.5 
0.0 
.. 
0.0 
2.7 
.. 
29.9 
0.1 
0.0 
0.0 
25.8 
25.0 
2.0 
21.5 
15.7 
0.0 
2.7 
33.6 
39.2 
0.0 
34.8 
54.6 
2.1 
28.4 
1.5 
6.0 
0.0 
35.1 
0.9 

0.7 
1.1 
4.1 
0.0 
1.0 
39.3 
34.4 
9.3 
12.3 
6.4 
10.8 
6.3 
15.4 
0.7 
40.9 
30.0 
82.0 
36.9 
0.1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

0.0 
0.0 
.. 
0.0 
0.7 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.3 
0.0 
0.0 
.. 
0.0 
1.1 
.. 
0.3 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.8 
6.2 
0.0 
0.1 
0.9 
0.0 
0.2 
1.9 
0.1 
0.0 
1.6 
3.0 
0.2 
0.4 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
1.6 
0.1 

0.0 
0.0 
0.1 
0.0 
0.2 
0.8 
0.0 
0.1 
0.4 
0.1 
0.1 
0.2 
0.6 
0.0 
0.1 
0.2 
2.1 
1.2 
0.0 

 
0.0 
 
0.4 
 
.. 
 
0.0 
 
0.0 
 
0.0 
 
0.0 
 
0.0 
 
0.0 
 
0.0 
 
0.0 
 
0.0 
 
0.0 
 
.. 
 
0.0 
 
0.0 
 
.. 
 
0.0 
 
0.0 
 
0.0 
 
0.0 
 
0.0 
  1,147.8 
0.0 
 
0.0 
 
2.5 
 
 
0.0 
0.0 
 
0.0 
 
0.0 
 
0.0 
 
0.0 
 
 
0.0 
0.0 
 
0.0 
 
29.5 
 
0.0 
 
 
0.0 
0.0 
 
 
0.0 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

0.0
0.7
..
0.0
14.9
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1
1.2
170.9
0.7
0.0
..
0.0
2.4
..
4.8
0.2
0.0
0.0
0.7
3.1
0.3
2.9
1.6
0.0
0.1
5.8
0.0
0.0
7.3
0.3
0.4
2.2
0.0
0.5
0.0
5.8
0.7

0.1
6.8
0.5
0.0
1.8
0.0
2.0
2.5
0.7
0.0
0.1
4.0
0.2
4.2
0.3
7.5
0.0
0.1
0.6

157

HDI rank

 119  Uzbekistan 
 120  Kyrgyzstan 
 121  Cape Verde 
 122  Guatemala 
 123  Egypt 
 124  Nicaragua 
 125  Botswana 
 126  Vanuatu 
 127  Tajikistan 
 128  Namibia 
 129  South Africa 
 130  Morocco 
 131  Sao Tome and Principe 
 132  Bhutan 
 133  Lao People’s Democratic Republic 
 134  India 
 135  Solomon Islands 
 136  Congo 
 137  Cambodia 
 138  Myanmar 
 139  Comoros 
 140  Yemen 
 141  Pakistan 
 142  Swaziland 
 143  Angola 
 144  Nepal 
 145  Madagascar 
 146  Bangladesh 
 147  Kenya 
 148  Papua New Guinea 
 149  Haiti 
 150  Sudan 
 151  Tanzania (United Republic of) 
 152  Ghana 
 153  Cameroon 
 154  Mauritania 
 155  Djibouti 
 156  Lesotho 
 157  Uganda 
 158  Nigeria 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

LOW HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
 159  Togo 
 160  Malawi 
 161  Benin 
 162  Timor-Leste 
 163  Côte d’Ivoire 
 164  Zambia 
 165  Eritrea 
 166  Senegal 
 167  Rwanda 
 168  Gambia 
 169  Liberia 
 170  Guinea 
 171  Ethiopia 
 172  Mozambique 
 173  Guinea-Bissau 
  174  Burundi 
 175  Chad 
 176  Congo (Democratic Republic of the)  
 177  Burkina Faso 

 

 

 

 

 

D

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009

Conflict and insecurity-induced movement 

 

 

 

By country of origin

International

Internal

By country of asylum

International

Stock of refugees      

Share of 

international 

emigrant 

stock                   
(%)

Share 
of world 
refugees                                             

(%)
2007

Total                               
(thousands)

2007

People in 
refugee-like 
situations

Stock of 
asylum 
seekers 

(pending cases)                                        

Internally 
displaced 
peopled 

Stock of refugees                                       

People in 
refugee-like 
situations

Stock of 
asylum 
seekers 

(pending cases) 

Total                                                  
(thousands)

Total                                                  
(thousands)

Total                                            
(thousands)

Total                                                  
(thousands)

2007

2007

2008

2007

Share of 

international 
immigrant 
stock                   
(%)

Share 
of world 
refugees                                             

(%)
2007

Total                                                  
(thousands)

Total                                                  
(thousands)

2007

2007

HDI rank

178  Mali 
179  Central African Republic 
180  Sierra Leone 
181  Afghanistan 
182  Niger 

 

 

 

OTHER UN MEMBER STATES
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  Iraq 
  Kiribati 
  Korea (Democratic People’s Rep. of)   
  Marshall Islands 
  Micronesia (Federated States of) 
  Monaco 
  Nauru 
  Palau 
  San Marino 
  Somalia 
  Tuvalu 
  Zimbabwe 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1.0 
98.1 
32.1 
1,909.9 
0.8 

2,279.2 
0.0 
0.6 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
455.4 
0.0 
14.4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  Africa 
 
2,859.7T 
  Asia 
  10,552.2T 
  Europe 
516.0T 
 
  Latin America and the Caribbean   
142.9T 
  Northern America 
2.7T 
 
  Oceania 
2.0T 
 
   
 
 
 
  OECD 
240.9T 
 
  European Union (EU27) 
19.0T 
 
  GCC 
2.0T 
 
 
 
   
 
  Very high human development 
9.7T 
 
     Very high HD: OECD 
 
6.8T 
     Very high HD: non-OECD 
2.9T 
 
  High human development 
828.8T 
 
  Medium human development 
9,410.0T 
 
  Low human development 
 
3,827.1T 
   
 
 
  World (excluding the former Soviet 
  13,891.2T 
                Union and Czechoslovakia) 
 
  World 
  14,297.5T 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

0.1 
89.5 
34.0 
73.2 
0.2 

.. 
1.0 
0.1 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.3 
0.0 
0.0 
84.5 
0.1 
5.0 

 

11.4 
16.1 
0.9 
0.5 
0.1 
0.1 
 
0.5 
0.1 
0.2 
 
0.0 
0.0 
0.1 
1.5 
12.3 
28.9 
 

 

 
9.6 
 
7.3 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

0.0 
0.7 
0.2 
13.4 
0.0 

15.9 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
3.2 
0.0 
0.1 

20.0T 
73.8T 
3.6T 
1.0T 
0.0T 
0.0T 
 

1.7T 
0.1T 
0.0T 
 
0.1T 
0.0T 
0.0T 
5.8T 
65.8T 
26.8T 
 
97.2T 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3.5 
 
0.0 
 
 
0.0 
  1,147.8 
 
0.0 

30.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
2.0 
0.0 
0.0 

31.6T 
1,192.1T 
0.1T 
482.0T 
0.0T 
0.0T 

 

 

 

 

0.0T 
0.0T 
0.0T 

 

 

0.0T 
0.0T 
0.0T 
482.1T 
70.3T 
1,153.3T 
 
1,700.3T 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 

 

0.6 
1.3 
4.7 
16.1 
0.3 

27.7 
.. 
0.2 
.. 
.. 
.. 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
16.4 
.. 
34.3 

234.2T 
166.4T 
42.7T 
112.2T 
1.2T 
0.3T 
 
26.4T 
2.0T 
0.2T 
 
3.2T 
2.0T 
1.2T 
117.2T 
240.6T 
195.9T 
 
521.4T 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

..  
108  
..  
200 t 
..  

2,842 v 
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
1,100  
..  
880–960  

 

..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
 
..  
..  
..  
 
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
 
..  
  
26,000 Tu 

 

 

9.2 
7.5 
8.8 
0.0 
0.3 

42.4 
.. 
.. 
.. 
0.0 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
0.9 
.. 
4.0 

2,468.8T 
9,729.8T 
1,564.1T 
43.0T 
457.0T 
34.9T 
 

 

1,924.1T 
1,363.3T 
241.1T 
 

 

1,903.7T 
1,897.3T 
6.4T 
941.1T 
10,550.7T 
902.1T 

 

 

14,274.8T 

 

14,297.5T 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

5.6 
10.0 
5.8 
0.0 
0.2 

33.1 
.. 
.. 
.. 
0.1 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
4.2 
.. 
1.0 

14.0 
17.6 
2.4 
0.6 
1.0 
0.6 
 
2.0 
3.3 
1.9 
 
1.8 
2.0 
0.0 
2.5 
25.8 
10.7 

 
8.5 
 
7.3 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
0.0 
0.0 

0.3 
.. 
.. 
.. 
0.0 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
0.0 
.. 
0.0 

17.3T 
68.1T 
10.9T 
0.3T 
3.2T 
0.2T 

13.5T 
9.5T 
1.7T 

13.3T 
13.3T 
0.0T 
6.6T 
73.8T 
6.3T 

99.8T 

 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
.. 
.. 
.. 
0.0 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
0.0 
.. 
0.0 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

29.5T 
1,189.1T 
5.1T 
487.6T 
0.0T 
0.0T 

0.0T 
0.0T 
38.0T 

38.0T 
0.0T 
38.0T 
488.1T 
1,185.1T 
0.0T 

1.9
2.0
0.2
0.0
0.0

2.4
..
..
..
0.0
..
..
..
..
8.7
..
0.5

272.3T
69.3T
234.2T
41.2T
121.4T
1.7T

357.7T
223.3T
1.2T

365.7T
344.4T
21.3T
70.1T
259.2T
45.0T

1,705.9T 

731.6T

 

100.0T 

1,711.3Tu                    740.0Tu

100.0T 

1,711.3Tu 

740.0Tu 

NOTES

h  Figure refers to those displaced from Nagorno 

a  Estimates maintained by the IDMC are based on 

Karabakh and seven occupied territories.

various sources and are associated with high levels of 
uncertainty.

b Higher figure includes an estimate of internally 

displaced Bedouin.

c  Data refer to a year or period other than that specified.
d Figure includes 206,000 registered IDPs in Serbia plus 

an estimated 20,000 unregistered Roma displaced in 
Serbia and 21,000 IDPs in Kosovo.

e  Figure includes forced migrants registered in 

Ingushetia and Chechnya.

f  Figure includes 32,000 Palestinian refugees displaced 

i  Some 59,000 people displaced since the August 

2008 crisis have not been able to return. There are 
some 221,597 IDPs  based on the result of a survey 
conducted by UNHCR and the government but these 
are yet to be endorsed. 

j  There are no reliable estimates but in 2002, the EU 

estimated the number to be 100,000.

k  Figures are suspected to be underestimate.
l  Lower figure relates to IDPs evicted by home 

demolitions in Gaza between 2000 and 2004 whilst 
higher figure is cumulative since 1967.

as a result of fighting between Lebanese forces and 
Fatah al Islam in May–August 2007.

m Figure relates to the eastern border areas only.
n  Exact IDP numbers are unknown but conflict induced 

g Including Palestinian refugees under the responsibility 

of UNRWA (2008).

displacement has taken place in the North-West 
Frontier province, Baluchistan and Waziristan.

o  Figure refers to IDPs in Cabinda region only.
p  Figure takes into account the government’s return 

programme which claims that some 172,000 displaced 
due to the post-election violence returned in May 
2008.

q  Figures are based on separate estimates for Darfur, 

Khartoum and Southern Sudan.

r  Excludes IDPs in urban areas.
s  Figure includes an estimated 250,000 civilians who 

fled their homes in North Kiva due to fighting between 
the national army and CNDP rebels.

t  It is believed that there are more than 200,000 IDPs.
u  Data are aggregates from the original data source.
v  Figure is cumulative since 2001 and includes 1.5 

million people displaced due to a rise in inter-
communal violence since February 2006.

158

SOURCES
Columns 1, 3, 4, 7, 9 and 10: UNHCR (2009b). 
Column 2: calculated based on data from UNHCR 
(2009b) and Migration DRC (2007).
Columns 5 and 11: UNHCR (2009a). 
Column 6: IDMC (2009a). 
Column 8: calculated based on UNHCR (2009b) and 
UN (2009d).

TABLE

E

Inflows
total 
(US$ 
millions)

613  
 
3,862  
 
41  
 
..  
 
580  
 
2,548  
 
 
775  
  13,746  
2,035  
 
1,577  
 
 
1,565  
772  
 
2,972  
 
 
2,945  
  10,687  
989  
 
 
8,562  
3,165  
 
..  
 
650  
 
8,234  
 
 
8,570  
..  
 
348  
 
2,484  
 
1,128  
 
 
1,041  
..  
 
284  
 
..  
 
..  
 
172  
 
 
..  
3,945  
 
..  
 
1,332  
 
140  
 
 
40  

..  
 
 
426  
  10,496  
1,483  
 
413  
 
3  
 
1,394  
 
 
1,427  
24  
 
552  
 
604  
 
97  
 
 
..  
 
..  
  27,144  
635  
 
16  
 
39  
 
 
11  
136  
 
 
..  

HDI rank

1  Norway 
2  Australia 
3  Iceland 
4  Canada 
5  Ireland 
6  Netherlands 
7  Sweden 
8  France 
9  Switzerland 

VERY HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  10  Japan 
  11  Luxembourg 
  12  Finland 
  13  United States 
  14  Austria 
  15  Spain 
  16  Denmark 
  17  Belgium 
  18  Italy 
  19  Liechtenstein 
  20  New Zealand 
  21  United Kingdom 
  22  Germany 
  23  Singapore 
  24  Hong Kong, China (SAR) 
  25  Greece 
  26  Korea (Republic of) 
  27  Israel 
  28  Andorra 
  29  Slovenia 
  30  Brunei Darussalam 
  31  Kuwait 
  32  Cyprus 
  33  Qatar 
  34  Portugal 
  35  United Arab Emirates 
  36  Czech Republic 
  37  Barbados 
  38  Malta 

HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
  39  Bahrain 
  40  Estonia 
  41  Poland 
  42  Slovakia 
  43  Hungary 
  44  Chile 
  45  Croatia 
  46  Lithuania 
  47  Antigua and Barbuda 
  48  Latvia 
  49  Argentina 
  50  Uruguay 
  51  Cuba 
  52  Bahamas 
  53  Mexico 
  54  Costa Rica 
  55  Libyan Arab Jamahiriya 
  56  Oman 
  57  Seychelles 
  58  Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) 
  59  Saudi Arabia 

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009

International financial flows: remittances, official development  
assistance and foreign direct investment

E

Remittances    

Relative size of remittance inflows

Remittance inflows by continent of origin

Outflows 

Outflows 

(net 

 ODA received

total
(US$ 
millions)

per 

disbursements)

migrant
(US$)

per capita

per capita 

(US$)

(US$)

as % of 
net ODA 
receipts

as %
of GDP

ratio of 

remittances 

to FDI

Africa

Asia

Europe

Latin 

American 
and the 
Caribbean

Northern 
America

Oceania

2007

(% of total remittance inflows)

3,642   10,588  
869  
3,559  
4,333  
100  
..  
..  
4,363  
2,554  
7,830  
4,780  
1,022  
1,142  
677  
4,380  
9,805  
16,273  
4,037  
1,971  
9,281   53,446  
2,506  
1,190  
2,420  
3,075  
7,612  
4,438  
4,481  
..  
1,880  
933  
1,366  
..  
127  
1,499  
7,384  
1,041  
..  
1,236  
3,263  
2,291  
3,195  
..  
1,717  
..  
5,790  
1,534  
5,011  

391  
45,643  
2,985  
14,728  
2,958  
3,192  
11,287  
..  
1,207  
5,048  
13,860  
..  
380  
1,460  
4,070  
2,770  
..  
207  
405  
3,824  
371  
..  
1,311  
..  
2,625  
40  
54  

1,483  
96  
1,278  
73  
235  
6  
86  
566  
2  
45  
472  
4  
..  
171  
..  
271  
762  
3,670  
21  
598  
16,068  

5,018  
474  
1,818  
588  
742  
25  
129  
3,424  
113  
100  
315  
42  
..  
5,397  
..  
616  
1,234  
5,847  
4,309  
592  
2,526  

..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
46  
..  

..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
7  
36  
..  
49  
..  
2  
10  
8  
..  
1  
12  
3  
..  
32  
3  
..  

130  
186  
137  
..  
135  
155  
85  
223  
272  
12  
3,355  
146  
10  
352  
241  
182  
819  
54  
..  
155  
135  
104  
..  
48  
223  
23  
150  
..  
142  
..  
..  
201  
..  
371  
..  
131  
476  
99  

..  
319  
276  
275  
41  
0  
306  
421  
276  
242  
15  
29  
..  
..  
255  
142  
3  
15  
129  
5  
..  

..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
1,025.6   
..   

..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
2.1   
850.8   
..   
560.9   
..   
737.0   
285.6   
..   
..   
22,416.0   
1,205.1   
84.1   
..   
402.5   
191.0   
..   

0.2 
0.4 
0.2 
.. 
0.2 
0.3 
0.2 
0.5 
0.4 
0.0 
3.3 
0.3 
0.0 
0.8 
0.7 
0.3 
1.9 
0.2 
.. 
0.5 
0.3 
0.3 
.. 
0.2 
0.7 
0.1 
0.6 
.. 
0.7 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
1.8 
.. 
0.8 
.. 
.. 

.. 
2.3 
2.6 
2.0 
0.3 
0.0 
2.9 
3.8 
2.0 
2.1 
0.2 
0.4 
.. 
.. 
3.0 
2.3 
.. 
0.1 
1.9 
0.1 
.. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

0.2   
0.1   
0.0   
.. 
 
0.0   
0.0   
0.1   
0.1   
0.0   
0.1   
0.0   
0.1   
0.0   
0.1   
0.2   
0.1   
0.1   
0.1   
.. 
 
0.2   
0.0   
0.2   
.. 
 
0.0   
1.3   
0.7   
0.1   
.. 
 
0.2   
 
.. 
.. 
 
0.1   
.. 
 
0.7   
.. 
 
0.1   
.. 
 
0.0   

.. 
 
0.2   
0.5   
0.4   
0.0   
0.0   
0.3   
0.7   
0.1   
0.2   
0.1   
0.1   
.. 
 
.. 
 
1.1   
0.3   
0.0   
0.0   
0.0   
0.2   
.. 
 

0.0   
0.7   
0.0   
.. 
 
0.0   
0.0   
0.6   
13.5   
 
0.1 
0.1 
 
0.0   
0.2   
0.7   
0.0   
0.1 
 
0.3   
0.2   
 
0.1 
 
.. 
0.1 
 
0.3   
0.2   
.. 
 
0.0   
0.0   
0.0   
0.0   
.. 
 
0.0   
 
.. 
.. 
 
0.0   
.. 
 
 
3.1 
.. 
 
0.0   
.. 
 
0.0   

.. 
 
0.0   
0.0   
0.0   
0.0   
0.0   
0.0   
0.0   
0.0   
0.0   
0.0   
0.0   
.. 
 
.. 
 
0.0   
0.0   
14.3   
.. 
 
7.6   
0.0   
.. 
 

4.2   
6.7   
0.5   
.. 
 
0.2   
3.4   
3.2   
3.8   
3.2   
8.8   
0.2   
1.0   
12.0   
3.7   
0.3   
2.6   
2.4   
0.2   
 
.. 
2.1 
 
4.4   
12.1 
 
.. 
 
2.5   
8.2   
36.1 
 
70.0   
 
.. 
 
0.1 
 
.. 
.. 
 
6.3   
.. 
 
0.3   
 
.. 
 
4.1 
 
.. 
0.1 
 

.. 
 
4.5   
5.5   
1.8   
3.4   
0.0   
0.0   
6.8   
14.2   
5.9   
6.5   
 
0.1 
.. 
 
.. 
 
0.0   
0.2   
34.0   
.. 
 
0.2   
 
0.1 
.. 
 

.. 

.. 

66.2   
49.3   
63.4   
 
70.6   
51.5   
69.4   
58.8   
75.4   
15.8   
90.7   
83.7   
31.2   
73.6   
63.8   
67.4   
79.7   
56.2   
 
16.5   
26.2   
44.3   
 
17.7   
58.1 
 
6.9   
7.8   
 
.. 
77.0   
 
 
69.8   
 
62.4   
 
70.2   
 
 

.. 
36.1 

.. 

.. 
.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

 
81.5   
54.2   
85.4   
52.4   
25.7   
77.8   
74.2   
11.7   
67.4   
41.1 
 
29.2   
.. 
 
.. 
 
0.8   
6.5   
 
32.1 
 
.. 
51.2   
 
47.1 
.. 
 

0.7   
0.8   
0.3   
.. 
 
0.1   
1.8   
1.4   
4.7   
2.3   
9.0   
0.2   
0.2   
38.2  
1.2   
24.2  
0.7   
1.3   
9.8   
.. 
 
0.1   
0.7   
1.5   
.. 
 
0.2   
0.4   
1.3   
0.8   
.. 
 
0.5   
 
.. 
.. 
 
0.0   
.. 
 
12.1  
.. 
 
0.4   
.. 
 
0.0   

.. 
 
0.1   
1.0   
0.1   
0.9   
42.0  
0.3   
0.3   
10.6  
0.2   
24.5  
48.4  
.. 
 
.. 
 
0.3   
11.8  
0.1   
.. 
 
0.0   
14.7  
 

.. 

26.3   
25.7   
34.1   
..   
22.9   
30.4   
22.9   
16.8   
16.2   
62.3   
8.5   
12.3   
13.4   
17.9   
10.8   
24.6   
15.3   
27.4   
..   
8.2   
38.4   
39.1   
..   
68.9   
23.6   
52.0   
20.5   
..   
17.1   
..   
..   
11.5   
..   
21.2   
..   
23.3   
..   
19.3   

..   
12.3   
36.4   
12.0   
37.8   
27.2   
13.7   
17.2   
63.3   
22.7   
26.2   
17.9   
..   
..   
98.9   
81.2   
17.4   
..   
17.7   
37.8   
..   

2.7 
16.8 
1.6 
.. 
6.1 
12.9 
2.6 
2.3 
2.8 
4.0 
0.4 
2.6 
4.5 
3.5 
1.0 
4.5 
1.2 
6.3 
.. 
73.0 
29.9 
2.8 
.. 
10.8 
9.7 
3.7 
0.9 
.. 
5.2 
.. 
.. 
12.4 
.. 
0.8 
.. 
2.0 
.. 
44.5 

.. 
1.6 
2.9 
0.7 
5.5 
5.1 
8.1 
1.5 
0.1 
3.7 
1.7 
4.5 
.. 
.. 
0.0 
0.3 
2.0 
.. 
23.3 
0.3 
.. 

159

E

HDI rank

 

 
 

60  Panama 
61  Bulgaria 
62  Saint Kitts and Nevis 
63  Romania 
64  Trinidad and Tobago 
65  Montenegro 
66  Malaysia 
67  Serbia 
68  Belarus 
69  Saint Lucia 
70  Albania 
71  Russian Federation 
 
72  Macedonia (the Former Yugoslav Rep. of)  
73  Dominica 
 
74  Grenada 
75  Brazil 
76  Bosnia and Herzegovina 
77  Colombia 
78  Peru 
79  Turkey 
80  Ecuador 
81  Mauritius 
82  Kazakhstan 
83  Lebanon 

 

 

MEDIUM HUMAN DEVELOPMENT

84  Armenia 
85  Ukraine 
86  Azerbaijan 
87  Thailand 
88  Iran (Islamic Republic of) 
89  Georgia 
90  Dominican Republic 
91  Saint Vincent and the Grenadines 
92  China 
93  Belize 
94  Samoa 
95  Maldives 
96  Jordan 
97  Suriname 
98  Tunisia 
99  Tonga 
100  Jamaica 
101  Paraguay 
102  Sri Lanka 
103  Gabon 
104  Algeria 
105  Philippines 
106  El Salvador 
107  Syrian Arab Republic 
108  Fiji 
109  Turkmenistan 
110  Occupied Palestinian Territories 
111  Indonesia 
112  Honduras 
113  Bolivia 
114  Guyana 
115  Mongolia 
116  Viet Nam 
117  Moldova 
118  Equatorial Guinea 

160

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009

International financial flows: remittances, official development 
assistance and foreign direct investment 

 

 

 

Remittances    

Relative size of remittance inflows

Remittance inflows by continent of origin

Outflows 

Outflows 

(net 

 ODA received

total
(US$ 
millions)

per 

disbursements)

migrant
(US$)

per capita

per capita 

(US$)

(US$)

as % of 
net ODA 
receipts

as %
of GDP

ratio of 

remittances 

to FDI

Africa

Asia

Europe

Latin 

American 
and the 
Caribbean

Northern 
America

Oceania

2007

(% of total remittance inflows)

151  
86  
6  
351  
..  
..  
6,385  
..  
109  
4  
7  
17,716  
18  
0  
4  
896  
65  
95  
137  
106  
83  
12  
4,303  
2,845  

1,476  
822  
1,352  
2,630  
..  
..  
3,895  
..  
92  
488  
85  
1,467  
147  
37  
329  
1,396  
1,601  
775  
3,294  
80  
726  
557  
1,720  
4,332  

749  
176  
6  
42  
2,395  
435  
..  
..  
..  
..  
148  
28  
180  
28  
702  
7  
7,340  
4,372  
555  
22  
13  
1,422  
103   30,601  
479  
215  
65   12,233  
15  
402  
12   10,525  
25,724  
..  
853  
451  
..  
93  
1,213  
239  
1,836  
..  
9  
1,654   10,356  
94  
2  
72  
621  
61   54,887  
8,443  
77  
..  
..  
197  
87  
..  
..  

454  
..  
314  
110  
..  
35  
29  
235  
32  
..  
16  

..  
..  
57  
..  
14  
177  
8  
85  
9  
143  
96  
..  
105  
288  
215  
2  
113  
16  
9  
11  
16  
59  
13  
229  

117  
9  
27  
..  
1  
87  
13  
545  
1  
81  
197  
122  
85  
329  
30  
304  
10  
18  
31  
36  
12  
7  
13  
4  
69  
6  
465  
3  
65  
50  
168  
87  
29  
71  
62  

54  
273  
739  
398  
69  
..  
64  
..  
37  
188  
336  
29  
131  
385  
524  
23  
640  
98  
76  
16  
232  
170  
14  
1,407  

282  
97  
152  
26  
16  
158  
350  
254  
25  
260  
640  
10  
580  
305  
166  
992  
790  
77  
131  
8  
63  
185  
541  
41  
197  
..  
149  
27  
369  
97  
377  
74  
63  
395  
..  

..   
..   
1,289.0   
..   
503.0   
..   
851.4   
..   
425.4   
131.5   
350.9   
..   
124.9   
133.8   
244.3   
1,475.0   
568.6   
618.9   
810.2   
151.7   
1,436.6   
288.3   
110.1   
614.1   

240.6   
1,111.1   
571.4   
..   
1,094.5   
182.0   
2,674.2   
46.6   
2,282.3   
319.4   
324.3   
8.0   
680.8   
92.7   
553.2   
326.8   
8,231.9   
434.1   
429.1   
22.8   
543.9   
2,567.7   
4,211.6   
1,099.7   
287.9   
..   
32.0   
776.1   
565.4   
194.4   
224.6   
85.1   
220.3   
556.6   
..   

0.8 
5.7 
.. 
5.6 
0.4 
.. 
1.0 
.. 
0.8 
3.5 
10.1 
0.3 
3.6 
8.0 
.. 
0.3 
.. 
3.0 
1.9 
0.2 
6.9 
2.9 
0.2 
24.4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

.. 
5.0 
.. 

9.0 
3.9 
4.4 
0.7 
0.5 
6.8 
9.3 
6.7 
1.1 
5.3 
.. 
.. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22.7   
 
 
 
 
19.4 
 
3.2 
 
8.1 
 
0.1 
 
1.6 
 
11.6 
 
18.4 
 
2.2 
 
5.0 
 
.. 
 
.. 
 
1.5 
 
24.5 
6.6 
 
23.5   
 
.. 
 
7.9 
38.3   
 

.. 

0.1   
0.2   
 
 
0.9   
 
.. 
.. 
 
0.2   
.. 
 
0.2   
0.1   
2.2   
0.1   
0.8   
0.6   
0.4   
0.1   
1.2   
0.5   
0.4   
0.1   
16.9   
0.6   
0.0   
2.0   

1.2   
0.5   
.. 
 
0.2   
1.5   
0.4   
2.0   
0.3   
0.2   
0.7   
48.1   
0.2   
1.9   
.. 
 
1.1   
3.6   
2.5   
2.4   
4.2   
0.0   
1.3   
5.6   
2.4   
.. 
 
0.6   
 
.. 
.. 
 
0.9   
3.2   
4.5   
1.8   
0.6   
0.8   
3.0   
.. 
 

0.0   
0.0   
.. 
 
0.0   
0.0   
.. 
 
0.0   
.. 
 
0.0   
.. 
 
0.0   
0.0   
0.0   
0.0   
0.0   
0.0   
0.0   
0.0   
0.0   
0.0   
0.0   
1.0   
0.0   
2.1 
 

0.0   
0.0   
0.0   
0.0   
0.0   
0.0   
0.0   
 
.. 
0.1 
 
0.0   
0.0   
0.0   
0.0   
0.0   
8.9   
0.0   
0.0   
0.0   
0.0   
33.5   
0.7   
0.0   
0.0   
4.7   
0.0   
 
.. 
.. 
 
0.0   
0.0   
0.0   
0.0   
0.0   
0.0   
0.0   
.. 
 

.. 

0.1 
 
53.8   
 
15.0   
0.0   
.. 
 
80.3   
 
.. 
 
6.1 
.. 
 
0.4   
31.3   
6.1 
 
0.3   
0.0   
31.9   
0.1 
 
0.2   
7.5   
3.7   
0.0   
0.2   
9.6   
11.0   

6.2   
9.1 
 
16.3   
32.4   
9.5   
10.4   
0.1 
 
 
.. 
61.9   
0.0   
0.0   
37.5   
74.2   
0.0   
4.3   
0.2   
0.0   
1.1 
 
26.2   
0.0   
2.3   
20.1 
 
0.0   
33.0   
0.3   
 
.. 
 
.. 
65.1 
 
0.1 
 
2.0   
0.0   
11.0   
4.1 
 
6.4   
.. 
 

.. 

.. 

3.9   
37.2   
 
61.3   
8.0   
.. 
 
6.0   
 
.. 
88.4   
 
91.2   
61.8   
71.0   
27.5   
17.6   
27.3   
85.1 
 
29.1 
 
26.7   
92.4   
52.7   
75.1 
 
89.6   
33.1 
 

72.7   
77.0   
80.1 
 
25.3   
40.1 
 
86.3   
12.7   
.. 
 
7.4   
2.8   
0.0   
38.5   
7.6   
89.0   
84.0   
1.3   
17.3   
4.6   
45.7   
61.5   
94.7   
9.6   
1.1 
 
31.9   
3.5   
 
.. 
 
.. 
20.3   
2.6   
16.7   
7.0   
63.2   
17.9   
83.2   
 

.. 

8.1   
0.1   
.. 
 
0.4   
2.0   
.. 
 
0.0   
.. 
 
0.0   
.. 
 
0.0   
0.1   
0.1   
13.3  
12.6  
11.2  
0.1   
26.7  
16.4  
0.0   
3.9   
0.0   
0.0   
4.0   

0.0   
0.1   
0.0   
0.0   
0.1   
0.0   
2.9   
.. 
 
0.4   
4.9   
0.0   
0.4   
0.1   
7.3   
0.0   
0.5   
1.3   
82.9  
0.0   
0.0   
0.0   
0.0   
2.7   
2.7   
0.0   
 
.. 
.. 
 
0.0   
4.3   
49.3  
2.9   
0.1   
0.0   
0.0   
.. 
 

87.8   
8.5   
..   
22.0   
89.6   
..   
6.7   
..   
5.4   
..   
8.2   
6.5   
9.5   
58.9   
69.6   
29.1   
12.7   
43.7   
48.7   
3.2   
43.3   
8.2   
0.8   
36.9   

20.9   
13.4   
3.5   
37.8   
48.1   
3.2   
84.4   
..   
27.3   
92.2   
26.9   
5.3   
17.1   
3.8   
2.6   
48.0   
81.3   
11.3   
19.4   
4.8   
2.2   
66.2   
95.3   
25.7   
46.2   
..   
..   
9.9   
93.0   
31.7   
90.0   
24.8   
70.6   
10.2   
..   

0.1 
0.5 
.. 
1.3 
0.4 
.. 
7.0 
.. 
0.1 
.. 
0.2 
0.2 
13.3 
0.0 
0.2 
0.5 
2.0 
0.3 
0.8 
0.7 
0.2 
15.5 
0.0 
12.9 

0.2 
0.5 
0.0 
4.5 
2.2 
0.1 
0.0 
.. 
3.0 
0.1 
73.1 
18.4 
0.9 
0.0 
0.1 
50.0 
0.1 
0.2 
8.6 
0.2 
0.1 
4.1 
0.9 
2.0 
50.0 
.. 
.. 
4.6 
0.0 
0.3 
0.1 
1.0 
7.5 
0.2 
.. 

Inflows
total 
(US$ 
millions)

180  
2,086  
37  
8,533  
92  
..  
1,700  
..  
354  
31  
1,071  
4,100  
267  
26  
55  
4,382  
2,520  
4,523  
2,131  
1,209  
3,094  
215  
223  
5,769  

846  
4,503  
1,287  
1,635  
1,115  
696  
3,414  
31  
32,833  
75  
120  
3  
3,434  
140  
1,716  
100  
2,144  
469  
2,527  
11  
2,120  
16,291  
3,711  
824  
165  
..  
598  
6,174  
2,625  
927  
278  
194  
5,500  
1,498  
..  

TABLE

Inflows
total 
(US$ 
millions)

..  
 
715  
 
139  
 
4,254  
 
7,656  
 
740  
 
141  
 
5  
 
1,691  
 
17  
 
834  
 
6,730  
 
2  
 
..  
 
 
1  
  35,262  
 
20  
15  
 
353  
 
125  
 
12  
 
 
1,283  
5,998  
 
99  
 
..  
 
1,734  
 
 
11  
6,562  
 
1,588  
 
13  
 
1,222  
 
1,769  
 
 
14  
117  
 
167  
 
2  
 
28  
 
 
443  
849  
 
 
9,221  

HDI rank

 119  Uzbekistan 
 120  Kyrgyzstan 
 121  Cape Verde 
 122  Guatemala 
 123  Egypt 
 124  Nicaragua 
 125  Botswana 
 126  Vanuatu 
 127  Tajikistan 
 128  Namibia 
 129  South Africa 
 130  Morocco 
 131  Sao Tome and Principe 
 132  Bhutan 
 133  Lao People’s Democratic Republic 
 134  India 
 135  Solomon Islands 
 136  Congo 
 137  Cambodia 
 138  Myanmar 
 139  Comoros 
 140  Yemen 
 141  Pakistan 
 142  Swaziland 
 143  Angola 
 144  Nepal 
 145  Madagascar 
 146  Bangladesh 
 147  Kenya 
 148  Papua New Guinea 
 149  Haiti 
 150  Sudan 
 151  Tanzania (United Republic of) 
 152  Ghana 
 153  Cameroon 
 154  Mauritania 
 155  Djibouti 
 156  Lesotho 
 157  Uganda 
 158  Nigeria 

..  
220  
6  
18  
180  
..  
120  
18  
184  
16  
1,186  
52  
1  
..  
1  
1,580  
3  
102  
157  
32  
..  
120  
3  
8  

..  
763  
537  
347  
1,082  
..  
1,495  
17,274  
600  
112  
1,072  
394  
92  
..  
20  
277  
854  
355  
517  
270  
..  
455  
1  
180  
603   10,695  
5  
338  
3  
47  
5,301  
3,208  
3  
59  
4  
750  
..  
233  
3,567  
702  
106  

4  
21  
3  
16  
135  
96  
2  
46  
6  
103  
..  
5  
21  
364  
103  

LOW HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
 159  Togo 
 160  Malawi 
 161  Benin 
 162  Timor-Leste 
 163  Côte d’Ivoire 
 164  Zambia 
 165  Eritrea 
 166  Senegal 
 167  Rwanda 
 168  Gambia 
 169  Liberia 
 170  Guinea 
 171  Ethiopia 
 172  Mozambique 
 173  Guinea-Bissau 
  174  Burundi 
 175  Chad 
 176  Congo (Democratic Republic of the) 
 177  Burkina Faso 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

229  
1  
224  
..  
179  
59  
..  
925  
51  
47  
65  
151  
359  
99  
29  
0  
..  
..  
50  

35  
1  
67  
..  
19  
124  
..  
96  
68  
12  
0  
119  
15  
45  
5  
0  
..  
..  
44  

193  
4  
383  
..  
8  
451  
..  
296  
562  
52  
5  
294  
26  
111  
280  
2  
..  
..  
57  

E

Remittances    

Relative size of remittance inflows

Remittance inflows by continent of origin

Outflows 

Outflows 

(net 

 ODA received

total
(US$ 
millions)

per 

disbursements)

migrant
(US$)

per capita

per capita 

(US$)

(US$)

as % of 
net ODA 
receipts

as %
of GDP

ratio of 

remittances 

to FDI

Africa

Asia

Europe

Latin 

American 
and the 
Caribbean

Northern 
America

Oceania

2007

(% of total remittance inflows)

6  
51  
308  
34  
14  
149  
56  
251  
33  
99  
16  
35  
228  
135  
68  
1  
500  
34  
46  
4  
53  
10  
13  
55  
14  
21  
45  
9  
34  
50  
73  
55  
69  
49  
104  
116  
135  
65  
56  
14  

18  
53  
52  
241  
9  
88  
32  
68  
73  
42  
186  
24  
29  
83  
73  
55  
33  
19  
63  

..  
134  
262  
319  
101  
132  
75  
22  
251  
8  
17  
216  
13  
..  
0  
30  
41  
4  
24  
3  
14  
57  
37  
86  
..  
61  
1  
41  
42  
2  
127  
46  
0  
5  
9  
1  
34  
221  
27  
62  

35  
0  
25  
..  
9  
5  
..  
75  
5  
28  
17  
16  
4  
5  
17  
0  
..  
..  
3  

..   
261.1   
85.0   
945.6   
706.6   
88.7   
135.2   
8.8   
764.0   
8.2   
105.0   
617.8   
5.6   
..   
0.3   
2,716.2   
8.2   
11.7   
52.5   
65.9   
27.0   
569.1   
271.1   
156.9   
..   
289.8   
1.2   
436.9   
124.5   
4.2   
174.3   
84.1   
0.5   
10.2   
8.7   
0.5   
25.3   
342.3   
49.1   
451.5   

189.4   
0.1   
47.7   
..   
108.7   
5.7   
..   
109.8   
7.2   
65.4   
9.3   
67.2   
14.8   
5.6   
23.5   
0.0   
..   
..   
5.4   

.. 

 
 
19.0 
 
9.2 
 
10.6 
 
6.0 
 
12.1 
 
1.2 
1.2 
 
45.5   
 
0.2 
0.3 
 
 
9.0 
 
.. 
 
.. 
 
0.0 
 
3.1 
.. 
 
 
0.2 
 
4.2 
 
.. 
 
2.6 
6.1 
 
 
4.2 
 
3.5 
 
.. 
 
15.5 
 
0.1 
 
9.5 
 
5.4 
0.2 
 
20.0   
 
3.7 
0.1 
 
 
0.8 
 
0.8 
0.1 
 
 
.. 
 
 
 

28.7 
7.2 
6.7 

8.4 
0.0 
4.1 
.. 
0.9 
0.5 
.. 
8.5 
1.9 
6.9 
.. 
3.0 
2.0 
1.3 
8.3 
0.0 
.. 
.. 
0.7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

.. 
 
3.4   
1.1   
5.9   
0.7   
1.9   
.. 
 
0.1   
4.7   
0.1   
0.1   
2.4   
0.1   
.. 
 
0.0   
1.5   
0.5   
0.0   
0.4   
0.3   
15.0   
1.4   
1.1   
2.6   
 
.. 
302.1   
0.0   
10.1   
2.2   
0.1   
16.4   
0.7   
0.0   
0.1   
0.4   
0.0   
0.1   
3.4   
1.8   
1.5   

3.3   
0.0   
4.7   
.. 
 
0.4   
0.1   
 
.. 
11.9   
0.8   
0.7   
0.5   
1.4   
1.6   
0.2   
4.1   
0.0   
.. 
 
.. 
 
0.1   

.. 
 
0.0   
12.7   
0.0   
12.5   
0.0   
76.2   
0.0   
0.0   
48.9   
23.6   
0.2   
8.4   
.. 
 
0.0   
0.3   
0.0   
25.8   
0.0   
 
.. 
10.8   
0.2   
0.2   
94.3   
.. 
 
0.0   
5.8   
0.0   
8.8   
0.0   
0.0   
16.7   
11.0   
29.7   
30.0   
 
37.1 
 
.. 
98.3   
4.3   
15.2   

.. 

.. 
.. 

 
38.1 
28.0   
81.2   
 
13.9   
 
 
20.0   
40.6   
5.4   
 
.. 
65.8   
4.7   
63.7   
17.7   
100.0   
 
 
91.6   

.. 
.. 

.. 
 
8.6   
0.0   
0.0   
58.6   
0.0   
0.1 
 
0.2   
28.6   
0.0   
0.6   
8.0   
0.0   
.. 
 
6.3   
58.2   
0.5   
0.4   
4.6   
 
.. 
0.1 
 
84.7   
45.2   
 
0.1 
.. 
 
75.3   
0.1 
 
69.7   
0.4   
0.7   
0.0   
55.5   
0.5   
0.7   
0.1 
 
0.5   
.. 
 
0.0   
0.5   
2.0   

0.0   
0.0   
0.0   
 
.. 
 
0.1 
.. 
 
 
.. 
 
0.1 
0.1 
 
0.0   
.. 
 
0.2   
24.1 
 
0.0   
0.0   
0.0   
.. 
 
.. 
 
0.0   

.. 

.. 

 
89.2   
62.0   
1.9   
13.3   
1.7   
12.9   
39.6   
69.2   
29.9   
38.3   
88.4   
90.5   
 
12.5   
12.8   
16.2   
67.7   
22.7   
 
.. 
88.1 
 
6.5   
32.2   
3.2   
 
.. 
10.2   
90.3   
18.4   
61.0   
 
6.1 
4.1 
 
12.5   
49.3   
38.8   
56.1 
 
54.3   
.. 
 
1.0   
69.0   
42.9   

.. 
74.1 
.. 
.. 

54.8   
59.1 
 
17.0   
 
 
 
 
73.5   
43.8   
 
73.1 
 
.. 
25.8   
28.7   
34.0   
80.5   
0.0   
.. 
 
.. 
 
7.8   

.. 
 
0.0   
0.0   
5.1   
0.1   
32.5  
0.0   
0.0   
0.0   
0.1   
0.1   
0.0   
0.0   
.. 
 
0.0   
0.0   
0.0   
0.0   
0.0   
.. 
 
0.0   
0.0   
0.0   
0.0   
.. 
 
0.0   
0.1   
0.0   
0.0   
0.0   
6.1   
0.0   
0.0   
0.0   
0.0   
0.0   
.. 
 
0.0   
0.0   
0.0   

0.0   
0.0   
0.0   
.. 
 
0.0   
.. 
 
.. 
 
0.0   
0.0   
0.0   
.. 
 
0.0   
0.0   
0.2   
0.0   
0.0   
.. 
 
.. 
 
0.0   

..   
2.0   
25.2   
92.9   
13.1   
65.6   
7.8   
5.6   
2.1   
14.9   
20.4   
3.3   
1.1   
..   
79.2   
26.9   
8.9   
6.1   
64.4   
..   
0.9   
8.5   
21.6   
1.9   
..   
12.4   
3.7   
11.2   
27.2   
8.5   
89.7   
13.3   
37.3   
30.2   
13.8   
8.1   
..   
0.6   
25.0   
39.5   

7.0   
10.8   
1.8   
..   
11.7   
..   
..   
6.2   
15.2   
21.4   
..   
8.2   
41.0   
1.8   
1.8   
0.0   
..   
..   
0.7   

.. 
0.1 
0.0 
0.0 
2.3 
0.2 
2.9 
54.6 
0.0 
6.2 
17.0 
0.1 
0.0 
.. 
2.1 
1.8 
74.3 
0.1 
8.3 
.. 
0.1 
0.1 
0.7 
0.5 
.. 
2.1 
0.1 
0.7 
2.6 
84.7 
0.0 
2.0 
1.9 
0.6 
0.0 
0.0 
.. 
0.1 
1.3 
0.4 

0.0 
2.2 
0.0 
.. 
0.1 
.. 
.. 
0.1 
0.2 
0.1 
.. 
0.0 
1.5 
0.3 
0.0 
0.0 
.. 
.. 
0.0 

161

E

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009

International financial flows: remittances, official development 
assistance and foreign direct investment 

 

 

 

Remittances    

Relative size of remittance inflows

Remittance inflows by continent of origin

Outflows 

Outflows 

(net 

 ODA received

total
(US$ 
millions)

per 

disbursements)

migrant
(US$)

per capita

per capita 

(US$)

(US$)

as % of 
net ODA 
receipts

as %
of GDP

ratio of 

remittances 

to FDI

Africa

Asia

Europe

Latin 

American 
and the 
Caribbean

Northern 
America

Oceania

2007

(% of total remittance inflows)

3.3 
.. 
9.4 
.. 
1.9 

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
 
.. 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

0.6   
.. 
 
1.6   
.. 
 
2.9   

 
74.1 
.. 
 
1.5   
.. 
 
82.7   

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
 
.. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

.. 
 
0.0   
 
.. 
.. 
 
 
.. 
 
.. 
 
.. 
 
.. 
 
.. 
.. 
 
 
.. 
.. 
 

12.2   
0.3   
2.2   
0.0   
 
.. 
.. 
 

 
2.0   
2.7   
.. 
 

 
2.7   
2.8   
.. 
 
0.2   
1.6   
34.7   
 
1.8   
 
 
1.8   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

0.0   
.. 
 
0.0   
.. 
 
0.0   

.. 
 
0.3   
 
.. 
.. 
 
 
.. 
 
.. 
 
.. 
 
.. 
 
.. 
.. 
 
 
.. 
.. 
 

16.4   
45.8   
6.3   
2.7   
 
.. 
.. 
 
 

 

 

3.6   
5.9   
.. 
 
 

5.0   
4.6   
 
.. 
9.1 
 
37.8   
2.5   

 

 
21.4   
 
 

21.1 

 

.. 
55.1 
.. 

23.8   
 
 
 
14.3   

.. 

 
34.0   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

0.0   
.. 
 
0.0   
.. 
 
0.0   

.. 
 
0.0   
 
.. 
.. 
 
 
.. 
 
.. 
 
.. 
 
.. 
 
.. 
.. 
 
 
.. 
.. 
 

.. 
 

57.4   
17.3   
62.0   
9.7   
 
.. 
.. 
 
 

 
44.1 
 
58.5   
 

.. 

 
55.3   
55.5   
 
35.8   
21.3   
53.0   
 
33.2   
 
34.7   

 

 

0.0   
0.5   
4.2   
6.2   
 
.. 
.. 
 
 

 
5.2   
5.1   
.. 
 
 

 

6.8   
6.9   
.. 
 
3.4   
1.0   
0.0   

 

 

3.4   
 
3.2   

 

2.0   
..   
42.9   
..   
3.0   

..   
34.0   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   

12.5   
32.8   
20.4   
81.2   
..   
..   
  

39.5   
22.5   
..   
  

22.8   
22.7   
..   
49.4   
35.9   
9.6   

  

36.4   
 
35.4   

 

0.0 
.. 
0.5 
.. 
0.0 

.. 
31.6 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

1.5 
3.4 
4.8 
0.2 
.. 
.. 
 
5.6 
5.4 
.. 
 
7.5 
7.5 
.. 
2.2 
2.3 
0.2 
 
3.8 

3.7 

Inflows
total 
(US$ 
millions)

 

212  
..  
148  
..  
78  

HDI rank

178  Mali 
179  Central African Republic 
180  Sierra Leone 
181  Afghanistan 
182  Niger 

OTHER UN MEMBER STATES
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  Iraq 
  Kiribati 
  Korea (Democratic People’s Rep. of)   
  Marshall Islands 
  Micronesia (Federated States of) 
  Monaco 
  Nauru 
  Palau 
  San Marino 
  Somalia 
  Tuvalu 
  Zimbabwe 

 

..  
7  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  

57  
..  
136  
..  
29  

781  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  

1,234  
..  
1,140  
..  
237  

27,538  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  

82  
41  
91  
146  
38  

314  
285  
4  
879  
1,034  
..  
2,518  
1,100  
..  
44  
1,115  
35  

17  
..  
25  
..  
5  

..  
74  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  

20.8   
..   
27.7   
..   
14.4   

..   
25.9   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

324  
1,448  
1,990  
798  
..  
..  

  Africa 
  Asia 
  Europe 
  Latin America and the Caribbean    63,408 T 
  Northern America 
  Oceania 
   
  OECD 
  European Union (EU27) 
  GCC 
   
  Very high human development 
      Very high HD: OECD 
      Very high HD: non-OECD 
  High human development 
  Medium human development 
  Low human development 
   
  World (excluding the former Soviet 
                Union and Czechoslovakia) 
  World 

  36,850 T 
4,754 T 
  141,398 T  62,220 T 
  119,945 T  126,169 T 
3,947 T 
2,972 T  45,643 T 
 
5,090 T 
6,193 T 
 
 
 
 
  124,520 T  165,254 T 
  96,811 T  88,391 T 
39 T  25,044 T 
 
 
 
  86,313 T  172,112 T 
  83,776 T  163,562 T 
8,550 T 
 
  92,453 T  59,434 T 
  189,093 T  15,403 T 
874 T 
 
 
 
1,540  
 349,632 T  221,119 T 
 
  
  
  370,765 Ta  248,283 Ta  1,464  

1,845  
1,919  
..  
1,705  
446  
133  

1,884  
2,208  
2,797  

2,907 T 
 

2,537 T 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

36  
9  
..  
10  
..  
..  

..  
..  
..  

..  
..  
..  
9  
12  
51  

14  
  
14  

44  
36  
160  
114  
..  
..  

 
108  
196  
..  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

92  
91  
..  
101  
44  
11  

 

 

 

 

57  
  
58  

..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   

..   
..   
..   

..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   

..   
 
 
..   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

NOTES

a  Data are aggregates from original data source.

162

SOURCES
Columns 1, 2 and 7: World Bank (2009b).
Column 3: calculated based on data on remittances and 
stocks of migrants from World Bank (2009b).
Column 4: calculated based on data on ODA from 
OECD-DAC (2009) and population data from UN 
(2009e).
Column 5: calculated based on data on remittances 
from World Bank (2009b) and population data from UN 
(2009e).
Column 6: calculated based on data on remittances 
from World Bank (2009b) and on ODA from OECD-DAC 
(2009).
Column 8: calculated based on data on remittances and 
FDI from World Bank (2009b).
Columns 9–14: calculated based on data from Ratha 
and Shaw (2006).

TABLE

F

HDI rank

1  Norway 
2  Australia 
3  Iceland 
4  Canada 
5  Ireland 
6  Netherlands 
7  Sweden 
8  France 
9  Switzerland 

VERY HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  10  Japan 
  11  Luxembourg 
  12  Finland 
  13  United States 
  14  Austria 
  15  Spain 
  16  Denmark 
  17  Belgium 
  18  Italy 
  19  Liechtenstein 
  20  New Zealand 
  21  United Kingdom 
  22  Germany 
  23  Singapore 
  24  Hong Kong, China (SAR) 
  25  Greece 
  26  Korea (Republic of) 
  27  Israel 
  28  Andorra 
  29  Slovenia 
  30  Brunei Darussalam 
  31  Kuwait 
  32  Cyprus 
  33  Qatar 
  34  Portugal 
  35  United Arab Emirates 
  36  Czech Republic 
  37  Barbados 
  38  Malta 

 HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
  39  Bahrain 
  40  Estonia 
  41  Poland 
  42  Slovakia 
  43  Hungary 
  44  Chile 
  45  Croatia 
  46  Lithuania 
  47  Antigua and Barbuda 
  48  Latvia 
  49  Argentina 
  50  Uruguay 
  51  Cuba 
  52  Bahamas 
  53  Mexico 
  54  Costa Rica 
  55  Libyan Arab Jamahiriya 
  56  Oman 
  57  Seychelles 
  58  Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) 
  59  Saudi Arabia 

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009

Selected conventions related to human rights and migration 
(by year of ratification) 

 

 

 

Protocol to Prevent, 

Suppress and 

Punish Trafficking 

in Persons, 

Especially Women 

and Children, 
supplementing 
the UN Convention 

against 

Transnational 

Organized Crime 

2000

 

 

2003  
2005  
2000  
2002  
2000  
2005  
2004  
2002  
2006  
2002  
2009  
2006  
2005  
2005  
2002  
2003  
2004  
2006  
2008  
2002  
2006  
2006  
..  
..  
2000  
2000  
2008  
..  
2004  
..  
2006  
2003  
2009  
2004  
2009  
2002  
2001  
2003  

2004  
2004  
2003  
2004  
2006  
2004  
2003  
2003  
..  
2004  
2002  
2005  
..  
2008  
2003  
2003  
2004  
2005  
2004  
2002  
2007  

International 
Convention on 
the Protection of 
the Rights of All 
Migrant Workers 
and Members 
of their Families 

1990

 
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

..  
 
..  
 
..  
 
..  
 
 
..  
  2005  
..  
 
 
..  
..  
 
 
..  
  2007  
  2001  
 
..  
 
..  
  1999  
 
..  
  2004  
 
..  
  1994  
..  
 
 
..  

International 
Convention on 
the Elimination 
of All Forms of 

Racial

International 
Covenant on 

Civil and

Discrimination

Political Rights

International 
Covenant on 
Economic,
Social and 
Cultural Rights

1966

 
1970  
1975  
1967  
1970  
2000  
1971  
1971  
1971  
1994  
1995  
1978  
1970  
1994  
1972  
1968  
1971  
1975  
1976  
2000  
1972  
1969  
1969  
..  
..  
1970  
1978  
1979  
2006  
1992  
..  
1968  
1967  
1976  
1982  
1974  
1993  
1972  
1971  

1990  
1991  
1968  
1993  
1967  
1971  
1992  
1998  
1988  
1992  
1968  
1968  
1972  
1975  
1975  
1967  
1968  
2003  
1978  
1967  
1997  

1966

 

 

1972  
1980  
1979  
1976  
1989  
1978  
1971  
1980  
1992  
1979  
1983  
1975  
1992  
1978  
1977  
1972  
1983  
1978  
1998  
1978  
1976  
1973  
..  
..  
1997  
1990  
1991  
2006  
1992  
..  
1996  
1969  
..  
1978  
..  
1993  
1973  
1990  

2006  
1991  
1977  
1993  
1974  
1972  
1992  
1991  
..  
1992  
1986  
1970  
2008  
2008  
1981  
1968  
1970  
..  
1992  
1978  
..  

1966

 
1972  
1975  
1979  
1976  
1989  
1978  
1971  
1980  
1992  
1979  
1983  
1975  
1977  
1978  
1977  
1972  
1983  
1978  
1998  
1978  
1976  
1973  
..  
..  
1985  
1990  
1991  
..  
1992  
..  
1996  
1969  
..  
1978  
..  
1993  
1973  
1990  

2007  
1991  
1977  
1993  
1974  
1972  
1992  
1991  
..  
1992  
1986  
1970  
2008  
2008  
1981  
1968  
1970  
..  
1992  
1978  
..  

Convention 
relating to the

Status of 
Refugees                         

1951

 
1953  
1954  
1955  
1969  
1956  
1956  
1954  
1954  
1955  
1981  
1953  
1968  
..  
1954  
1978  
1952  
1953  
1954  
1957  
1960  
1954  
1953  
..  
..  
 1960  
1992  
1954  
..  
1992  
..  
..  
1963  
..  
1960  
..  
 1993  
..  
1971  

..  
1997  
1991  
1993  
1989  
1972  
1992  
1997  
1995  
1997  
1961  
1970  
..  
1993  
2000  
1978  
..  
..  
1980  
..  
..  

Convention 

against Torture 

and Other 

Cruel, Inhuman 
or Degrading 
Treatment or 
Punishment

1984

 

1986  
1989  
1996  
1987  
2002  
1988  
1986  
1986  
1986  
1999  
1987  
1989  
1994  
1987  
1987  
1987  
1999  
1989  
1990  
1989  
1988  
1990  
..  
..  
1988  
1995  
1991  
2006  
1993  
..  
1996  
1991  
2000  
1989  
..  
1993  
..  
1990  

1998  
1991  
1989  
1993  
1987  
1988  
1992  
1996  
1993  
1992  
1986  
1986  
1995  
2008  
1986  
1993  
1989  
..  
1992  
1991  
1997  

Convention on 
the Elimination 
of All Forms of 
Discrimination 
against Women

1979

 

 

1981  
1983  
1985  
1981  
1985  
1991  
1980  
1983  
1997  
1985  
1989  
1986  
1980  
1982  
1984  
1983  
1985  
1985  
1995  
1985  
1986  
1985  
1995  
..  
1983  
1984  
1991  
1997  
1992  
2006  
1994  
1985  
2009  
1980  
2004  
1993  
1980  
1991  

2002  
1991  
1980  
1993  
1980  
1989  
1992  
1994  
1989  
1992  
1985  
1981  
1980  
1993  
1981  
1986  
1989  
2006  
1992  
1983  
2000  

F

Convention on 
the Rights of

the Child

1989

 

1991
1990
1992
1991
1992
1995
1990
1990
1997
1994
1994
1991
1995
1992
1990
1991
1991
1991
1995
1993
1991
1992
1995
..
1993
1991
1991
1996
1992
1995
1991
1991
1995
1990
1997
1993
1990
1990

1992
1991
1991
1993
1991
1990
1992
1992
1993
1992
1990
1990
1991
1991
1990
1990
1993
1996
1990
1990
1996

163

F

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009

Selected conventions related to human rights and migration
(by year of ratification) 

 

 

 

Protocol to Prevent, 

Suppress and 

Punish Trafficking 

in Persons, 

Especially Women 

and Children, 
supplementing 
the UN Convention 

against 

Transnational 

Organized Crime 

2000

International 
Convention on 
the Protection of 
the Rights of All 
Migrant Workers 
and Members 
of their Families 

1990

International 
Convention on 
the Elimination 
of All Forms of 

Racial

International 
Covenant on 

Civil and

Discrimination

Political Rights

1966

1966

Convention 
relating to the

Status of 
Refugees                         

1951

International 
Covenant on 
Economic,
Social and 
Cultural Rights

1966

Convention on 
the Elimination 
of All Forms of 
Discrimination 
against Women

1979

Convention 

against Torture 

and Other 

Cruel, Inhuman 
or Degrading 
Treatment or 
Punishment

1984

Convention on 
the Rights of

the Child

1989

..  
 
..  
 
..  
 
..  
 
 
..  
  2006  
 
..  
  2004  
..  
 
 
..  
  2007  
..  
 
..  
 
..  
 
..  
 
 
..  
  1996  
  1995  
  2005  
  2004  
  2002  
 
..  
..  
 
 
..  

..  
 
 
..  
  1999  
..  
 
..  
 
..  
 
 
..  
..  
 
 
..  
  2001  
..  
 
 
..  
..  
 
..  
 
..  
 
 
..  
  2008  
  2008  
  1996  
  2004  
  2005  
  1995  
  2003  
  2005  
..  
 
..  
 
 
..  
  2004  
  2005  
  2000  
  2005  
..  
 
 
..  
..  
 
 
..  

2004  
2001  
2004  
2002  
2007  
2006  
2009  
2001  
2003  
..  
2002  
2004  
2005  
..  
2004  
2004  
2002  
2004  
2002  
2003  
2002  
2003  
2008  
2005  

2003  
2004  
2003  
2001  
..  
2006  
2008  
2002  
..  
2003  
..  
..  
..  
2007  
2003  
..  
2003  
2004  
2000  
..  
2004  
2002  
2004  
2000  
..  
2005  
..  
2000 
2008  
2006  
2004  
2008  
..  
2005  
2003  

1978  
1993  
2002  
1991  
2000  
2006  
..  
2001  
2001  
..  
1992  
1993  
1994  
1994  
..  
1960  
1993  
1961  
1964  
1962  
1955  
..  
1999  
..  

1993  
2002  
1993  
..  
1976  
1999  
1978  
1993  
1982  
1990  
1988  
..  
..  
1978  
1957  
..  
1964  
1970  
..  
1964  
1963  
1981  
1983  
..  
1972  
1998  
..  
..  
1992  
1982  
..  
..  
..  
2002  
1986  

1967  
1966  
2006  
1970  
1973  
2006  
..  
..  
1969  
1990  
1994  
1969  
1994  
..  
1981
1968  
1993  
1981  
1971  
2002  
1966  
1972  
1998  
1971  

1993  
1969  
1996  
2003  
1968  
1999  
1983  
1981  
1981  
2001  
..  
1984  
1974  
1984  
1967  
1972  
1971  
2003  
1982  
1980  
1972  
1967  
1979  
1969  
1973  
1994  
..  
1999  
2002  
1970  
1977  
1969  
1982  
1993  
2002  

1977  
1970  
..  
1974  
1978  
2006  
..  
..  
1973  
..  
1991  
1973  
1994  
1993  
1991  
1992  
1993  
1969  
1978  
2003  
1969  
1973  
2006  
1972  

1993  
1973  
1992  
1996  
1975  
1994  
1978  
1981  
1998  
1996  
2008  
2006  
1975  
1976  
1969  
..  
1975  
1992  
1980  
1983  
1989  
1986  
1979  
1969  
..  
1997  
..  
2006  
1997  
1982  
1977  
1974  
1982  
1993  
1987  

1977  
1970  
..  
1974  
1978  
2006  
..  
..  
1973  
..  
1991  
1973  
1994  
1993  
1991  
1992  
1993  
1969  
1978  
2003  
1969  
1973  
2006  
1972  

1993  
1973  
1992  
1999  
1975  
1994  
1978  
1981  
2001  
2000  
..  
2006  
1975  
1976  
1969  
..  
1975  
1992  
1980  
1983  
1989  
1974  
1979  
1969  
..  
1997  
..  
2006  
1981  
1982  
1977  
1974  
1982  
1993  
1987  

1981  
1982  
1985  
1982  
1990  
2006  
1995  
2001  
1981  
1982  
1994  
1981  
1994  
1980  
1990  
1984  
1993  
1982  
1982  
1985  
1981  
1984  
1998  
1997  

1993  
1981  
1995  
1985  
..  
1994  
1982  
1981  
1980  
1990  
1992  
1993  
1992  
1993  
1985  
..  
1984  
1987  
1981  
1983  
1996  
1981  
1981  
2003  
1995  
1997  
..  
1984  
1983  
1990  
1980  
1981  
1982  
1994  
1984  

1987  
1986  
..  
1990  
..  
2006  
..  
..  
1987  
..  
1994  
1987  
1994  
..  
..  
1989  
1993  
1987  
1988  
1988  
1988  
1992  
1998  
2000  

1993  
1987  
1996  
2007  
..  
1994  
1985 
2001  
1988  
1986  
..  
2004  
1991  
..  
1988  
..  
..  
1990  
1994  
2000  
1989  
1986  
1996  
2004  
..  
1999  
..  
1998  
1996  
1999  
1988  
2002  
..  
1995  
2002  

1990
1991
1990
1990
1991
2006
1995
2001
1990
1993
1992
1990
1993
1991
1990
1990
1993
1991
1990
1995
1990
1990
1994
1991

1993
1991
1992
1992
1994
1994
1991
1993
1992
1990
1994
1991
1991
1993
1992
1995
1991
1990
1991
1994
1993
1990
1990
1993
1993
1993
..
1990
1990
1990
1991
1990
1990
1993
1992

HDI rank

60  Panama 
61  Bulgaria 
62  Saint Kitts and Nevis 
63  Romania 
64  Trinidad and Tobago 
65  Montenegro 
66  Malaysia 
67  Serbia 
68  Belarus 
69  Saint Lucia 
70  Albania 
71  Russian Federation 
72  Macedonia (the Former Yugoslav Rep. of) 
73  Dominica 
74  Grenada 
75  Brazil 
76  Bosnia and Herzegovina 
77  Colombia 
78  Peru 
79  Turkey 
80  Ecuador 
81  Mauritius 
82  Kazakhstan 
83  Lebanon 

MEDIUM HUMAN DEVELOPMENT

84  Armenia 
85  Ukraine 
86  Azerbaijan 
87  Thailand 
88  Iran (Islamic Republic of) 
89  Georgia 
90  Dominican Republic 
91  Saint Vincent and the Grenadines 
92  China 
93  Belize 
94  Samoa 
95  Maldives 
96  Jordan 
97  Suriname 
98  Tunisia 
99  Tonga 
100  Jamaica 
101  Paraguay 
102  Sri Lanka 
103  Gabon 
104  Algeria 
105  Philippines 
106  El Salvador 
107  Syrian Arab Republic 
108  Fiji 
109  Turkmenistan 
110  Occupied Palestinian Territories 
111  Indonesia 
112  Honduras 
113  Bolivia 
114  Guyana 
115  Mongolia 
116  Viet Nam 
117  Moldova 
118  Equatorial Guinea 

164

TABLE

F

Protocol to Prevent, 

Suppress and 

Punish Trafficking 

in Persons, 

Especially Women 

and Children, 
supplementing 
the UN Convention 

against 

Transnational 

Organized Crime 

2000

International 
Convention on 
the Protection of 
the Rights of All 
Migrant Workers 
and Members 
of their Families 

1990

International 
Convention on 
the Elimination 
of All Forms of 

Racial

International 
Covenant on 

Civil and

Discrimination

Political Rights

1966

1966

Convention 
relating to the

Status of 
Refugees                         

1951

International 
Covenant on 
Economic,
Social and 
Cultural Rights

1966

Convention on 
the Elimination 
of All Forms of 
Discrimination 
against Women

1979

Convention 

against Torture 

and Other 

Cruel, Inhuman 
or Degrading 
Treatment or 
Punishment

1984

Convention on 
the Rights of

the Child

1989

 
..  
  2003  
  1997  
  2003  
  1993  
  2005  
..  
 
 
..  
  2002  
..  
 
 
..  
  1993  
  2000  
..  
 
..  
 
 
..  
 
..  
  2008  
  2004  
 
..  
  2000  
 
..  
..  
 
..  
 
..  
 
..  
 
 
..  
  1998  
..  
 
..  
 
..  
 
 
..  
 
..  
  2000  
 
..  
  2007  
 
..  
  2005  
  1995  
 
..  

  2001  
 
..  
  2005  
  2004  
..  
 
 
..  
 
..  
  1999  
  2008  
 
..  
  2004  
  2000  
..  
 
 
..  
  2000  
..  
 
 
..  
 
..  
  2003  

2008  
2003  
2004  
2004  
2004  
2004  
2002  
..  
2002  
2002  
2004  
..  
2006  
..  
2003  
2002  
..  
2000  
2007  
2004  
..  
..  
..  

2001        

..  
..  
2005  
..  
2005  
..  
2000  
..  
2006  
..  
2006  
2005  
2005  
2003  
2000  
2001  

2009  
2005  
2004  
..  
..  
2005  
..  
2003  
2003  
2003  
2004  
2004  
..  
2006  
2007  
2000  
..  
2005  
2002  

..  
1996  
..  
1983  
1981  
1980  
1969  
..  
1993  
1995  
1996  
1956  
1978  
..  
..  
..  
1995  
1962  
1992  
..  
..  
1980  
..  
2000  
1981  
..  
1967  
..  
1966  
1986  
1984  
1974  
1964  
1963  
1961  
1987  
1977  
1981  
1976  
1967  

1962  
1987  
1962  
2003  
1961  
1969  
..  
1963  
1980  
1966  
1964  
1965  
1969  
1983  
1976  
1963  
1981  
1965  
1980  

1995  
1997  
1979  
1983  
1967  
1978  
1974  
..  
1995  
1982  
1998  
1970  
2000  
1973  
1974  
1968  
1982  
1988  
1983  
..  
2004  
1972  
1966  
1969  
..  
1971  
1969  
1979  
2001  
1982  
1972  
1977  
1972  
1966  
1971  
1988  
2006  
1971  
1980  
1967  

1972  
1996  
2001  
2003  
1973  
1972  
2001  
1972  
1975  
1978  
1976  
1977  
1976  
1983  
2000  
1977  
1977  
1976  
1974  

1995  
1994  
1993  
1992  
1982  
1980  
2000  
2008  
1999  
1994  
1998  
1979  
1995  
..  
2000  
1979  
..  
1983  
1992  
..  
2008  
1987  
2008  
2004  
1992  
1991  
1971  
2000  
1972  
2008  
1991  
1986  
1976  
2000  
1984  
2004  
2002  
1992  
1995  
1993  

1984  
1993  
1992  
2003  
1992  
1984  
2002  
1978  
1975  
1979  
2004  
1978  
1993  
1993  
2000  
1990  
1995  
1976  
1999  

1995  
1994  
1993  
1988  
1982  
1980  
..  
..  
1999  
1994  
1994  
1979  
1995  
..  
2007  
1979  
1982  
1983  
1992  
..  
2008  
1987  
2008  
2004  
1992  
1991  
1971  
1998  
1972  
2008  
..  
1986  
1976  
2000  
1984  
2004  
2002  
1992  
1987  
1993  

1984  
1993  
1992  
2003  
1992  
1984  
2001  
1978  
1975  
1978  
2004  
1978  
1993  
..  
1992  
1990  
1995  
1976  
1999  

1995  
1997  
1980  
1982  
1981  
1981  
1996  
1995  
1993  
1992  
1995  
1993  
2003  
1981  
1981  
1993  
2002  
1982  
1992  
1997  
1994  
1984  
1996  
2004  
1986  
1991  
1989  
1984  
1984  
1995  
1981  
..  
1985  
1986  
1994  
2001  
1998  
1995  
1985  
1985  

1983  
1987  
1992  
2003  
1995  
1985  
1995  
1985  
1981  
1993  
1984  
1982  
1981  
1997  
1985  
1992  
1995  
1986  
1987  

1995  
1997  
1992  
1990  
1986  
2005  
2000  
..  
1995  
1994  
1998  
1993  
2000  
..  
..  
1997  
..  
2003  
1992  
..  
2000  
1991  
2008  
2004  
..  
1991  
2005  
1998  
1997  
..  
..  
1986  
..  
2000  
1986  
2004  
2002  
2001  
1986  
2001  

1987  
1996  
1992  
2003  
1995  
1998  
..  
1986  
2008  
1985  
2004  
1989  
1994  
1999  
2000  
1993  
1995  
1996  
1999  

1994
1994
1992
1990
1990
1990
1995
1993
1993
1990
1995
1993
1991
1990
1991
1992
1995
1993
1992
1991
1993
1991
1990
1995
1990
1990
1991
1990
1990
1993
1995
1990
1991
1990
1993
1991
1990
1992
1990
1991

1990
1991
1990
2003
1991
1991
1994
1990
1991
1990
1993
1990
1991
1994
1990
1990
1990
1990
1990

165

HDI rank

 119  Uzbekistan 
 120  Kyrgyzstan 
 121  Cape Verde 
 122  Guatemala 
 123  Egypt 
 124  Nicaragua 
 125  Botswana 
 126  Vanuatu 
 127  Tajikistan 
 128  Namibia 
 129  South Africa 
 130  Morocco 
 131  Sao Tome and Principe 
 132  Bhutan 
 133  Lao People’s Democratic Republic 
 134  India 
 135  Solomon Islands 
 136  Congo 
 137  Cambodia 
 138  Myanmar 
 139  Comoros 
 140  Yemen 
 141  Pakistan 
 142  Swaziland 
 143  Angola 
 144  Nepal 
 145  Madagascar 
 146  Bangladesh 
 147  Kenya 
 148  Papua New Guinea 
 149  Haiti 
 150  Sudan 
 151  Tanzania (United Republic of) 
 152  Ghana 
 153  Cameroon 
 154  Mauritania 
 155  Djibouti 
 156  Lesotho 
 157  Uganda 
 158  Nigeria 

LOW HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
 159  Togo 
 160  Malawi 
 161  Benin 
 162  Timor-Leste 
 163  Côte d’Ivoire 
 164  Zambia 
 165  Eritrea 
 166  Senegal 
 167  Rwanda 
 168  Gambia 
 169  Liberia 
 170  Guinea 
 171  Ethiopia 
 172  Mozambique 
 173  Guinea-Bissau 
  174  Burundi 
 175  Chad 
 176  Congo (Democratic Republic of the) 
 177  Burkina Faso 

F

HDI rank

178  Mali 
179  Central African Republic 
180  Sierra Leone 
181  Afghanistan 
182  Niger 

OTHER UN MEMBER STATES
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  Iraq 
  Kiribati 
  Korea (Democratic People’s Rep. of) 
  Marshall Islands 
  Micronesia (Federated States of) 
  Monaco 
  Nauru 
  Palau 
  San Marino 
  Somalia 
  Tuvalu 
  Zimbabwe 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 

  Total state parties 
  Treaties signed, not yet ratified 
   
 
  Africa 
 
   
 
  Asia 
 
   
 
  Europe 
   
 
  Latin America and the Caribbean   
 
   
 
  Northern America 
 
   
 
  Oceania 
   
 

  Very high human development 
   
  High human development 
   
  Medium human development 
   
  Low human development 
   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

International 
Convention on 
the Protection of 
the Rights of All 
Migrant Workers 
and Members 
of their Families 

1990

  2003  
 
..  
  2000  
 
..  
  2009  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  

41  
15  
 
 
16  
9  
8  
3  
2  
2  
15  
1  
0  
0  
0  
0  

0  
0  
12  
2  
22  
8  
7  
5  

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009

Selected conventions related to human rights and migration
(by year of ratification) 

 

 

 

Protocol to Prevent, 

Suppress and 

Punish Trafficking 

in Persons, 

Especially Women 

and Children, 
supplementing 
the UN Convention 

against 

Transnational 

Organized Crime 

2000

2002  
2006  
2001  
..  
2004  

2009  
2005  
..  
..  
..  
2001  
2001  
..  
2000  
..  
..  
..  

129  
21  

 

 

 

 

36  
5  
25  
6  
37  
5  
26  
3  
2  
0  
3  
1  

26  
8  
41  
1  
44  
11  
15  
3  

International 
Convention on 
the Elimination 
of All Forms of 

Racial

International 
Covenant on 

Civil and

Discrimination

Political Rights

1966

1966

Convention 
relating to the

Status of 
Refugees                         

1951

International 
Covenant on 
Economic,
Social and 
Cultural Rights

1966

Convention on 
the Elimination 
of All Forms of 
Discrimination 
against Women

1979

Convention 

against Torture 

and Other 

Cruel, Inhuman 
or Degrading 
Treatment or 
Punishment

1984

Convention on 
the Rights of

the Child

1989

1973  
1962  
1981  
2005  
1961  

..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
1954  
..  
..  
..  
1978  
1986  
1981  

144  
0  
 
48  
0  
19  
0  
42  
0  
27  
0  
1  
0  
7  
0  

31  
0  
34  
0  
54  
0  
25  
0  

1974  
1971  
1967  
1983  
1967  

1970  
..  
..  
..  
..  
1995  
2001  
..  
2002  
1975  
..  
1991  

173  
6  

 

 

 

 

 

49  
3  
41  
1  
44  
0  
31  
1  
2  
0  
6  
1  

37  
0  
43  
1  
68  
4  
25  
1  

1974  
1981  
1996  
1983  
1986  

1971  
..  
1981  
..  
..  
1997  
2001  
..  
1985  
1990  
..  
1991  

164  
8  
 
50  
3  
35  
3  
43  
0  
29  
1  
2  
0  
5  
1  

34  
0  
39  
1  
66  
6  
25  
1  

1974  
1981  
1996  
1983  
1986  

1971  
..  
1981  
..  
..  
1997  
..  
..  
1985  
1990  
..  
1991  

160  
6  

 

 

48  
3  
38  
0  
42  
0  
27  
2  
1  
1  
4  
0  

32  
1  
39  
1  
64  
4  
25  
0  

1985  
1991  
1988  
2003  
1999  

1986  
2004  
2001  
2006  
2004  
2005  
..  
..  
2003  
..  
1999  
1991  

186  
1  

51  
0  
45  
0  
43  
0  
33  
0  
1  
1  
12  
0  

36  
1  
47  
0  
77  
0  
25  
0  

1999  
..  
2001  
1987  
1998  

..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
1991  
2001  
..  
2006  
1990  
..  
..  

146  
10  

43  
5  
33  
2  
44  
0  
22  
2  
2  
0  
2  
1  

36  
0  
37  
1  
52  
7  
21  
2  

1990
1992
1990
1994
1990

1994
1995
1990
1993
1993
1993
1994
1995
1991
2002
1995
1990

193
2

52
1
47
0
44
0
33
0
1
1
16
0

38
1
47
0
83
0
25
1

SOURCES
All columns: UN (2009b).

NOTES
Data refer to the year of ratification, accession or 
succession unless otherwise specified. All these 
stages have the same legal effect. Bold signifies 
signature not yet followed by ratification. Data are as 
of June 2009. 

 Total state parties 
  Treaties signed, but not yet ratified.

166

TABLE

G

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009

Human development index trends

G

Average annual 
growth rates                                                                                         

(%)

Rank

Change in 

rank

Long
term

Medium

term

Short
term

HDI rank

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2006

2007

2006

2006–2007 1980–2007 1990–2007 2000–2007

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1  Norway 
2  Australia 
3  Iceland 
4  Canada 
5  Ireland 
6  Netherlands 
7  Sweden 
8  France 
9  Switzerland 

VERY HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  10  Japan 
  11  Luxembourg 
  12  Finland 
  13  United States 
  14  Austria 
  15  Spain 
  16  Denmark 
  17  Belgium 
  18  Italy 
  19  Liechtenstein 
  20  New Zealand 
  21  United Kingdom 
  22  Germany 
  23  Singapore 
  24  Hong Kong, China (SAR) 
  25  Greece 
  26  Korea (Republic of) 
  27  Israel 
  28  Andorra 
  29  Slovenia 
  30  Brunei Darussalam 
  31  Kuwait 
  32  Cyprus 
  33  Qatar 
  34  Portugal 
  35  United Arab Emirates 
  36  Czech Republic 
  37  Barbados 
  38  Malta 
 
HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
  39  Bahrain 
  40  Estonia 
  41  Poland 
  42  Slovakia 
  43  Hungary 
  44  Chile 
  45  Croatia 
  46  Lithuania 
  47  Antigua and Barbuda 
  48  Latvia 
  49  Argentina 
  50  Uruguay 
  51  Cuba 
  52  Bahamas 
  53  Mexico 
  54  Costa Rica 
  55  Libyan Arab Jamahiriya 
  56  Oman 
  57  Seychelles 
  58  Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) 
  59  Saudi Arabia 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

0.900 
0.871 
0.886 
0.890 
0.840 
0.889 
0.885 
0.876 
0.899 
0.887 
.. 
0.865 
0.894 
0.865 
0.855 
0.882 
0.871 
0.857 
.. 
0.863 
0.861 
0.869 
0.785 
.. 
0.844 
0.722 
0.829 
.. 
.. 
0.827 
0.812 
.. 
.. 
0.768 
0.743 
.. 
.. 
.. 

0.761 
.. 
.. 
.. 
0.802 
0.748 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
0.793 
0.776 
.. 
.. 
0.756 
0.763 
.. 
.. 
.. 
0.765 
.. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

0.912 
0.883 
0.894 
0.913 
0.855 
0.903 
0.895 
0.888 
0.906 
0.902 
.. 
0.882 
0.909 
0.878 
0.869 
0.891 
0.885 
0.866 
.. 
0.874 
0.870 
0.877 
0.805 
.. 
0.857 
0.760 
0.853 
.. 
.. 
0.843 
0.826 
.. 
.. 
0.789 
0.806 
.. 
.. 
0.809 

0.784 
.. 
.. 
.. 
0.813 
0.762 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
0.797 
0.783 
.. 
.. 
0.768 
0.770 
.. 
.. 
.. 
0.765 
.. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

0.924 
0.902 
0.913 
0.933 
0.879 
0.917 
0.906 
0.909 
0.920 
0.918 
.. 
0.904 
0.923 
0.899 
0.896 
0.899 
0.904 
0.889 
.. 
0.884 
0.891 
0.896 
0.851 
.. 
0.872 
0.802 
0.868 
.. 
0.853 
0.876 
.. 
0.849 
.. 
0.833 
0.834 
0.847 
.. 
0.836 

0.829 
0.817 
0.806 
.. 
0.812 
0.795 
0.817 
0.828 
.. 
0.803 
0.804 
0.802 
.. 
.. 
0.782 
0.791 
.. 
.. 
.. 
0.790 
0.744 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

0.948 
0.938 
0.918 
0.938 
0.903 
0.938 
0.937 
0.927 
0.931 
0.931 
.. 
0.916 
0.939 
0.920 
0.914 
0.917 
0.933 
0.906 
.. 
0.911 
0.929 
0.919 
0.884 
.. 
0.874 
0.837 
0.883 
.. 
0.861 
0.889 
0.851 
0.866 
.. 
0.870 
0.845 
0.857 
.. 
0.856 

0.850 
0.796 
0.823 
0.827 
0.816 
0.822 
0.811 
0.791 
.. 
0.765 
0.824 
0.817 
.. 
.. 
0.794 
0.807 
.. 
.. 
.. 
0.793 
0.765 

  0.961 
 
0.954 
  0.943 
 
0.948 
  0.936 
 
0.950 
  0.954 
 
0.941 
  0.948 
0.943 
 
 
.. 
 
0.938 
  0.949 
 
0.940 
  0.931 
 
0.936 
  0.945 
0.927 
 
.. 
 
 
0.930 
  0.932 
 
 
 
  0.895 
 
0.869 
  0.908 
 
  0.892 
 
0.905 
  0.874 
 
0.897 
  0.870 
 
0.895 
  0.848 
0.868 
 
.. 
 
 
0.874 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 

  0.864 
 
0.835 
  0.853 
 
0.840 
  0.844 
 
0.849 
  0.837 
 
0.830 
.. 
 
0.810 
 
.. 
 
0.837 
 
.. 
 
 
.. 
  0.825 
 
0.825 
  0.821 
 
  0.841 
0.802 
 
 
.. 

.. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

0.968 
0.967 
0.965 
0.963 
0.961 
0.958 
0.960 
0.956 
0.957 
0.956 
0.956 
0.952 
0.955 
0.949 
0.949 
0.950 
0.947 
0.947 
.. 
0.946 
0.947 
0.942 
.. 
0.939 
0.935 
0.927 
0.929 
.. 
0.918 
0.917 
0.915 
0.908 
0.903 
0.904 
0.896 
0.894 
0.890 
0.897 

0.888 
0.872 
0.871 
0.867 
0.874 
0.872 
0.862 
0.862 
.. 
0.852 
0.855 
0.855 
0.839 
0.852 
0.844 
0.844 
0.837 
0.836 
0.838 
0.822 
0.837 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

0.970   
0.968 
 
0.967   
0.965 
 
0.964   
0.961 
 
0.961   
0.958 
 
0.959   
0.958 
 
0.959   
0.955 
 
0.955   
0.952 
 
0.952   
 
0.953 
0.951 
 
0.950 
 
0.950   
0.948 
 
0.945   
0.945 
 
0.942   
0.943 
 
0.938   
0.933 
 
0.932   
 
0.933 
 
0.924 
 
0.919 
 
0.912 
0.911 
 
0.905   
0.907 
 
0.896   
0.899 
 
0.891   
0.899 
 

0.894   
0.878 
 
0.876   
0.873 
 
0.878   
0.874 
 
0.867   
0.865 
 
0.860   
0.859 
 
0.861   
0.860 
 
0.856   
0.854 
 
0.849   
0.849 
 
0.842   
0.843 
 
0.841   
0.833 
 
0.840   

0.971 
0.970 
0.969 
0.966 
0.965 
0.964 
0.963 
0.961 
0.960 
0.960 
0.960 
0.959 
0.956 
0.955 
0.955 
0.955 
0.953 
0.951 
0.951 
0.950 
0.947 
0.947 
0.944 
0.944 
0.942 
0.937 
0.935 
0.934 
0.929 
0.920 
0.916 
0.914 
0.910 
0.909 
0.903 
0.903 
0.903 
0.902 

0.895 
0.883 
0.880 
0.880 
0.879 
0.878 
0.871 
0.870 
0.868 
0.866 
0.866 
0.865 
0.863 
0.856 
0.854 
0.854 
0.847 
0.846 
0.845 
0.844 
0.843 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1  
2  
3  
4  
5  
7  
6  
11  
9  
10  
8  
13  
12  
16  
15  
14  
17  
19  
18  
20  
21  
22  
24  
23  
25  
26  
28  
27  
29  
30  
31  
32  
34  
33  
37  
36  
39  
35  

38  
40  
42  
44  
41  
43  
45  
46  
48  
50  
47  
49  
51  
52  
54  
53  
56  
55  
57  
62  
58  

0  
0  
0  
0  
0  
1  
-1  
3  
0  
0  
-3  
1  
-1  
2  
0  
-2  
0  
1  
-1  
0  
0  
0  
1  
-1  
0  
0  
1  
-1  
0  
0  
0  
0  
1  
-1  
2  
0  
2  
-3  

-1  
0  
1  
2  
-2  
-1  
0  
0  
1  
2  
-2  
-1  
0  
0  
1  
-1  
1  
-1  
0  
4  
-1  

0.28 
0.40 
0.33 
0.31 
0.52 
0.30 
0.32 
0.34 
0.25 
0.29 
.. 
0.38 
0.25 
0.37 
0.41 
0.29 
0.34 
0.39 
.. 
0.36 
0.35 
0.32 
0.68 
.. 
0.41 
0.97 
0.44 
.. 
.. 
0.39 
0.44 
.. 
.. 
0.63 
0.72 
.. 
.. 
0.50a 

0.60 
.. 
.. 
.. 
0.34 
0.59 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
0.33 
0.40 
.. 
.. 
0.45 
0.42 
.. 
.. 
.. 
0.37 
.. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

0.29 
0.43 
0.35 
0.21 
0.55 
0.30 
0.36 
0.32 
0.25 
0.26 
.. 
0.35 
0.21 
0.35 
0.37 
0.36 
0.31 
0.40 
.. 
0.42 
0.36 
0.33 
0.61 
.. 
0.45 
0.92 
0.44 
.. 
0.51 
0.29 
.. 
0.43 
.. 
0.52 
0.47 
0.38 
.. 
0.45 

0.45 
0.46 
0.52 
.. 
0.47 
0.58 
0.38 
0.29 
.. 
0.44 
0.44 
0.45 
.. 
.. 
0.52 
0.45 
.. 
.. 
.. 
0.39 
0.74 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

0.16
0.24
0.39
0.27
0.44
0.21
0.14
0.30
0.19
0.25
..
0.32
0.11
0.23
0.36
0.28
0.13
0.36
..
0.30
0.24
..
..
..
0.73
1.08
0.42
..
0.58
0.22
0.67
0.26
0.64
0.23
0.91
0.56
..
0.45

0.50
0.80
0.45
0.66
0.58
0.48
0.58
0.68
..
0.96
..
0.47
..
..
0.50
0.48
0.44
..
0.06
0.74
..

167

G

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009

Human development index trends

HDI rank

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2006

2007

2006

2006–2007 1980–2007 1990–2007 2000–2007

Average annual 
growth rates                                                                                         

(%)

Rank

Change in 

rank

Long
term

Medium

term

Short
term

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

60  Panama 
61  Bulgaria 
62  Saint Kitts and Nevis 
63  Romania 
64  Trinidad and Tobago 
65  Montenegro 
66  Malaysia 
67  Serbia 
68  Belarus 
69  Saint Lucia 
70  Albania 
71  Russian Federation 
72  Macedonia (the Former Yugoslav Rep. of) 
73  Dominica 
74  Grenada 
75  Brazil 
76  Bosnia and Herzegovina 
77  Colombia 
78  Peru 
79  Turkey 
80  Ecuador 
81  Mauritius 
82  Kazakhstan 
83  Lebanon 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

MEDIUM HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
 

 
 
 

84  Armenia 
85  Ukraine 
86  Azerbaijan 
87  Thailand 
88  Iran (Islamic Republic of) 
89  Georgia 
90  Dominican Republic 
91  Saint Vincent and the Grenadines 
92  China 
93  Belize 
94  Samoa 
95  Maldives 
96  Jordan 
97  Suriname 
98  Tunisia 
99  Tonga 
100  Jamaica 
101  Paraguay 
102  Sri Lanka 
103  Gabon 
104  Algeria 
105  Philippines 
106  El Salvador 
107  Syrian Arab Republic 
108  Fiji 
109  Turkmenistan 
110  Occupied Palestinian Territories 
111  Indonesia 
112  Honduras 
113  Bolivia 
114  Guyana 
115  Mongolia 
116  Viet Nam 
117  Moldova 
118  Equatorial Guinea 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

168
168

0.759 
.. 
.. 
.. 
0.794 
.. 
0.666 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
0.685 
.. 
0.688 
0.687 
0.628 
0.709 
.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 
0.658 
0.561 
.. 
0.640 
.. 
0.533 
.. 
.. 
.. 
0.631 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
0.677 
0.649 
.. 
.. 
0.652 
0.573 
0.603 
.. 
.. 
.. 
0.522 
0.567 
0.560 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

0.769 
.. 
.. 
.. 
0.791 
.. 
0.689 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
0.694 
.. 
0.698 
0.703 
0.674 
0.723 
.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 
0.684 
0.620 
.. 
0.659 
.. 
0.556 
.. 
0.686 
.. 
0.638 
.. 
0.605 
.. 
.. 
0.677 
0.670 
.. 
0.628 
0.651 
0.585 
0.625 
.. 
.. 
.. 
0.562 
0.593 
0.577 
.. 
.. 
0.561 
.. 
.. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

0.765 
.. 
.. 
0.786 
0.796 
.. 
0.737 
.. 
0.795 
.. 
.. 
0.821 
.. 
.. 
.. 
0.710 
.. 
0.715 
0.708 
0.705 
0.744 
0.718 
0.778 
.. 

0.731 
.. 
.. 
0.706 
0.672 
.. 
0.667 
.. 
0.608 
0.705 
0.697 
.. 
0.666 
.. 
0.627 
.. 
.. 
0.711 
0.683 
.. 
0.647 
0.697 
0.660 
0.626 
.. 
.. 
.. 
0.624 
0.608 
0.629 
.. 
.. 
0.599 
0.735 
.. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

0.784 
.. 
.. 
0.780 
0.797 
.. 
0.767 
.. 
0.760 
.. 
.. 
0.777 
0.782 
.. 
.. 
0.734 
.. 
0.757 
0.744 
0.730 
0.758 
0.735 
0.730 
.. 

0.693 
.. 
.. 
0.727 
0.712 
.. 
0.686 
.. 
0.657 
0.723 
0.716 
0.683 
0.656 
.. 
0.654 
.. 
.. 
0.726 
0.696 
0.748 
0.653 
0.713 
0.691 
0.649 
.. 
.. 
.. 
0.658 
0.623 
0.653 
.. 
.. 
0.647 
0.682 
.. 

.. 

.. 

  0.811 
0.803 
 
.. 
 
 
0.788 
  0.806 
 
0.815 
  0.797 
 
0.797 
  0.786 
 
  0.784 
 
  0.800 
.. 
 
.. 
 
0.790 
 
.. 
 
 
0.772 
  0.771 
0.758 
 
 
.. 
 
0.770 
  0.747 
 

.. 

.. 

.. 

  0.738 
0.754 
 
 
.. 
  0.753 
  0.738 
 
0.739 
  0.748 
 
  0.719 
 
0.735 
  0.742 
 
0.730 
  0.691 
 
  0.678 
 
0.759 
  0.750 
 
0.737 
  0.729 
 
0.735 
  0.713 
 
0.726 
  0.704 
0.715 
 
.. 
 
.. 
 
 
.. 
 
0.673 
  0.690 
0.699 
 
.. 
 
 
0.676 
  0.690 
 
0.683 
  0.655 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

0.829 
0.829 
0.831 
0.824 
0.825 
0.823 
0.821 
0.817 
0.812 
0.817 
0.811 
0.804 
0.810 
0.814 
0.812 
0.805 
0.803 
0.795 
0.791 
0.796 
.. 
0.797 
0.794 
0.800 

0.777 
0.783 
0.755 
0.777 
0.773 
0.765 
0.765 
0.763 
0.756 
0.770 
0.764 
0.755 
0.764 
0.759 
0.758 
0.765 
0.765 
0.754 
0.752 
0.747 
0.746 
0.744 
0.743 
0.733 
0.744 
.. 
0.736 
0.723 
0.725 
0.723 
0.722 
0.713 
0.715 
0.712 
0.715 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

0.834   
0.835 
 
0.835   
0.832 
 
0.832   
0.828 
 
0.825   
 
0.821 
 
0.819 
 
0.821 
0.814 
 
 
0.811 
 
0.813 
 
0.814 
 
0.810 
0.808 
 
0.807   
0.800 
 
0.799   
0.802 
 
0.805   
0.801 
 
0.800   
0.800 
 

 
0.787 
0.789 
 
0.773   
0.780   
0.777   
 
0.768 
0.771 
 
0.767 
 
0.763   
0.770 
 
0.766   
0.765 
 
 
0.767 
0.765 
 
0.763   
0.767 
 
0.768   
0.757 
 
0.755   
 
0.750 
 
0.749 
0.747 
 
 
0.746 
 
0.738 
 
0.744 
 
0.739 
0.737 
 
0.729 
 
0.729   
 
0.726 
 
0.721 
 
0.720 
0.720 
 
 
0.718 
0.712 
 

0.840 
0.840 
0.838 
0.837 
0.837 
0.834 
0.829 
0.826 
0.826 
0.821 
0.818 
0.817 
0.817 
0.814 
0.813 
0.813 
0.812 
0.807 
0.806 
0.806 
0.806 
0.804 
0.804 
0.803 

0.798 
0.796 
0.787 
0.783 
0.782 
0.778 
0.777 
0.772 
0.772 
0.772 
0.771 
0.771 
0.770 
0.769 
0.769 
0.768 
0.766 
0.761 
0.759 
0.755 
0.754 
0.751 
0.747 
0.742 
0.741 
0.739 
0.737 
0.734 
0.732 
0.729 
0.729 
0.727 
0.725 
0.720 
0.719 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

61  
59  
60  
64  
63  
65  
66  
67  
69  
68  
70  
73  
72  
71  
74  
75  
76  
82  
83  
78  
77  
79  
81  
80  

85  
84  
88  
86  
87  
91  
89  
93  
99  
90  
96  
97  
95  
98  
100  
94  
92  
101  
102  
103  
104  
105  
106  
109  
107  
108  
110  
111  
112  
113  
114  
116  
115  
117  
118  

1  
-2  
-2  
1  
-1  
0  
0  
0  
1  
-1  
0  
2  
0  
-2  
0  
0  
0  
5  
5  
-1  
-3  
-2  
-1  
-3  

1  
-1  
2  
-1  
-1  
2  
-1  
2  
7  
-3  
2  
2  
-1  
1  
2  
-5  
-8  
0  
0  
0  
0  
0  
0  
2  
-1  
-1  
0  
0  
0  
0  
0  
1  
-1  
0  
0  

0.38 
.. 
.. 
.. 
0.19 
.. 
0.81 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
0.63 
.. 
0.59 
0.59 
0.93 
0.48 
.. 
.. 
.. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
.. 
 
.. 
 
.. 
 
0.64 
 
1.23 
 
.. 
 
0.72 
 
.. 
 
1.37 
 
.. 
 
0.53a 
 
.. 
 
0.73 
.. 
 
1.09 a   
 
.. 
.. 
 
 
0.43 
 
0.58 
 
.. 
 
0.83a 
0.53 
 
 
0.99 
 
0.77 
 
.. 
 
.. 
 
.. 
1.26 
 
 
0.94 
 
0.98 
 
.. 
 
.. 
1.16a 
 
 
.. 
.. 
 

0.55 
.. 
.. 
0.37 
0.30 
.. 
0.69 
.. 
0.22 
.. 
.. 

-0.03 

.. 
.. 
.. 
0.79 
.. 
0.71 
0.76 
0.79 
0.47 
0.67 
0.20 
.. 

0.51 
.. 
.. 
0.61 
0.89 
.. 
0.90 
.. 
1.40 
0.54 
0.59 
.. 
0.85 
.. 
1.20 
.. 
.. 
0.40 
0.62 
.. 
0.90 
0.44 
0.73 
1.00 
.. 
.. 
.. 
0.95 
1.09 
0.87 
.. 
.. 
1.13 
-0.12 

.. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

0.50
0.65
..
0.87
0.53
0.34
0.56
0.51
0.70
..
0.61
..
0.30
..
..
0.41
..
0.63
0.63
0.87
..
0.63
1.05
..

1.12
0.76
..
0.57
0.83
0.73
0.54
..
1.00
0.70
0.55
0.78
1.55
..
1.79
0.16
0.29
0.45
0.57
0.39
0.79
0.49
0.85
0.53
..
..
..
1.25
0.84
0.62
..
1.02
0.71
0.77
1.33

TABLE

G

Average annual 
growth rates                                                                                         

(%)

Rank

Change in 

rank

Long
term

Medium

term

Short
term

HDI rank

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2006

2007

2006

2006–2007 1980–2007 1990–2007 2000–2007

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 119  Uzbekistan 
 120  Kyrgyzstan 
 121  Cape Verde 
 122  Guatemala 
 123  Egypt 
 124  Nicaragua 
 125  Botswana 
 126  Vanuatu 
 127  Tajikistan 
 128  Namibia 
 129  South Africa 
 130  Morocco 
 131  Sao Tome and Principe 
 132  Bhutan 
 
 133  Lao People’s Democratic Republic 
 134  India 
 
 135  Solomon Islands 
 136  Congo 
 137  Cambodia 
 138  Myanmar 
 139  Comoros 
 140  Yemen 
 141  Pakistan 
 142  Swaziland 
 143  Angola 
 144  Nepal 
 145  Madagascar 
 146  Bangladesh 
 147  Kenya 
 148  Papua New Guinea 
 149  Haiti 
 150  Sudan 
 151  Tanzania (United Republic of) 
 152  Ghana 
 153  Cameroon 
 154  Mauritania 
 155  Djibouti 
 156  Lesotho 
 157  Uganda 
 158  Nigeria 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

LOW HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
 159  Togo 
 160  Malawi 
 161  Benin 
 162  Timor-Leste 
 163  Côte d’Ivoire 
 164  Zambia 
 165  Eritrea 
 166  Senegal 
 167  Rwanda 
 168  Gambia 
 169  Liberia 
 170  Guinea 
 171  Ethiopia 
 172  Mozambique 
 173  Guinea-Bissau 
  174  Burundi 
 175  Chad 
 176  Congo (Democratic Republic of the) 
 177  Burkina Faso 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

.. 
.. 
.. 
0.531 
0.496 
0.565 
0.539 
.. 
.. 
.. 
0.658 
0.473 
.. 
.. 
.. 
0.427 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
0.447 
.. 
0.402 
0.535 
.. 
0.309 
.. 
0.328 
.. 
0.418 
0.433 
.. 
.. 
.. 
0.460 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

0.404 
.. 
0.351 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
0.357 
.. 
0.365 
.. 
.. 
0.280 
0.256 
0.268 
.. 
.. 
0.248 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

.. 
.. 
.. 
0.538 
0.552 
0.569 
0.579 
.. 
.. 
.. 
0.680 
0.499 
.. 
.. 
.. 
0.453 
.. 
.. 
.. 
0.492 
0.461 
.. 
0.423 
0.587 
.. 
0.342 
.. 
0.351 
.. 
0.427 
0.442 
.. 
.. 
.. 
0.498 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

0.387 
0.379 
0.364 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
0.361 
.. 
0.370 
.. 
.. 
0.258 
0.278 
0.292 
.. 
.. 
0.264 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

.. 
.. 
0.589 
0.555 
0.580 
0.573 
0.682 
.. 
0.707 
0.657 
0.698 
0.518 
.. 
.. 
.. 
0.489 
.. 
0.597 
.. 
0.487 
0.489 
.. 
0.449 
0.619 
.. 
0.407 
.. 
0.389 
.. 
0.432 
0.462 
.. 
0.436 
.. 
0.485 
.. 
.. 
.. 
0.392 
0.438 

0.391 
0.390 
0.384 
.. 
0.463 
0.495 
.. 
0.390 
0.325 
.. 
0.325 
.. 
.. 
0.273 
0.320 
0.327 
.. 
.. 
0.285 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

.. 
.. 
0.641 
0.621 
0.631 
0.597 
0.665 
.. 
0.636 
0.675 
.. 
0.562 
.. 
.. 
0.518 
0.511 
.. 
0.575 
.. 
0.506 
0.513 
0.486 
0.469 
0.626 
.. 
0.436 
.. 
0.415 
.. 
0.461 
0.483 
.. 
0.425 
.. 
0.457 
.. 
.. 
.. 
0.389 
0.450 

0.404 
0.453 
0.411 
.. 
0.456 
0.454 
.. 
0.399 
0.306 
.. 
0.280 
.. 
0.308 
0.310 
0.349 
0.299 
0.324 
.. 
0.297 

.. 

  0.687 
 
0.687 
  0.674 
 
0.664 
  0.665 
 
0.667 
  0.632 
 
0.663 
  0.641 
 
0.661 
  0.688 
0.583 
 
.. 
 
 
.. 
  0.566 
0.556 
 
 
.. 
 
0.536 
  0.515 
 
  0.540 
 
0.522 
.. 
 
0.598 
 
.. 
 
 
0.500 
  0.501 
 
0.493 
  0.522 
.. 
 
.. 
 
 
0.491 
  0.458 
 
0.495 
  0.513 
0.495 
 
 
.. 
 
0.533 
  0.460 
 
0.466 

.. 

.. 
 
 
0.478 
  0.447 
 
  0.481 
 
0.431 
  0.431 
 
0.436 
  0.402 
 
  0.419 
 
  0.332 
 
0.350 
  0.370 
 
0.358 
  0.350 
 
0.353 
  0.319 

.. 

.. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

0.703 
0.702 
0.692 
0.691 
0.696 
0.691 
0.673 
0.681 
0.677 
0.672 
0.678 
0.640 
0.639 
0.602 
0.607 
0.596 
0.599 
0.600 
0.575 
0.583 
0.570 
0.562 
0.555 
0.567 
0.541 
0.537 
0.532 
0.527 
0.530 
0.532 
.. 
0.515 
0.510 
0.512 
0.520 
0.511 
0.513 
0.508 
0.494 
0.499 

0.495 
0.476 
0.481 
0.488 
0.480 
0.466 
0.466 
0.460 
0.449 
0.450 
0.427 
0.426 
0.391 
0.390 
0.386 
0.375 
0.394 
0.370 
0.367 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

0.706   
0.705 
 
0.704   
0.696 
 
0.700   
0.696 
 
0.683   
0.688 
 
0.683   
0.678 
 
0.680   
0.648 
 
0.645   
 
0.608 
 
0.613 
0.604 
 
0.604   
0.603 
 
0.584   
0.584 
 
0.573   
0.568 
 
0.568   
0.569 
 
0.552   
0.547 
 
0.537   
0.535 
 
0.535   
0.536 
 
0.526   
 
0.526 
0.519 
 
 
0.518 
 
0.519 
 
0.519 
0.517 
 
0.511 
 
0.505   
0.506 
 

0.498   
0.484 
 
0.487   
0.484 
 
0.482   
0.473 
 
0.467   
0.462 
 
0.455   
0.453 
 
0.434   
0.433 
 
0.402   
0.397 
 
0.391   
0.387 
 
0.393   
0.371 
 
0.384   

0.710 
0.710 
0.708 
0.704 
0.703 
0.699 
0.694 
0.693 
0.688 
0.686 
0.683 
0.654 
0.651 
0.619 
0.619 
0.612 
0.610 
0.601 
0.593 
0.586 
0.576 
0.575 
0.572 
0.572 
0.564 
0.553 
0.543 
0.543 
0.541 
0.541 
0.532 
0.531 
0.530 
0.526 
0.523 
0.520 
0.520 
0.514 
0.514 
0.511 

0.499 
0.493 
0.492 
0.489 
0.484 
0.481 
0.472 
0.464 
0.460 
0.456 
0.442 
0.435 
0.414 
0.402 
0.396 
0.394 
0.392 
0.389 
0.389 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

119  
120  
121  
123  
122  
124  
126  
125  
127  
129  
128  
130  
131  
133  
132  
134  
135  
136  
137  
138  
139  
141  
142  
140  
143  
144  
145  
148  
147  
146  
149  
150  
151  
154  
152  
153  
155  
156  
158  
157  

159  
161  
160  
162  
163  
164  
165  
166  
167  
168  
169  
170  
171  
172  
174  
175  
173  
177  
176  

0  
0  
0  
1  
-1  
0  
1  
-1  
0  
1  
-1  
0  
0  
1  
-1  
0  
0  
0  
0  
0  
0  
1  
1  
-2  
0  
0  
0  
2  
0  
-2  
0  
0  
0  
2  
-1  
-1  
0  
0  
1  
-1  

0  
1  
-1  
0  
0  
0  
0  
0  
0  
0  
0  
0  
0  
0  
1  
1  
-2  
1  
-1  

.. 
.. 
.. 
1.05 
1.30 
0.79 
0.94 
.. 
.. 
.. 
0.14 
1.20 
.. 
.. 
.. 
1.33 
.. 
.. 
.. 
0.79a 
0.94 
.. 
1.30 
0.24 
.. 
2.16 
.. 
1.86 
.. 
0.95 
0.77 
.. 
.. 
.. 
0.48 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

0.78 
1.20a 
1.25 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
0.94 
.. 
0.71 
.. 
.. 
1.34 
1.62 
1.43 
.. 
.. 
1.67 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

.. 
.. 
1.08 
1.40 
1.13 
1.17 
0.10 
.. 

-0.16 
0.26 
-0.13 
1.37 
.. 
.. 
.. 
1.32 
.. 
0.04 
.. 
1.08 
0.96 
.. 
1.42 
-0.47 

.. 
1.81 
.. 
1.96 
.. 
1.32 
0.83 
.. 
1.15 
.. 
0.44 
.. 
.. 
.. 
1.59 
0.91 

1.44 
1.38 
1.46 
.. 
0.26 
-0.17 

.. 
1.02 
2.04 
.. 
1.81 
.. 
.. 
2.28 
1.25 
1.10 
.. 
.. 
1.82 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

0.48
0.46
0.71
0.85
0.81
0.67
1.34
0.62
1.03
0.53
  -0.10
1.63
..
..
1.26
1.36
..
1.65
2.01
..
0.92
1.36
..

 

 

 

 

 

 

-0.63

..
1.46
1.14
1.39
0.51
..
..
1.12
2.09
0.88
0.26
0.71
..

-0.52
1.57
1.31

..
0.44
1.37
..
0.08
1.57
1.29
0.88
1.90
..
0.77
..
3.13
1.97
0.99
1.38
1.61
1.41
2.85

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

169

G

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009

Human development index trends

Average annual 
growth rates                                                                                         

(%)

Rank

Change in 

rank

Long
term

Medium

term

Short
term

HDI rank

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2006

2007

2006

2006–2007 1980–2007 1990–2007 2000–2007

178  Mali 
179  Central African Republic 
180  Sierra Leone 
181  Afghanistan 
182  Niger 

 

 

 

 

 

0.245 
0.335 
.. 
.. 
.. 

 
 
 
 
 

0.239 
0.344 
.. 
.. 
.. 

 
 
 
 
 

0.254 
0.362 
.. 
.. 
.. 

 
 
 
 
 

0.267 
0.347 
.. 
.. 
.. 

  0.316 
0.378 
 
.. 
 
 
.. 
  0.258 

 
 
 
 
 

0.361 
0.364 
0.350 
0.347 
0.330 

 
 
 
 
 

0.366   
0.367 
 
0.357   
0.350 
 
0.335   

0.371 
0.369 
0.365 
0.352 
0.340 

 
 
 
 
 

179  
178  
180  
181  
182  

1  
-1  
0  
0  
0  

1.53 
0.36 
.. 
.. 
.. 

 
 
 
 
 

2.23 
0.12 
.. 
.. 
.. 

 

 

 

 

 

2.30
-0.33

..
..
3.92

NOTES
The human development index values in this table were 
calculated using a consistent methodology and data 
series. They are not strictly comparable with those 
published in earlier Human Development Reports. See 
the Reader’s guide for more details. 
 

 

a  Average annual growth rate between 1985 and 2007.

SOURCES
Columns 1–8: calculated based on data on life 
expectancy from UN (2009e); data on adult literacy 
rates from UNESCO Institute for Statistics (2003) and 
(2009a); data on combined gross enrolment ratios from 
UNESCO Institute for Statistics (1999) and (2009b); 
and data on GDP per capita (2007 PPP US$) from World 
Bank (2009d).
Column 9: calculated based on revised HDI values for 
2006 in column 7.
Column 10: calculated based on revised HDI ranks for 
2006 and new HDI ranks for 2007.
Column 11: calculated based on the HDI values for 1980 
and 2007.
Column 12: calculated based on the HDI values for 1990 
and 2007.
Column 13: calculated based on the HDI values for 2000 
and 2007.

170

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009

Human development index 2007 and its components 

 

 

H

TABLE

H

Human 

Life 

Adult literacy 

development 

expectancy at 

rate

index
value

2007

birth
(years)

2007

(% aged 15 
and above)

1999–2007a

 

0.971 
0.970 
0.969 
0.966 
0.965 
0.964 
0.963 
0.961 
0.960 
0.960 
0.960 
0.959 
0.956 
0.955 
0.955 
0.955 
0.953 
0.951 
0.951 
0.950 
0.947 
0.947 
0.944 
0.944 
0.942 
0.937 
0.935 
0.934 
0.929 
0.920 
0.916 
0.914 
0.910 
0.909 
0.903 
0.903 
0.903 
0.902 

0.895 
0.883 
0.880 
0.880 
0.879 
0.878 
0.871 
0.870 
0.868 
0.866 
0.866 
0.865 
0.863 
0.856 
0.854 
0.854 
0.847 
0.846 
0.845 
0.844 
0.843 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

80.5  
81.4   
81.7  
80.6   
79.7  
79.8   
80.8  
81.0   
81.7  
82.7   
79.4  
79.5   
79.1  
79.9   
80.7  
78.2   
79.5  
81.1   
.. k 
80.1   
79.3  
79.8   
80.2  
82.2   
79.1  
79.2   
80.7  
..  k 
78.2  
77.0   
77.5  
79.6   
75.5  
78.6   
77.3  
76.4   
77.0  
79.6   

75.6  
72.9   
75.5  
74.6   
73.3  
78.5   
76.0  
71.8   
.. k 
72.3   
75.2  
76.1   
78.5  
73.2   
76.0  
78.7   
73.8  
75.5   
.. k 
73.6   
72.7  

 
.. c 
.. c 
.. c 
.. c 
.. c 
.. c 
.. c 
.. c 
.. c 
.. c 
.. c 
.. c 
.. c 
.. c 
97.9 i 
.. c 
.. c 
98.9 j 
.. c 
.. c 
.. c 
.. c 
94.4 j 
.. o 
97.1 j 
.. c 
97.1 l 
.. c 
99.7 c,j 
94.9 j 
94.5 i 
97.7  j 
93.1 i 
94.9 j 
90.0  i 
.. c 
.. c,o 
92.4 r 

88.8 j 
99.8 c,j 
99.3 c,j 
.. c 
98.9 j 
96.5 j 
98.7 j 
99.7 c,j 
99.0 r 
99.8 c,j 
97.6 j 
97.9 i 
99.8 c,j 
.. o 
92.8 i 
95.9 j 
86.8  j 
84.4  j 
91.8 r 
95.2 i 
85.0 j 

HDI rank

1  Norway 
2  Australia 
3  Iceland 
4  Canada 
5  Ireland 
6  Netherlands 
7  Sweden 
8  France 
9  Switzerland 

VERY HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  10  Japan 
  11  Luxembourg 
  12  Finland 
  13  United States 
  14  Austria 
  15  Spain 
  16  Denmark 
  17  Belgium 
  18  Italy 
  19  Liechtenstein 
  20  New Zealand 
  21  United Kingdom 
  22  Germany 
  23  Singapore 
  24  Hong Kong, China (SAR) 
  25  Greece 
  26  Korea (Republic of) 
  27  Israel 
  28  Andorra 
  29  Slovenia 
  30  Brunei Darussalam 
  31  Kuwait 
  32  Cyprus 
  33  Qatar 
  34  Portugal 
  35  United Arab Emirates 
  36  Czech Republic 
  37  Barbados 
  38  Malta 

HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
  39  Bahrain 
  40  Estonia 
  41  Poland 
  42  Slovakia 
  43  Hungary 
  44  Chile 
  45  Croatia 
  46  Lithuania 
  47  Antigua and Barbuda 
  48  Latvia 
  49  Argentina 
  50  Uruguay 
  51  Cuba 
  52  Bahamas 
  53  Mexico 
  54  Costa Rica 
  55  Libyan Arab Jamahiriya 
  56  Oman 
  57  Seychelles 
  58  Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) 
  59  Saudi Arabia 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Combined 

gross

enrolment ratio 
in education

GDP per capita

expectancy 

Education 

Life

(%)

2007

 

98.6 d 
114.2 d,f 
96.0 d 
99.3 d,g 
97.6 d 
97.5 d 
94.3 d 
95.4 d 
82.7 d 
86.6 d 
94.4 h 
101.4 d,f 
92.4 d 
90.5 d 
96.5 d 
101.3 d,f 
94.3 d 
91.8 d 
86.8 d,l 
107.5 d,f 
89.2 d,g 
88.1 d,g 
.. n 
74.4 d 
101.6 d,f 
98.5 d 
89.9 d 
65.1 d,l 
92.8 d 
77.7  
72.6 d 
77.6 d,l 
80.4  
88.8 d 
71.4  
83.4 d 
92.9  
81.3 d 

90.4 d,g 
91.2 d 
87.7 d 
80.5 d 
90.2 d 
82.5 d 
77.2 d 
92.3 d 
.. n 
90.2 d 
88.6 d 
90.9 d 
100.8  
71.8  d,g 
80.2 d 
73.0 d,g 
95.8 d,g 
68.2  
82.2  d,l 
85.9 l 
78.5  d,l 

 

(PPP US$)

2007

 
53,433 e 
34,923  
35,742  
35,812  
44,613 e 
38,694  
36,712  
33,674  
40,658  
33,632  
79,485 e 
34,526  
45,592 e 
37,370  
31,560  
36,130  
34,935  
30,353  
85,382 e,m 
27,336  
35,130  
34,401  
49,704 e 
42,306  
28,517  
24,801  
26,315  
41,235 e,p 
26,753  
50,200 e 
47,812 d,e 
24,789  
74,882 d,e 
22,765  
54,626 d,e,q 
24,144  
17,956 d,q 
23,080  

29,723  d 
20,361  
15,987  
20,076  
18,755  
13,880  
16,027  
17,575  
18,691 q 
16,377  
13,238  
11,216  
6,876 d,s 
20,253 d,s 
14,104  
10,842 q 
14,364 q 
22,816 d 
16,394 q 
12,156  
22,935  

index

2007

 
0.925  
0.940  
0.946  
0.927  
0.911  
0.914  
0.930  
0.933  
0.945  
0.961  
0.906  
0.908  
0.902  
0.915  
0.929  
0.887  
0.908  
0.935  
0.903  
0.919  
0.906  
0.913  
0.920  
0.953  
0.902  
0.904  
0.928  
0.925  
0.886  
0.867  
0.875  
0.910  
0.841  
0.893  
0.872  
0.856  
0.867  
0.910  

0.843  
0.799  
0.842  
0.827  
0.805  
0.891  
0.850  
0.780  
0.786  
0.788  
0.836  
0.852  
0.891  
0.804  
0.850  
0.896  
0.814  
0.841  
0.797  
0.811  
0.794  

index

2007

GDP index

2007

 

 

0.989  
0.993  
0.980  
0.991  
0.985  
0.985  
0.974  
0.978  
0.936  
0.949  
0.975  
0.993  
0.968  
0.962  
0.975  
0.993  
0.974  
0.965  
0.949  
0.993  
0.957  
0.954  
0.913  
0.879  
0.981  
0.988  
0.947  
0.877  
0.969  
0.891  
0.872  
0.910  
0.888  
0.929  
0.838  
0.938  
0.975  
0.887  

0.893  
0.964  
0.952  
0.928  
0.960  
0.919  
0.916  
0.968  
0.945  
0.961  
0.946  
0.955  
0.993  
0.878  
0.886  
0.883  
0.898  
0.790  
0.886  
0.921  
0.828  

 

1.000  
0.977  
0.981  
0.982  
1.000  
0.994  
0.986  
0.971  
1.000  
0.971  
1.000  
0.975  
1.000  
0.989  
0.960  
0.983  
0.977  
0.954  
1.000  
0.936  
0.978  
0.975  
1.000  
1.000  
0.944  
0.920  
0.930  
1.000  
0.933  
1.000  
1.000  
0.920  
1.000  
0.906  
1.000  
0.916  
0.866  
0.908  

0.950  
0.887  
0.847  
0.885  
0.874  
0.823  
0.847  
0.863  
0.873  
0.851  
0.815  
0.788  
0.706  
0.886  
0.826  
0.782  
0.829  
0.906  
0.851  
0.801  
0.907  

GDP per capita 
rank minus HDI 

rankb

2007

 

4
20
16
14
5
8
9
17
4
16
-9
11
-4
1
12
1
4
11
-18
12
-1
2
-16
-13
6
9
7
-16
4
-24
-23
4
-30
8
-31
1
11
1

-9
3
12
3
3
15
7
3
0
3
13
20
44
-8
5
19
2
-15
-7
7
-19

171

H

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009

Human development index 2007 and its components 

 

 

Human 

Life 

Adult literacy 

development 

expectancy at 

rate

index
value

2007

birth
(years)

2007

(% aged 15 
and above)

1999–2007a

HDI rank

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

60  Panama 
61  Bulgaria 
62  Saint Kitts and Nevis 
63  Romania 
64  Trinidad and Tobago 
65  Montenegro 
66  Malaysia 
67  Serbia 
68  Belarus 
69  Saint Lucia 
70  Albania 
71  Russian Federation 
 
72  Macedonia (the Former Yugoslav Rep. of)  
73  Dominica 
 
74  Grenada 
75  Brazil 
76  Bosnia and Herzegovina 
77  Colombia 
78  Peru 
79  Turkey 
80  Ecuador 
81  Mauritius 
82  Kazakhstan 
83  Lebanon 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

MEDIUM HUMAN DEVELOPMENT

84  Armenia 
85  Ukraine 
86  Azerbaijan 
87  Thailand 
88  Iran (Islamic Republic of) 
89  Georgia 
90  Dominican Republic 
91  Saint Vincent and the Grenadines 
92  China 
93  Belize 
94  Samoa 
95  Maldives 
96  Jordan 
97  Suriname 
98  Tunisia 
99  Tonga 
100  Jamaica 
101  Paraguay 
102  Sri Lanka 
103  Gabon 
104  Algeria 
105  Philippines 
106  El Salvador 
107  Syrian Arab Republic 
108  Fiji 
109  Turkmenistan 
110  Occupied Palestinian Territories 
111  Indonesia 
112  Honduras 
113  Bolivia 
114  Guyana 
115  Mongolia 
116  Viet Nam 
117  Moldova 
118  Equatorial Guinea 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

172

0.840 
0.840 
0.838 
0.837 
0.837 
0.834 
0.829 
0.826 
0.826 
0.821 
0.818 
0.817 
0.817 
0.814 
0.813 
0.813 
0.812 
0.807 
0.806 
0.806 
0.806 
0.804 
0.804 
0.803 

0.798 
0.796 
0.787 
0.783 
0.782 
0.778 
0.777 
0.772 
0.772 
0.772 
0.771 
0.771 
0.770 
0.769 
0.769 
0.768 
0.766 
0.761 
0.759 
0.755 
0.754 
0.751 
0.747 
0.742 
0.741 
0.739 
0.737 
0.734 
0.732 
0.729 
0.729 
0.727 
0.725 
0.720 
0.719 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

75.5  
73.1   
.. k 
72.5   
69.2  
74.0   
74.1  
73.9   
69.0  
73.6   
76.5  
66.2   
74.1  
..  k 
75.3  
72.2   
75.1  
72.7   
73.0  
71.7   
75.0  
72.1   
64.9  
71.9   

73.6  
68.2   
70.0  
68.7   
71.2  
71.6   
72.4  
71.4   
72.9  
76.0   
71.4  
71.1   
72.4  
68.8   
73.8  
71.7   
71.7  
71.7   
74.0  
60.1   
72.2  
71.6   
71.3  
74.1   
68.7  
64.6   
73.3  
70.5   
72.0  
65.4   
66.5  
66.2   
74.3  
68.3   
49.9  

93.4 j 
98.3 j 
97.8 t 
97.6 j 
98.7 j 
96.4 r,u 
91.9 j 
96.4 r,u 
99.7 c,j 
94.8 x 
99.0 c,j 
99.5 c,j 
97.0 j 
88.0 x 
96.0 x 
90.0 i 
96.7 y 
92.7 i 
89.6 i 
88.7 i 
91.0 r 
87.4 j 
99.6 c,j 
89.6 i 

99.5 c,j 
99.7 c,j 
99.5 c,i 
94.1 j 
82.3 i 
100.0 c,ab 
89.1 j 
88.1 x 
93.3 j 
75.1 x 
98.7 j 
97.0 j 
91.1 i 
90.4 j 
77.7 j 
99.2 c,j 
86.0 j 
94.6 i 
90.8 i 
86.2 j 
75.4 j 
93.4 j 
82.0 r 
83.1 j 
.. o 
99.5 c,j 
93.8 i 
92.0 i 
83.6 i 
90.7 i 
.. o 
97.3 j 
90.3 r 
99.2 c,j 
87.0 y 

Combined 

gross

enrolment ratio 
in education

GDP per capita

expectancy 

Education 

Life

GDP per capita 
rank minus HDI 

(%)

2007

(PPP US$)

2007

79.7 d 
82.4 d 
73.1 d,g 
79.2 d 
61.1 d,g 
74.5 d,u,v 
71.5 d 
74.5 d,u,v 
90.4  
77.2  
67.8 d 
81.9 d 
70.1 d 
78.5 d,g 
73.1 d,g 
87.2 d 
69.0 d,z 
79.0  
88.1 d,g 
71.1 d,g 
.. n 
76.9 d,g 
91.4  
78.0  

74.6  
90.0  
66.2 d,aa 
78.0 d,g 
73.2 d,g 
76.7  
73.5 d,g 
68.9 d 
68.7 d 
78.3 d,g 
74.1 d,g 
71.3 d,g 
78.7 d 
74.3 d,g 
76.2 d 
78.0 d,g 
78.1 d,g 
72.1 d,g 
68.7 d,g 
80.7 d,g 
73.6 d,g 
79.6 d 
74.0  
65.7 d,g 
71.5 d,g 
.. n 
78.3  
68.2 d 
74.8 d,g 
86.0 d,g 
83.9  
79.2  
62.3 d,g 
71.6  
62.0 d,g 

11,391 q 
11,222  
14,481 q 
12,369  
23,507 q 
11,699  
13,518  
10,248 w 
10,841  
9,786 q 
7,041  
14,690  
9,096  
7,893 q 
7,344 q 
9,567  
7,764  
8,587  
7,836  
12,955  
7,449  
11,296  
10,863  
10,109  

5,693  
6,914  
7,851  
8,135  
10,955  
4,662  
6,706 q 
7,691 q 
5,383  
6,734 q 
4,467 q 
5,196  
4,901  
7,813 q 
7,520  
3,748 q 
6,079 q 
4,433  
4,243  
15,167  
7,740 q 
3,406  
5,804 q 
4,511  
4,304  
4,953 d,q 
.. d,ac 

3,712  
3,796 q 
4,206  
2,782 q 
3,236  
2,600  
2,551  
30,627  

index

2007

0.842  
0.802  
0.787  
0.792  
0.737  
0.817  
0.819  
0.816  
0.733  
0.810  
0.858  
0.686  
0.819  
0.865  
0.838  
0.787  
0.834  
0.795  
0.800  
0.779  
0.833  
0.785  
0.666  
0.781  

0.810  
0.720  
0.751  
0.728  
0.769  
0.777  
0.790  
0.774  
0.799  
0.851  
0.773  
0.768  
0.790  
0.729  
0.813  
0.778  
0.778  
0.778  
0.816  
0.584  
0.787  
0.777  
0.771  
0.818  
0.728  
0.661  
0.806  
0.758  
0.783  
0.673  
0.691  
0.687  
0.821  
0.722  
0.415  

index

2007

0.888  
0.930  
0.896  
0.915  
0.861  
0.891  
0.851  
0.891  
0.961  
0.889  
0.886  
0.933  
0.880  
0.848  
0.884  
0.891  
0.874  
0.881  
0.891  
0.828  
0.866  
0.839  
0.965  
0.857  

0.909  
0.960  
0.881  
0.888  
0.793  
0.916  
0.839  
0.817  
0.851  
0.762  
0.905  
0.885  
0.870  
0.850  
0.772  
0.920  
0.834  
0.871  
0.834  
0.843  
0.748  
0.888  
0.794  
0.773  
0.868  
0.906  
0.886  
0.840  
0.806  
0.892  
0.939  
0.913  
0.810  
0.899  
0.787  

GDP index

2007

rankb

2007

0.790  
0.788  
0.830  
0.804  
0.911  
0.795  
0.819  
0.773  
0.782  
0.765  
0.710  
0.833  
0.753  
0.729  
0.717  
0.761  
0.726  
0.743  
0.728  
0.812  
0.719  
0.789  
0.782  
0.770  

0.675  
0.707  
0.728  
0.734  
0.784  
0.641  
0.702  
0.725  
0.665  
0.703  
0.634  
0.659  
0.650  
0.727  
0.721  
0.605  
0.686  
0.633  
0.626  
0.838  
0.726  
0.589  
0.678  
0.636  
0.628  
0.651  
0.519  
0.603  
0.607  
0.624  
0.555  
0.580  
0.544  
0.541  
0.955  

7
8
-6
1
-26
1
-5
8
6
8
23
-16
8
10
18
4
11
4
7
-16
11
-13
-10
-7

16
9
-2
-5
-17
21
7
-2
10
3
19
9
11
-11
-8
21
-2
13
14
-49
-16
19
-7
5
7
-3

10
7
4
13
10
13
14
-90

TABLE

H

HDI rank

 119  Uzbekistan 
 120  Kyrgyzstan 
 121  Cape Verde 
 122  Guatemala 
 123  Egypt 
 124  Nicaragua 
 125  Botswana 
 126  Vanuatu 
 127  Tajikistan 
 128  Namibia 
 129  South Africa 
 130  Morocco 
 131  Sao Tome and Principe 
 132  Bhutan 
 133  Lao People’s Democratic Republic 
 134  India 
 135  Solomon Islands 
 136  Congo 
 137  Cambodia 
 138  Myanmar 
 139  Comoros 
 140  Yemen 
 141  Pakistan 
 142  Swaziland 
 143  Angola 
 144  Nepal 
 145  Madagascar 
 146  Bangladesh 
 147  Kenya 
 148  Papua New Guinea 
 149  Haiti 
 150  Sudan 
 151  Tanzania (United Republic of) 
 152  Ghana 
 153  Cameroon 
 154  Mauritania 
 155  Djibouti 
 156  Lesotho 
 157  Uganda 
 158  Nigeria 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

LOW HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
 159  Togo 
 160  Malawi 
 161  Benin 
 162  Timor-Leste 
 163  Côte d’Ivoire 
 164  Zambia 
 165  Eritrea 
 166  Senegal 
 167  Rwanda 
 168  Gambia 
 169  Liberia 
 170  Guinea 
 171  Ethiopia 
 172  Mozambique 
 173  Guinea-Bissau 
  174  Burundi 
 175  Chad 
 176  Congo (Democratic Republic of the)  
 177  Burkina Faso 

 

 

 

 

 

Human 

Life 

Adult literacy 

development 

expectancy at 

rate

index
value

2007

birth
(years)

2007

(% aged 15 
and above)

1999–2007a

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

0.710 
0.710 
0.708 
0.704 
0.703 
0.699 
0.694 
0.693 
0.688 
0.686 
0.683 
0.654 
0.651 
0.619 
0.619 
0.612 
0.610 
0.601 
0.593 
0.586 
0.576 
0.575 
0.572 
0.572 
0.564 
0.553 
0.543 
0.543 
0.541 
0.541 
0.532 
0.531 
0.530 
0.526 
0.523 
0.520 
0.520 
0.514 
0.514 
0.511 

0.499 
0.493 
0.492 
0.489 
0.484 
0.481 
0.472 
0.464 
0.460 
0.456 
0.442 
0.435 
0.414 
0.402 
0.396 
0.394 
0.392 
0.389 
0.389 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

67.6  
67.6   
71.1  
70.1   
69.9  
72.7   
53.4  
69.9   
66.4  
60.4   
51.5  
71.0   
65.4  
65.7   
64.6  
63.4   
65.8  
53.5   
60.6  
61.2   
64.9  
62.5   
66.2  
45.3   
46.5  
66.3   
59.9  
65.7   
53.6  
60.7   
61.0  
57.9   
55.0  
56.5   
50.9  
56.6   
55.1  
44.9   
51.9  
47.7   

62.2  
52.4   
61.0  
60.7   
56.8  
44.5   
59.2  
55.4   
49.7  
55.7   
57.9  
57.3   
54.7  
47.8   
47.5  
50.1   
48.6  
47.6   
52.7  

96.9 y 
99.3  c,j 
83.8 j 
73.2 j 
66.4 r 
78.0 r 
82.9 j 
78.1 j 
99.6 c,j 
88.0  j 
88.0 j 
55.6 j 
87.9 j 
52.8 r 
72.7 r 
66.0 j 
76.6 l 
81.1 j 
76.3 j 
89.9 y 
75.1 j 
58.9 j 
54.2 i 
79.6 y 
67.4 y 
56.5 j 
70.7 y 
53.5 j 
73.6 y 
57.8 j 
62.1 j 
60.9 y,ad 
72.3 j 
65.0 j 
67.9 i 
55.8 j 
.. o 
82.2 i 
73.6 j 
72.0  j 

53.2 y 
71.8 j 
40.5 j 
50.1 ae 
48.7 y 
70.6  j 
64.2 j 
41.9 i 
64.9 y 
.. o 
55.5 j 
29.5 y 
35.9 i 
44.4 j 
64.6 j 
59.3 y 
31.8 j 
67.2 y 
28.7 i 

Combined 

gross

enrolment ratio 
in education

GDP per capita

expectancy 

Education 

Life

GDP per capita 
rank minus HDI 

(%)

2007

(PPP US$)

2007

72.7  
77.3  
68.1  
70.5  
76.4 d,g 
72.1 d,g 
70.6 d,g 
62.3 d,g 
70.9  
67.2 d 
76.8 d 
61.0  
68.1  
54.1 d,g 
59.6 d 
61.0 d 
49.7 d 
58.6 d,g 
58.5  
56.3 d,g,aa 
46.4 d,g 
54.4 d 
39.3 d 
60.1 d 
65.3 d 
60.8 d,g 
61.3  
52.1 d 
59.6 d,g 
40.7 d,v 
.. n 
39.9 d,g 
57.3  
56.5  
52.3  
50.6 d,l 
25.5 d 
61.5 d,g 
62.3 d,g 
53.0 d,g 

53.9  
61.9 d,g 
52.4 d,g 
63.2 d,g 
37.5 d,g 
63.3 d,g 
33.3 d,g 
41.2 d,g 
52.2 d,g 
46.8 d,g 
57.6 d 
49.3 d 
49.0  
54.8 d,g 
36.6 d,g 
49.0  
36.5 d,g 
48.2  
32.8  

2,425 q 
2,006  
3,041  
4,562  
5,349  
2,570 q 
13,604  
3,666 q 
1,753  
5,155  
9,757  
4,108  
1,638  
4,837  
2,165  
2,753  
1,725 q 
3,511  
1,802  

904 d,q 
1,143  
2,335  
2,496  
4,789  
5,385  
1,049  
932  
1,241  
1,542  
2,084 q 
1,155 q 
2,086  
1,208  
1,334  
2,128  
1,927  
2,061  
1,541  
1,059  
1,969  

788  
761  
1,312  
717 q 
1,690  
1,358  
626 q 
1,666  
866  
1,225  
362  
1,140  
779  
802  
477  
341  
1,477  
298  
1,124  

index

2007

0.711  
0.710  
0.769  
0.752  
0.749  
0.795  
0.473  
0.748  
0.691  
0.590  
0.442  
0.767  
0.673  
0.678  
0.659  
0.639  
0.680  
0.474  
0.593  
0.603  
0.666  
0.624  
0.687  
0.339  
0.359  
0.688  
0.582  
0.678  
0.477  
0.594  
0.600  
0.548  
0.500  
0.525  
0.431  
0.526  
0.501  
0.332  
0.449  
0.378  

0.620  
0.456  
0.601  
0.595  
0.531  
0.326  
0.570  
0.506  
0.412  
0.511  
0.548  
0.538  
0.496  
0.380  
0.375  
0.418  
0.393  
0.377  
0.462  

index

2007

0.888  
0.918  
0.786  
0.723  
0.697  
0.760  
0.788  
0.728  
0.896  
0.811  
0.843  
0.574  
0.813  
0.533  
0.683  
0.643  
0.676  
0.736  
0.704  
0.787  
0.655  
0.574  
0.492  
0.731  
0.667  
0.579  
0.676  
0.530  
0.690  
0.521  
0.588  
0.539  
0.673  
0.622  
0.627  
0.541  
0.554  
0.753  
0.698  
0.657  

0.534  
0.685  
0.445  
0.545  
0.450  
0.682  
0.539  
0.417  
0.607  
0.439  
0.562  
0.361  
0.403  
0.478  
0.552  
0.559  
0.334  
0.608  
0.301  

GDP index

2007

rankb

2007

0.532  
0.500  
0.570  
0.638  
0.664  
0.542  
0.820  
0.601  
0.478  
0.658  
0.765  
0.620  
0.467  
0.647  
0.513  
0.553  
0.475  
0.594  
0.483  
0.368  
0.407  
0.526  
0.537  
0.646  
0.665  
0.392  
0.373  
0.420  
0.457  
0.507  
0.408  
0.507  
0.416  
0.432  
0.510  
0.494  
0.505  
0.457  
0.394  
0.497  

0.345  
0.339  
0.430  
0.329  
0.472  
0.435  
0.306  
0.469  
0.360  
0.418  
0.215  
0.406  
0.343  
0.348  
0.261  
0.205  
0.449  
0.182  
0.404  

14
20
5
-11
-20
6
-65
-4
17
-23
-51
-12
17
-24
2
-6
10
-13
6
29
20
-6
-9
-33
-42
21
21
9
2
-10
9
-13
6
1
-17
-12
-16
-6
6
-17

11
12
-7
11
-17
-12
12
-19
1
-12
10
-10
0
-3
5
6
-24
5
-16

173

H

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009

Human development index 2007 and its components 

 

 

Human 

Life 

Adult literacy 

development 

expectancy at 

rate

HDI rank

178  Mali 
179  Central African Republic 
180  Sierra Leone 
181  Afghanistan 
182  Niger 

 

 

 

 

 

 

OTHER UN MEMBER STATES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  Iraq 
  Kiribati 
 
  Korea (Democratic People’s Rep. of)   
  Marshall Islands 
 
  Micronesia (Federated States of) 
  Monaco 
  Nauru 
  Palau 
  San Marino 
  Somalia 
  Tuvalu 
  Zimbabwe 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

index
value

2007

0.371 
0.369 
0.365 
0.352 
0.340 

 

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

  Arab States 
0.719 
  Central and Eastern Europe and the CIS  0.821 
  East Asia and the Pacific 
0.770 
 
  Latin America and the Caribbean 
0.821 
  South Asia 
0.612 
  Sub-Saharan Africa 
0.514 
   
  OECD 
  European Union (EU27) 
  GCC 
   
  Very high human development 
      Very high HD: OECD 
      Very high HD: non-OECD 
  High human development 
  Medium human development 
  Low human development 
   
  World 

0.955 
.. 
.. 
0.833 
0.686 
0.423 

0.932 
0.937 
0.868 

0.753 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

birth
(years)

2007

48.1  
46.7   
47.3  
43.6   
50.8  

 

 

67.8  
..  k 
67.1  
..  k 
68.4  
..  k 
..  k 
.. k 
..  k 
49.7   
..  k 
43.4   

68.5  
69.7  
72.2  
73.4  
64.1  
51.5  

 
79.0  
79.0  
74.0  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

80.1  
80.1  
79.7  
72.4  
66.9  
51.0  

 

 

 

 

67.5 af 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

(% aged 15 
and above)

1999–2007a

26.2 i 
48.6 y 
38.1 j 
28.0 y 
28.7 i 

 

74.1 y 
..  
..  
..  
..  
.. c 
..  

91.9 d,r 
.. c 
..  
..  
91.2 j 

 

 

71.2  
97.6  
92.7  
91.2  
64.2  
62.9  
 
..  
..  
86.8  
 
..  
..  
..  
94.1  
80.0  
47.7  
 

 
83.9 af 

Combined 

gross

enrolment ratio 
in education

GDP per capita

expectancy 

Education 

Life

GDP per capita 
rank minus HDI 

(%)

2007

(PPP US$)

2007

46.9  
28.6 d,g 
44.6 d 
50.1 d,g 
27.2  

 

 

60.5 d,g 
75.8 d,g 

..  

71.1 d,g 

..  
..  

55.0 d,g 
96.9 d,g 

..  
..  

69.2 d,g 
54.4 d,g 

66.2  
79.5  
69.3  
83.4  
58.0  
53.5  
 
89.1  
91.0  
77.0  
 
92.5  
92.9  
..  
82.4  
63.3  
47.6  
 
67.5  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1,083  
713  
679  

1,054 d,ag 

627  

 
..  
1,295 q 
..  
..  
2,802 q 
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  

8,202  
12,185  
5,733  
10,077  
2,905  
2,031  
 
32,647  
29,956  
30,415  
 
37,272  
37,122  
41,887  
12,569  
3,963  
862  
 
9,972  

index

2007

0.385  
0.361  
0.371  
0.310  
0.431  

 
0.714  
0.699  
0.702  
0.758  
0.724  
0.948  
0.906  
0.758  
0.940  
0.412  
0.683  
0.306  

0.726  
0.745  
0.786  
0.806  
0.651  
0.441  

0.900  
0.899  
0.816  

0.918  
0.919  
0.912  
0.790  
0.698  
0.434  

index

2007

0.331  
0.419  
0.403  
0.354  
0.282  

 

 

0.695  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
0.936  
..  
..  
..  
0.789  

0.695  
0.916  
0.849  
0.886  
0.621  
0.597  

..  
..  
0.835  

..  
..  
..  
0.902  
0.744  
0.477  

0.708  

0.784  

GDP index

2007

0.398  
0.328  
0.320  
0.393  
0.307  

 

..  
0.427  
..  
..  
0.556  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  

0.736  
0.802  
0.676  
0.770  
0.562  
0.503  

0.966  
0.952  
0.954  

0.988  
0.988  
1.000  
0.807  
0.614  
0.359  

0.768  

rankb

2007

-16
-5
-5
-17
-6

 

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..

..

174

TABLE

H

SOURCES
Column 1: calculated based on data in columns 6–8.
Column 2: UN (2009e).
Column 3: UNESCO Institute for Statistics (2009a).
Column 4: UNESCO Institute for Statistics (2009b).
Column 5: World Bank (2009d).
Column 6: calculated based on data in column 2.
Column 7: calculated based on data in columns 3 and 4.
Column 8: calculated based on data in column 5.
Column 9: calculated based on data in columns 1 and 5.

  NOTES
a  Data refer to national literacy estimates from 

censuses or surveys conducted between 1999 and 
2007, unless otherwise specified. Due to differences 
in methodology and timeliness of underlying data, 
comparisons across countries and over time should 
be made with caution.  For more details, see http://
www.uis.unesco.org/.

o 

In the absence of recent data, estimates for 2005 
from UNESCO Institute for Statistics (2003), based 
on outdated census or survey information, were used 
and should be interpreted with caution: the Bahamas 
95.8, Barbados 99.7, Djibouti 70.3, Fiji 94.4, the 
Gambia 42.5, Guyana 99.0 and Hong Kong, China 
(SAR) 94.6. 

b  A positive figure indicates that the HDI rank is higher 
than the GDP per capita (PPP US$) rank; a negative 
figure, the opposite.

c  For the purposes of calculating the HDI, a value of 

p  HDRO estimate based on GDP from UN (2009c).
q  World Bank estimate based on regression.
r  Data are from a national census of population.
s  Heston, Summers and Aten (2006). Data differ from 

99.0% was applied.

the standard definition.

d  Data refer to a year other than that specified.
e  For the purposes of calculating the HDI, a value of 

t  Data are from the Secretariat of the Organization of 

Eastern Caribbean States, based on national sources.

40,000 (PPP US$) was applied.

u  Data refer to Serbia and Montenegro prior to its 

f  For the purposes of calculating the HDI, a value of 

100% was applied.

separation into two independent states in June 2006. 
Data exclude Kosovo.

g  UNESCO Institute for Statistics estimate.
h  Statec (2008). Data refer to nationals enrolled both 
in the country and abroad and thus differ from the 
standard definition.

v  UNESCO Institute for Statistics (2007).
w  Data exclude Kosovo.
x  Data are from the Secretariat of the Caribbean 

Community, based on national sources.

i  Data are from a national household survey.
j  UNESCO Institute for Statistics estimates based on its 
Global Age-specific Literacy Projections model, April 
2009.

k  For the purposes of calculating the HDI unpublished 

estimates from UN (2009e) were used: Andorra 
80.5, Antigua and Barbuda 72.2, Dominica 76.9, 
Liechtenstein 79.2, Saint Kitts and Nevis 72.2 and the 
Seychelles 72.8.
l  National estimate.
m  HDRO estimate based on GDP from UN (2009c) and 

the PPP exchange rate for Switzerland from World 
Bank (2009d).

n  Because the combined gross enrolment ratio was 

unavailable, the following HDRO estimates were used: 
Antigua and Barbuda 85.6, Ecuador 77.8, Haiti 52.1, 
Singapore 85.0 and Turkmenistan 73.9.

y   Data are from UNICEF’s Multiple Indicator Cluster 

Survey.

z   UNDP (2007d).
aa UNESCO Institute for Statistics (2008a).
ab UNICEF (2004). 
ac In the absence of an estimate of GDP per capita 

(PPP US$), an HDRO estimate of 2,243 (PPP US$) 
was used, derived from the value of GDP for 2005 
in US$ and the weighted average ratio of PPP US$ 
to US$ in the Arab States. The value is expressed in 
2007 prices.

ad Data refer to North Sudan only.
ae UNDP (2006b).
af Data are aggregates provided by original data source.
ag Calculated on the basis of GDP in PPP US$ for 2006 
from World Bank (2009d) and total population for the 
same year from UN (2009e).

175

TABLE

I1

HDI rank

VERY HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT

23  Singapore 
24  Hong Kong, China (SAR) 
26  Korea (Republic of) 
27  Israel 
29  Slovenia 
30  Brunei Darussalam 
31  Kuwait 
32  Cyprus 
33  Qatar 
35  United Arab Emirates 
36  Czech Republic 
37  Barbados 
38  Malta 

HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

39  Bahrain 
40  Estonia 
41  Poland 
42  Slovakia 
43  Hungary 
44  Chile 
45  Croatia 
46  Lithuania 
47  Antigua and Barbuda 
48  Latvia 
49  Argentina 
50  Uruguay 
51  Cuba 
52  Bahamas 
53  Mexico 
54  Costa Rica 
55  Libyan Arab Jamahiriya 
56  Oman 
57  Seychelles 
58  Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) 
59  Saudi Arabia 
60  Panama 
61  Bulgaria 
62  Saint Kitts and Nevis 
63  Romania 
64  Trinidad and Tobago 
65  Montenegro 
66  Malaysia 
67  Serbia 
68  Belarus 
69  Saint Lucia 
70  Albania 
71  Russian Federation 
72  Macedonia (the Former Yugoslav Rep. of) 
73  Dominica 
74  Grenada 
75  Brazil 
76  Bosnia and Herzegovina 
77  Colombia 
78  Peru 
79  Turkey 
80  Ecuador 
81  Mauritius 
82  Kazakhstan 
83  Lebanon 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009

Human and income poverty 

 

 

 

Human poverty 
index (HPI-1)

Probability of 
not surviving 
to age 40a,†

Adult 

illiteracy 
rateb,† 

Population 
not using an 
improved 

water source†

Children 

under weight 

for age  

Population below income poverty line    

(%)

Rank

Value
(%)

(% of cohort)
2005–2010

(% aged 15 
and above) 
1999–2007

(%)
2006

(% aged 
under 5)

2000–2006c

$1.25 a day
2000–2007c

$2 a day

2000–2007c

National 
poverty line
2000–2006c

HPI-1 rank 

minus income 
poverty rankd

14  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
19  
35  
1  
4  
..  

39  
..  
..  
..  
3  
10  
2  
..  
..  
..  
13  
6  
17  
..  
23  
11  
60  
64  
..  
28  
53  
30  
..  
..  
20  
27  
8  
25  
7  
16  
26  
15  
32  
9  
..  
..  
43  
5  
34  
47  
40  
38  
45  
37  
33  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3.9  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
5.0  
7.7  
1.5  
2.6  
..  

8.0  
..  
..  
..  
2.2  
3.2  
1.9  
..  
..  
..  
3.7  
3.0  
4.6  
..  
5.9  
3.7  
13.4  
14.7  
..  
6.6  
12.1  
6.7  
..  
..  
5.6  
6.4  
3.1  
6.1  
3.1  
4.3  
6.3  
4.0  
7.4  
3.2  
..  
..  
8.6  
2.8  
7.6  
10.2  
8.3  
7.9  
9.5  
7.9  
7.6  

1.6  
1.4  
1.9  
1.9  
1.9  
2.6  
2.5  
2.1  
3.0  
2.3  
2.0  
3.0  
1.9  

2.9  
5.2  
2.9  
2.7  
3.1  
3.1  
2.6  
5.7  
..  
4.8  
4.4  
3.8  
2.6  
7.3  
5.0  
3.3  
4.0  
3.0  
..  
6.7  
4.7  
5.9  
3.8  
..  
4.3  
8.4  
3.0  
3.7  
3.3  
6.2  
4.6  
3.6  
10.6  
3.4  
..  
3.2  
8.2  
3.0  
8.3  
7.4  
5.7  
7.3  
5.8  
11.2  
5.5  

5.6 i 
.. k 
.. e 
2.9 l 
0.3 e,i 
5.1 i 
5.5 h 
2.3 i 
6.9 h 
10.0 h 
.. e 
.. e,k 
7.6 n 

11.2 i 
0.2 e,i 
0.7 e,i 
.. e 
1.1 i 
3.5 i 
1.3 i 
0.3 e,i 
1.1 n 
0.2 e,i 
2.4 i 
2.1 h 
0.2 e,i 
.. k 
7.2 h 
4.1 i 
13.2 i 
15.6 i 
8.2 n 
4.8 h 
15.0 i 
6.6 i 
1.7 i 
2.2 o 
2.4 i 
1.3 i 
3.6 n,p 
8.1 i 
3.6 n,p 
0.3 e,i 
5.2 q 
1.0 e,i 
0.5 e,i 
3.0 i 
12.0 q 
4.0 q 
10.0 h 
3.3 r 
7.3 h 
10.4 h 
11.3 h 
9.0 n 
12.6 i 
0.4 e,i 
10.4 h 

0 f 
..  
8 j 
0  
..  
..  
..  
0  
0  
0  
0  
0  
0  

0 f 
0  
0 f 
0  
0  
5  
1  
..  
9 j 
1  
4  
0  
9  
3 j 
5  
2  
29 j 
18 j 
13 j 
10 j 
10 j 
8  
1  
1  
12  
6  
2  
1  
1  
0  
2  
3  
3  
0  
3 j 
6 j 
9  
1  
7  
16  
3  
5  
0  
4  
0  

3  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
10 g 
..  
6 g 
14 g 
1 g 
6 g,m 
..  

9 g 
..  
..  
..  
2 g,m 
1  
1 g 
..  
10 g,m 
..  
4  
5  
4  
..  
5  
5 g 
5 g 
18 g 
6 g,m 
5  
14 g 
7 g 
..  
..  
3  
6  
3  
8  
2  
1  
14 g,m 
8  
3 g 
6 g 
5 g,m 
..  
6 g 
2  
7  
8  
4  
9  
15 g 
4  
4  

..  
..  

<2 f,g 

..  
<2  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
<2 g 
..  
..  

..  
<2  
<2  
<2 g 
<2  
<2  
<2  
<2  
..  
<2  
4.5 f 
<2 f 
..  
..  
<2  
2.4  
..  
..  
..  
3.5  
..  
9.5  
<2  
..  
<2  
4.2 g 
..  
<2  
..  
<2  
20.9 g 
<2  
<2  
<2  
..  
..  
5.2  
<2  
16.0  
7.9  
2.7  
4.7  
..  
3.1  
..  

..  
..  

<2 f,g 

..  
<2  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
<2 g 
..  
..  

..  
<2  
<2  
<2 g 
<2  
2.4  
<2  
<2  
..  
<2  
11.3 f 
4.2 f 
..  
..  
4.8  
8.6  
..  
..  
..  
10.2  
..  
17.8  
2.4  
..  
3.4  
13.5 g 
..  
7.8  
..  
<2  
40.6 g 
7.8  
<2  
3.2  
..  
..  
12.7  
<2  
27.9  
18.5  
9.0  
12.8  
..  
17.2  
..  

..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  

..  
8.9 g 
14.8  
..  
17.3 g 
17.0 g 
..  
..  
..  
5.9  
..  
..  
..  
..  
17.6  
23.9  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
37.3 g 
12.8  
..  
28.9  
21.0 g 
..  
..  
..  
18.5  
..  
25.4  
19.6  
21.7  
..  
..  
21.5  
19.5  
64.0 g 
53.1  
27.0  
46.0 g 
..  
15.4  
..  

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
0
..
..

..
..
..
..
2
6
1
..
..
..
-18
4
..
..
16
-13
..
..
..
-5
..
-15
..
..
13
-7
..
17
..
11
-35
10
24
5
..
..
1
3
-21
0
6
0
..
3
..

176

TABLE

I1

Human poverty 
index (HPI-1)

Probability of 
not surviving 
to age 40a,†

Adult 

illiteracy 
rateb,† 

Population 
not using an 
improved 

water source†

Children 

under weight 

for age  

Population below income poverty line    

(%)

HDI rank

Rank

MEDIUM HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
  84  Armenia 
  85  Ukraine 
  86  Azerbaijan 
  87  Thailand 
  88  Iran (Islamic Republic of) 
  89  Georgia 
  90  Dominican Republic 
  91  Saint Vincent and the Grenadines 
  92  China 
  93  Belize 
  94  Samoa 
  95  Maldives 
  96  Jordan 
  97  Suriname 
  98  Tunisia 
  99  Tonga 
 100  Jamaica 
 101  Paraguay 
 102  Sri Lanka 
 103  Gabon 
 104  Algeria 
 105  Philippines 
 106  El Salvador 
 107  Syrian Arab Republic 
 108  Fiji 
 109  Turkmenistan 
 110  Occupied Palestinian Territories 
  111  Indonesia 
  112  Honduras 
  113  Bolivia 
  114  Guyana 
  115  Mongolia 
 116  Viet Nam 
  117  Moldova 
  118  Equatorial Guinea 
 119  Uzbekistan 
 120  Kyrgyzstan 
 121  Cape Verde 
 122  Guatemala 
 123  Egypt 
 124  Nicaragua 
 125  Botswana 
 126  Vanuatu 
 127  Tajikistan 
 128  Namibia 
 129  South Africa 
 130  Morocco 
 131  Sao Tome and Principe 
 132  Bhutan 
 133  Lao People’s Democratic Republic 
 134  India 
 135  Solomon Islands 
 136  Congo 
 137  Cambodia 
 138  Myanmar 
 139  Comoros 
 140  Yemen 
 141  Pakistan 
 142  Swaziland 
 143  Angola 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

12  
21  
50  
41  
59  
18  
44  
..  
36  
73  
..  
66  
29  
46  
65  
..  
51  
49  
67  
72  
71  
54  
63  
56  
79  
..  
24  
69  
61  
52  
48  
58  
55  
22  
98  
42  
31  
62  
76  
82  
68  
81  
83  
74  
70  
85  
96  
57  
102  
94  
88  
80  
84  
87  
77  
78  
111  
101  
108  
118  

Value
(%)

3.7  
5.8  
10.7  
8.5  
12.8  
4.7  
9.1  
..  
7.7  
17.5  
..  
16.5  
6.6  
10.1  
15.6  
..  
10.9  
10.5  
16.8  
17.5  
17.5  
12.4  
14.6  
12.6  
21.2  
..  
6.0  
17.0  
13.7  
11.6  
10.2  
12.7  
12.4  
5.9  
31.9  
8.5  
7.3  
14.5  
19.7  
23.4  
17.0  
22.9  
23.6  
18.2  
17.1  
25.4  
31.1  
12.6  
33.7  
30.7  
28.0  
21.8  
24.3  
27.7  
20.4  
20.4  
35.7  
33.4  
35.1  
37.2  

(% of cohort)
2005–2010

(% aged 15 
and above) 
1999–2007

(%)
2006

(% aged 
under 5)

2000–2006c

$1.25 a day
2000–2007c

$2 a day

2000–2007c

National 
poverty line
2000–2006c

HPI-1 rank 

minus income 
poverty rankd

5.0  
8.4  
8.6  
11.3  
6.1  
6.7  
9.4  
5.8  
6.2  
5.6  
5.6  
6.0  
5.3  
10.0  
4.1  
5.4  
9.9  
8.9  
5.5  
22.6  
6.4  
5.7  
10.7  
3.9  
6.2  
13.0  
4.3  
6.7  
9.3  
13.9  
12.8  
10.3  
5.8  
6.2  
34.5  
10.7  
9.2  
6.4  
11.2  
7.2  
7.9  
31.2  
7.1  
12.5  
21.2  
36.1  
6.6  
13.9  
14.2  
13.1  
15.5  
11.6  
29.7  
18.5  
19.1  
12.6  
15.6  
12.6  
47.2  
38.5  

0.5 e,i 
0.3 e,i 
0.5 e,h 
5.9 i 
17.7 h 
0.0 e,s 
10.9 i 
11.9 q 
6.7 i 
24.9 q 
1.3 i 
3.0 i 
8.9 h 
9.6 i 
22.3 i 
0.8 e,i 
14.0 i 
5.4 h 
9.2 h 
13.8 i 
24.6 i 
6.6 i 
18.0 n 
16.9 i 
.. k 
0.5 e,i 
6.2 h 
8.0 h 
16.4 h 
9.3 h 
.. k 
2.7 i 
9.7 n 
0.8 e,i 
13.0 r 
3.1 r 
0.7 e,i 
16.2 i 
26.8 i 
33.6 n 
22.0 n 
17.1 i 
21.9 i 
0.4 e,i 
12.0 i 
12.0 i 
44.4 i 
12.1 i 
47.2 n 
27.3 n 
34.0 i 
23.4 l 
18.9 i 
23.7 i 
10.1 r 
24.9 i 
41.1 i 
45.8 h 
20.4 r 
32.6 r 

2  
3  
22  
2  
6 j 
1  
5  
..  
12  
9 j 
12  
17  
2  
8  
6  
0  
7  
23  
18  
13  
15  
7  
16  
11  
53  
..  
11  
20  
16  
14  
7  
28  
8  
10  
57  
12  
11  
20 j 
4  
2  
21  
4  
41 j 
33  
7  
7  
17  
14  
19  
40  
11  
30  
29  
35  
20  
15  
34  
10  
40  
49  

4  
1  
7  
9  
11 g 
3 g 
5  
..  
7  
7  
..  
30  
4  
13  
4  
..  
4  
5  
29  
12  
4  
28  
10  
10  
8 g 
11  
3  
28  
11  
8  
14  
6  
25  
4  
19  
5  
3  
14 g 
23  
6  
10  
13  
20 g,m 
17  
24  
12 g 
10  
9  
19 g 
40  
46  
21 g,m 
14  
36  
32  
25  
46  
38  
10  
31  

10.6  
<2  
<2  
<2  
<2  
13.4  
5.0  
..  
15.9 t 
..  
..  
..  
<2  
15.5 g 
2.6  
..  
<2  
6.5  
14.0  
4.8  
6.8 g 
22.6  
11.0  
..  
..  
24.8 g 
..  
..  
18.2  
19.6  
7.7 g 
22.4  
21.5  
8.1  
..  
46.3  
21.8  
20.6  
11.7  
<2  
15.8  
31.2 g 
..  
21.5  
49.1 g 
26.2  
2.5  
..  
26.2  
44.0  
41.6 t 
..  
54.1  
40.2  
..  
46.1  
17.5  
22.6  
62.9  
54.3  

43.4  
<2  
<2  
11.5  
8.0  
30.4  
15.1  
..  
36.3 t 
..  
..  
..  
3.5  
27.2 g 
12.8  
..  
5.8  
14.2  
39.7  
19.6  
23.6 g 
45.0  
20.5  
..  
..  
49.6 g 
..  
..  
29.7  
30.3  
16.8 g 
49.0  
48.4  
28.9  
..  
76.7  
51.9  
40.2  
24.3  
18.4  
31.8  
49.4 g 
..  
50.8  
62.2 g 
42.9  
14.0  
..  
49.5  
76.8  
75.6 t 
..  
74.4  
68.2  
..  
65.0  
46.6  
60.3  
81.0  
70.2  

50.9  
19.5  
49.6  
13.6 g 
..  
54.5  
42.2  
..  
2.8  
..  
..  
..  
14.2  
..  
7.6 g 
..  
18.7  
..  
22.7  
..  
22.6 g 
25.1 g 
37.2  
..  
..  
..  
..  
16.7  
50.7  
65.2  
35.0 g 
36.1  
28.9  
48.5  
..  
27.5  
43.1  
..  
56.2  
16.7  
47.9 g 
..  
..  
44.4  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
33.0  
28.6  
..  
..  
35.0  
..  
..  
41.8 g 
32.6 g 
69.2  
..  

-30
14
38
30
44
-29
3
..
-19
..
..
..
21
-9
26
..
39
5
7
24
19
-19
8
..
..
..
..
..
-3
-10
2
-15
-13
-21
..
-46
-34
-6
15
58
6
-8
..
-2
-29
-2
50
..
13
-6
-10
..
-27
-10
..
-20
35
16
-15
2

177

I1

TABLE

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009

Human and income poverty 

 

 

 

Human poverty 
index (HPI-1)

Probability of 
not surviving 
to age 40a,†

Adult 

illiteracy 
rateb,† 

Population 
not using an 
improved 

water source†

Children 

under weight 

for age  

Population below income poverty line    

(%)

Value
(%)

32.1  
36.1  
36.1  
29.5  
39.6  
31.5  
34.0  
30.0  
28.1  
30.8  
36.2  
25.6  
34.3  
28.8  
36.2  

36.6  
28.2  
43.2  
40.8  
37.4  
35.5  
33.7  
41.6  
32.9  
40.9  
35.2  
50.5  
50.9  
46.8  
34.9  
36.4  
53.1  
38.0  
51.8  
54.5  
42.4  
47.7  
59.8  
55.8  

19.4  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
34.0  

(% of cohort)
2005–2010

(% aged 15 
and above) 
1999–2007

11.0  
20.8  
11.6  
30.3  
15.9  
18.5  
23.9  
28.2  
25.8  
34.2  
21.6  
26.2  
47.4  
31.4  
37.4  

18.6  
32.6  
19.2  
18.0  
24.6  
42.9  
18.2  
22.4  
34.2  
21.8  
23.2  
23.7  
27.7  
40.6  
37.4  
33.7  
35.7  
37.3  
26.9  
32.5  
39.6  
31.0  
40.7  
29.0  

10.0  
..  
10.0  
..  
8.8  
..  
..  
34.1  
..  
48.1  

43.5 i 
29.3 r 
46.5 i 
26.4 r 
42.2 i 
37.9 j,n 
39.1 r,w 
27.7 i 
35.0 i 
32.1 h 
44.2 i 
.. k 
17.8 h 
26.4 i 
28.0 i 

46.8 r 
28.2 i 
59.5 i 
49.9 x 
51.3 r 
29.4 i 
35.8 i 
58.1 h 
35.1 r 
.. k 
44.5 i 
70.5 r 
64.1 h 
55.6 i 
35.4 i 
40.7 r 
68.2 i 
32.8 r 
71.3 h 
73.8 h 
51.4 r 
61.9 i 
72.0 r 
71.3 h 

25.9 r 
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  

8.1 j,n 

..  
..  
8.8 i 

(%)
2006

11  
53  
20 u 
43  
60  
42  
30  
45  
20  
30  
40  
8  
22  
36  
53  

41  
24  
35  
38  
19  
42  
40  
23  
35  
14  
36  
30  
58  
58  
43  
29  
52  
54  
28  
40  
34  
47  
78  
58  

23  
35  
0  
12 j 
6  
..  
11  
71  
7  
19  

(% aged 
under 5)

2000–2006c

$1.25 a day
2000–2007c

$2 a day

2000–2007c

National 
poverty line
2000–2006c

HPI-1 rank 

minus income 
poverty rankd

39  
42  
48  
20  
35 g,m 
22  
41  
22  
18  
19  
32  
29  
20  
20  
29  

26  
19  
23  
46  
20  
20  
40  
17  
23  
20  
26 g 
26  
38  
24  
19  
39  
37  
31  
37  
33  
29  
30  
39  
44  

8  
13 g 
23  
..  
15 g 
..  
..  
36  
..  
17  

55.1 t 
67.8  
49.6 v 
19.7  
35.8 g 
54.9  
..  
88.5  
30.0  
32.8  
21.2  
18.8  
43.4  
51.5  
64.4  

38.7  
73.9  
47.3  
52.9  
23.3  
64.3  
..  
33.5  
76.6  
34.3  
83.7  
70.1  
39.0  
74.7  
48.8  
81.3  
61.9  
59.2  
56.5  
51.4  
62.4  
53.4  
..  
65.9  

..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  

77.6 t 
89.6  
81.3 v 
39.9  
57.4 g 
72.1  
..  
96.6  
53.6  
57.7  
44.1  
41.2  
62.2  
75.6  
83.9  

69.3  
90.4  
75.3  
77.5  
46.8  
81.5  
..  
60.3  
90.3  
56.7  
94.8  
87.2  
77.5  
90.0  
77.9  
93.4  
83.3  
79.5  
81.2  
77.1  
81.9  
76.1  
..  
85.6  

..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  

30.9  
71.3 g 
40.0  
52.0 g 
37.5 g 
..  
..  
35.7  
28.5  
40.2  
46.3  
..  
68.0 g 
37.7  
34.1 g 

..  
65.3 g 
29.0 g 
..  
..  
68.0  
53.0 g 
33.4 g 
60.3  
61.3  
..  
40.0 g 
44.2  
54.1  
65.7  
68.0 g 
64.0 g 
..  
46.4  
63.8 g 
..  
70.2  
..  
63.0 g 

..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
34.9 g 

-16
-14
2
16
23
-16
..
-37
0
4
32
12
3
-17
-11

18
-35
19
9
29
-14
..
28
-28
26
-24
1
30
-3
-1
-16
11
0
12
22
3
14
..
8

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

HDI rank

Rank

99  
113  
112  
92  
121  
97  
104  
93  
89  
95  
115  
86  
106  
91  
114  

117  
90  
126  
122  
119  
110  
103  
124  
100  
123  
109  
129  
130  
127  
107  
116  
132  
120  
131  
133  
125  
128  
135  
134  

75  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
105  

144  Nepal 
145  Madagascar 
146  Bangladesh 
147  Kenya 
148  Papua New Guinea 
149  Haiti 
150  Sudan 
151  Tanzania (United Republic of) 
152  Ghana 
153  Cameroon 
154  Mauritania 
155  Djibouti 
156  Lesotho 
157  Uganda 
158  Nigeria 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

LOW HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
159  Togo 
160  Malawi 
161  Benin 
162  Timor-Leste 
163  Côte d’Ivoire 
164  Zambia 
165  Eritrea 
166  Senegal 
167  Rwanda 
168  Gambia 
169  Liberia 
170  Guinea 
171  Ethiopia 
172  Mozambique 
173  Guinea-Bissau 
174  Burundi 
175  Chad 
176  Congo (Democratic Republic of the)  
177  Burkina Faso 
178  Mali 
179  Central African Republic 
180  Sierra Leone 
181  Afghanistan 
182  Niger 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

OTHER UN MEMBER STATES
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   

  Iraq 
  Kiribati 
  Korea (Democratic People’s Rep. of)   
  Marshall Islands 
  Micronesia (Federated States of) 
  Nauru 
  Palau 
  Somalia 
  Tuvalu 
  Zimbabwe 

 

 

 

 

 

178

TABLE

I1

e  For the purposes of calculating the HPI-1 a value of 

p  Data refer to Serbia and Montenegro prior to its 

SOURCES
Column 1: determined on the basis of HPI-1 values.
Column 2: calculated on the basis of data in columns 
3–6.
Column 3: UN (2009e).
Column 4: UNESCO Institute for Statistics (2009a).
Columns 5 and 6: UN (2009a) based on a joint effort by 
UNICEF and WHO.
Columns 7–9: World Bank (2009d).
Column 10: calculated based on HPI-1 values and the 
income poverty measures.

separation into two independent states in June 2006. 
Data exclude Kosovo.

q  Data are from the Secretariat of the Caribbean 

Community, based on national sources.

r  Data are from UNICEF’s Multiple Indicator Cluster 

Survey.

s  UNICEF (2004).
t  Estimates are weighted averages of urban and rural 

values.

u  Estimates have been adjusted for arsenic 

contamination levels based on national surveys 
conducted and approved by the government.

v  Estimates are adjusted by spatial consumer price 

index information.

w  Data refer to North Sudan only.
x  UNDP (2006b).

  NOTES
†  Denotes indicators used to calcualte the human 

poverty index (HPI-1). For further details, see 
Technical note 1: www.hdr.undp.org/en/statistics/tn1
a  Data refer to the probability at birth of not surviving to 

1% was assumed.

f  Estimates cover urban areas only.
g  Data refer to an earlier year outside the range of years 

age 40, multiplied by 100. 

specified.

b  Data refer to national illiteracy estimates from 

censuses or surveys conducted between 1999 and 
2007, unless otherwise specified. Due to differences 
in methodology and timeliness of underlying data, 
comparisons across countries and over time should be 
made with caution. For more details, see http://www.
uis.unesco.org/.

c  Data refer to the most recent year available during the 

period specified.

d  Income poverty refers to the share of the population 
living on less than $1.25 a day. All countries with an 
income poverty rate of less than 2% were given equal 
rank. The rankings are based on countries for which 
data are available for both indicators. A positive figure 
indicates that the country performs better in income 
poverty than in human poverty, a negative the opposite.  

h  Data are from a national household survey.
i  UNESCO Institute for Statistics estimates based on its 
Global Age-specific Literacy Projections model, April 
2009.

j  Data refer to an earlier year than that specified.
k  In the absence of recent data, estimates for 2005 
from UNESCO Institute for Statistics (2003), based 
on outdated census or survey information, were used 
and should be interpreted with caution: Bahamas 4.2, 
Barbados 0.3, Djibouti 29.7, Fiji 5.6, Gambia 57.5, 
Guyana 1.0 and Hong Kong, China (SAR) 5.4.

l  National estimate.
m  UNICEF (2005b). 
n  Data are from a national census of population.
o  Data are from the Secretariat of the Organization of 

Eastern Caribbean States, based on national sources.

HPI-1 RANKS FOR 135 COUNTRIES AND AREAS

  1  Czech Republic
  2  Croatia
  3  Hungary
  4  Barbados
  5  Bosnia and Herzegovina
  6  Uruguay
  7  Serbia
  8  Montenegro
  9  Macedonia (the Former Yugoslav Rep. of)
  10  Chile
  11  Costa Rica
  12  Armenia
  13  Argentina
  14  Singapore
  15  Albania
  16  Belarus
  17  Cuba
  18  Georgia
  19  Qatar
  20  Romania
  21  Ukraine
  22  Moldova
  23  Mexico
  24  Occupied Palestinian Territories
  25  Malaysia
  26  Saint Lucia
  27  Trinidad and Tobago
  28  Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
  29  Jordan
  30  Panama
  31  Kyrgyzstan
  32  Russian Federation
  33  Lebanon
  34  Colombia
  35  United Arab Emirates

  36  China
  37  Kazakhstan
  38  Ecuador
  39  Bahrain
  40  Turkey
  41  Thailand
  42  Uzbekistan
  43  Brazil
  44  Dominican Republic
  45  Mauritius
  46  Suriname
  47  Peru
  48  Guyana
  49  Paraguay
  50  Azerbaijan
  51  Jamaica
  52  Bolivia
  53  Saudi Arabia
  54  Philippines
  55  Viet Nam
  56  Syrian Arab Republic
  57  Sao Tome and Principe
  58  Mongolia
  59  Iran (Islamic Republic of)
  60  Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
  61  Honduras
  62  Cape Verde
  63  El Salvador
  64  Oman
  65  Tunisia
  66  Maldives
  67  Sri Lanka
  68  Nicaragua
  69  Indonesia
  70  Namibia

 106  Lesotho
 107  Guinea-Bissau
 108  Swaziland
 109  Liberia
 110  Zambia
 111  Yemen
 112  Bangladesh
 113  Madagascar
 114  Nigeria
 115  Mauritania
 116  Burundi
 117  Togo
 118  Angola
 119  Côte d’Ivoire
 120  Congo (Democratic Republic of the) 
 121  Papua New Guinea 
 122  Timor-Leste 
 123  Gambia 
 124  Senegal 
 125  Central African Republic 
 126  Benin 
 127  Mozambique 
 128  Sierra Leone 
 129  Guinea 
 130  Ethiopia 
 131  Burkina Faso 
 132  Chad 
 133  Mali 
 134  Niger 
 135  Afghanistan 

  71  Algeria
  72  Gabon
  73  Belize
  74  Tajikistan
  75  Iraq
  76  Guatemala
  77  Myanmar
  78  Comoros
  79  Fiji
  80  Solomon Islands
  81  Botswana 
  82  Egypt 
  83  Vanuatu 
  84  Congo 
  85  South Africa 
  86  Djibouti 
  87  Cambodia 
  88  India 
  89  Ghana 
  90  Malawi 
  91  Uganda 
  92  Kenya 
  93  Tanzania (United Republic of) 
  94  Lao People’s Democratic Republic 
  95  Cameroon 
  96  Morocco 
  97  Haiti 
  98  Equatorial Guinea 
  99  Nepal 
 100  Rwanda
 101  Pakistan
 102  Bhutan
 103  Eritrea
 104  Sudan
 105  Zimbabwe

179

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009

Human and income poverty: OECD countries 

Human poverty index (HPI-2)

Rank

Value
(%)

Probability at birth
of not surviving to 

People lacking 

functional literacy 

age 60a† 

(% of cohort) 
2005–2010

skillsb†

(% aged 16–65)

1994–2003

Long-term

unemployment† 

(% of 

labour force)  

2007

Population living 
below 50% of 
median income† 

2000–2005c

HPI-2 rank minus 
income poverty rankd

0.2 
0.7 
0.1 
0.4 
1.4 
1.3 
0.7 
3.1 
1.5 
1.2 
1.3 
1.5 
0.5 
1.2 
2.0 
0.7 
3.8 
2.8 
0.2 
1.3 
4.8 
4.1 
0.0 
3.7 
2.8 

4.4 
7.8 
3.5 
0.1 
3.1 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

7.1  
12.2  
..  
13.0  
16.2  
4.9f  
5.6  
7.3  
7.6  
11.8 f,h 
8.8  
6.5  
17.3  
7.7  
14.2  
5.6  
8.1  
12.8  
..  
11.6  
8.4  
14.3  
..  
..  
4.9 f 

11.5  
7.0 f 
6.4 f 
18.4  
..  

-6
-4
..
-8
0
1
-3
-1
-3
-4
-4
-1
-2
-2
-4
1
3
6
..
5
-7
-4
..
..
10

4
9
15
-1
..

2 
14 
.. 
12 
23 
3 
1 
8 
7 
13 
10 
5 
22 
9 
17 
4 
15 
25 
.. 
21 
6 
18 
.. 
.. 
11 

19 
16 
20 
24 
.. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

6.6 
12.0 
.. 
11.2 
15.9 
7.4 
6.0 
11.0 
10.6 
11.6 
11.2 
7.9 
15.2 
11.0 
12.4 
7.7 
12.2 
29.8 
.. 
14.6 
10.1 
12.5 
.. 
.. 
11.2 

12.8 
12.4 
13.2 
28.1 
.. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

6.6 
6.4 
5.4 
7.3 
6.9 
7.1 
6.3 
7.7 
6.4 
6.2 
7.8 
8.2 
9.7 
7.6 
7.1 
9.2 
8.0 
6.8 
7.6 
7.8 
7.6 
7.0 
8.1 
8.7 
10.2 

13.2 
13.3 
16.4 
13.0 
14.9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

7.9  
17.0 e 
..  
14.6  
22.6 e 
10.5 e 
7.5 e 
.. g 
15.9  
.. g 
.. g 
10.4 e 
20.0  
.. g 
.. g 
9.6 e 
18.4 e,i 
47.0  
18.4 e 
21.8 e 
14.4 e 
.. g 
..  
..  
.. g 

.. g 
.. g 
.. g 
43.2 j 
..  

SOURCES
Column 1: Determined on the basis of HPI-2 values in 
column 2.
Column 2: calculated based on data in columns 3–6.
Column 3: UN (2009e).
Column 4: OECD and Statistics Canada (2005), unless 
otherwise specified.
Column 5: calculated on the basis of data on long-term 
unemployment and labour force from OECD (2009c).
Column 6: LIS (2009).
Column 7: calculated based on data in columns 1 and 6.

TABLE

I2

HDI rank

1  Norway 
2  Australia 
3  Iceland 
4  Canada 
5  Ireland 
6  Netherlands 
7  Sweden 
8  France 
9  Switzerland 

VERY HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  10  Japan 
  11  Luxembourg 
  12  Finland 
  13  United States 
  14  Austria 
  15  Spain 
  16  Denmark 
  17  Belgium 
  18  Italy 
  20  New Zealand 
  21  United Kingdom 
  22  Germany 
  25  Greece 
  26  Korea (Republic of) 
  34  Portugal 
  36  Czech Republic 
 
HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
  41  Poland 
  42  Slovakia 
  43  Hungary 
  53  Mexico 
  79  Turkey 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

NOTES

†  Denotes indicators used to calculate the HPI-2. For 

further details see Technical note 1.

a  Data refer to the probability at birth of not surviving to 

age 60, multiplied by 100. 

b Based on scoring at level 1 on the prose literacy 

scale of the IALS. Data refer to the most recent year 
available during the period specified.

c  Data refer to the most recent year available during the 

period specified.

d Income poverty refers to the share of the population 

living on less than 50% of the median adjusted 
disposable household income. A positive figure 
indicates that the country performs better in income 
poverty than in human poverty, a negative the 
opposite. 

e  OECD and Statistics Canada (2000).
f  Data refer to an earlier year than the period specified.
g For calculating HPI-2 an estimate of 16.4%, the 

unweighted average of countries with available data, 
was applied. 

h Smeeding (1997).
i  Data refer to Flanders only.
j  Data refer to the state of Nuevo Leon only.

180

TABLE

J

HDI rank

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009

Gender-related development index and its components

J

Gender-related 

development index (GDI)

2007

Life expectancy at birth                                                                                                                       
(years)                                                                                            
2007        

Adult literacy ratea                                                                                                                    
(% aged 15 and above)                                                                                 

1999–2007        

Combined gross 

enrolment 

ratio in educationb                                                                                                   
(%)                                                                                             
2007

Estimated 

earned incomec                                                                                                       
(PPP US$)                                                                                        

2007

Rank

Value

as a % of 
HDI value

Female

Male

Female

Male

Female

Male

Female

Male

HDI rank 
minus GDI 

rankd

1  Norway 
2  Australia 
3  Iceland 
4  Canada 
5  Ireland 
6  Netherlands 
7  Sweden 
8  France 
9  Switzerland 

VERY HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  10  Japan 
  11  Luxembourg 
  12  Finland 
  13  United States 
  14  Austria 
  15  Spain 
  16  Denmark 
  17  Belgium 
  18  Italy 
  19  Liechtenstein 
  20  New Zealand 
  21  United Kingdom 
  22  Germany 
  23  Singapore 
  24  Hong Kong, China (SAR) 
  25  Greece 
  26  Korea (Republic of) 
  27  Israel 
  28  Andorra 
  29  Slovenia 
  30  Brunei Darussalam 
  31  Kuwait 
  32  Cyprus 
  33  Qatar 
  34  Portugal 
  35  United Arab Emirates 
  36  Czech Republic 
  37  Barbados 
  38  Malta 
 
HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
  39  Bahrain 
  40  Estonia 
  41  Poland 
  42  Slovakia 
  43  Hungary 
  44  Chile 
  45  Croatia 
  46  Lithuania 
  47  Antigua and Barbuda 
  48  Latvia 
  49  Argentina 
  50  Uruguay 
  51  Cuba 
  52  Bahamas 
  53  Mexico 
  54  Costa Rica 
  55  Libyan Arab Jamahiriya 
  56  Oman 
  57  Seychelles 
  58  Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) 
  59  Saudi Arabia 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2  
1  
3  
4  
10  
7  
5  
6  
13  
14  
16  
8  
19  
23  
9  
12  
11  
15  
..  
18  
17  
20  
..  
22  
21  
25  
26  
..  
24  
29  
34  
27  
35  
28  
38  
31  
30  
32  

33  
36  
39  
40  
37  
41  
43  
42  
..  
44  
46  
45  
49  
..  
48  
47  
54  
56  
..  
55  
60  

0.961  
0.966  
0.959  
0.959  
0.948  
0.954  
0.956  
0.956  
0.946  
0.945  
0.943  
0.954  
0.942  
0.930  
0.949  
0.947  
0.948  
0.945  
..  
0.943  
0.943  
0.939  
..  
0.934  
0.936  
0.926  
0.921  
..  
0.927  
0.906  
0.892  
0.911  
0.891  
0.907  
0.878  
0.900  
0.900  
0.895  

0.895  
0.882  
0.877  
0.877  
0.879  
0.871  
0.869  
0.869  
..  
0.865  
0.862  
0.862  
0.844  
..  
0.847  
0.848  
0.830  
0.826  
..  
0.827  
0.816  

98.9  
99.6  
99.0  
99.2  
98.2  
98.9  
99.3  
99.4  
98.5  
98.4  
98.2  
99.5  
98.5  
97.4  
99.4  
99.2  
99.4  
99.3  
..  
99.3  
99.5  
99.2  
..  
98.9  
99.4  
98.8  
98.5  
..  
99.7  
98.5  
97.4  
99.7  
97.9  
99.7  
97.2  
99.7  
99.7  
99.3  

99.9  
99.8  
99.6  
99.7  
99.9  
99.2  
99.7  
99.9  
..  
99.8  
99.5  
99.7  
97.7  
..  
99.2  
99.4  
98.0  
97.7  
..  
97.9  
96.7  

82.7  
83.7  
83.3  
82.9  
82.0  
81.9  
83.0  
84.5  
84.1  
86.2  
82.0  
82.8  
81.3  
82.5  
84.0  
80.5  
82.4  
84.0  
.. k 
82.1  
81.5  
82.3  
82.6  
85.1  
81.3  
82.4  
82.7  
.. k 
81.7  
79.6  
79.8  
81.9  
76.8  
81.8  
78.7  
79.4  
79.7  
81.3  

77.4  
78.3  
79.7  
78.5  
77.3  
81.6  
79.4  
77.7  
.. k 
77.1  
79.0  
79.8  
80.6  
76.0  
78.5  
81.3  
76.8  
77.3  
.. k 
76.7  
75.1  

78.2  
79.1  
80.2  
78.2  
77.3  
77.6  
78.6  
77.4  
79.2  
79.0  
76.5  
76.0  
76.7  
77.0  
77.5  
75.9  
76.5  
78.1  
..k  
78.1  
77.1  
77.0  
77.8  
79.3  
76.9  
75.8  
78.5  
.. k 
74.4  
74.9  
76.0  
77.3  
74.8  
75.3  
76.6  
73.2  
74.0  
77.7  

74.2  
67.3  
71.3  
70.7  
69.2  
75.5  
72.6  
65.9  
.. k 
67.1  
71.5  
72.6  
76.5  
70.4  
73.6  
76.4  
71.6  
74.1  
.. k 
70.7  
70.8  

.. e 
.. e 
.. e 
.. e 
.. e 
.. e 
.. e 
.. e 
.. e 
.. e 
.. e 
.. e 
.. e 
.. e 
97.3  
.. e 
.. e 
98.6  
.. e 
.. e 
.. e 
.. e 
91.6  
.. m 
96.0  
.. e 
88.7f  
.. e 
99.6  
93.1  
93.1  
96.6  
90.4  
93.3  
91.5  
.. e 
.. g,m 

93.5f  

86.4  
99.8 g 
99.0  
.. e 
98.8  
96.5  
98.0  
99.7  
99.4  
99.8 g 
97.7  
98.2  
99.8  
.. m 
91.4  
96.2  
78.4  
77.5  
92.3  
94.9  
79.4  

.. e 
.. e 
.. e 
.. e 
.. e 
.. e 
.. e 
.. e 
.. e 
.. e 
.. e 
.. e 
.. e 
.. e 
98.6  
.. e 
.. e 
99.1  
.. e 
.. e 
.. e 
.. e 
97.3  
.. m 
98.2  
.. e 
95.0f  
.. e 
99.7  
96.5  
95.2  
99.0  
93.8  
96.6  
89.5  
.. e 
.. g,m 

91.2f  

90.4  
99.8 g 
99.6  
.. e 
99.0  
96.6  
99.5  
99.7  
98.4  
99.8 g 
97.6  
97.4  
99.8  
.. m 
94.4  
95.7  
94.5  
89.4  
91.4  
95.4  
89.1  

102.7 f,g 
115.7 f,g 
102.1 f,g 
101.0 f,g,h 
99.1 f 
97.1 f 
99.0 f 
97.4 f 
81.4 f 
85.4 f 
94.7 j 
105.1 f,g 
96.9 f 
92.1 f 
99.9 f 
105.3 f,g 
95.9 f 
94.7 f 
79.6 f,l 
113.4 f,g 
92.8 f,h 
87.5  
..  
73.4 f 
103.2 f,g 
90.6 f,g 
92.1 f 
66.3 f,h 
98.1f  
79.1  
77.8 f 
77.8 f,l 
87.7  
91.6 f 
78.7 h 
85.1 f 
100.2 g 
81.7 f 

95.3 f,h 
98.2 f 
91.4 f 
83.1 f 
94.0 f 
82.0 f,h 
79.4 f 
97.6 f 
..  
97.5 f 
93.3 f 
96.3 f 
110.7 g 
72.2 f,h 
79.0 f 
74.4 f,h 
98.5 f,h 
68.3  
83.6 f,l 
75.7 f 
78.0 f 

94.7 f,g 
112.8 f,g 
90.1 f,g 
97.6 f,g,h 
96.2 f 
97.9 f 
89.8 f 
93.5 f 
84.0 f 
87.7 f 
94.0 j 
97.9 f,g 
88.1 f 
89.0 f 
93.3 f 
97.6 f,g 
92.8 f 
89.1 f 
94.0 f,l 
102.0 f,g 
85.9 f,h 
88.6  
..  
75.4 f 
100.1 f,g 
105.8 f,g 
87.8 f 
64.0 f,g 
87.7 f 
76.5  
67.8 f 
77.3 f,l 
74.2  
86.2 f 
65.4 h 
81.9 f 
85.8 g 
81.0 f 

85.8 f,h 
84.6 f 
84.2 f 
77.9 f 
86.6 f 
83.0 f,h 
75.2 f 
87.2 f 
..  
83.2 f 
84.0 f 
85.6 f 
91.5 g 
71.4 f,h 
81.5 f 
71.6 f,h 
93.1 f,h 
68.1  
80.9 f,l 
72.7 f 
79.1 f 

46,576 g 
28,759 g 
27,460 g 
28,315 g,i 
31,978 g,i 
31,048  
29,476 g,i 
25,677 g 
31,442 g 
21,143 g 
57,676 g,i 
29,160 g 
34,996 g,i 
21,380 g 
21,817 g,i 
30,745 g 
27,333 g 
20,152 g,i 
..  
22,456  
28,421 g 
25,691 g,i 
34,554 g,i 
35,827 g 
19,218 i 
16,931 i 
20,599 i 
..  
20,427 i 
36,838 g,i 
24,722 f,g,i 
18,307  
24,584 g,i 
17,154  
18,361 g,i 
17,706 i 
14,735 f,i 
14,458  

19,873 f 
16,256 i 
11,957 i 
14,790 i 
16,143  
8,188 i 
12,934  
14,633  
..  
13,403  
8,958 i 
7,994 i 
4,132 f,i,n 

..  
8,375 i 
6,788  
5,590 i 
7,697 i 
..  
7,924 i 
5,987 i 

60,394 g 
41,153 g 
43,959 g 
43,456 g,i 
57,320 g,i 
46,509  
44,071 g,i 
42,091 g 
50,346 g 
46,706 g 
101,855 g,i 
40,126 g 
56,536 g,i 
54,037 g 
41,597 g,i 
41,630 g 
42,866 g 
41,158 g,i 
..  
32,375  
42,133 g 
43,515 g,i 
64,656 g,i 
49,324 g 
38,002 i 
32,668 i 
32,148 i 
..  
33,398 i 
62,631 g,i 
68,673 f,g,i 
31,625  
88,264 g,i 
28,762  
67,556 g,i 
30,909 i 
22,830 f,i 
31,812  

39,060 f 
25,169 i 
20,292 i 
25,684 i 
21,625  
19,694 i 
19,360  
20,944  
..  
19,860  
17,710 i 
14,668 i 
8,442 f,i,n 

..  
20,107 i 
14,763  
22,505 i 
32,797 i 
..  
16,344 i 
36,662 i 

-1
1
0
0
-5
-1
2
2
-4
-4
-5
4
-6
-9
6
4
6
3
..
1
3
1
..
0
2
-1
-1
..
2
-2
-6
2
-5
3
-6
2
4
3

3
1
-1
-1
3
0
-1
1
..
0
-1
1
-2
..
0
2
-4
-5
..
-3
-7

181

J

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009

Gender-related development index and its components

Gender-related 

development index (GDI)

2007

Life expectancy at birth                                                                                                                       
(years)                                                                                            
2007        

Adult literacy ratea                                                                                                                    
(% aged 15 and above)                                                                                 

1999–2007        

Combined gross 

enrolment 

ratio in educationb                                                                                                   
(%)                                                                                             
2007

Estimated 

earned incomec                                                                                                       
(PPP US$)                                                                                        

2007

HDI rank

Rank

Value

as a % of 
HDI value

Female

Male

Female

Male

Female

Male

Female

Male

HDI rank 
minus GDI 

rankd

60  Panama 
61  Bulgaria 
62  Saint Kitts and Nevis 
63  Romania 
64  Trinidad and Tobago 
65  Montenegro 
66  Malaysia 
67  Serbia 
68  Belarus 
69  Saint Lucia 
70  Albania 
71  Russian Federation 
72  Macedonia (the Former Yugoslav Rep. of) 
73  Dominica 
74  Grenada 
75  Brazil 
76  Bosnia and Herzegovina 
77  Colombia 
78  Peru 
79  Turkey 
80  Ecuador 
81  Mauritius 
82  Kazakhstan 
83  Lebanon 

MEDIUM HUMAN DEVELOPMENT

84  Armenia 
85  Ukraine 
86  Azerbaijan 
87  Thailand 
88  Iran (Islamic Republic of) 
89  Georgia 
90  Dominican Republic 
91  Saint Vincent and the Grenadines 
92  China 
93  Belize 
94  Samoa 
95  Maldives 
96  Jordan 
97  Suriname 
98  Tunisia 
99  Tonga 
100  Jamaica 
101  Paraguay 
102  Sri Lanka 
103  Gabon 
104  Algeria 
105  Philippines 
106  El Salvador 
107  Syrian Arab Republic 
108  Fiji 
109  Turkmenistan 
110  Occupied Palestinian Territories 
111  Indonesia 
112  Honduras 
113  Bolivia 
114  Guyana 
115  Mongolia 
116  Viet Nam 
117  Moldova 
118  Equatorial Guinea 

182

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

51  
50  
..  
52  
53  
..  
58  
..  
57  
..  
61  
59  
62  
..  
..  
63  
..  
64  
65  
70  
..  
67  
66  
71  

68  
69  
73  
72  
76  
..  
74  
..  
75  
..  
80  
77  
87  
79  
84  
78  
81  
82  
83  
85  
88  
86  
89  
98  
90  
..  
..  
93  
95  
91  
96  
92  
94  
97  
102  

0.838  
0.839  
..  
0.836  
0.833  
..  
0.823  
..  
0.824  
..  
0.814  
0.816  
0.812  
..  
..  
0.810  
..  
0.806  
0.804  
0.788  
..  
0.797  
0.803  
0.784  

0.794  
0.793  
0.779  
0.782  
0.770  
..  
0.775  
..  
0.770  
..  
0.763  
0.767  
0.743  
0.763  
0.752  
0.765  
0.762  
0.759  
0.756  
0.748  
0.742  
0.748  
0.740  
0.715  
0.732  
..  
..  
0.726  
0.721  
0.728  
0.721  
0.727  
0.723  
0.719  
0.700  

99.7  
99.9  
..  
99.9  
99.5  
..  
99.2  
..  
99.8  
..  
99.5  
99.9  
99.4  
..  
..  
99.7  
..  
99.9  
99.7  
97.7  
..  
99.1  
99.8  
97.7  

99.5  
99.7  
99.0  
99.8  
98.4  
..  
99.7  
..  
99.8  
..  
99.0  
99.5  
96.5  
99.3  
97.8  
99.6  
99.5  
99.8  
99.6  
99.1  
98.4  
99.6  
99.0  
96.4  
98.7  
..  
..  
99.0  
98.4  
99.8  
98.9  
100.0  
99.7  
99.8  
97.3  

78.2  
76.7  
.. k 
76.1  
72.8  
76.5  
76.6  
76.3  
75.2  
75.5  
79.8  
72.9  
76.5  
.. k 
76.7  
75.9  
77.7  
76.5  
75.8  
74.2  
78.0  
75.7  
71.2  
74.1  

76.7  
73.8  
72.3  
72.1  
72.5  
75.0  
75.2  
73.6  
74.7  
78.0  
74.7  
72.7  
74.3  
72.5  
76.0  
74.6  
75.1  
73.8  
77.9  
61.5  
73.6  
73.9  
75.9  
76.0  
71.0  
68.8  
74.9  
72.5  
74.4  
67.5  
69.6  
69.6  
76.1  
72.1  
51.1  

73.0  
69.6  
.. k 
69.0  
65.6  
71.6  
71.9  
71.6  
63.1  
71.7  
73.4  
59.9  
71.7  
.. k 
73.7  
68.6  
72.4  
69.1  
70.4  
69.4  
72.1  
68.5  
59.1  
69.8  

70.1  
62.7  
67.6  
65.4  
69.9  
68.1  
69.8  
69.4  
71.3  
74.2  
68.4  
69.7  
70.7  
65.3  
71.8  
69.0  
68.3  
69.6  
70.3  
58.7  
70.8  
69.4  
66.4  
72.2  
66.5  
60.6  
71.7  
68.5  
69.6  
63.3  
63.7  
63.0  
72.3  
64.5  
48.7  

92.8  
97.9  
..  
96.9  
98.3  
94.1 f,o 
89.6  
94.1 f,o 
99.7 g 
..  
98.8 g 
99.4  
95.4  
..  
..  
90.2  
94.4  
92.8  
84.6  
81.3  
89.7  
84.7  
99.5  
86.0  

99.3  
99.6  
99.2 g 
92.6  
77.2  
..  
89.5  
..  
90.0  
..  
98.4  
97.1  
87.0  
88.1  
69.0  
99.3  
91.1  
93.5  
89.1  
82.2  
66.4  
93.7  
79.7  
76.5  
.. m 
99.3  
90.3  
88.8  
83.5  
86.0  

94.0  
98.6  
..  
98.3  
99.1  
98.9 f,o 
94.2  
98.9 f,o 
99.8 g 
..  
99.3 g 
99.7  
98.6  
..  
..  
89.8  
99.0  
92.4  
94.9  
96.2  
92.3  
90.2  
99.8  
93.4  

99.7  
99.8  
99.8 g 
95.9  
87.3  
..  
88.8  
..  
96.5  
..  
98.9  
97.0  
95.2  
92.7  
86.4  
99.2  
80.5  
95.7  
92.7  
90.2  
84.3  
93.1  
84.9  
89.7  
.. m 
99.7  
97.2  
95.2  
83.7  
96.0  

.. g,m 

.. g,m 

97.7  
86.9  
98.9  
80.5  

96.8  
93.9  
99.6  
93.4  

83.5 f 
82.9 f 
74.1 f 
81.7 f 
62.2 f,h 

..  
73.1 f 
..  
93.8  
80.6  
67.6 f 
86.1 f 
71.1 f 
82.7 f,h 
73.8 f,h 
89.4 f 
..  
80.9  
89.9 f,h 
66.3 f,h 

..  

75.7 f,h 
95.1  
80.3  

77.8  
93.2 l 
..  

79.6 f,h 
73.0 f,h 
77.7 h 
76.7 f 
70.3 f 
68.5 f 
79.2 f,h 
76.3 f,h 
71.4 f,h 
79.9 f 
79.3 f,h 
78.9 f,h 
78.8 f,h 
82.0 f,h 
72.2 f,h 
69.9 f,h 
75.0 f 
74.5 f,h 
81.6 f 
74.8  
63.9 f,h 
73.2 f,h 

..  
80.8  
66.8 f,h 
78.3 f,h 
83.6 f 
83.0  
84.9  
60.7 f,h 
74.6 l 
55.8 f 

76.1 f 
81.8 f 
72.1 f 
76.7 f 
59.9 f,h 

..  
69.8 f 
..  
87.1  
73.8  
68.0 f 
78.0 f 
69.1 f 
74.5 f,h 
72.4 f,h 
85.1 f 
..  
77.2  
86.4 f,h 
75.7 f,h 

..  

78.0 f,h 
87.8  
75.7  

71.6  
87.0 l 
..  

76.6 f,h 
73.4 f,h 
75.8 h 
70.4 f 
67.6 f 
68.9 f 
77.4 f,h 
72.0 f,h 
71.3 f,h 
77.5 f 
69.4 f,h 
73.6 f,h 
77.2 f,h 
74.3 f,h 
72.1 f,h 
67.5 f,h 
79.8 f 
72.8 f,h 
77.8 f 
73.3  
67.5 f,h 
70.0 f,h 

..  
75.9  
69.5 f,h 
71.3 f,h 
89.7 f 
84.7  
73.7  
63.9 f,h 
68.6 l 
68.2 f 

8,331  
9,132  
..  
10,053  
16,686 i 
8,611 i,p 
7,972 i 
7,654 i,p 
8,482  
6,599 i 
4,954 i 
11,675 i 
5,956 i 
..  
..  
7,190  
5,910 i 
7,138  
5,828 i 
5,352 i 
4,996 i 
6,686 i 
8,831 i 
4,062 i 

4,215  
5,249  
4,836  
6,341 i 
5,304 i 
2,639  
4,985 i 
5,180 i 
4,323 i 
4,021  
2,525 i 
3,597 i 
1,543  
4,794 i 
3,249 i 
2,705 i 
4,469 i 
3,439 i 
3,064  
11,221 i 
4,081 i 
2,506 i 
3,675 i 
1,512 i 
2,349 i 
3,594 i 
..  
2,263 i 
1,951 i 
3,198 i 
1,607 i 
3,019  
2,131 i 
2,173 i 
16,161 i 

14,397  
13,439  
..  
14,808  
30,554 i 
14,951 i,p 
18,886 i 
12,900 i,p 
13,543  
13,084 i 
9,143 i 
18,171 i 
12,247 i 
..  
..  
12,006  
9,721 i 
10,080  
9,835 i 
20,441 i 
9,888 i 
15,972 i 
13,080 i 
16,404 i 

7,386  
8,854  
11,037  
10,018 i 
16,449 i 
6,921  
8,416 i 
10,219 i 
6,375 i 
9,398  
6,258 i 
6,714 i 
8,065  
10,825 i 
11,731 i 
4,752 i 
7,734 i 
5,405 i 
5,450  
19,124 i 
11,331 i 
4,293 i 
8,016 i 
7,452 i 
6,200 i 
5,545 i 
..  
5,163 i 
5,668 i 
5,222 i 
3,919 i 
3,454  
3,069 i 
2,964 i 
45,418 i 

3
5
..
4
4
..
0
..
2
..
-1
2
0
..
..
0
..
0
0
-4
..
0
2
-2

2
2
-1
1
-2
..
1
..
1
..
-3
1
-8
1
-3
4
2
2
2
1
-1
2
0
-8
1
..
..
-1
-2
3
-1
4
3
1
-3

TABLE

J

Gender-related 

development index (GDI)

2007

Life expectancy at birth                                                                                                                       
(years)                                                                                            
2007        

Adult literacy ratea                                                                                                                    
(% aged 15 and above)                                                                                 

1999–2007        

Combined gross 

enrolment 

ratio in educationb                                                                                                   
(%)                                                                                             
2007

Estimated 

earned incomec                                                                                                       
(PPP US$)                                                                                        

2007

HDI rank

Rank

Value

as a % of 
HDI value

Female

Male

Female

Male

Female

Male

Female

Male

HDI rank 
minus GDI 

rankd

 119  Uzbekistan 
 120  Kyrgyzstan 
 121  Cape Verde 
 122  Guatemala 
 123  Egypt 
 124  Nicaragua 
 125  Botswana 
 126  Vanuatu 
 127  Tajikistan 
 128  Namibia 
 129  South Africa 
 130  Morocco 
 131  Sao Tome and Principe 
 132  Bhutan 
 133  Lao People’s Democratic Republic 
 134  India 
 135  Solomon Islands 
 136  Congo 
 137  Cambodia 
 138  Myanmar 
 139  Comoros 
 140  Yemen 
 141  Pakistan 
 142  Swaziland 
 143  Angola 
 144  Nepal 
 145  Madagascar 
 146  Bangladesh 
 147  Kenya 
 148  Papua New Guinea 
 149  Haiti 
 150  Sudan 
 151  Tanzania (United Republic of) 
 152  Ghana 
 153  Cameroon 
 154  Mauritania 
 155  Djibouti 
 156  Lesotho 
 157  Uganda 
 158  Nigeria 

LOW HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
 159  Togo 
 160  Malawi 
 161  Benin 
 162  Timor-Leste 
 163  Côte d’Ivoire 
 164  Zambia 
 165  Eritrea 
 166  Senegal 
 167  Rwanda 
 168  Gambia 
 169  Liberia 
 170  Guinea 
 171  Ethiopia 
 172  Mozambique 
 173  Guinea-Bissau 
  174  Burundi 
 175  Chad 
 176  Congo (Democratic Republic of the) 
 177  Burkina Faso 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

99  
100  
101  
103  
..  
106  
105  
104  
107  
108  
109  
111  
110  
113  
112  
114  
..  
115  
116  
..  
117  
122  
124  
118  
..  
119  
120  
123  
121  
..  
..  
127  
125  
126  
129  
128  
130  
132  
131  
133  

..  
134  
135  
..  
137  
136  
138  
140  
139  
141  
142  
143  
144  
145  
148  
146  
149  
150  
147  

0.708  
0.705  
0.701  
0.696  
..  
0.686  
0.689  
0.692  
0.686  
0.683  
0.680  
0.625  
0.643  
0.605  
0.614  
0.594  
..  
0.594  
0.588  
..  
0.571  
0.538  
0.532  
0.568  
..  
0.545  
0.541  
0.536  
0.538  
..  
..  
0.516  
0.527  
0.524  
0.515  
0.516  
0.514  
0.509  
0.509  
0.499  

..  
0.490  
0.477  
..  
0.468  
0.473  
0.459  
0.457  
0.459  
0.452  
0.430  
0.425  
0.403  
0.395  
0.381  
0.390  
0.380  
0.370  
0.383  

99.7  
99.4  
98.9  
98.9  
..  
98.2  
99.3  
99.9  
99.6  
99.5  
99.6  
95.7  
98.8  
97.7  
99.3  
97.1  
..  
98.8  
99.2  
..  
99.2  
93.6  
93.0  
99.3  
..  
98.4  
99.6  
98.7  
99.4  
..  
..  
97.0  
99.4  
99.5  
98.6  
99.1  
98.8  
99.1  
99.2  
97.7  

..  
99.4  
97.0  
..  
96.6  
98.3  
97.3  
98.5  
99.8  
99.1  
97.3  
97.7  
97.3  
98.3  
96.2  
99.1  
96.8  
95.1  
98.4  

70.9  
71.4  
73.5  
73.7  
71.7  
75.9  
53.3  
72.0  
69.3  
61.2  
53.2  
73.3  
67.3  
67.6  
65.9  
64.9  
66.7  
54.4  
62.3  
63.4  
67.2  
64.1  
66.5  
44.8  
48.5  
66.9  
61.5  
66.7  
54.0  
63.0  
62.9  
59.4  
55.8  
57.4  
51.4  
58.5  
56.5  
45.5  
52.4  
48.2  

63.9  
53.4  
62.1  
61.5  
58.3  
45.0  
61.4  
56.9  
51.4  
57.3  
59.3  
59.3  
56.2  
48.7  
49.1  
51.4  
49.9  
49.2  
54.0  

64.5  
63.9  
68.2  
66.7  
68.2  
69.8  
53.2  
68.1  
63.7  
59.3  
49.8  
68.8  
63.5  
64.0  
63.2  
62.0  
64.9  
52.5  
58.6  
59.0  
62.8  
60.9  
65.9  
45.7  
44.6  
65.6  
58.3  
64.7  
53.2  
58.7  
59.1  
56.3  
54.2  
55.6  
50.3  
54.7  
53.7  
43.9  
51.4  
47.2  

60.4  
51.3  
59.8  
59.8  
55.7  
44.0  
56.8  
53.9  
47.9  
54.1  
56.5  
55.3  
53.3  
46.9  
46.0  
48.6  
47.3  
46.1  
51.4  

95.8  
99.1  
78.8  
68.0  
57.8  
77.9  
82.9  
76.1  
99.5  
87.4  
87.2  
43.2  
82.7  
38.7  
63.2  
54.5  
..  
71.8 f 
67.7  
86.4  
69.8  
40.5  
39.6  
78.3  
54.2  
43.6  
65.3  
48.0  
70.2  
53.4  
64.0 f 
51.8  
65.9  
58.3  
59.8  
48.3  
.. m 
90.3  
65.5  
64.1  

38.5  
64.6  
27.9  
..  
38.6  
60.7  
53.0  
33.0  
59.8  
.. m 
50.9  
18.1  
22.8  
33.0  
54.4  
52.2  
20.8  
54.1  
21.6  

98.0  
99.5  
89.4  
79.0  
74.6  
78.1  
82.8  
80.0  
99.8  
88.6  
88.9  
68.7  
93.4  
65.0  
82.5  
76.9  
..  
90.6 f 
85.8  
93.9  
80.3  
77.0  
67.7  
80.9  
82.9  
70.3  
76.5  
58.7  
77.7  
62.1  
60.1 f 
71.1  
79.0  
71.7  
77.0  
63.3  
.. m 
73.7  
81.8  
80.1  

68.7  
79.2  
53.1  
..  
60.8  
80.8  
76.2  
52.3  
71.4  
.. m 
60.2  
42.6  
50.0  
57.2  
75.1  
67.3  
43.0  
80.9  
36.7  

71.4  
79.7  
69.7  
67.8  
..  

72.7 f,h 
71.3 f,h 
60.3 f,h 
64.6  
68.2 f 
77.3 f 
55.1 f,h 
68.6  
53.7 f,h 
54.3 f 
57.4 f 
47.8 f 
55.2 f,h 
54.8 h 
..  

42.3 f,h 
42.3 f 
34.4 f 
58.4 f 
..  

58.1 f,h 
60.2  
52.5 f 
58.2 f,h 

..  
..  

37.6 f,h 
56.2 h 
54.5 h 
47.7 l 
50.5 f,l 
21.9 f 
62.3 f,h 
61.6 f,h 
48.1 f,h 

..  

61.7 f,h 
44.5 f,h 
62.1 f,h 
31.3 f,h 
60.7 f,h 
27.6 f,h 
39.0 f,h 
52.4 f 
47.2 f,h 
48.6 f 
41.5 f 
44.0 h 
50.2 f,h 
28.8 f,h 
46.2 h 
27.5 f,h 
40.5 l 
29.2  

74.0  
74.9  
66.6  
73.2  
..  

71.5 f,h 
70.0 f,h 
64.2 f,h 
77.2  
66.3 f 
76.3 f 
64.0 f,h 
67.7  
54.6 f,h 
64.8 f 
64.3 f 
51.4 f 
62.0 f,h 
62.1 h 
..  

50.4 f,h 
65.9 f 
43.9 f 
61.8 f 
..  

63.4 f,h 
62.5  
51.8 f 
61.0 f,h 

..  
..  

42.2 f,h 
58.4 h 
58.3 h 
56.7 l 
50.7 f,l 
29.0 f 
60.6 f,h 
62.9 f,h 
57.9 f,h 

..  

62.1 f,h 
60.1 f,h 
64.2 f,h 
43.7 f,h 
66.0 f,h 
39.1 f,h 
43.3 f,h 
52.0 f 
46.4 f,h 
66.5 f 
56.9 f 
54.0 h 
59.4 f,h 
44.5 f,h 
51.8 h 
45.5 f,h 
55.9 l 
36.3  

1,891 i 
1,428 i 
2,015 i 
2,735 i 
2,286  
1,293 i 
9,961 i 
2,970 i 
1,385 i 
4,006 i 
7,328 i 
1,603 i 
1,044 i 
2,636 i 
1,877 i 
1,304 i 
1,146 i 
2,385 i 
1,465 i 
640 i 
839 i 
921 i 
760 i 
3,994 i 
4,212 i 
794 i 
774  
830 i 
1,213 i 
1,775 i 
626 i 
1,039 i 
1,025 i 
1,133 i 
1,467 i 
1,405 i 
1,496 i 
1,315 i 
861 i 
1,163 i 

494 i 
646 i 
892  
493 i 
852 i 
980 i 
422 i 
1,178 i 
770 i 
951 i 
240 i 
919 i 
624 i 
759 i 
301 i 
296 i 
1,219 i 
189 i 
895 i 

2,964 i 
2,600 i 
4,152 i 
6,479 i 
8,401  
3,854 i 
17,307 i 
4,332 i 
2,126 i 
6,339 i 
12,273 i 
6,694 i 
2,243 i 
6,817 i 
2,455 i 
4,102 i 
2,264 i 
4,658 i 
2,158 i 
1,043 i 
1,446 i 
3,715 i 
4,135 i 
5,642 i 
6,592 i 
1,309 i 
1,093  
1,633 i 
1,874 i 
2,383 i 
1,695 i 
3,119 i 
1,394 i 
1,531 i 
2,791 i 
2,439 i 
2,627 i 
1,797 i 
1,256 i 
2,777 i 

1,088 i 
877 i 
1,726  
934 i 
2,500 i 
1,740 i 
839 i 
2,157 i 
970 i 
1,499 i 
484 i 
1,356 i 
936 i 
848 i 
658 i 
387 i 
1,739 i 
410 i 
1,354 i 

1
1
1
0
..
-2
0
2
0
0
0
-1
1
-1
1
0
..
0
0
..
0
-4
-5
2
..
2
2
0
3
..
..
-2
1
1
-1
1
0
-1
1
0

..
0
0
..
-1
1
0
-1
1
0
0
0
0
0
-2
1
-1
-1
3

183

J

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009

Gender-related development index and its components

Gender-related 

development index (GDI)

2007

Life expectancy at birth                                                                                                                       
(years)                                                                                            
2007        

Adult literacy ratea                                                                                                                    
(% aged 15 and above)                                                                                 

1999–2007        

Combined gross 

enrolment 

ratio in educationb                                                                                                   
(%)                                                                                             
2007

Estimated 

earned incomec                                                                                                       
(PPP US$)                                                                                        

2007

HDI rank

Rank

Value

as a % of 
HDI value

Female

Male

Female

Male

Female

Male

Female

Male

HDI rank 
minus GDI 

rankd

178  Mali 
179  Central African Republic 
180  Sierra Leone 
181  Afghanistan 
182  Niger 

 

153  
151  
152  
154  
155  

0.353  
0.354  
0.354  
0.310  
0.308  

95.2  
95.8  
97.1  
88.0  
90.8  

OTHER UN MEMBER STATES
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

  Iraq 
  Kiribati 
  Korea (Democratic People’s Rep. of)   
  Marshall Islands 
  Micronesia (Federated States of) 
  Monaco 
  Nauru 
  Palau 
  San Marino 
  Somalia 
  Tuvalu 
  Zimbabwe 

 

..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  

..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  

..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  

48.8  
48.2  
48.5  
43.5  
51.7  

71.8  
.. k 
69.1  
.. k 
69.2  
.. k 
.. k 
.. k 
.. k 
51.2  
.. k 
43.6  

47.4  
45.1  
46.0  
43.6  
50.0  

64.2  
.. k 
64.9  
.. k 
67.6  
.. k 
.. k 
.. k 
.. k 
48.3  
.. k 
42.6  

18.2  
33.5  
26.8  
12.6  
15.1  

64.2  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
90.5 f 
.. e 
..  
..  
88.3  

34.9  
64.8  
50.0  
43.1  
42.9  

84.1  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
93.3 f 
.. e 
..  
..  
94.1  

37.5 f,h 
22.9 f,h 
37.6 f,h 
35.4 f,h 
22.1  

51.0 f,h 
34.4 f,h 
51.7 f,h 
63.6 f,h 
32.3  

672 i 
535 i 
577 i 
442 f,i,q 
318 i 

1,517 i 
900 i 
783 i 

1,845 f,i,q 

929 i 

52.1 f,h 
77.9 f,h 

..  

68.5 f,h 
73.8 f,h 

..  

71.2 f,h 

71.1 f,h 

..  
..  

..  
..  

56.1 f,h 
91.2 f,h 

54.0 f,h 
82.4 f,h 

..  
..  

..  
..  

70.8 f,h 
53.4 f,h 

67.8 f,h 
55.5 f,h 

..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  

..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  

-2
1
1
0
0

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

NOTES

a  Data refer to national literacy estimates from censuses 

or surveys conducted between 1999 and 2007, 
unless otherwise specified. Due to differences in 
methodology and timeliness of underlying data, 
comparisons across countries and over time should be 
made with caution. For more details, see http://www.
uis.unesco.org/.

b Data for some countries may refer to national or 

UNESCO Institute for Statistics estimates. For details, 
see http://www.uis.unesco.org/.

c  Because of the lack of gender-disaggregated 

income data, female and male earned income are 
crudely estimated on the basis of data on the ratio 
of the female nonagricultural wage to the male 
nonagricultural wage, the female and male shares of 
the economically active population, the total female 
and male population and GDP per capita in PPP US$ 
(see http://hdr.undp.org/en/statistics/tn1). The wage 
ratios used in this calculation are based on data for the 
most recent year available between 1999 and 2007.

d The HDI ranks used in this calculation are recalculated 

for the countries with a GDI value. A positive figure 
indicates that the GDI rank is higher than the HDI rank; 
a negative figure, the opposite.

e  For the purposes of calculating the HDI, a value of 

99.0% was applied.

f  Data refer to an earlier year than that specified.
g  For the purpose of calculating the GDI, the female 

and male values appearing in this table were scaled 
downward to reflect the maximum values for adult 
literacy (99%), gross enrolment ratios (100%), and 
GDP per capita (40,000 (PPP US$)). For more details, 
see http://hdr.undp.org/en/statistics/tn1.
h  UNESCO Institute for Statistics estimate.
i  No wage data are available. For the purposes of 

m In the absence of recent data, estimates for 2005 

from UNESCO Institute for Statistics (2003), based on 
outdated census or survey information, were used and 
should be interpreted with caution: the Bahamas 96.7 
(for females) and 95.0 (for males), Barbados 99.8 and 
99.7,  Djibouti 61.4 and 79.9, Fiji 92.9 and 95.9, the 
Gambia 35.4 and 49.9, Guyana 98.7 and 99.2 and 
Hong Kong, China (SAR) 91.4 and 97.3. 

n  Heston, Summers and  Aten (2006). Data differ from 

calculating the estimated female and male earned 
income, a value of 0.75 was used for the ratio 
of the female nonagricultural wage to the male 
nonagricultural wage.

j  Statec (2008). Data refer to nationals enrolled both 
in the country and abroad and thus differ from the 
standard definition.

k  For the purposes of calculating the HDI unpublished 

estimates from UN (2009e) were used: Andorra 
84.3 (for females) and 77.5 (for males), Antigua and 
Barbuda 74.6 and 69.7, Dominica 80.3 and 73.7, 
Liechtenstein 82.4 and 76.0, Saint Kitts and Nevis 
74.6 and 69.8 and the Seychelles 77.7 and 68.4.
l  National estimate from the UNESCO Institute for 

Statistics.

the standard definition.

o  Data refer to Serbia and Montenegro prior to its 

separation into two independent states in June 2006. 
Data exclude Kosovo.

p  Earned income is estimated using data on the 

economic activity rate for Serbia and Montenegro prior 
to its separation into two independent states in June 
2006.

q  Calculated on the basis of GDP in PPP US$ for 2006 
from World Bank (2009d) and total population for the 
same year from UN (2009e).

SOURCES
Column 1: determined on the basis of the GDI values.
Column 2: calculated based on data in columns 4–11.
Column 3: calculated based on GDI and HDI values.
Columns 4 and 5: UN (2009e).
Columns 6 and 7: UNESCO Institute for Statistics (2009a.)
Columns 8 and 9: UNESCO Institute for Statistics (2009b).
Columns 10 and 11: calculated based on data on GDP 
(in PPP US$) and population from the World Bank (2009d), 
data on wages and economically active population from 
ILO (2009b).
Column 12: calculated based on recalculated HDI ranks 
and GDI ranks in column 1.

184

TABLE

GDI RANKS FOR 155 COUNTRIES AND AREAS

  1  Australia
  2  Norway
  3  Iceland
  4  Canada
  5  Sweden
  6  France
  7  Netherlands
  8  Finland
  9  Spain
  10  Ireland
  11  Belgium
  12  Denmark
  13  Switzerland
  14  Japan
  15  Italy
  16  Luxembourg
  17  United Kingdom
  18  New Zealand
  19  United States
  20  Germany
  21  Greece
  22  Hong Kong, China (SAR)
  23  Austria
  24  Slovenia
  25  Korea (Republic of)
 
  26  Israel 
 
 
  27  Cyprus   
 
  28  Portugal  
 
  29  Brunei Darussalam 
 
  30  Barbados 
 
  31  Czech Republic 
 
  32  Malta 
 
 
  33  Bahrain   
 
  34  Kuwait   
 
  35  Qatar 
 
 
  36  Estonia   
  37  Hungary  
 
  38  United Arab Emirates   
 
  39  Poland   
  40  Slovakia  
 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  41  Chile 
 
  42  Lithuania 
  43  Croatia   
  44  Latvia 
 
  45  Uruguay  
  46  Argentina 
  47  Costa Rica 
  48  Mexico   
  49  Cuba 
 
  50  Bulgaria  
  51  Panama
  52  Romania
  53  Trinidad and Tobago 
 
  54  Libyan Arab Jamahiriya 
  55  Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) 
  56  Oman 
 
  57  Belarus   
  58  Malaysia 
  59  Russian Federation 
  60  Saudi Arabia 
  61  Albania   
  62  Macedonia (the Former Yugoslav Rep. of)
 
  63  Brazil 
 
 
  64  Colombia 
 
  65  Peru 
 
 
  66  Kazakhstan 
 
  67  Mauritius 
 
  68  Armenia  
 
  69  Ukraine   
 
  70  Turkey 
 
 
  71  Lebanon  
 
  72  Thailand  
 
  73  Azerbaijan 
 
  74  Dominican Republic 
 
  75  China 
  76  Iran (Islamic Republic of)
  77  Maldives 
  78  Tonga 
 
  79  Suriname 
  80  Samoa   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 
 
 

  81  Jamaica  
  82  Paraguay 
  83  Sri Lanka 
  84  Tunisia   
  85  Gabon 
 
  86  Philippines 
  87  Jordan   
  88  Algeria   
  89  El Salvador 
 
  90  Fiji 
  91  Bolivia 
 
  92  Mongolia 
  93  Indonesia 
  94  Viet Nam 
  95  Honduras 
  96  Guyana   
  97  Moldova  
  98  Syrian Arab Republic   
  99  Uzbekistan 
 
 
 100  Kyrgyzstan 
 
 101  Cape Verde 
 102  Equatorial Guinea 
 
 103  Guatemala
 104  Vanuatu  
 105  Botswana 
 106  Nicaragua 
 107  Tajikistan 
 108  Namibia  
 109  South Africa 
 
 110  Sao Tome and Principe 
 111  Morocco 
 
 112  Lao People’s Democratic Republic 
 113  Bhutan   
 
 114  India 
 115  Congo 
 
 116  Cambodia 
 117  Comoros 
 118  Swaziland 
 119  Nepal 
 
 120  Madagascar 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 121  Kenya 
 
 122  Yemen   
 123  Bangladesh 
 124  Pakistan  
 125  Tanzania (United Republic of) 
 126  Ghana 
 127  Sudan 
 128  Mauritania 
 129  Cameroon
 130  Djibouti
 131  Uganda
 132  Lesotho
 133  Nigeria 
 134  Malawi   
 135  Benin 
 
 136  Zambia   
 137  Côte d’Ivoire 
 138  Eritrea 
 
 139  Rwanda  
 140  Senegal  
 141  Gambia   
 142  Liberia   
 143  Guinea   
 144  Ethiopia  
 145  Mozambique 
 146  Burundi  
 147  Burkina Faso 
 148  Guinea-Bissau 
 149  Chad 
 150  Congo (Democratic Republic of the) 
 151  Central African Republic 
 
 152  Sierra Leone 
 
 153  Mali 
 154  Afghanistan 
 
 155  Niger

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

J

 

185

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009

Gender empowerment measure and its components 
 

 

 

 

 

Gender empowerment 

measure 
(GEM)

Seats in 
parliament 

held by 
womena
(% of total)  

Female 
legislators,

senior

officials and
managersb 
 (% of total)      

Female 

professional 
and technical 

workersb
(% of total)

Ratio of 
estimated  
female to 

male earned 

incomec

Year women

received right tod

vote

stand for 
election

Year a woman 

became 
Presiding 
Officer of 

parliament or 
of one of its 
houses for the 

first timee

Women in 
ministerial 
positionsf
(% of total)

TABLE

K

HDI rank

Rank

Value  

VERY HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT

1  Norway 
2  Australia 
3  Iceland 
4  Canada 
5  Ireland 
6  Netherlands 
7  Sweden 
8  France 
9  Switzerland 
10  Japan 
11  Luxembourg 
12  Finland 
13  United States 
14  Austria 
15  Spain 
16  Denmark 
17  Belgium 
18  Italy 
19  Liechtenstein 
20  New Zealand 
21  United Kingdom 
22  Germany 
23  Singapore 
24  Hong Kong, China (SAR) 
25  Greece 
26  Korea (Republic of) 
27  Israel 
28  Andorra 
29  Slovenia 
30  Brunei Darussalam 
31  Kuwait 
32  Cyprus 
33  Qatar 
34  Portugal 
35  United Arab Emirates 
36  Czech Republic 
37  Barbados 
38  Malta 

HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 

39  Bahrain 
40  Estonia 
41  Poland 
42  Slovakia 
43  Hungary 
44  Chile 
45  Croatia 
46  Lithuania 
47  Antigua and Barbuda 
48  Latvia 
49  Argentina 
50  Uruguay 
51  Cuba 
52  Bahamas 
53  Mexico 
54  Costa Rica 
55  Libyan Arab Jamahiriya 
56  Oman 
57  Seychelles 
58  Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) 
59  Saudi Arabia 

186

2  
7  
8  
12  
22  
5  
1  
17  
13  
57  
..  
3  
18  
20  
11  
4  
6  
21  
..  
10  
15  
9  
16  
..  
28  
61  
23  
..  
34  
..  
..  
48  
88  
19  
25  
31  
37  
74  

 

46  
30  
38  
32  
52  
75  
44  
40  
..  
33  
24  
63  
29  
..  
39  
27  
..  
87  
..  
55  
106  

 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

0.906 
0.870 
0.859 
0.830 
0.722 
0.882 
0.909 
0.779 
0.822 
0.567 
.. 
0.902 
0.767 
0.744 
0.835 
0.896 
0.874 
0.741 
.. 
0.841 
0.790 
0.852 
0.786 
.. 
0.677 
0.554 
0.705 
.. 
0.641 
.. 
.. 
0.603 
0.445 
0.753 
0.691 
0.664 
0.632 
0.531 

 

0.605 
0.665 
0.631 
0.663 
0.590 
0.526 
0.618 
0.628 
.. 
0.648 
0.699 
0.551 
0.676 
.. 
0.629 
0.685 
.. 
0.453 
.. 
0.581 
0.299 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

36 g 
30 g 
33 g 
25 g 
15 g 
39 g 
47 g 
20 g 
27 g 
12  
23 g 
42  
17 g 
27 g 
34 g 
38 g 
36 g 
20 g 
24  
34  
20 g 
31 g 
24  
..  
15 g 
14 g 
18 g 
25  
10 g 
..  
3  
14 g 
0  
28 g 
23  
16 g 
14  
9 g 

14  
21  
18 g 
19 g 
11 g 
13 g 
21 g 
18 g 
17  
20  
40 g 
12 g 
43  
25  
22 g 
37 g 
8  
9  
24  
19 g 
0  

 

31  
37  
30  
37  
31  
28  
32  
38  
30  
9 h 
..  
29  
43  
27  
32  
28  
32  
34  
..  
40  
34  
38  
31  
30  
28  
9  
30  
..  
34  
35 h 
..  
15  
7  
32  
10  
29  
43  
19  

13 h 
34  
36  
31  
35  
23 h 
21  
38  
45  
41  
23  
40  
31 h 
43  
31  
27  
..  
9  
..  
27 h 
10  

 

51  
57  
56  
56  
53  
50  
51  
48  
46  
46 h 
..  
55  
56  
48  
49  
52  
49  
47  
..  
54  
47  
50  
45  
42  
49  
40  
52  
..  
56  
37 h 
..  
48  
25  
51  
21  
53  
52  
41  

 
19 h 
69  
60  
58  
60  
50 h 
51  
70  
55  
66  
54  
53  
60 h 
63  
42  
43  
..  
33  
..  
61 h 
29  

0.77  
0.70  
0.62  
0.65  
0.56  
0.67  
0.67  
0.61  
0.62  
0.45  
0.57  
0.73  
0.62  
0.40  
0.52  
0.74  
0.64  
0.49  
.. 
 
0.69  
0.67  
0.59  
0.53  
0.73  
0.51  
0.52  
0.64  
.. 
 
0.61  
0.59  
0.36  
0.58  
0.28  
0.60  
0.27  
0.57  
0.65  
0.45  

 

 

0.51  
0.65  
0.59  
0.58  
0.75  
0.42  
0.67  
0.70  
.. 
 
0.67  
0.51  
0.55  
0.49  
.. 
 
0.42  
0.46  
0.25  
0.23  
.. 
 
0.48  
0.16  

1913  
1902, 1962  
1915, 1920  
1917, 1960  
1918, 1928  
1919  
1919, 1921  
1944  
1971  
1945, 1947  
1919  
1906  
1920, 1965  
1918  
1931  
1915  
1919, 1948  
1945  
1984  
1893  
1918, 1928  
1918  
1947  
..  
1952  
1948  
1948  
1970  
1946  
—  
2005  
1960  
2003 k 
1931, 1976  
2006 l 
1920  
1950  
1947  

 
1973, 2002  
1918  
1918  
1920  
1918, 1945  
1949  
1945  
1919  
1951  
1918  
1947  
1932  
1934  
1961, 1964  
1947  
1949  
1964  
1994, 2003  
1948  
1946  
—  

1907, 1913  
1902, 1962  
1915, 1920  
1920, 1960  
1918, 1928  
1917  
1919, 1921  
1944  
1971  
1945, 1947  
1919  
1906  
1788 j 
1918  
1931  
1915  
1921  
1945  
1984  
1919  
1918, 1928  
1918  
1947  
..  
1952  
1948  
1948  
1973  
1946  
—  
2005  
1960  
2003  
1931, 1976  
2006 l 
1920  
1950  
1947  

 

1973, 2002  
1918  
1918  
1920  
1918, 1945  
1949  
1945  
1919  
1951  
1918  
1947  
1932  
1934  
1961, 1964  
1953  
1949  
1964  
1994, 2003  
1948  
1946  
—  

1993  
1987  
1974  
1972  
1982  
1998  
1991  
..  
1977  
1993  
1989  
1991  
2007  
1927  
1999  
1950  
2004  
1979  
..  
2005  
1992  
1972  
..  
..  
2004  
..  
2006  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
1998  
..  
1996  

 

..  
2003  
1997  
..  
1963  
2002  
1993  
..  
1994  
1995  
1973  
1963  
..  
1997  
1994  
1986  
..  
..  
..  
1998  
..  

56
24
36
16
21
33
48
47
43
12
14
58
24
38
44
37
23
24
20
32
23
33
0
..
12
5
12
38
18
7
7
18
8
13
8
13
28
15

4
23
26
13
21
41
24
23
9
22
23
29
19
8
16
29
0
9
20
21
0

 

TABLE

K

Gender empowerment 

measure 
(GEM)

HDI rank

Rank

Value  

Seats in 
parliament 

held by 
womena
(% of total)  

Female 
legislators,

senior

officials and
managersb 
 (% of total)      

Female 

professional 
and technical 

workersb
(% of total)

Ratio of 
estimated  
female to 

male earned 

incomec

Year women

received right tod

vote

stand for 
election

Year a woman 

became 
Presiding 
Officer of 

parliament or 
of one of its 
houses for the 

first timee

Women in 
ministerial 
positionsf
(% of total)

 
  60  Panama 
 
  61  Bulgaria 
 
  62  Saint Kitts and Nevis 
 
  63  Romania 
 
  64  Trinidad and Tobago 
 
  65  Montenegro 
 
  66  Malaysia 
 
  67  Serbia 
 
  68  Belarus 
 
  69  Saint Lucia 
 
  70  Albania 
  71  Russian Federation 
 
  72  Macedonia (the Former Yugoslav Rep. of)   
 
  73  Dominica 
 
  74  Grenada 
 
  75  Brazil 
  76  Bosnia and Herzegovina 
 
 
  77  Colombia 
 
  78  Peru 
 
  79  Turkey 
 
  80  Ecuador 
  81  Mauritius 
 
 
  82  Kazakhstan 
  83  Lebanon 
 

MEDIUM HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 
  84  Armenia 
  85  Ukraine 
  86  Azerbaijan 
  87  Thailand 
  88  Iran (Islamic Republic of) 
  89  Georgia 
  90  Dominican Republic 
  91  Saint Vincent and the Grenadines 
  92  China 
  93  Belize 
  94  Samoa 
  95  Maldives 
  96  Jordan 
  97  Suriname 
  98  Tunisia 
  99  Tonga 
 100  Jamaica 
 101  Paraguay 
 102  Sri Lanka 
 103  Gabon 
 104  Algeria 
 105  Philippines 
 106  El Salvador 
 107  Syrian Arab Republic 
 108  Fiji 
 109  Turkmenistan 
 110  Occupied Palestinian Territories 
  111  Indonesia 
  112  Honduras 
  113  Bolivia 
  114  Guyana 
  115  Mongolia 
 116  Viet Nam 
  117  Moldova 
  118  Equatorial Guinea 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

47  
45  
..  
77  
14  
84  
68  
42  
..  
51  
..  
60  
35  
..  
..  
82  
..  
80  
36  
101  
41  
71  
73  
..  

93  
86  
100  
76  
103  
95  
64  
..  
72  
81  
89  
90  
..  
58  
..  
102  
..  
79  
98  
..  
105  
59  
70  
..  
..  
..  
..  
96  
54  
78  
53  
94  
62  
66  
..  

0.604 
0.613 
.. 
0.512 
0.801 
0.485 
0.542 
0.621 
.. 
0.591 
.. 
0.556 
0.641 
.. 
.. 
0.504 
.. 
0.508 
0.640 
0.379 
0.622 
0.538 
0.532 
.. 

 

0.412 
0.461 
0.385 
0.514 
0.331 
0.408 
0.550 
.. 
0.533 
0.507 
0.431 
0.429 
.. 
0.560 
.. 
0.363 
.. 
0.510 
0.389 
.. 
0.315 
0.560 
0.539 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
0.408 
0.589 
0.511 
0.590 
0.410 
0.554 
0.547 
.. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

17 g 
22  
7  
10 g 
33 g 
11  
15  
22 g 
33  
17  
7 g 
11  
28 g 
19  
21  
9 g 
12 g 
10 g 
29 g 
9  
28 g,n 
17  
12 g 
5 g 

44  
31  
..  
28  
43  
20  
23  
35  
..  
52  
..  
39  
29  
48  
49  
35  
..  
38 h 
29  
8  
28  
20  
38  
..  

 

 

 

8 g 
8  
11  
13 g 
3  
6  
17 g 
18  
21 g 
11  
8  
12  
8 g 
25  
20 g 
3 o 
14  
14 g 
6 g 
17  
6 g 
20 g 
19 g 
12  
.. p 
..  
.. g 
12 g 
23 g 
15 g 
30 g 
4  
26  
22 g 
6 g 

24  
39  
5  
30  
13  
34  
31  
..  
17  
41  
29  
14  
..  
28 h 
..  
27  
..  
35  
24  
..  
5  
57  
29  
..  
51 h 
..  
10  
14 h 
41 h 
36  
25  
48  
22  
40  
..  

52  
61  
..  
56  
53  
60  
41  
55  
..  
56  
..  
64  
53  
55  
53  
53  
..  
50 h 
47  
33  
49  
45  
67  
..  

 
65  
64  
53  
53  
34  
62  
51  
..  
52  
50  
39  
49  
..  
23  
..  
43  
..  
50  
46  
..  
35  
63  
48  
40 h 
9  
..  
34  
48 h 
52 h 
40  
59  
54  
51  
68  
..  

0.58  
0.68  
.. 
 
0.68  
0.55  
0.58  
0.42  
0.59  
0.63  
0.50  
0.54  
0.64  
0.49  
 
.. 
.. 
 
0.60  
0.61  
0.71  
0.59  
0.26  
0.51  
0.42  
0.68  
0.25  

 

 

0.57  
0.59  
0.44  
0.63  
0.32  
0.38  
0.59  
0.51  
0.68  
0.43  
0.40  
0.54  
0.19  
0.44  
0.28  
0.57  
0.58  
0.64  
0.56  
0.59  
0.36  
0.58  
0.46  
0.20  
0.38  
0.65  
.. 
 
0.44  
0.34  
0.61  
0.41  
0.87  
0.69  
0.73  
0.36  

1941, 1946  
1937, 1945  
1951  
1929, 1946  
1946  
1946 m 
1957  
1946 m 
1918  
1951  
1920  
1918  
1946  
1951  
1951  
1932  
1946  
1954  
1955  
1930  
1929  
1956  
1924, 1993  
1952  

 
1918  
1919  
1918  
1932  
1963  
1918, 1921  
1942  
1951  
1949  
1954  
1948, 1990  
1932  
1974  
1948  
1959  
1960  
1944  
1961  
1931  
1956  
1962  
1937  
1939  
1949, 1953  
1963  
1927  
..  
1945, 2003  
1955  
1938, 1952  
1953  
1924  
1946  
1924, 1993  
1963  

1941, 1946  
1945  
1951  
1929, 1946  
1946  
1946 m 
1957  
1946 m 
1918  
1951  
1920  
1918  
1946  
1951  
1951  
1932  
1946  
1954  
1955  
1930  
1929  
1956  
1924, 1993  
1952  

 
1918  
1919  
1918  
1932  
1963  
1918, 1921  
1942  
1951  
1949  
1954  
1948, 1990  
1932  
1974  
1948  
1959  
1960  
1944  
1961  
1931  
1956  
1962  
1937  
1961  
1953  
1963  
1927  
..  
1945  
1955  
1938, 1952  
1945  
1924  
1946  
1924, 1993  
1963  

1994  
..  
2004  
2008  
1991  
..  
..  
2008  
..  
2007  
2005  
..  
..  
1980  
1990  
..  
2009  
..  
1995  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  

 

..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
2001  
1999  
..  
..  
1984  
..  
..  
..  
1997  
..  
..  
1984  
..  
..  
2009  
..  
..  
1994  
..  
..  
2006  
..  
..  
..  
1979  
..  
..  
..  
2001  
..  

 

23
24
..
0
36
6
9
17
6
..
7
10
14
21
50
11
0
23
29
4
35
10
6
5

6
4
7
10
3
18
14
21
9
18
23
14
15
17
7
..
11
19
6
17
11
9
39
6
8
7
..
11
..
24
26
20
4
11
14

187

K

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009

Gender empowerment measure and its components 
 

 

 

 

 

Gender empowerment 

measure 
(GEM)

HDI rank

Rank

Value  

Seats in 
parliament 

held by 
womena
(% of total)  

Female 
legislators,

senior

officials and
managersb 
 (% of total)      

Female 

professional 
and technical 

workersb
(% of total)

Ratio of 
estimated  
female to 

male earned 

incomec

Year women

received right tod

vote

stand for 
election

Year a woman 

became 
Presiding 
Officer of 

parliament or 
of one of its 
houses for the 

first timee

Women in 
ministerial 
positionsf
(% of total)

119  Uzbekistan 
120  Kyrgyzstan 
121  Cape Verde 
122  Guatemala 
123  Egypt 
124  Nicaragua 
125  Botswana 
126  Vanuatu 
127  Tajikistan 
128  Namibia 
129  South Africa 
130  Morocco 
131  Sao Tome and Principe 
132  Bhutan 
133  Lao People’s Democratic Republic 
134  India 
135  Solomon Islands 
136  Congo 
137  Cambodia 
138  Myanmar 
139  Comoros 
140  Yemen 
141  Pakistan 
142  Swaziland 
143  Angola 
144  Nepal 
145  Madagascar 
146  Bangladesh 
147  Kenya 
148  Papua New Guinea 
149  Haiti 
150  Sudan 
151  Tanzania (United Republic of) 
152  Ghana 
153  Cameroon 
154  Mauritania 
155  Djibouti 
156  Lesotho 
157  Uganda 
158  Nigeria 

LOW HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 
159  Togo 
160  Malawi 
161  Benin 
162  Timor-Leste 
163  Côte d’Ivoire 
164  Zambia 
165  Eritrea 
166  Senegal 
167  Rwanda 
168  Gambia 
169  Liberia 
170  Guinea 
171  Ethiopia 
172  Mozambique 
173  Guinea-Bissau 
174  Burundi 
175  Chad 
176  Congo (Democratic Republic of the) 
177  Burkina Faso 

188

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 
 
 

..  
56  
..  
..  
107  
67  
65  
..  
..  
43  
26  
104  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
91  
..  
..  
109  
99  
..  
..  
83  
97  
108  
..  
..  
..  
..  
69  
..  
..  
..  
..  
50  
49  
..  

 

..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
92  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
85  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  

.. 
0.575 
.. 
.. 
0.287 
0.542 
0.550 
.. 
.. 
0.620 
0.687 
0.318 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
0.427 
.. 
.. 
0.135 
0.386 
.. 
.. 
0.486 
0.398 
0.264 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
0.539 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
0.591 
0.591 
.. 

 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
0.426 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
0.464 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

16 g 
26 g 
18  
12 g 
4 g 
18 g 
11 g 
4  
20  
27 g 
34 g,q 
6 g 
7  
14  
25  
9 g 
0  
9  
16  
.. r 
3  
1  
21 g 
22  
37 g 
33 g 
9  
6 g,s 
10 g 
1  
5 g 
17 g 
30 g 
8 g 
14 g 
20 g 
14 g 
26 g 
31 g 
7  

..  
35  
..  
..  
11  
41  
33  
..  
..  
36  
34  
12  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
14  
..  
..  
4  
3  
..  
..  
14  
22  
10 h 
..  
..  
..  
..  
16  
..  
..  
..  
..  
52  
33  
..  

 

 

 

11  
13 g 
11  
29 g 
9 g 
15  
22 g 
29 g 
51 g 
9  
14 g 
.. u 
21 g 
35 g 
10  
32 g 
5  
8  
15 g 

..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
19 h 
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
16  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  

..  
62  
..  
..  
32  
51  
51  
..  
..  
52  
55  
35  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
41  
..  
..  
15  
25  
..  
..  
20  
43  
22 h 
..  
..  
..  
..  
38  
..  
..  
..  
..  
58  
35  
..  

 

..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
31 h 
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
33  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  

0.64  
0.55  
0.49  
0.42  
0.27  
0.34  
0.58  
0.69  
0.65  
0.63  
0.60  
0.24  
0.47  
0.39  
0.76  
0.32  
0.51  
0.51  
0.68  
0.61  
0.58  
0.25  
0.18  
0.71  
0.64  
0.61  
0.71  
0.51  
0.65  
0.74  
0.37  
0.33  
0.74  
0.74  
0.53  
0.58  
0.57  
0.73  
0.69  
0.42  

1938  
1918  
1975  
1946  
1956  
1950  
1965  
1975, 1980  
1924  
1989  
1930, 1994  
1959  
1975  
1953  
1958  
1935, 1950  
1974  
1947, 1961  
1955  
1935  
1956  
1967, 1970  
1956  
1968  
1975  
1951  
1959  
1935, 1972  
1919, 1963  
1964  
1957  
1964  
1959  
1954  
1946  
1961  
1946  
1965  
1962  
1958  

1938  
1918  
1975  
1946, 1965  
1956  
1955  
1965  
1975, 1980  
1924  
1989  
1930, 1994  
1963  
1975  
1953  
1958  
1935, 1950  
1974  
1963  
1955  
1946  
1956  
1967, 1970  
1956  
1968  
1975  
1951  
1959  
1935, 1972  
1919, 1963  
1963  
1957  
1964  
1959  
1954  
1946  
1961  
1986  
1965  
1962  
1958  

 

 

0.45  
0.74  
0.52  
0.53  
0.34  
0.56  
0.50  
0.55  
0.79  
0.63  
0.50  
0.68  
0.67  
0.90  
0.46  
0.77  
0.70  
0.46  
0.66  

 
1945  
1961  
1956  
..  
1952  
1962  
1955 t 
1945  
1961  
1960  
1946  
1958  
1955  
1975  
1977  
1961  
1958  
1967  
1958  

 
1945  
1961  
1956  
..  
1952  
1962  
1955 t 
1945  
1961  
1960  
1946  
1958  
1955  
1975  
1977  
1961  
1958  
1970  
1958  

2008  
..  
..  
1991  
..  
1990  
..  
..  
..  
..  
1994  
..  
1980  
..  
..  
2009  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
2008  
2006  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
2009  
..  
..  
..  
2000  
..  
2007  

 

..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
2008  
2006  
2003  
..  
1995  
..  
..  
2005  
..  
..  
..  

5
19
36
7
6
33
28
8
6
25
45
19
25
0
11
10
0
13
7
0
..
6
4
19
6
20
13
8
..
4
11
6
21
16
12
12
9
32
28
23

10
24
22
25
13
17
18
18
17
28
20
16
10
26
25
30
17
12
14

 

TABLE

K

Gender empowerment 

measure 
(GEM)

HDI rank

Rank

Value  

Seats in 
parliament 

held by 
womena
(% of total)  

Female 
legislators,

senior

officials and
managersb 
 (% of total)      

Female 

professional 
and technical 

workersb
(% of total)

Ratio of 
estimated  
female to 

male earned 

incomec

Year women

received right tod

vote

stand for 
election

Year a woman 

became 
Presiding 
Officer of 

parliament or 
of one of its 
houses for the 

first timee

Women in 
ministerial 
positionsf
(% of total)

 178  Mali 
 179  Central African Republic 
 180  Sierra Leone 
 181  Afghanistan 
 182  Niger 

OTHER UN MEMBER STATES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    

  Iraq 
  Kiribati 
  Korea (Democratic People’s Rep. of) 
  Marshall Islands 
  Micronesia (Federated States of) 
  Monaco 
  Nauru 
  Palau 
  San Marino 
  Somalia 
  Tuvalu 
  Zimbabwe 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

..  
..  
..  
..  
..  

..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

10 g 
10  
13 g 
26 g 
12 g 

25 g 
4  
20 g 
3  
0  
25  
0  
7  
15  
.. g 
0  
18 g 

..  
..  
..  
..  
..  

 

 

..  
27 h 
..  
19 h 
..  
..  
..  
36 h 
19  
..  
25  
..  

..  
..  
..  
..  
..  

 

..  
44 h 
..  
36 h 
..  
..  
..  
44 h 
52  
..  
50  
..  

0.44  
0.59  
0.74  
0.24  
0.34  

 

 

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1956  
1986  
1961  
1963  
1948  

 
1980  
1967  
1946  
1979  
1979  
1962  
1968  
1979  
1959  
1956  
1967  
1919, 1957  

1956  
1986  
1961  
1963  
1948  

 
1980  
1967  
1946  
1979  
1979  
1962  
1968  
1979  
1973  
1956  
1967  
1919, 1978  

..  
..  
..  
..  
..  

 

..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
1981  
..  
..  
2005  

 

23
13
14
4
26

10
8
0
10
14
0
0
0
20
..
0
16

SOURCES
Column 1: detemined on the basis of GEM values in 
column 2.
Column 2: calculated on the basis of data in columns 
3–6; see Technical note 1 for details (http://hdr.undp.
org/en/statistics/tn1).
Column 3: calculated on the basis of data on 
parliamentary seats from IPU (2009).
Column 4: calculated on the basis of occupational data 
from ILO (2009b).
Column 5: calculated on the basis of occupational data 
from ILO (2009b).
Column 6: calculated on the basis of data in columns 10 
and 11 of table J.
Columns 7 and 8: IPU (2009).
Columns 9 and 10: IPU (2009).

  NOTES
a  Data are as of 28 February 2009, unless otherwise 
specified. Where there are lower and upper houses, 
data refer to the weighted average of women’s shares 
of seats in both houses.

b  Data refer to the most recent year available between 

1999 and 2007. Estimates for countries that have 
implemented the International Standard Classification 
of Occupations (ISCO-88) are not strictly comparable 
with those for countries using the previous 
classification (ISCO-68).

c  Calculated on the basis of data in columns 10 and 
11 in Table J. Estimates are based on data for the 
most recent year available between 1996 and 2007. 
Following the methodology implemented in the 
calculation of the GDI, the income component of 
the GEM has been scaled downward for countries 
whose income exceeds the maximum goalpost GDP 
per capita value of 40,000 (PPP US$). For more 
details, For more details see http://hdr.undp.org/en/
statistics/tn1

d  Data refer to the year in which the right to vote or 

stand for national election on a universal and equal 
basis was recognized. Where two years are shown, 
the first refers to the first partial recognition of the 
right to vote or stand for election. In some countries, 
women were granted the right to vote or stand at local 
elections before obtaining these rights for national 
elections; however, data on local election rights are 
not included in this table.

e  Date at which, for the first time in the country’s 

m Serbia and Montenegro separated into two 

parliamentary history, a woman became speaker/
presiding officer of parliament or of one of its houses. 
As of May 2009, women occupy only 12.6% of the 
total number of 269 posts of Presiding Officers of 
parliament or of one of its houses.

independent states in June 2006. Women received 
the right to vote and to stand for elections in 1946, 
when Serbia and Montenegro were part of the former 
Yugoslavia.

n  The 2008 Constitution provides that the National 

f  Data are as of January 2008. The total includes 

deputy prime ministers and ministers. Prime ministers 
were also included when they held ministerial 
portfolios.  Vice-presidents and heads of governmental 
or public agencies are not included.

g  Countries with established quota systems for women. 
Quota systems aim at ensuring that women constitute 
at least a ‘critical minority’ of 30 or 40 percent. Today 
women constitute 16 percent of the members of 
parliaments around the world.

h  Data follow the ISCO-68 classification.
i  The total refers to all voting members of the House.
j  No information is available on the year all women 

received the right to stand for election. As the 
country’s constitution does not mention gender with 
regard to this right.  

k  According to the new constitution approved in 2003, 
women are granted suffrage. To date, no legislative 
elections have been held. 
In December 2006, the Federal National Council was 
renewed. Men and women were entitled to vote, under 
similar conditions.  One woman was elected to the 
Council and 7 subsequently appointed. 

l 

Congress shall be replaced by a 124-member National 
Assembly. Elections to that body are due to take place 
on 26 April 2009. During the transitional period, a 
Legislative and Oversight Commission, comprising the 
members of the Constituent Assembly, assumes the 
legislative and oversight functions. The date refers to 
the date when the Commission held its first session.

o  No woman candidate was elected in the 2008 

elections. One woman was appointed to the cabinet. As 
cabinet ministers also sit in parliament, there was one 
woman out of a total of 32 members in October 2008.
p  The parliament was dissolved following a coup d’état in 

December 2006.

q  The figures on the distribution of seats do not include 
the 36 special rotating delegates appointed on an ad 
hoc basis, and all percentages given are therefore 
calculated on the basis of the 54 permanent seats.

r  The parliament elected in 1990 has never been 
convened nor authorized to sit, and many of its 
members were detained or forced into exile.

s  Forty five seats reserved for women are yet to be filled.
t  In November 1955, Eritrea was part of Ethiopia. The 
Constitution of sovereign Eritrea adopted on 23 May 
1997 stipulates that “All Eritrean citizens, of eighteen 
years of age or more, shall have the right to vote”.

u  The parliament was dissolved following a coup d’état in 

December 2008.

189

K

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009

Gender empowerment measure and its components

 

 

 

  29  Cuba 
 
  30  Estonia   
  31  Czech Republic 
  32  Slovakia  
  33  Latvia 
 
  34  Slovenia  
  35  Macedonia (the Former Yugoslav Rep. of)
 
  36  Peru 
  37  Barbados 
  38  Poland   
  39  Mexico   
  40  Lithuania 
  41  Ecuador
  42  Serbia
  43  Namibia
  44  Croatia
  45  Bulgaria
  46  Bahrain
  47  Panama
  48  Cyprus
  49  Uganda
  50  Lesotho
  51  Saint Lucia
  52  Hungary
  53  Guyana
  54  Honduras
  55  Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
  56  Kyrgyzstan

  57  Japan
  58  Suriname
  59  Philippines
  60  Russian Federation
  61  Korea (Republic of) 
  62  Viet Nam 
  63  Uruguay 
  64  Dominican Republic 
  65  Botswana 
  66  Moldova 
  67  Nicaragua 
  68  Malaysia 
  69  Tanzania (United Republic of) 
  70  El Salvador 
  71  Mauritius 
  72  China 
  73  Kazakhstan 
  74  Malta 
  75  Chile 
  76  Thailand 
  77  Romania 
  78  Bolivia 
  79  Paraguay 
  80  Colombia 
  81  Belize 
  82  Brazil 
  83  Nepal 
  84  Montenegro 

  85  Ethiopia 
  86  Ukraine 
  87  Oman 
  88  Qatar 
  89  Samoa 
  90  Maldives 
  91  Cambodia 
  92  Zambia 
  93  Armenia 
  94  Mongolia 
  95  Georgia 
  96  Indonesia 
  97  Madagascar 
  98  Sri Lanka 
  99  Pakistan 
 100  Azerbaijan 
 101  Turkey 
 102  Tonga 
 103  Iran (Islamic Republic of) 
 104  Morocco 
 105  Algeria 
 106  Saudi Arabia 
 107  Egypt 
 108  Bangladesh 
 109  Yemen 

GEM RANKS FOR 109 COUNTRIES OR AREAS

1  Sweden
2  Norway
3  Finland
4  Denmark
5  Netherlands
6  Belgium
7  Australia
8  Iceland
9  Germany
10  New Zealand
11  Spain
12  Canada
13  Switzerland
14  Trinidad and Tobago
15  United Kingdom
16  Singapore
17  France
18  United States
19  Portugal
20  Austria
21  Italy 
 
22  Ireland   
23  Israel 
 
 
24  Argentina 
25  United Arab Emirates   
 
26  South Africa 
27  Costa Rica 
 
28  Greece   

190

TABLE

L

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009

Demographic trends

Total population                                    

natural increase                                                       

Rate of 

(millions)

(%)

(%)

(% of total)

ratio

ratio

Net international 
migration rate                                                      

Urban populationa                 

Child dependency 

dependency 

Old age 

L

Total fertility rate           
(births per woman)

1990

to

1995

2005

to

2010

HDI rank

1990

2007

2020b

1990

to

1995

2005

to

2010

1990

to

1995

2005

to

2010

1990

2010

1990

2010

1990

2010

1  Norway 
2  Australia 
3  Iceland 
4  Canada 
5  Ireland 
6  Netherlands 
7  Sweden 
8  France 
9  Switzerland 

VERY HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  10  Japan 
  11  Luxembourg 
  12  Finland 
  13  United States 
  14  Austria 
  15  Spain 
  16  Denmark 
  17  Belgium 
  18  Italy 
  19  Liechtenstein 
  20  New Zealand 
  21  United Kingdom 
  22  Germany 
  23  Singapore 
  24  Hong Kong, China (SAR) 
  25  Greece 
  26  Korea (Republic of) 
  27  Israel 
  28  Andorra 
  29  Slovenia 
  30  Brunei Darussalam 
  31  Kuwait 
  32  Cyprus 
  33  Qatar 
  34  Portugal 
  35  United Arab Emirates 
  36  Czech Republic 
  37  Barbados 
  38  Malta 
 
HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 
  39  Bahrain 
  40  Estonia 
  41  Poland 
  42  Slovakia 
  43  Hungary 
  44  Chile 
  45  Croatia 
  46  Lithuania 
  47  Antigua and Barbuda 
  48  Latvia 
  49  Argentina 
  50  Uruguay 
  51  Cuba 
  52  Bahamas 
  53  Mexico 
  54  Costa Rica 
  55  Libyan Arab Jamahiriya 
  56  Oman 
  57  Seychelles 
  58  Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) 
  59  Saudi Arabia 

4.2  
 
17.1  
 
0.3  
 
27.7  
 
3.5  
 
15.0  
 
8.6  
 
56.8  
 
 
6.7  
  123.2  
 
0.4  
 
5.0  
  254.9  
7.7  
 
38.8  
 
5.1  
 
 
9.9  
57.0  
 
0.0  
 
3.4  
 
57.2  
 
 
79.4  
3.0  
 
5.7  
 
10.2  
 
43.0  
 
 
4.5  
0.1  
 
1.9  
 
0.3  
 
2.1  
 
0.7  
 
 
0.5  
10.0  
 
1.9  
 
10.3  
 
0.3  
 
 
0.4  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

0.5  
1.6  
38.1  
5.3  
10.4  
13.2  
4.5  
3.7  
0.1  
2.7  
32.5  
3.1  
10.6  
0.3  
83.4  
3.1  
4.4  
1.8  
0.1  
19.7  
16.3  

4.7  
20.9  
0.3  
32.9  
4.4  
16.5  
9.2  
61.7  
7.5  
127.4  
0.5  
5.3  
308.7  
8.3  
44.1  
5.4  
10.5  
59.3  
0.0  
4.2  
60.9  
82.3  
4.5  
6.9  
11.1  
48.0  
6.9  
0.1  
2.0  
0.4  
2.9  
0.9  
1.1  
10.6  
4.4  
10.3  
0.3  
0.4  

5.2  
23.7  
0.4  
37.1  
5.1  
17.1  
9.7  
64.9  
7.9  
123.7  
0.5  
5.5  
346.2  
8.5  
48.6  
5.6  
11.0  
60.4  
0.0  
4.7  
65.1  
80.4  
5.2  
7.7  
11.3  
49.5  
8.3  
0.1  
2.1  
0.5  
3.7  
1.0  
1.7  
10.8  
5.7  
10.6  
0.3  
0.4  

 

 

 

0.8  
1.3  
38.1  
5.4  
10.0  
16.6  
4.4  
3.4  
0.1  
2.3  
39.5  
3.3  
11.2  
0.3  
107.5  
4.5  
6.2  
2.7  
0.1  
27.7  
24.7  

1.0  
1.3  
37.5  
5.4  
9.8  
18.6  
4.3  
3.1  
0.1  
2.2  
44.3  
3.5  
11.2  
0.4  
119.7  
5.2  
7.7  
3.5  
0.1  
33.4  
31.6  

0.4  
0.7  
1.1  
0.7  
0.5  
0.4  
0.3  
0.3  
0.3  
0.3  
0.3  
0.3  
0.7  
0.1  
0.1  
0.1  
0.1  
0.0  
..   
0.9  
0.2  
-0.1  
1.3  
0.7  
0.1  
1.0  
1.5  
..   
0.0  
2.5  
1.9  
1.0  
1.8  
0.1  
2.1  
0.0  
0.6  
0.7  

2.3  
-0.3  
0.3  
0.4  
-0.3  
1.6  
0.0  
0.2  
..   
-0.3  
1.3  
0.8  
0.8  
1.8  
2.2  
2.1  
2.0  
3.1  
..   
2.2  
2.9  

0.4  
0.6  
0.9  
0.3  
0.9  
0.3  
0.2  
0.4  
0.1  
-0.1  
0.3  
0.2  
0.6  
0.0  
0.2  
0.1  
0.2  
-0.1  
..   
0.7  
0.2  
-0.2  
0.3  
0.2  
-0.1  
0.4  
1.5  
..   
0.0  
1.7  
1.6  
0.4  
1.0  
0.0  
1.3  
0.0  
0.4  
0.1  

 
1.6  
-0.1  
0.0  
0.0  
-0.4  
1.0  
-0.2  
-0.4  
..   
-0.4  
1.0  
0.6  
0.4  
1.1  
1.4  
1.3  
1.9  
1.9  
..   
1.6  
2.0  

0.2  
0.4  
-0.1  
0.5  
0.0  
0.3  
0.3  
0.1  
0.7  
0.1  
1.1  
0.2  
0.5  
0.6  
0.2  
0.2  
0.2  
0.1  
..   
0.8  
0.1  
0.7  
1.5  
1.0  
0.9  
-0.3  
2.0  
..   
0.4  
0.3  
-6.2  
0.4  
0.6  
0.0  
3.2  
0.0  
-0.8  
0.3  

 

0.9  
-1.4  
0.0  
0.0  
0.2  
0.1  
0.7  
-0.5  
..   
-1.0  
0.1  
-0.1  
-0.2  
0.1  
-0.3  
0.4  
0.0  
0.2  
..   
0.0  
-0.6  

0.6  
0.5  
1.3  
0.6  
0.9  
0.1  
0.3  
0.2  
0.3  
0.0  
0.8  
0.2  
0.3  
0.4  
0.8  
0.1  
0.4  
0.6  
..   
0.2  
0.3  
0.1  
2.2  
0.3  
0.3  
0.0  
0.2  
..   
0.2  
0.2  
0.8  
0.6  
9.4  
0.4  
1.6  
0.4  
-0.1  
0.2  

 
0.5  
0.0  
-0.1  
0.1  
0.1  
0.0  
0.0  
-0.6  
..   
-0.1  
0.0  
-0.3  
-0.3  
0.1  
-0.5  
0.1  
0.1  
0.1  
..   
0.0  
0.1  

72.0  
85.4  
90.8  
76.6  
56.9  
68.7  
83.1  
74.1  
73.2  
63.1  
80.9  
61.4  
75.3  
65.8  
75.4  
84.8  
96.4  
66.7  
16.9  
84.7  
88.7  
73.1  
100.0  
99.5  
58.8  
73.8  
90.4  
94.7  
50.4  
65.8  
98.0  
66.8  
92.2  
47.9  
79.1  
75.2  
32.7  
90.4  

88.1  
71.1  
61.3  
56.5  
65.8  
83.3  
54.0  
67.6  
35.4  
69.3  
87.0  
89.0  
73.4  
79.8  
71.4  
50.7  
75.7  
66.1  
49.3  
84.3  
76.6  

77.6   
89.1   
92.3   
80.6   
61.9   
82.9   
84.7   
77.8   
73.6   
66.8   
82.2   
63.9   
82.3   
67.6   
77.4   
87.2   
97.4   
68.4   
14.2   
86.8   
90.1   
73.8   
100.0   
100.0   
61.4   
81.9   
91.7   
88.0   
48.0   
75.7   
98.4   
70.3   
95.8   
60.7   
78.0   
73.5   
40.8   
94.7   

 

 

88.6   
69.5   
61.2   
56.8   
68.3   
89.0   
57.8   
67.2   
30.3   
68.2   
92.4   
92.5   
75.7   
84.1   
77.8   
64.3   
77.9   
71.7   
55.3   
94.0   
82.1   

29.3  
32.9  
38.7  
30.4  
44.6  
26.5  
27.9  
30.5  
24.9  
26.3  
25.1  
28.7  
33.0  
25.8  
29.8  
25.3  
27.0  
24.0  
..   
35.1  
29.1  
23.3  
29.4  
30.7  
28.7  
36.9  
52.5  
..   
30.9  
54.9  
58.9  
40.8  
38.9  
30.8  
43.4  
32.4  
36.4  
35.5  

47.5  
33.5  
38.8  
39.2  
30.5  
46.7  
30.1  
33.9  
..   
32.1  
50.2  
41.7  
32.8  
51.9  
67.4  
60.6  
79.7  
81.8  
..   
65.3  
75.1  

28.4  
28.1  
29.8  
23.5  
30.6  
26.3  
25.3  
28.4  
22.4  
20.5  
25.7  
25.0  
30.3  
21.8  
22.0  
27.6  
25.4  
21.7  
..   
30.3  
26.3  
20.2  
21.0  
15.3  
21.1  
22.3  
44.4  
..   
19.8  
37.5  
31.3  
25.2  
19.2  
22.7  
24.0  
19.9  
23.5  
21.7  

 
36.2  
22.7  
20.6  
20.9  
21.4  
32.5  
22.1  
21.2  
..   
20.1  
38.6  
35.4  
24.6  
36.8  
42.7  
37.1  
45.9  
46.8  
..   
45.4  
49.1  

25.2  
16.8  
16.5  
16.6  
18.5  
18.6  
27.7  
21.6  
21.3  
17.2  
19.4  
19.9  
18.7  
22.1  
20.5  
23.2  
22.3  
22.2  
..   
16.9  
24.1  
21.7  
7.7  
12.1  
20.4  
7.2  
15.2  
..   
16.3  
4.3  
1.9  
17.3  
1.6  
20.3  
1.8  
19.0  
15.1  
15.8  

 

3.4  
17.5  
15.5  
16.0  
20.1  
9.6  
16.6  
16.4  
..   
17.7  
15.3  
18.7  
12.7  
7.0  
7.6  
8.4  
4.7  
3.6  
..   
6.4  
4.1  

22.7  
20.7  
17.4  
20.3  
16.7  
22.9  
28.1  
26.2  
25.5  
35.1  
20.5  
25.9  
19.4  
25.9  
25.3  
25.6  
26.4  
31.3  
..   
19.4  
25.1  
30.9  
13.8  
17.0  
27.2  
15.2  
16.4  
..   
23.5  
4.9  
3.2  
19.0  
1.3  
26.7  
1.3  
21.6  
14.4  
21.2  

 
3.1  
25.2  
18.8  
16.9  
23.8  
13.5  
25.6  
23.7  
..   
25.4  
16.6  
21.8  
17.5  
10.3  
10.0  
9.5  
6.6  
4.7  
..   
8.7  
4.6  

1.9  
1.9  
2.2  
1.7  
2.0  
1.6  
2.0  
1.7  
1.5  
1.5  
1.7  
1.8  
2.0  
1.5  
1.3  
1.7  
1.6  
1.3  
..   
2.1  
1.8  
1.3  
1.8  
1.3  
1.4  
1.7  
2.9  
..   
1.4  
3.1  
3.2  
2.4  
4.1  
1.5  
3.9  
1.7  
1.6  
2.0  

 
3.4  
1.6  
1.9  
1.9  
1.7  
2.6  
1.5  
1.8  
..   
1.6  
2.9  
2.5  
1.7  
2.6  
3.2  
2.9  
4.1  
6.3  
..   
3.3  
5.4  

1.9
1.8
2.1 
1.6 
2.0 
1.7 
1.9 
1.9 
1.5 
1.3 
1.7 
1.8 
2.1 
1.4 
1.4 
1.8 
1.8 
1.4 
.. 
2.0 
1.8 
1.3 
1.3 
1.0 
1.4 
1.2 
2.8 
.. 
1.4 
2.1 
2.2 
1.5 
2.4 
1.4 
1.9 
1.4 
1.5 
1.3 

2.3 
1.6 
1.3 
1.3 
1.4 
1.9 
1.4 
1.3 
.. 
1.4 
2.3 
2.1 
1.5 
2.0 
2.2 
2.0 
2.7 
3.1 
.. 
2.5 
3.2 

191

L

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009

Demographic trends

Total population                                    

natural increase                                                       

Rate of 

Net international 
migration rate                                                      

Urban populationa                 

Child dependency 

dependency 

Old age 

(millions)

(%)

(%)

(% of total)

ratio

ratio

HDI rank

1990

2007

2020b

1990

to

1995

2005

to

2010

1990

to

1995

2005

to

2010

1990

2010

1990

2010

1990

2010

Total fertility rate           
(births per woman)

1990

to

1995

2005

to

2010

2.4  
 
60  Panama 
8.8  
 
61  Bulgaria 
0.0  
 
62  Saint Kitts and Nevis 
23.2  
 
63  Romania 
1.2  
 
64  Trinidad and Tobago 
0.6  
 
65  Montenegro 
18.1  
 
66  Malaysia 
9.6  
 
67  Serbia 
10.3  
 
68  Belarus 
0.1  
 
69  Saint Lucia 
3.3  
 
70  Albania 
  148.1  
71  Russian Federation 
1.9  
72  Macedonia (the Former Yugoslav Rep. of)  
0.1  
 
73  Dominica 
 
74  Grenada 
0.1  
  149.6  
75  Brazil 
76  Bosnia and Herzegovina 
 
4.3  
33.2  
 
77  Colombia 
21.8  
 
78  Peru 
56.1  
 
79  Turkey 
10.3  
 
80  Ecuador 
81  Mauritius 
 
1.1  
16.5  
 
82  Kazakhstan 
83  Lebanon 
 
3.0  

3.3  
7.6  
0.1  
21.5  
1.3  
0.6  
26.6  
9.8  
9.7  
0.2  
3.1  
141.9  
2.0  
0.1  
0.1  
190.1  
3.8  
44.4  
28.5  
73.0  
13.3  
1.3  
15.4  
4.2  

4.0  
7.0  
0.1  
20.4  
1.4  
0.6  
32.0  
9.8  
9.1  
0.2  
3.3  
135.4  
2.0  
0.1  
0.1  
209.1  
3.7  
52.3  
32.9  
83.9  
15.4  
1.4  
16.7  
4.6  

MEDIUM HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 

 

 

 

84  Armenia 
85  Ukraine 
86  Azerbaijan 
87  Thailand 
88  Iran (Islamic Republic of) 
89  Georgia 
90  Dominican Republic 
91  Saint Vincent and the Grenadines 
92  China 
93  Belize 
94  Samoa 
95  Maldives 
96  Jordan 
97  Suriname 
98  Tunisia 
99  Tonga 
100  Jamaica 
101  Paraguay 
102  Sri Lanka 
103  Gabon 
104  Algeria 
105  Philippines 
106  El Salvador 
107  Syrian Arab Republic 
108  Fiji 
109  Turkmenistan 
110  Occupied Palestinian Territories 
111  Indonesia 
112  Honduras 
113  Bolivia 
114  Guyana 
115  Mongolia 
116  Viet Nam 
117  Moldova 
118  Equatorial Guinea 

192

3.5  
51.6  
7.2  
56.7  
56.7  
5.5  
7.4  
0.1  

3.1  
46.3  
8.6  
67.0  
72.4  
4.4  
9.8  
0.1  

3.2  
 
42.9  
 
9.8  
 
71.4  
 
83.7  
 
4.0  
 
11.5  
 
 
0.1  
  1,142.1  c  1,329.1  c  1,431.2 c 
0.2  
0.4  
 
0.2  
0.2  
 
0.2  
 
0.4  
3.3  
7.5  
 
0.4  
0.6  
 
8.2  
11.4  
 
0.1  
0.1  
 
2.4  
 
2.8  
4.2  
7.5  
 
17.3  
21.7  
 
0.9  
1.8  
 
25.3  
40.6  
 
62.4  
 
109.7  
5.3  
6.6  
 
12.7  
26.5  
 
0.7  
0.9  
 
5.8  
3.7  
 
5.8  
 
2.2  
  177.4  
254.2  
9.1  
4.9  
 
11.6  
6.7  
 
0.7  
0.7  
 
3.0  
2.2  
 
 
66.2  
98.0  
4.4  
 
3.4  
 
0.4  
0.9  

0.3  
0.2  
0.3  
5.9  
0.5  
10.1  
0.1  
2.7  
6.1  
19.9  
1.4  
33.9  
88.7  
6.1  
20.5  
0.8  
5.0  
4.0  
224.7  
7.2  
9.5  
0.8  
2.6  
86.1  
3.7  
0.6  

2.0  
-0.3  
..   
0.0  
1.1  
0.7  
2.3  
0.4  
0.0  
1.8  
1.7  
-0.2  
0.8  
..   
1.7  
1.6  
0.3  
2.0  
2.2  
1.8  
2.2  
1.5  
1.1  
1.8  

1.1  
-0.2  
1.8  
1.2  
2.2  
0.6  
2.3  
1.7  
1.2  
3.1  
2.4  
2.8  
2.9  
1.5  
1.8  
2.4  
1.8  
2.6  
1.4  
2.7  
2.3  
2.5  
2.3  
2.9  
2.1  
2.4  
3.9  
1.6  
3.1  
2.6  
1.6  
2.0  
2.2  
0.4  
2.8  

1.6  
-0.5  
..   
-0.2  
0.7  
0.2  
1.6  
0.0  
-0.5  
1.1  
0.9  
-0.4  
0.2  
..   
1.3  
1.0  
-0.1  
1.5  
1.6  
1.2  
1.6  
0.7  
0.9  
0.9  

 
0.7  
-0.6  
1.2  
0.6  
1.3  
0.0  
1.7  
1.0  
0.7  
2.1  
1.8  
1.4  
2.2  
1.2  
1.0  
2.2  
1.2  
1.9  
1.2  
1.8  
1.6  
2.0  
1.4  
2.5  
1.5  
1.4  
3.2  
1.2  
2.3  
2.0  
1.0  
1.2  
1.2  
-0.1  
2.3  

0.1  
-0.8  
..   
-0.5  
-0.4  
0.5  
0.3  
0.9  
0.0  
-0.6  
-2.6  
0.3  
-0.3  
..   
-0.9  
0.0  
-5.4  
-0.1  
-0.3  
0.0  
-0.1  
-0.1  
-1.9  
1.4  

 

-3.0  
0.0  
-0.3  
0.0  
-0.4  
-2.1  
-0.3  
-1.5  
0.0  
-0.1  
-1.6  
0.0  
2.7  
-0.2  
-0.1  
-1.8  
-0.9  
-0.1  
-0.3  
0.4  
0.0  
-0.3  
-0.9  
-0.1  
-0.9  
0.3  
0.0  
-0.1  
-0.5  
-0.3  
-1.3  
-1.5  
-0.2  
-0.6  
0.7  

0.1  
-0.1  
..   
-0.2  
-0.3  
-0.2  
0.1  
0.0  
0.0  
-0.1  
-0.5  
0.0  
-0.1  
..   
-1.0  
0.0  
-0.1  
-0.1  
-0.4  
0.0  
-0.5  
0.0  
-0.1  
-0.1  

 
-0.5  
0.0  
-0.1  
0.1  
-0.1  
-1.2  
-0.3  
-0.9  
0.0  
-0.1  
-1.8  
0.0  
0.8  
-0.2  
0.0  
-1.7  
-0.7  
-0.1  
-0.3  
0.1  
-0.1  
-0.2  
-0.9  
0.8  
-0.8  
-0.1  
0.0  
-0.1  
-0.3  
-0.2  
-1.0  
-0.1  
0.0  
-0.9  
0.3  

53.9  
66.4  
34.6  
53.2  
8.5  
48.0  
49.8  
50.4  
66.0  
29.3  
36.4  
73.4  
57.8  
67.7  
32.2  
74.8  
39.2  
68.3  
68.9  
59.2  
55.1  
43.9  
56.3  
83.1  

67.5  
66.8  
53.7  
29.4  
56.3  
55.1  
55.2  
40.6  
27.4  
47.5  
21.2  
25.8  
72.2  
68.3  
57.9  
22.7  
49.4  
48.7  
17.2  
69.1  
52.1  
48.8  
49.2  
48.9  
41.6  
45.1  
67.9  
30.6  
40.3  
55.6  
29.5  
57.0  
20.3  
46.8  
34.7  

74.8   
71.7   
32.4   
54.6   
13.9   
59.5   
72.2   
52.4   
74.3   
28.0   
48.0   
72.8   
67.9   
74.6   
31.0   
86.5   
48.6   
75.1   
71.6   
69.6   
66.9   
42.6   
58.5   
87.2   

 

 

63.7   
68.1   
52.2   
34.0   
69.5   
52.9   
70.5   
47.8   
44.9   
52.7   
23.4   
40.5   
78.5   
75.6   
67.3   
25.3   
53.7   
61.5   
15.1   
86.0   
66.5   
66.4   
61.3   
54.9   
53.4   
49.5   
72.1   
53.7   
48.8   
66.5   
28.5   
57.5   
28.8   
41.2   
39.7   

58.8  
30.5  
..   
35.7  
56.8  
40.2  
63.5  
34.6  
34.8  
65.4  
53.0  
34.3  
39.4  
..   
73.2  
58.5  
34.7  
61.8  
66.3  
60.5  
68.5  
43.7  
50.2  
60.5  

47.4  
32.3  
55.7  
45.9  
86.7  
37.2  
66.6  
67.9  
42.9  
82.6  
74.0  
94.0  
93.6  
53.7  
66.5  
70.1  
61.2  
75.9  
51.1  
77.9  
80.6  
72.6  
75.0  
98.9  
64.1  
72.6  
93.6  
59.3  
88.9  
74.0  
62.1  
76.8  
70.6  
43.8  
68.4  

45.0  
19.6  
..   
21.8  
28.3  
28.3  
44.0  
25.9  
20.4  
38.3  
34.0  
20.8  
25.0  
..   
41.9  
37.7  
21.4  
43.8  
46.7  
39.0  
48.8  
31.5  
34.5  
36.4  

 
29.4  
19.7  
34.4  
30.3  
33.4  
24.2  
49.5  
39.7  
27.7  
56.3  
68.6  
39.6  
54.4  
44.0  
32.4  
66.0  
45.7  
54.7  
35.7  
59.2  
39.5  
53.8  
51.5  
56.1  
48.2  
43.4  
84.6  
39.7  
62.5  
60.2  
45.0  
36.4  
36.6  
23.0  
72.2  

8.4  
19.7  
..   
15.8  
9.2  
12.7  
6.2  
14.3  
16.1  
13.4  
8.6  
15.1  
11.2  
..   
14.8  
7.4  
8.8  
7.2  
6.9  
6.8  
7.4  
7.1  
9.3  
8.8  

 

8.8  
18.3  
6.9  
7.1  
6.2  
14.1  
6.6  
11.0  
8.3  
7.4  
7.1  
5.2  
6.3  
7.6  
8.0  
8.0  
12.5  
7.4  
8.9  
10.6  
6.8  
5.8  
8.6  
5.4  
5.3  
6.8  
6.8  
6.3  
6.6  
6.8  
7.8  
7.4  
8.4  
13.0  
7.6  

10.4  
25.5  
..   
21.3  
9.5  
18.8  
7.3  
21.1  
18.6  
10.1  
14.4  
17.9  
16.9  
..   
10.6  
10.2  
19.6  
8.6  
9.3  
8.8  
10.6  
10.7  
10.0  
10.8  

16.1  
22.1  
9.5  
10.9  
6.8  
20.7  
9.8  
10.0  
11.4  
6.7  
8.6  
6.4  
5.9  
9.9  
9.6  
10.3  
12.2  
8.4  
11.4  
7.2  
6.8  
6.9  
12.0  
5.2  
7.7  
6.2  
5.5  
9.0  
7.3  
8.0  
9.5  
5.8  
9.3  
15.4  
5.1  

2.9  
1.5  
..   
1.5  
2.1  
1.8  
3.5  
2.0  
1.7  
3.2  
2.8  
1.5  
2.1  
..   
3.5  
2.6  
1.5  
3.0  
3.6  
2.9  
3.4  
2.3  
2.6  
3.0  

2.4  
1.6  
2.9  
2.1  
4.0  
2.1  
3.3  
2.9  
2.0  
4.3  
4.7  
5.3  
5.1  
2.6  
3.1  
4.5  
2.8  
4.3  
2.5  
5.1  
4.1  
4.1  
3.7  
4.9  
3.4  
4.0  
6.5  
2.9  
4.9  
4.8  
2.6  
3.5  
3.3  
2.1  
5.9  

2.6 
1.4 
.. 
1.3 
1.6 
1.6 
2.6 
1.6 
1.3 
2.0 
1.9 
1.4 
1.4 
.. 
2.3 
1.9 
1.2 
2.5 
2.6 
2.1 
2.6 
1.8 
2.3 
1.9 

1.7 
1.3 
2.2 
1.8 
1.8 
1.6 
2.7 
2.1 
1.8 
2.9 
4.0 
2.1 
3.1 
2.4 
1.9 
4.0 
2.4 
3.1 
2.3 
3.4 
2.4 
3.1 
2.3 
3.3 
2.8 
2.5 
5.1 
2.2 
3.3 
3.5 
2.3 
2.0 
2.1 
1.5 
5.4 

TABLE

Total population                                    

natural increase                                                       

Rate of 

Net international 
migration rate                                                      

Urban populationa                 

Child dependency 

dependency 

Old age 

(millions)

(%)

(%)

(% of total)

ratio

ratio

HDI rank

1990

2007

2020b

1990

to

1995

2005

to

2010

1990

to

1995

2005

to

2010

1990

2010

1990

2010

1990

2010

L

Total fertility rate           
(births per woman)

1990

to

1995

2005

to

2010

 119  Uzbekistan 
 120  Kyrgyzstan 
 121  Cape Verde 
 122  Guatemala 
 123  Egypt 
 124  Nicaragua 
 125  Botswana 
 126  Vanuatu 
 127  Tajikistan 
 128  Namibia 
 129  South Africa 
 130  Morocco 
 131  Sao Tome and Principe 
 132  Bhutan 
 133  Lao People’s Democratic Republic 
 134  India 
 135  Solomon Islands 
 136  Congo 
 137  Cambodia 
 138  Myanmar 
 139  Comoros 
 140  Yemen 
 141  Pakistan 
 142  Swaziland 
 143  Angola 
 144  Nepal 
 145  Madagascar 
 146  Bangladesh 
 147  Kenya 
 148  Papua New Guinea 
 149  Haiti 
 150  Sudan 
 151  Tanzania (United Republic of) 
 152  Ghana 
 153  Cameroon 
 154  Mauritania 
 155  Djibouti 
 156  Lesotho 
 157  Uganda 
 158  Nigeria 

20.5  
4.4  
0.4  
8.9  
57.8  
4.1  
1.4  
0.1  
5.3  
1.4  
36.7  
24.8  
0.1  
0.5  
4.2  

26.9  
 
5.3  
 
0.5  
 
13.4  
 
80.1  
 
5.6  
 
1.9  
 
0.2  
 
6.7  
 
2.1  
 
49.2  
 
31.2  
 
0.2  
 
0.7  
 
 
6.1  
  862.2   1,164.7  
 
0.5  
0.3  
 
3.6  
2.4  
14.3  
 
9.7  
49.1  
 
40.8  
 
0.6  
0.4  
22.3  
 
12.3  
173.2  
  115.8  
0.9  
 
1.2  
17.6  
10.7  
 
28.3  
19.1  
 
 
11.3  
18.6  
157.8  
  115.6  
37.8  
23.4  
 
6.4  
4.1  
 
7.1  
 
9.7  
40.4  
27.1  
 
 
25.5  
41.3  
22.9  
15.0  
 
18.7  
12.2  
 
3.1  
2.0  
 
0.8  
0.6  
 
 
1.6  
2.0  
30.6  
17.7  
 
 
97.3  
147.7  

31.2  
6.2  
0.6  
18.1  
98.6  
6.7  
2.2  
0.3  
8.4  
2.6  
52.7  
36.2  
0.2  
0.8  
7.7  
1,367.2  
0.7  
4.7  
17.7  
55.5  
0.8  
31.6  
226.2  
1.4  
24.5  
35.3  
25.7  
185.6  
52.0  
8.5  
11.7  
52.3  
59.6  
29.6  
24.3  
4.1  
1.0  
2.2  
46.3  
193.3  

LOW HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 
 159  Togo 
 160  Malawi 
 161  Benin 
 162  Timor-Leste 
 163  Côte d’Ivoire 
 164  Zambia 
 165  Eritrea 
 166  Senegal 
 167  Rwanda 
 168  Gambia 
 169  Liberia 
 170  Guinea 
 171  Ethiopia 
 172  Mozambique 
 173  Guinea-Bissau 
  174  Burundi 
 175  Chad 
 176  Congo (Democratic Republic of the) 
 177  Burkina Faso 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

3.9  
9.5  
4.8  
0.7  
12.6  
7.9  
3.2  
7.5  
7.2  
0.9  
2.2  
6.1  
48.3  
13.5  
1.0  
5.7  
6.1  
37.0  
8.8  

 

 

 

6.3  
14.4  
8.4  
1.1  
20.1  
12.3  
4.8  
11.9  
9.5  
1.6  
3.6  
9.6  
78.6  
21.9  
1.5  
7.8  
10.6  
62.5  
14.7  

8.4  
20.5  
12.2  
1.6  
27.0  
16.9  
6.7  
16.2  
13.2  
2.2  
5.3  
13.5  
108.0  
28.5  
2.1  
10.3  
14.9  
87.6  
21.9  

2.5  
2.1  
2.9  
3.1  
2.2  
2.9  
2.5  
2.9  
2.8  
2.9  
1.9  
2.0  
2.8  
2.3  
2.8  
2.0  
2.9  
2.7  
2.9  
1.5  
2.5  
3.7  
2.8  
3.1  
3.0  
2.6  
3.0  
2.1  
3.0  
2.6  
2.4  
2.7  
2.8  
2.8  
2.8  
2.8  
2.7  
2.5  
3.2  
2.5  

3.0  
3.3  
3.1  
2.7  
2.9  
2.8  
2.6  
3.0  
-0.1  
2.9  
2.9  
2.9  
3.0  
2.4  
2.3  
2.5  
3.1  
3.3  
3.0  

1.4  
1.5  
1.9  
2.8  
1.9  
2.0  
1.3  
2.5  
2.2  
1.9  
0.7  
1.5  
2.5  
1.4  
2.1  
1.4  
2.5  
2.2  
1.6  
1.1  
2.6  
3.0  
2.3  
1.4  
2.6  
1.9  
2.7  
1.5  
2.7  
2.4  
1.9  
2.1  
3.0  
2.1  
2.3  
2.3  
1.8  
1.2  
3.3  
2.4  

 
2.5  
2.8  
3.0  
3.1  
2.4  
2.6  
2.9  
2.8  
2.6  
2.6  
2.8  
2.9  
2.7  
2.3  
2.4  
2.1  
2.9  
2.8  
3.5  

-0.3  
-1.2  
-0.5  
-0.8  
-0.2  
-0.5  
0.2  
-0.1  
-1.1  
-0.2  
0.5  
-0.3  
-0.8  
-3.8  
-0.1  
0.0  
0.0  
-0.1  
0.3  
-0.1  
-0.1  
0.9  
-0.4  
-0.8  
0.2  
-0.1  
0.0  
-0.1  
0.2  
0.0  
-0.4  
-0.1  
0.4  
0.0  
0.0  
-0.1  
-0.5  
-1.0  
0.1  
0.0  

 

-0.6  
-1.9  
0.4  
0.0  
0.5  
0.0  
-2.3  
-0.2  
-5.3  
0.9  
-5.1  
1.0  
0.3  
0.9  
0.4  
-0.8  
0.0  
0.6  
-0.3  

-0.3  
-0.3  
-0.5  
-0.3  
-0.1  
-0.7  
0.2  
0.0  
-0.6  
0.0  
0.3  
-0.3  
-0.9  
0.3  
-0.2  
0.0  
0.0  
-0.3  
0.0  
-0.2  
-0.3  
-0.1  
-0.2  
-0.1  
0.1  
-0.1  
0.0  
-0.1  
-0.1  
0.0  
-0.3  
0.1  
-0.1  
0.0  
0.0  
0.1  
0.0  
-0.4  
-0.1  
0.0  

 
0.0  
0.0  
0.1  
0.2  
-0.1  
-0.1  
0.2  
-0.2  
0.0  
0.2  
1.3  
-0.6  
-0.1  
0.0  
-0.2  
0.8  
-0.1  
0.0  
-0.1  

40.1  
37.8  
44.1  
41.1  
43.5  
52.3  
41.9  
18.7  
31.7  
27.7  
52.0  
48.4  
43.6  
16.4  
15.4  
25.5  
13.7  
54.3  
12.6  
24.9  
27.9  
20.9  
30.6  
22.9  
37.1  
8.9  
23.6  
19.8  
18.2  
15.0  
28.5  
26.6  
18.9  
36.4  
40.7  
39.7  
75.7  
14.0  
11.1  
35.3  

30.1  
11.6  
34.5  
20.8  
39.7  
39.4  
15.8  
39.0  
5.4  
38.3  
45.3  
28.0  
12.6  
21.1  
28.1  
6.3  
20.8  
27.8  
13.8  

36.9   
36.6   
61.1   
49.5   
42.8   
57.3   
61.1   
25.6   
26.5   
38.0   
61.7   
56.7   
62.2   
36.8   
33.2   
30.1   
18.6   
62.1   
22.8   
33.9   
28.2   
31.8   
37.0   
25.5   
58.5   
18.2   
30.2   
28.1   
22.2   
12.5   
49.6   
45.2   
26.4   
51.5   
58.4   
41.4   
88.1   
26.9   
13.3   
49.8   

 

 

43.4   
19.8   
42.0   
28.1   
50.1   
35.7   
21.6   
42.9   
18.9   
58.1   
61.5   
35.4   
17.6   
38.4   
30.0   
11.0   
27.6   
35.2   
20.4   

74.3  
65.4  
97.8  
88.5  
78.4  
90.4  
85.9  
83.7  
81.4  
82.6  
67.2  
70.6  
95.2  
79.2  
82.7  
64.9  
87.6  
84.1  
84.8  
62.6  
91.1  
111.8  
82.1  
97.8  
95.3  
78.1  
85.7  
79.8  
101.2  
74.4  
81.3  
83.1  
89.5  
83.4  
88.7  
84.5  
82.1  
88.6  
97.7  
89.2  

90.2  
92.4  
89.4  
68.7  
85.1  
88.6  
90.7  
92.3  
102.1  
79.0  
87.0  
85.4  
86.5  
92.7  
74.7  
87.9  
90.7  
94.1  
94.6  

42.7  
44.1  
58.7  
76.8  
50.8  
56.6  
52.1  
65.4  
60.6  
60.7  
46.6  
42.1  
72.2  
45.8  
61.9  
47.9  
66.4  
71.8  
51.0  
39.1  
64.7  
79.8  
61.7  
67.1  
84.5  
59.8  
78.0  
47.4  
78.5  
68.0  
60.2  
67.0  
85.8  
65.5  
73.2  
67.5  
58.2  
67.9  
99.9  
77.7  

 
69.5  
90.1  
79.7  
85.4  
72.6  
91.0  
74.1  
79.8  
76.8  
76.4  
78.2  
78.8  
80.5  
83.0  
79.0  
63.9  
88.4  
91.0  
90.0  

7.3  
8.7  
9.0  
6.6  
6.9  
6.2  
5.0  
6.8  
7.2  
6.3  
5.5  
6.8  
8.9  
6.1  
6.7  
6.6  
5.8  
7.2  
5.2  
8.4  
5.9  
4.2  
7.0  
5.5  
5.2  
5.9  
6.1  
5.6  
5.6  
3.9  
7.2  
5.7  
5.2  
5.7  
7.0  
5.2  
4.5  
8.5  
5.5  
5.7  

6.1  
5.3  
7.0  
3.5  
5.2  
5.4  
5.1  
4.9  
5.4  
5.0  
5.7  
6.2  
5.5  
6.4  
6.5  
6.0  
6.7  
5.5  
5.1  

 

6.6  
7.7  
6.8  
8.2  
7.3  
7.5  
6.1  
5.7  
6.0  
6.1  
7.1  
8.1  
6.9  
7.5  
6.1  
7.7  
5.4  
6.8  
5.6  
8.1  
5.2  
4.4  
6.9  
5.9  
4.7  
6.8  
5.6  
6.1  
4.8  
4.3  
7.3  
6.4  
6.0  
6.3  
6.4  
4.6  
5.4  
8.4  
5.2  
5.8  

 
6.3  
6.1  
6.1  
5.8  
7.0  
6.0  
4.5  
4.4  
4.5  
5.2  
5.7  
6.1  
6.0  
6.2  
6.4  
4.7  
5.5  
5.2  
3.9  

3.9  
3.6  
4.9  
5.5  
3.9  
4.5  
4.3  
4.8  
4.9  
4.9  
3.3  
3.7  
5.2  
5.4  
5.8  
3.9  
5.5  
5.2  
5.5  
3.1  
5.1  
7.7  
5.7  
5.3  
7.1  
4.9  
6.1  
4.0  
5.6  
4.7  
5.2  
5.8  
6.1  
5.3  
5.7  
5.7  
5.9  
4.7  
7.1  
6.4  

 
6.0  
6.8  
6.6  
5.7  
5.9  
6.3  
6.1  
6.5  
6.2  
6.0  
6.4  
6.6  
7.0  
6.1  
5.9  
6.5  
6.6  
7.1  
6.7  

2.3 
2.6 
2.8 
4.2 
2.9 
2.8 
2.9 
4.0 
3.5 
3.4 
2.6 
2.4 
3.9 
2.7 
3.5 
2.8 
3.9 
4.4 
3.0 
2.3 
4.0 
5.3 
4.0 
3.6 
5.8 
2.9 
4.8 
2.4 
5.0 
4.1 
3.5 
4.2 
5.6 
4.3 
4.7 
4.5 
3.9 
3.4 
6.4 
5.3 

4.3 
5.6 
5.5 
6.5 
4.6 
5.9 
4.7 
5.0 
5.4 
5.1 
5.1 
5.5 
5.4 
5.1 
5.7 
4.7 
6.2 
6.1 
5.9 

193

L

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009

Demographic trends

Total population                                    

natural increase                                                       

Rate of 

Net international 
migration rate                                                      

Urban populationa                 

Child dependency 

dependency 

Old age 

(millions)

(%)

(%)

(% of total)

ratio

ratio

HDI rank

1990

2007

2020b

1990

to

1995

2005

to

2010

1990

to

1995

2005

to

2010

1990

2010

1990

2010

1990

2010

2.7  
1.9  
2.4  
2.7  
3.9  

2.6  
..   
0.4  
..   
1.9  
..   
..   
..   
..   
2.8  
..   
1.4  

-0.6  
0.2  
-2.2  
4.3  
0.0  

-0.2  
..   
0.0  
..   
-0.4  
..   
..   
..   
..   
-2.7  
..   
-0.3  

-0.3  
0.0  
0.2  
0.7  
0.0  

-0.4  
..   
0.0  
..   
-1.6  
..   
..   
..   
..   
-0.6  
..   
-1.1  

23.3  
36.8  
32.9  
18.3  
15.4  

33.3   
38.9   
38.4   
24.8   
16.7   

86.2  
81.4  
77.2  
89.5  
100.7  

82.2  
72.3  
79.5  
88.5  
104.7  

69.7  
35.0  
58.4  
65.1  
25.8  
100.0  
100.0  
69.6  
90.4  
29.7  
40.7  
29.0  

66.4   
44.0   
63.4   
71.8   
22.7   
100.0   
100.0   
82.7   
94.3   
37.4   
50.4   
38.3   

89.0  
..   
37.9  
..   
84.3  
..   
..   
..   
..   
84.5  
..   
90.3  

72.5  
..   
30.6  
..   
61.2  
..   
..   
..   
..   
85.7  
..   
70.0  

5.4  
7.5  
5.1  
4.5  
4.1  

6.6  
..   
6.8  
..   
6.8  
..   
..   
..   
..   
5.6  
..   
5.8  

4.3  
6.9  
3.4  
4.3  
4.1  

5.8  
..   
14.2  
..   
6.1  
..   
..   
..   
..   
5.2  
..   
7.3  

2.3 d 
1.2 d 

-0.1  d 
0.0 d 

-0.1  d 
0.0 d 

4.6  
2.4  

-0.1  d 
1.3 d 
0.6 d 
1.0 d 

 

 
0.4  
0.0  
1.8  

 

 
0.3  
0.3  
0.8  
0.8  
1.3  
2.7  
 

 

0.1  d 
-0.1  d 
0.5 d 
0.3 d 
 
 
0.2  
0.2  
-0.5  
 
 
0.3  
0.3  
0.9  
-0.1  
-0.1  
0.1  
 
 
0.0 d 

 

0.2 d 
-0.2 d 
0.4 d 
0.3 d 
 
0.2  
0.3  
0.7  
 
0.3  
0.3  
1.2  
-0.1  
-0.1  
0.0  
 
0.0 d 

 

 

1.5  
2.3  
2.0  
2.4  
 
71.8  
71.5  
78.5  
 
73.7  
73.3  
88.5  
69.4  
30.3  
22.7  
 
2.6  

4.6   
2.4   

1.5   
2.3   
2.0   
2.4   

76.8   
74.0   
82.8   

78.4   
78.0   
89.7   
76.5   
41.1   
29.7   

2.6   

 

 

 

 

 

 

85.5 d 
55.2 d 

71.5 d 
39.0 d 

5.9 d 
7.8 d 

6.1  d 
10.0 d 

30.7 d 
61.4 d 
32.7 d 
41.4 d 
 
34.6  
29.1  
70.2  
 
29.8  
29.6  
40.1  
51.4  
61.0  
89.9  
 
53.8 d 

 

 

22.5 d 
42.3 d 
29.6 d 
37.2 d 

 

27.7  
23.2  
43.1  

 

25.5  
25.5  
26.4  
35.0  
44.3  
83.6  

 

 

19.1  d 
8.3 d 
18.5 d 
14.3 d 
 
17.5  
20.8  
3.6  

 
19.0  
19.2  
10.5  
10.6  
7.3  
5.5  

 

 

41.2 d 

 

 
10.0 d 

23.8 d 
10.6 d 
19.5 d 
16.6 d 

 

 

22.1  
26.2  
3.9  
 

24.3  
24.7  
12.4  
12.7  
8.8  
5.5  
 

 

 

11.6 d 

178  Mali 
179  Central African Republic 
180  Sierra Leone 
181  Afghanistan 
182  Niger 

 
 
 
 
 

OTHER UN MEMBER STATES
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
  Iraq 
  Kiribati 
 
  Korea (Democratic People’s Rep. of)   
  Marshall Islands 
 
 
  Micronesia (Federated States of) 
 
  Monaco 
 
  Nauru 
  Palau 
 
 
  San Marino 
  Somalia 
 
 
  Tuvalu 
  Zimbabwe 
 

8.7  
2.9  
4.1  
12.6  
7.9  

18.1  
0.1  
20.1  
0.0  
0.1  
0.0  
0.0  
0.0  
0.0  
6.6  
0.0  
10.5  

12.4  
4.3  
5.4  
26.3  
14.1  

29.5  
0.1  
23.7  
0.1  
0.1  
0.0  
0.0  
0.0  
0.0  
8.7  
0.0  
12.4  

16.8  
5.3  
7.3  
39.6  
22.9  

40.2  
0.1  
24.8  
0.1  
0.1  
0.0  
0.0  
0.0  
0.0  
12.2  
0.0  
15.6  

732.8 T 
645.5 T 
383.4 T 
40.3 T 

730.7 T 
569.7 T 
341.7 T 
34.5 T 

  638.6 T 
964.5 T  1,276.1 T 
 3,178.8 T  4,029.3 T  4,596.3 T 

  Arab States 
  Central and Eastern Europe 
     and the CIS 
  East Asia and the Pacific 
  720.8 T 
  Latin America and the Caribbean   442.3 T 
  South Asia 
  282.7 T 
  Sub-Saharan Africa 
 
26.9 T 
 
   
 
  OECD 
 1,048.6 T  1,189.0 T  1,269.7 T 
  European Union (EU27) 
505.3 T 
  471.6 T 
  GCC 
23.1  T 
47.1 T 
 
 
   
 
 
  Very high human development 
986.5 T 
1,051.0 T 
  877.3 T 
     Very high HD: OECD 
954.9 T  1,013.4 T 
  855.4 T 
     Very high HD: non-OECD 
37.6 T 
22.0 T 
 
  High human development 
  784.2 T 
996.0 T 
  Medium human development 
 3,388.5 T  4,380.5 T  5,090.6 T 
  Low human development 
  240.2 T 
536.8 T 
 
   
 
  World 
 5,290.5  Td 6,670.8  Td  7,674.3 Td 

493.2 T 
36.5 T 

31.6 T 
918.4 T 

385.1  T 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   

2.5  
2.4  
1.8  
2.9  
3.3  

3.1  
..   
1.5  
..   
2.6  
..   
..   
..   
..   
2.5  
..   
2.6  

2.6 d 
1.7 d 

0.0 d 
1.9 d 
0.7 d 
1.2 d 

 
0.6  
0.1  
2.7  
 
0.4  
0.4  
1.2  
1.2  
1.8  
2.9  
 

 

 

 

SOURCES
Columns 1–7 and 10–15: UN (2009e).
Columns 8 and 9: UN (2008c).

NOTES

a  Because data are based on national definitions of what 
constitutes a city or metropolitan area, cross-country 
comparisons should be made with caution.

b Data refer to medium variant projections.
c  Population estimates include Taiwan, Province of 

China.

d Data are aggregates provided by original data source.

194

1.5 d 

1.2 d 

Total fertility rate           
(births per woman)

1990

to

1995

2005

to

2010

6.3  
5.7  
5.5  
8.0  
7.8  

5.8  
..   
2.4  
..   
4.8  
..   
..   
..   
..   
6.5  
..   
4.8  

5.6 d 
3.0 d 

1.6 d 
3.0 d 
2.0 d 
2.5 d 
  
1.9  
1.6  
5.1  
  
1.7  
1.7  
2.2  
2.5  
3.3  
6.7  
  
3.1 d 

5.5 
4.8 
5.2 
6.6 
7.1 

4.1 
.. 
1.9 
.. 
3.6 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
6.4 
.. 
3.5 

4.6 d
2.4 d

1.5 d
2.3 d
2.0 d
2.4 d
 
1.8 
1.5 
2.9 
 
1.7 
1.7 
1.8 
2.0 
2.6 
5.6 
 
2.6 d

TABLE

M

HDI rank

1  Norway 
2  Australia 
3  Iceland 
4  Canada 
5  Ireland 
6  Netherlands 
7  Sweden 
8  France 
9  Switzerland 

VERY HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  10  Japan 
  11  Luxembourg 
  12  Finland 
  13  United States 
  14  Austria 
  15  Spain 
  16  Denmark 
  17  Belgium 
  18  Italy 
  19  Liechtenstein 
  20  New Zealand 
  21  United Kingdom 
  22  Germany 
  23  Singapore 
  24  Hong Kong, China (SAR) 
  25  Greece 
  26  Korea (Republic of) 
  27  Israel 
  28  Andorra 
  29  Slovenia 
  30  Brunei Darussalam 
  31  Kuwait 
  32  Cyprus 
  33  Qatar 
  34  Portugal 
  35  United Arab Emirates 
  36  Czech Republic 
  37  Barbados 
  38  Malta 

HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
  39  Bahrain 
  40  Estonia 
  41  Poland 
  42  Slovakia 
  43  Hungary 
  44  Chile 
  45  Croatia 
  46  Lithuania 
  47  Antigua and Barbuda 
  48  Latvia 
  49  Argentina 
  50  Uruguay 
  51  Cuba 
  52  Bahamas 
  53  Mexico 
  54  Costa Rica 
  55  Libyan Arab Jamahiriya 
  56  Oman 
  57  Seychelles 
  58  Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) 
  59  Saudi Arabia 

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009

Economy and inequality  

 

 

 

 

M

GDP

GDP per capita

Average annual change 
in consumer price index                                                       

(%)

Share of income 
or expenditureb                                                                                                                    

(%)

Inequality measures

US$ billions                                               

2007

PPP US$ 
billions  
2007

US$                                                           
2007

Annual 

growth rate 
at constant 
prices                                  
(%)                                 
1990–2007

Highest 
value in 
the period 
1980–2007                                                                                                         
2007 PPP 

US$a

Year of 
highest 
value

1990–2007

2006–2007

Poorest 
10%

Richest 
10%

Richest 
10% to 
poorest 
10%c

Gini indexd

388.4  
821.0  
20.0  
1,329.9  
259.0  
765.8  
454.3  
2,589.8  
424.4  
4,384.3  
49.5  
244.7  

251.6  
 
733.9  
 
11.1  
 
1,180.9  
 
194.8  
 
633.9  
 
335.8  
 
2,078.0  
 
307.0  
 
4,297.2  
 
38.2  
 
 
182.6  
  13,751.4   13,751.4  
310.7  
 
1,416.4  
 
197.3  
 
 
371.2  
1,802.2  
 
..   
 
115.6  
 
2,143.0  
 
 
2,830.1  
228.1  
 
293.0  
 
319.2  
 
1,201.8  
 
 
188.9  
..   
 
54.0  
 
19.5  
 
121.1  h 
 
21.2  
 
 
56.3  
241.5  
 
226.1  
 
249.5  
 
5.0 h 
 
 
9.4  

373.2  
1,436.9  
311.6  
452.8  
2,101.6  
..   
135.7  
2,772.0  
3,317.4  
161.3  
207.2  
313.4  
969.8  
164.0  
..   
47.2  
11.5  h 
112.1  
21.3  
52.7  
222.8  
163.3  
175.0  
3.0  h 
7.4  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

15.8 h 
20.9  
422.1  
75.0  
138.4  
163.9  
51.3  
38.3  
1.0h 
27.2  
262.5  
23.1  
..   
6.6  
1,022.8  
26.3  
58.3  
35.7  
0.7  
228.1  
381.7  

20.3 h 
27.3  
609.4  
108.4  
188.6  
230.3  
71.1  
59.3  
1.6 h 
37.3  
522.9  
37.3  
..   
..   
1,484.9  
48.4  
88.4  
56.6  
1.4  
334.1  
554.1  

82,480  
39,066  
64,190  
40,329  
59,324  
46,750  
49,662  
41,970  
56,207  
34,313  
103,042  
46,261  
45,592  
44,879  
32,017  
57,051  
42,609  
35,396  
..  
32,086  
45,442  
40,324  
35,163  
29,912  
27,995  
20,014  
22,835  
..  
23,379  
30,032 h 
42,102  
24,895  
64,193 h 
20,998  
38,436 h 
16,934  
10,427 h 
18,203  

21,421 h 
15,578  
11,072  
13,891  
13,766  
9,878  
11,559  
11,356  
11,664 h 
11,930  
6,644  
6,960  
..  
19,844  
9,715  
5,887  
9,475  
14,031 h 
8,560  
8,299  
15,800  

2.6  
2.4  
2.5  
2.2  
5.8  
2.1  
2.3  
1.6  
0.8  
1.0  
3.3  
2.8  
2.0  
1.8  
2.4  
1.9  
1.8  
1.2  
..   
2.1  
2.4  
1.4  
3.8  
2.4  
2.7  
4.5  
1.7  
..   
3.5  
-0.3  
1.8  
2.5  
..   
1.9  
-0.1  
2.4  
..   
2.6  

2.4  
5.3  
4.4  
3.4  
3.3  
3.7  
3.0  
3.0  
1.8  
4.7  
1.5  
1.5  
..   
..   
1.6  
2.6  
..   
2.3  
1.4  
-0.2  
0.3  

53,433  
34,923  
35,742  
35,812  
44,613  
38,694  
36,712  
33,674  
40,658  
33,632  
79,485  
34,526  
45,592  
37,370  
31,560  
36,130  
34,935  
30,353  
..  
27,336  
35,130  
34,401  
49,704  
42,306  
28,517  
24,801  
26,315  
..  
26,753 f 
83,688  
47,812 f 
24,789  
..  
22,765  
101,057 f 
24,144 f 
..  
23,080  

29,723 f 
20,361  
15,987 f 
20,076 f 
18,755  
13,880  
16,027 f 
17,575 f 
19,085  
16,377  
13,238  
11,216  
..  
..  
14,104  
10,842  
..  
22,816 f 
16,771  
12,233  
36,637  

2007  
2007  
2007  
2007  
2007  
2007  
2007  
2007  
2007  
2007  
2007  
2007  
2007  
2007  
2007  
2007  
2007  
2007  
..  
2007  
2007  
2007  
2007  
2007  
2007  
2007  
2007  
..  
2007  
1980  
2006  
2007  
..  
2007  
1980  
2007  
..  
2007  

2005  
2007  
2007  
2007  
2007  
2007  
2007  
2007  
2006  
2007  
2007  
2007  
..  
..  
2007  
2007  
..  
2006  
2000  
1980  
1980  

2.1  
2.5  
3.5  
2.0  
3.0  
2.4  
1.5  
1.6  
1.2  
0.2  
2.1  
1.5  
2.6  
2.0  
3.4  
2.1  
1.9  
2.9  
..   
2.0  
2.7  
1.7  
1.2  
2.0  
5.9  
4.0  
5.7  
..   
8.2  
1.2 f 
2.0  
3.2  
3.4  
3.6  
..   
4.6  
2.5  
2.7  

0.5  
10.3  
13.6  
7.3  
13.4  
5.7  
32.4  
11.8  
..   
13.3  
7.3  
19.7  
..   
1.9  
13.2  
13.1  
1.2 f 
..   
2.5  
34.3  
0.5  

0.7  
2.3  
5.1  
2.1  
4.9  
1.6  
2.2  
1.5  
0.7  
0.1  
2.3  
2.5  
2.9  
2.2  
2.8  
1.7  
1.8  
1.8  
..   
2.4  
4.3  
2.1  
2.1  
2.0  
2.9  
2.5  
0.5  
..   
3.6  
0.1 h 
5.5  
2.4  
13.8  
2.8  
..   
2.9  
4.0  
1.3  

-5.5  
6.6  
2.4  
2.8  
7.9  
4.4  
2.9  
5.7  
..   
10.1  
8.8  
8.1  
..   
2.5  
4.0  
9.4  
3.4 h 
6.0  
5.3  
18.7  
4.2  

3.9 e 
2.0 e 
..   
2.6 e 
2.9 e 
2.5 e 
3.6 e 
2.8 e 
2.9 e 
4.8 e 
3.5 e 
4.0 e 
1.9 e 
3.3 e 
2.6 e 
2.6 e 
3.4 e 
2.3 e 
..   
2.2 e 
2.1 e 
3.2 e 
1.9 e 
2.0 e 
2.5 e 
2.9 e 
2.1 e 
..   
3.4 g 
..   
..   
..   
..   
2.0 e 
..   
4.3 e 
..   
..   

..   
2.7 g 
3.0 g 
3.1 e 
3.5 g 
1.6 e 
3.6 g 
2.7 g 
..   
2.7 g 
1.2 e 
1.7 e 
..   
..   
1.8 g 
1.5 e 
..   
..   
..   
1.7 e 
..   

23.4 e 
25.4 e 
..   
24.8 e 
27.2 e 
22.9 e 
22.2 e 
25.1  e 
25.9 e 
21.7 e 
23.8 e 
22.6 e 
29.9 e 
23.0 e 
26.6 e 
21.3 e 
28.1  e 
26.8 e 
..   
27.8 e 
28.5 e 
22.1  e 
32.8 e 
34.9 e 
26.0 e 
22.5 e 
28.8 e 
..   
24.6 g 
..   
..   
..   
..   
29.8 e 
..   
22.7 e 
..   
..   

..   
27.7 g 
27.2 g 
20.8 e 
24.1  g 
41.7 e 
23.1  g 
27.4 g 
..   
27.4 g 
37.3  e 
34.8 e 
..   
..   
37.9 g 
35.5 e 
..   
..   
..   
32.7 e 
..   

6.1  
12.5  
..   
9.4  
9.4  
9.2  
6.2  
9.1  
9.0  
4.5  
6.8  
5.6  
15.9  
6.9  
10.3  
8.1  
8.2  
11.6  
..   
12.5  
13.8  
6.9  
17.7  
17.8  
10.2  
7.8  
13.4  
..   
7.3  
..   
..   
..   
..   
15.0  
..   
5.3  
..   
..   

..   
10.4  
9.0  
6.8  
6.8  
26.2  
6.4  
10.3  
..   
10.3  
31.6  
20.1  
..   
..   
21.0  
23.4  
..   
..   
..   
18.8  
..   

25.8
35.2
..
32.6
34.3
30.9
25.0
32.7
33.7
24.9
30.8
26.9
40.8
29.1
34.7
24.7
33.0
36.0
..
36.2
36.0
28.3
42.5
43.4
34.3
31.6
39.2
..
31.2
..
..
..
..
38.5
..
25.8
..
..

..
36.0
34.9
25.8
30.0
52.0
29.0
35.8
..
35.7
50.0
46.2
..
..
48.1
47.2
..
..
..
43.4
..

195

M

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009

Economy and inequality 

GDP

GDP per capita

Average annual change 
in consumer price index                                                       

(%)

Share of income 
or expenditureb                                                                                                                    

(%)

Inequality measures

US$ billions                                               

2007

PPP US$ 
billions  
2007

US$                                                           
2007

Annual 

growth rate 
at constant 
prices                                  
(%)                                 
1990–2007

Highest 
value in 
the period 
1980–2007                                                                                                         
2007 PPP 

US$a

Year of 
highest 
value

1990–2007

2006–2007

Poorest 
10%

Richest 
10%

Richest 
10% to 
poorest 
10%c

Gini indexd

HDI rank

 

 
 

60  Panama 
61  Bulgaria 
62  Saint Kitts and Nevis 
63  Romania 
64  Trinidad and Tobago 
65  Montenegro 
66  Malaysia 
67  Serbia 
68  Belarus 
69  Saint Lucia 
70  Albania 
71  Russian Federation 
 
72  Macedonia (the Former Yugoslav Rep. of)  
73  Dominica 
 
74  Grenada 
75  Brazil 
76  Bosnia and Herzegovina 
77  Colombia 
78  Peru 
79  Turkey 
80  Ecuador 
81  Mauritius 
82  Kazakhstan 
83  Lebanon 

 

 

MEDIUM HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 

84  Armenia 
85  Ukraine 
86  Azerbaijan 
87  Thailand 
88  Iran (Islamic Republic of) 
89  Georgia 
90  Dominican Republic 
91  Saint Vincent and the Grenadines 
92  China 
93  Belize 
94  Samoa 
95  Maldives 
96  Jordan 
97  Suriname 
98  Tunisia 
99  Tonga 
100  Jamaica 
101  Paraguay 
102  Sri Lanka 
103  Gabon 
104  Algeria 
105  Philippines 
106  El Salvador 
107  Syrian Arab Republic 
108  Fiji 
109  Turkmenistan 
110  Occupied Palestinian Territories 
111  Indonesia 
112  Honduras 
113  Bolivia 
114  Guyana 
115  Mongolia 
116  Viet Nam 
117  Moldova 
118  Equatorial Guinea 

196

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

19.5  
39.5  
0.5  
166.0  
20.9  
3.5  
186.7  
40.1  
44.8  
1.0  
10.8  
1,290.1  
7.7  
0.3 h 
0.6  
1,313.4  
15.1  
207.8  
107.3  
655.9  
44.5  
6.8  
104.9  
24.4  

9.2  
141.2  
31.2  
245.4  
286.1  
10.2  
36.7  
0.6  
3,205.5  
1.3  
0.5  
1.1  
15.8  
2.2  
35.0  
0.3  
11.4  
12.2  
32.3  
11.6  
135.3  
144.1  
20.4  
37.7  
3.4  
12.9  
4.0  
432.8  
12.2  
13.1  
1.1  
3.9  
68.6  
4.4  
9.9  

38.1  
86.0  
0.7  
266.5  
31.3  
7.0  
358.9  
75.6  
105.2  
1.6  
22.4  
2,087.4  
18.5  
0.6 h 
0.8  
1,833.0  
29.3  
377.7  
218.6  
957.2  
99.4  
14.2  
168.2  
41.4  

17.1  
321.5  
67.2  
519.2  
778.0  
20.5  
65.2  
0.9  
7,096.7  
2.0  
0.8  
1.6  
28.0  
3.6  
76.9  
0.4  
16.3  
27.1  
84.9  
20.2  
262.0  
299.4  
39.8  
89.7  
3.6  
22.6  
..   
837.6  
27.0  
40.0  
2.1  
8.4  
221.4  
9.7  
15.5  

5,833  
5,163  
10,795  
7,703  
15,668  
5,804  
7,033  
5,435  
4,615  
5,834  
3,405  
9,079  
3,767  
..  
5,724  
6,855  
4,014  
4,724  
3,846  
8,877  
3,335  
5,383  
6,772  
5,944  

3,059  
3,035  
3,652  
3,844  
4,028  
2,313  
3,772  
4,596  
2,432  
4,200  
2,894  
3,456  
2,769  
4,896  
3,425  
2,474  
4,272  
1,997  
1,616  
8,696  
3,996  
1,639  
2,973  
1,898  
4,113  
2,606  
1,160 h 
1,918  
1,722  
1,379  
1,462  
1,507  
806  
1,156  
19,552  

2.6  
2.3  
2.8  
2.3  
5.0  
3.8  
3.4  
0.0  
3.4  
1.3  
5.2  
1.2  
0.4  
1.4  
2.4  
1.2  
11.2  
1.2  
2.7  
2.2  
1.2  
3.7  
3.2  
2.4  

5.8  
-0.7  
2.9  
2.9  
2.5  
1.8  
3.8  
3.0  
8.9  
2.3  
2.9  
5.1  
2.0  
1.8  
3.4  
1.7  
0.6  
-0.3  
3.9  
-0.7  
1.4  
1.7  
1.8  
1.5  
1.6  
..   
..   
2.3  
1.5  
1.3  
2.9  
2.2  
6.0  
-1.3  
21.1  

11,391  
11,222  
14,481  
12,369  
23,507  
11,699 f 
13,518  
13,137f 
10,841f 
9,786  
7,041  
14,690 f 
9,096 f 
7,893 f 
7,557  
9,567  
7,764 f 
8,587  
7,836  
12,955  
7,449  
11,296  
10,863 f 
10,137 f 

5,693 f 
9,137 f 
7,851 f 
8,135  
10,955  
7,604  
6,706  
7,691  
5,383  
6,796  
4,467 f 
5,196 f 
4,901  
7,813  
7,520  
3,772 f 
6,587  
4,631  
4,243  
18,600  
7,740  
3,406  
5,804  
4,511  
4,632  
..  
..  
3,712  
3,796  
4,206  
2,782  
3,236 f 
2,600 f 
4,208  
30,627 f 

2007  
2007  
2007  
2007  
2007  
2007  
2007  
1990  
2007  
2007  
2007  
2007  
2007  
2006  
2005  
2007  
2007  
2007  
2007  
2007  
2007  
2007  
2007  
2004  

2007  
1989  
2007  
2007  
2007  
1985  
2007  
2007  
2007  
2006  
2007  
2007  
2007  
2007  
2007  
2006  
2006  
1981  
2007  
1984  
2007  
2007  
2007  
2007  
2006  
..  
..  
2007  
2007  
2007  
2007  
2007  
2007  
1989  
2007  

1.1  
55.7  
3.2  
56.4  
5.2  
..   
2.8  
36.4  
114.2  
2.6  
13.0  
44.4  
4.8  
1.6  
2.1  
67.6  
..   
13.6  
12.5  
56.5  
30.1  
6.2  
24.3  
..   

21.1  
50.6  
52.1  
3.6  
20.1  
11.4  
11.0  
1.9  
4.4  
1.9  
4.1  
..   
2.9  
50.4  
3.5  
5.7  
15.4  
10.7  
9.6  
2.7  
9.2  
6.4  
5.5  
4.1  
3.0  
..   
4.1  f 
12.8  
16.2  
5.9  
5.8  
17.2  
4.1  
15.6  
7.6  

4.2  
8.4  
4.4  
4.8  
7.9  
..   
2.0  
6.4  
8.4  
2.5  
2.9  
9.0  
3.5  
3.1  
4.2  
3.6  
..   
5.4  
1.8  
8.8  
2.3  
8.8  
10.8  
..   

4.4  
12.8  
16.7  
2.2  
17.2  
9.2  
6.1  
7.0  
4.8  
2.3  
5.6  
7.4  
5.4  
6.7  
3.1  
5.9  
9.3  
8.1  
15.8  
5.0  
3.5  
2.8  
4.6  
3.9  
4.8  
..   
3.5  
6.4  
6.9  
8.7  
12.3  
9.0  
8.9  
12.4  
..   

0.8 e 
3.5 g 
..   
3.3 g 
2.1 e 
..   
2.6 e 
..   
3.6 g 
2.0 e 
3.2 g 
2.6 g 
2.4 g 
..   
..   
1.1 e 
2.8  
0.8  
1.5  
1.9  
1.2  
..   
3.1  
..   

3.7  
3.8  
6.1  
2.6  
2.6  
1.9  
1.5  
..   
2.4  
..   
..   
..   
3.0  
1.0  
2.4  
..   
2.1  
1.1  
2.9  
2.5  
2.8  
2.4  
1.0  
..   
..   
2.5  
..   
3.0  
0.7  
0.5  
1.3  
2.9  
3.1  
3.0  
..   

41.4 e 
23.8 g 
..   
25.3 g 
29.9 e 
..   
28.5 e 
..   
22.0 g 
32.5 e 
25.9 g 
28.4 g 
29.5 g 
..   
..   
43.0 e 
27.4 g 
45.9 e 
37.9 e 
33.2 g 
43.3 e 
..   
25.9 g 
..   

28.9 g 
22.5 g 
17.5 g 
33.7 g 
29.6 g 
30.6 g 
38.7 e 
..   
31.4 g 
..   
..   
..   
30.7 g 
40.0 e 
31.6 g 
..   
35.6 g 
42.3 e 
33.3 g 
32.7 g 
26.9 g 
33.9 g 
37.0 e 
..   
..   
31.8 g 
..   
32.3 g 
42.2 e 
44.1  g 
34.0 e 
24.9 g 
29.8 g 
28.2 g 
..   

49.9  
6.9  
..   
7.6  
14.4  
..   
11.0  
..   
6.1  
16.2  
8.0  
11.0  
12.4  
..   
..   
40.6  
9.9  
60.4  
26.1  
17.4  
35.2  
..   
8.5  
..   

7.9  
6.0  
2.9  
13.1  
11.6  
15.9  
25.3  
..   
13.2  
..   
..   
..   
10.2  
40.4  
13.3  
..   
17.0  
38.8  
11.7  
13.3  
9.6  
14.1  
38.6  
..   
..   
12.9  
..   
10.8  
59.4  
93.9  
25.5  
8.6  
9.7  
9.4  
..   

54.9
29.2
..
31.5
40.3
..
37.9
..
27.9
42.6
33.0
37.5
39.0
..
..
55.0
35.8
58.5
49.6
43.2
54.4
..
33.9
..

33.8
28.2
36.5
42.5
38.3
40.8
50.0
..
41.5
..
..
..
37.7
52.9
40.8
..
45.5
53.2
41.1
41.5
35.3
44.0
49.7
..
..
40.8
..
39.4
55.3
58.2
44.6
33.0
37.8
35.6
..

TABLE

M

GDP

GDP per capita

Average annual change 
in consumer price index                                                       

(%)

Share of income 
or expenditureb                                                                                                                    

(%)

Inequality measures

US$ billions                                               

2007

PPP US$ 
billions  
2007

US$                                                           
2007

Annual 

growth rate 
at constant 
prices                                  
(%)                                 
1990–2007

Highest 
value in 
the period 
1980–2007                                                                                                         
2007 PPP 

US$a

Year of 
highest 
value

1990–2007

2006–2007

Poorest 
10%

Richest 
10%

Richest 
10% to 
poorest 
10%c

Gini indexd

22.3  
3.7  
1.4  
33.9  
130.5  
5.7  
12.3  
0.5  
3.7  
7.0  
283.0  
75.1  
0.1  
1.1  
4.1  
1,176.9  
0.4  
7.6  
8.3  
..   
0.4  
22.5  
142.9  
2.9  
61.4  
10.3  
7.4  
68.4  
24.2  
6.3  
6.7  
46.2  
16.2  
15.1  
20.7  
2.6  
0.8  
1.6  
11.8  
165.5  

2.5  
3.6  
5.4  
0.4  
19.8  
11.4  
1.4  
11.2  
3.3  
0.6  
0.7  
4.6  
19.4  
7.8  
0.4  
1.0  
7.1  
9.0  
6.8  

65.1  
10.5  
1.6  
60.9  
403.7  
14.4  
25.6  
0.8  
11.8  
10.7  
466.9  
126.8  
0.3  
3.2  
12.7  
3,096.9  
0.9  
13.2  
26.0  
41.0  
0.7  
52.3  
405.6  
5.5  
91.3  
29.5  
18.3  
196.7  
57.9  
13.2  
11.1  
80.4  
48.8  
31.3  
39.4  
6.0  
1.7  
3.1  
32.7  
291.4  

5.2  
10.6  
11.8  
0.8  
32.6  
16.2  
3.0  
20.7  
8.4  
2.1  
1.3  
10.7  
61.6  
17.1  
0.8  
2.9  
15.9  
18.6  
16.6  

830  
715  
2,705  
2,536  
1,729  
1,022  
6,544  
2,001  
551  
3,372  
5,914  
2,434  
916  
1,668  
701  
1,046  
784  
2,030  
578  
..  
714  
1,006  
879  
2,521  
3,623  
367  
375  
431  
645  
990  
699  
1,199  
400  
646  
1,116  
847  
997  
798  
381  
1,118  

380  
256  
601  
373  
1,027  
953  
284  
900  
343  
377  
198  
487  
245  
364  
211  
115  
658  
143  
458  

1.2  
-0.4  
3.3  
1.4  
2.5  
1.9  
4.3  
-0.4  
-2.2  
1.8  
1.0  
2.0  
..   
5.2  
4.2  
4.5  
-1.5  
-0.2  
6.2  
6.8  
-0.4  
1.6  
1.6  
0.9  
2.9  
1.9  
-0.4  
3.1  
0.0  
-0.6  
-2.1  
3.6  
1.8  
2.1  
0.6  
0.6  
-2.1  
2.4  
3.5  
1.1  

-0.2  
0.4  
1.3  
..   
-0.7  
0.1  
-0.7  
1.1  
1.1  
0.3  
1.9  
1.3  
1.9  
4.2  
-2.6  
-2.7  
2.4  
-4.3  
2.5  

2,425 f 
2,652 f 
3,041 f 
4,562  
5,349  
2,955  
13,604  
3,877  
3,685 f 
5,155  
9,757  
4,108  
..  
4,837  
2,165 f 
2,753  
2,149  
4,496  
1,802 f 
904 f 
1,361  
2,335 f 
2,496  
4,789  
5,385 f 
1,049  
1,297  
1,241  
1,542  
2,551  
2,258  
2,086  
1,208 f 
1,334  
2,979  
1,940  
2,906 f 
1,541  
1,059 f 
1,969  

1,147  
800  
1,312  
..  
2,827  
1,660  
900 f 
1,666  
872  
1,225  
1,910  
1,147  
779 f 
802  
753  
525  
1,555  
794  
1,124  

2007  
1990  
2007  
2007  
2007  
1981  
2007  
1998  
1988  
2007  
2007  
2007  
..  
2007  
2007  
2007  
1995  
1984  
2007  
2005  
1984  
2007  
2007  
2007  
2007  
2007  
1980  
2007  
2007  
1994  
1980  
2007  
2007  
2007  
1986  
2006  
1990  
2007  
2007  
2007  

1980  
1980  
2007  
..  
1980  
1981  
1997  
2007  
1983  
2007  
1980  
2006  
2007  
2007  
1997  
1991  
2005  
1980  
2007  

..   
11.3  
3.5  
8.3  
6.5  
..   
9.1  
2.5  
..   
..   
7.0  
2.6  
..   
6.6  
25.7  
6.8  
9.5  
5.9  
3.9  
24.6  
..   
17.6  
7.3  
8.5 f 
308.1  
6.5  
14.0  
5.4  
11.2  
9.4  
19.1  
35.5  
12.6  
24.0  
4.3  
6.0  
..   
8.2  
6.7  
21.3  

5.1  
26.1  
5.0  
..   
4.9  
35.5  
..   
3.3  
10.5  
5.2 f 
..   
..   
4.8  
20.0  
17.0  
12.8  
4.8  
318.3  
3.8  

..   
10.2  
4.4  
6.5  
9.3  
11.1  
7.1  
4.0  
13.1  
6.7  
7.1  
2.0  
..   
5.2  
4.5  
6.4  
7.7  
2.7  
5.9  
35.0  
..   
10.0  
7.6  
5.3  
12.2  
6.1  
10.3  
9.1  
9.8  
0.9  
8.5  
8.0  
7.0  
10.7  
0.9  
7.3  
..   
8.0  
6.1  
5.4  

1.0  
8.0  
1.3  
10.3  
1.9  
10.7  
..   
5.9  
9.1  
2.1 h 
..   
..   
17.2  
8.2  
4.6  
8.3  
-9.0  
16.9  
-0.2  

2.9  
3.6  
1.9  
1.3  
3.9  
1.4  
1.3  
..   
3.2  
0.6  
1.3  
2.7  
..   
2.3  
3.7  
3.6  
..   
2.1  
3.0  
..   
0.9  
2.9  
3.9  
1.8  
0.6  
2.7  
2.6  
4.3  
1.8  
1.9  
0.9  
..   
3.1  
2.0  
2.4  
2.5 g 
2.4 g 
1.0 g 
2.6 g 
2.0 g 

3.3 g 
3.0 g 
2.9 g 
2.9 g 
2.0 g 
1.3 g 
..   
2.5 g 
2.1 g 
2.0 g 
2.4 g 
2.4 g 
4.1 g 
2.1 g 
2.9 g 
4.1 g 
2.6 g 
2.3 g 
3.0 g 

29.5 g 
25.9 g 
40.6 g 
42.4 e 
27.6 g 
41.8 e 
51.2 g 
..   
26.4  g 
65.0  e 
44.9 g 
33.2 g 
..   
37.6 g 
27.0 g 
31.1  g 
..   
37.1  g 
34.2 g 
..   
55.2 g 
30.8 g 
26.5 g 
40.8 g 
44.7 g 
40.4 g 
41.5 g 
26.6 g 
37.8 g 
40.9 g 
47.8 e 
..   
27.0 g 
32.8 g 
35.5 g 
29.6 g 
30.9 g 
39.4 g 
34.1  g 
32.4 g 

27.1  g 
31.9 g 
31.0 g 
31.3 g 
39.6 g 
38.9 g 
..   
30.1  g 
37.8 g 
36.9 g 
30.1  g 
34.4 g 
25.6 g 
39.2 g 
28.0 g 
28.0 g 
30.8 g 
34.7 g 
32.4 g 

10.3  
7.3  
21.6  
33.9  
7.2  
31.0  
40.0  
..   
8.2  
106.6  
35.1  
12.5  
..   
16.3  
7.3  
8.6  
..   
17.8  
11.5  
..   
60.6  
10.6  
6.7  
22.4  
74.6  
14.8  
15.9  
6.2  
21.3  
21.5  
54.4  
..   
8.9  
16.1  
15.0  
11.6  
12.8  
39.8  
13.2  
16.3  

8.3  
10.5  
10.8  
10.8  
20.2  
29.5  
..   
11.9  
18.1  
18.9  
12.8  
14.4  
6.3  
18.5  
9.5  
6.8  
11.8  
15.1  
10.8  

36.7
32.9
50.5
53.7
32.1
52.3
61.0
..
33.6
74.3
57.8
40.9
..
46.8
32.6
36.8
..
47.3
40.7
..
64.3
37.7
31.2
50.7
58.6
47.3
47.2
31.0
47.7
50.9
59.5
..
34.6
42.8
44.6
39.0
40.0
52.5
42.6
42.9

34.4
39.0
38.6
39.5
48.4
50.7
..
39.2
46.7
47.3
52.6
43.3
29.8
47.1
35.5
33.3
39.8
44.4
39.6

197

HDI rank

 119  Uzbekistan 
 120  Kyrgyzstan 
 121  Cape Verde 
 122  Guatemala 
 123  Egypt 
 124  Nicaragua 
 125  Botswana 
 126  Vanuatu 
 127  Tajikistan 
 128  Namibia 
 129  South Africa 
 130  Morocco 
 131  Sao Tome and Principe 
 132  Bhutan 
 133  Lao People’s Democratic Republic 
 134  India 
 135  Solomon Islands 
 136  Congo 
 137  Cambodia 
 138  Myanmar 
 139  Comoros 
 140  Yemen 
 141  Pakistan 
 142  Swaziland 
 143  Angola 
 144  Nepal 
 145  Madagascar 
 146  Bangladesh 
 147  Kenya 
 148  Papua New Guinea 
 149  Haiti 
 150  Sudan 
 151  Tanzania (United Republic of) 
 152  Ghana 
 153  Cameroon 
 154  Mauritania 
 155  Djibouti 
 156  Lesotho 
 157  Uganda 
 158  Nigeria 

LOW HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 
 159  Togo 
 160  Malawi 
 161  Benin 
 162  Timor-Leste 
 163  Côte d’Ivoire 
 164  Zambia 
 165  Eritrea 
 166  Senegal 
 167  Rwanda 
 168  Gambia 
 169  Liberia 
 170  Guinea 
 171  Ethiopia 
 172  Mozambique 
 173  Guinea-Bissau 
  174  Burundi 
 175  Chad 
 176  Congo (Democratic Republic of the) 
 177  Burkina Faso 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

M

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009

Economy and inequality  

 

 

 

 

Average annual change 
in consumer price index                                                       

(%)

Share of income 
or expenditureb                                                                                                                    

(%)

Inequality measures

1990–2007

2006–2007

Poorest 
10%

Richest 
10%

Richest 
10% to 
poorest 
10%c

Gini indexd

3.4  
3.7  
17.8  
..   
4.0  

..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
105.6  

..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   

..   
..   
..   

..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   

..   

 

 

 

 

1.4  
..   
11.7  
17.0  
0.1  

..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   

..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   

..   
..   
..   

..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   

..   

 

 

 

 

2.7 g 
2.1 g 
2.6 g 
..   
2.3 g 

..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
1.8 g 

..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   

..   
..   
..   

..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   

..   

 

 

 

 

30.5 g 
33.0 g 
33.6 g 
..   
35.7 g 

..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
40.3 g 

..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
 
..   
..   
..   

..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   

..   

 

 

 

 

11.2  
15.7  
12.8  
..   
15.3  

..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
22.0  

..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   

..   
..   
..   

..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   

..   

39.0
43.6
42.5
..
43.9

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
50.1

..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..

..

Year of 
highest 
value

2006  
1982  
1982  
..  
1980  

..  
2002  
..  
..  
1993  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  

..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  

..  
..  
..  

..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  

..  

 

 

 

 

GDP

GDP per capita

US$ billions                                               

2007

PPP US$ 
billions  
2007

US$                                                           
2007

Annual 

growth rate 
at constant 
prices                                  
(%)                                 
1990–2007

Highest 
value in 
the period 
1980–2007                                                                                                         
2007 PPP 

US$a

13.4  
3.1  
4.0  
26.1  h 
8.9  

556  
394  
284  
..  
294  

..   
0.1  
..   
..   
0.3  
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   

6.9  
1.7  
1.7  
8.4  h 
4.2  

 
..   
0.1  
..   
0.1  
0.2  
..   
..   
0.2  
1.7  
..   
..   
3.4  

 

 

2.2  
-0.8  
-0.3  
..   
-0.6  

..   
2.1  
..   
..   
-0.4  
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   

..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
 
..   
..   
..   

 

1.8 i 
..   
..   
2.1 i 
4.8 i 
0.0 i 
 
 
1.6 i 

1,086  
990  
855  
..  
980  

..  
1,520  
..  
..  
3,279 f 
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  

..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
 
..  
..  
..  

..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
 
..  

 

 

..  
817  
..  
2,559  
2,126  
..  
..  
8,148  
55,681  
..  
..  
261 h 

..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
 
..  
..  
..  

 

39,821 i 
..  
..  
8,470 i 
1,746 i 
380 i 
 

 

8,257 i 

HDI rank

178  Mali 
179  Central African Republic 
180  Sierra Leone 
181  Afghanistan 
182  Niger 

 

OTHER UN MEMBER STATES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  Iraq 
  Kiribati 
  Korea (Democratic People’s Rep. of)   
  Marshall Islands 
  Micronesia (Federated States of) 
  Monaco 
  Nauru 
  Palau 
  San Marino 
  Somalia 
  Tuvalu 
  Zimbabwe 

 

 

  Arab States 
1,347.1  T  2,285.8  
  Central and Eastern Europe and the CIS  3,641.3 T  5,805.0  
  East Asia and the Pacific 
5,661.6 T  11,184.6  
 
  Latin America and the Caribbean   
5,576.6  
3,610.5 T 
  South Asia 
4,622.5  
1,727.5 T 
 
  Sub-Saharan Africa 
1,481.7  
804.0 T 
 
   
 
 
  OECD 
40,378.6  T  38,543.3  
 
  European Union (EU27) 
16,843.0  T  14,811.7  
 
  GCC 
1,034.4  
 
 
  Very high human development 
      Very high HD: OECD 
      Very high HD: non-OECD 
  High human development 
  Medium human development 
  Low human development 
   
  World 

39,078.8  Ti  36,438.4  
 
..  T  35,194.8  
 
1,243.6  
..  T 
 
7,929.2 Ti  11,321.4  
 
7,516.8  Ti  16,837.5  
 
312.4  
 
 
 
  54,583.8  Ti  64,909.7 

147.4  Ti 

761.4T  

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   

SOURCES
Columns 1–3 and 9–12: World Bank (2009d).
Column 4: calculated for HDRO by the World Bank 
based on World Bank (2009d) using the least squares 
method.
Columns 5 and 6: calculated based on GDP per capita 
(PPP US$) time series from World Bank (2009d).
Columns 7 and 8: calculated based on consumer price 
index data from World Bank (2009d).

NOTES

a  Expressed in 2007 constant prices.
b Because the underlying household surveys differ in 

method and type of data collected, cross-country 
comparisons should be made with caution as the the 
distribution data are not strictly comparable across 
countries.

c  Data show the ratio of  the income or expenditure 

share of the richest group to that of the poorest.

d The Gini index lies between 0 and 100. A value of 
0 represents absolute equality and 100 absolute 
inequality.

e  Data refer to income shares by percentiles of the 

population, ranked by per capita income.

f  Data refer to a period shorter than that specified.
g Data refer to expenditure shares by percentiles of the 

population, ranked by per capita expenditure.

h Data refer to an earlier year than that specified.
i  Aggregates calculated for HDRO by the World Bank.

198

TABLE

N

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009

Health and education

N

Public expenditure

Public expenditure

on health

on education

Aid 

allocated 
to social 
sectorsa

Educational attainment levelsb

(% of the population
aged 25 and above) 

Under-five mortality rate
(per 1,000 live births)

Low

Medium

High

Wealth quintile

mother

Educational level of 

 

as % of
total 

per capita
PPP US$

government 
expenditure

per pupil 
in primary 
education 
PPP US$

as % of 

total

government 
expenditure

as % of 
total aid

less than 

upper 

secondary

upper

secondary 
or post-
secondary 
non-tertiary

tertiary

lowest 

highest

education)

lowest
(no 

Healthy

life 

highest 

(secondary 
or higher)

expectancy 
at birthc                                           
(years)

Unhealthy 

life

expectancy 
as a % of 
total life 
expectancyd

HDI rank

2006

2006

2003–2006

2000–2007

2007

2000–2007 2000–2007 2000–2007 2000–2007 2000–2007 2000–2007 2000–2007

2007

2007

1  Norway 
2  Australia 
3  Iceland 
4  Canada 
5  Ireland 
6  Netherlands 
7  Sweden 
8  France 
9  Switzerland 

VERY HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  10  Japan 
  11  Luxembourg 
  12  Finland 
  13  United States 
  14  Austria 
  15  Spain 
  16  Denmark 
  17  Belgium 
  18  Italy 
  19  Liechtenstein 
  20  New Zealand 
  21  United Kingdom 
  22  Germany 
  23  Singapore 
  24  Hong Kong, China (SAR) 
  25  Greece 
  26  Korea (Republic of) 
  27  Israel 
  28  Andorra 
  29  Slovenia 
  30  Brunei Darussalam 
  31  Kuwait 
  32  Cyprus 
  33  Qatar 
  34  Portugal 
  35  United Arab Emirates 
  36  Czech Republic 
  37  Barbados 
  38  Malta 

HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 
  39  Bahrain 
  40  Estonia 
  41  Poland 
  42  Slovakia 
  43  Hungary 
  44  Chile 
  45  Croatia 
  46  Lithuania 
  47  Antigua and Barbuda 
  48  Latvia 
  49  Argentina 
  50  Uruguay 
  51  Cuba 
  52  Bahamas 
  53  Mexico 
  54  Costa Rica 
  55  Libyan Arab Jamahiriya 
  56  Oman 
  57  Seychelles 
  58  Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) 
  59  Saudi Arabia 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

3,780  
2,097  
2,758  
2,585  
2,413  
2,768  
2,533  
2,833  
2,598  
2,067  
5,233  
1,940  
3,074  
2,729  
1,732  
2,812  
2,264  
2,022  
..  
1,905  
2,434  
2,548  
413  
..  
1,317  
819  
1,477  
2,054  
1,507  
314  
422  
759  
1,115  
1,494  
491  
1,309  
722  
1,419  

 
669  
734  
636  
913  
978  
367  
869  
728  
439  
615  
758  
430  
329  
775  
327  
565  
189  
321  
602  
196  
468  

.. 

17.9   
17.2   
18.1   
17.9   
17.3   
16.4   
13.4   
16.7   
19.6   
17.7   
16.8   
12.1   
19.1   
15.5   
15.3   
15.6   
13.9   
14.2   
 
18.6   
16.5   
17.6   
5.4   
 
.. 
11.5   
11.9   
11.1   
22.7   
13.5   
5.1   
4.9   
6.4   
9.7   
15.5   
8.7   
13.6   
11.9   
14.7   

9.5   
11.3   
9.9   
13.8   
10.4   
14.1   
13.9   
13.3   
11.3   
10.2   
14.2   
9.2   
10.8   
13.9   
11.0   
21.5   
6.5   
5.4   
8.8   
9.3   
8.7   

7,072  
5,181  
7,788  
..  
5,100  
5,572  
8,415  
5,224  
7,811  
..  
9,953  
5,373  
..  
7,596  
4,800  
7,949  
6,303  
6,347  
..  
4,831  
5,596  
4,837  
..  
..  
3,562  
3,379  
5,135  
..  
5,206  
..  
2,204  
..  
..  
4,908  
1,636  
2,242  
..  
2,549  

 

 

..  
2,511  
3,155  
2,149  
4,479  
1,287  
2,197  
2,166  
..  
..  
1,703  
..  
..  
..  
1,604  
1,623  
..  
..  
2,399  
583  
..  

16.7   
13.3   
18.0   
12.5   
13.9   
11.5   
12.9   
10.6   
13.0   
9.5   
..   
12.5   
13.7   
10.9   
11.0   
15.5   
12.1   
9.2   
..   
15.5   
12.5   
9.7   
..   
23.2   
9.2   
15.3   
13.7   
..   
12.7   
9.1   
12.9   
14.5   
19.6   
11.3   
28.3   
9.5   
16.4   
10.5   

..   
14.6   
12.7   
10.8   
10.9   
16.0   
10.0   
14.7   
..   
14.2   
13.1   
11.6   
14.2   
19.7   
25.6   
20.6   
..   
31.1   
12.6   
..   
27.6   

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
94.8  
 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

 
 
 
 
 
34.0  
72.3  
 
91.3  
 
54.7  
51.4  
77.5  
.. 
 
67.7  
26.2  
51.6  
22.8  
39.4  
71.0  
78.8  

.. 

.. 

14.5  
 
37.4  
23.7  
40.0  
34.8  
20.7  
42.6  
21.4  
26.1  
39.0  
30.9  
14.8  
26.2  
58.6  
25.8  
42.3  
59.5  
 
28.7  
 
21.5  
41.2  
45.9  
51.0  
36.2  
23.9  
48.0  
26.4  
 
74.4  
41.3  
59.0  
77.4  
 
14.5  
75.7  
77.2  

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

53.8   
 
30.3   
38.1   
31.2   
38.6   
51.1   
35.9   
52.3   
43.9   
39.7   
38.8   
49.0   
57.9   
17.8   
43.7   
31.0   
30.4   
 
40.1   
 
57.1   
39.2   
38.9   
25.7   
40.4   
33.1   
34.8   
55.5   
 
17.3   
33.8   
20.1   
11.4   
 
73.0   
23.1   
12.0   

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

50.3  
27.9  
 
19.2  
36.5  
 
40.2  
23.5  
 
19.7  
65.7  
75.3  
59.6  
28.9  
69.7  
64.7  
 
 
51.8  
63.9  
65.8  

.. 
.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

38.4   
42.3   
 
67.6   
48.9   
 
45.4   
50.8   
 
60.0   
23.2   
15.1   
31.0   
70.2   
15.3   
18.5   
 
 
36.8   
21.7   
19.2   

.. 
.. 

31.7   
..   
27.6   
38.2   
26.4   
26.0   
27.0   
19.8   
26.2   
30.0   
21.3   
30.3   
36.2   
15.9   
23.6   
30.3   
26.8   
10.1   
..   
25.9   
..   
21.4   
19.6   
15.2   
23.3   
23.4   
39.7   
16.1   
18.1   
..   
8.3   
24.9   
20.9   
11.2   
..   
12.5   
1.1   
10.8   

11.2   
27.5   
..   
13.2   
14.7   
..   
13.9   
25.7   
..   
20.3   
11.1   
9.6   
9.4   
0.3   
14.9   
15.0   
..   
..   
7.4   
12.8   
14.9   

..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  

..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  

..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  

..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  

..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  

..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  

..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  

..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  

74  
75  
75  
75  
74  
74  
75  
76  
76  
78  
75  
75  
72  
74  
76  
73  
74  
76  
..  
74  
73  
75  
75  
..  
74  
74  
74  
76  
74  
67  
69  
71  
66  
73  
68  
72  
69  
74  

66  
71  
70  
70  
69  
72  
70  
68  
66  
68  
69  
70  
71  
68  
69  
71  
66  
67  
65  
68  
64  

8
8
8
7
7
7
7
6
7
6
5
6
9
7
6
7
7
6
..
8
8
6
6
..
6
7
8
..
5
13
11
11
13
7
12
6
10
7

13
3
7
6
6
8
8
5
..
6
8
8
10
7
9
10
11
11
..
8
12

199

N

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009

Health and education 

 

 

 

 

Public expenditure

Public expenditure

on health

on education

Aid 

allocated 
to social 
sectorsa

Educational attainment levelsb

(% of the population
aged 25 and above) 

Under-five mortality rate
(per 1,000 live births)

Low

Medium

High

Wealth quintile

mother

Educational level of 

 

as % of
total 

per capita
PPP US$

government 
expenditure

per pupil 
in primary 
education 
PPP US$

as % of 

total

government 
expenditure

as % of 
total aid

less than 

upper 

secondary

upper

secondary 
or post-
secondary 
non-tertiary

tertiary

lowest 

highest

education)

lowest
(no 

Healthy

life 

highest 

(secondary 
or higher)

expectancy 
at birthc                                           
(years)

Unhealthy 

life

expectancy 
as a % of 
total life 
expectancyd

HDI rank

2006

2006

2003–2006

2000–2007

2007

2000–2007 2000–2007 2000–2007 2000–2007 2000–2007 2000–2007 2000–2007

2007

2007

 

 
 

60  Panama 
61  Bulgaria 
62  Saint Kitts and Nevis 
63  Romania 
64  Trinidad and Tobago 
65  Montenegro 
66  Malaysia 
67  Serbia 
68  Belarus 
69  Saint Lucia 
70  Albania 
71  Russian Federation 
 
72  Macedonia (the Former Yugoslav Rep. of)  
73  Dominica 
 
74  Grenada 
75  Brazil 
76  Bosnia and Herzegovina 
77  Colombia 
78  Peru 
79  Turkey 
80  Ecuador 
81  Mauritius 
82  Kazakhstan 
83  Lebanon 

 

 

MEDIUM HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 

84  Armenia 
85  Ukraine 
86  Azerbaijan 
87  Thailand 
88  Iran (Islamic Republic of) 
89  Georgia 
90  Dominican Republic 
91  Saint Vincent and the Grenadines 
92  China 
93  Belize 
94  Samoa 
95  Maldives 
96  Jordan 
97  Suriname 
98  Tunisia 
99  Tonga 
100  Jamaica 
101  Paraguay 
102  Sri Lanka 
103  Gabon 
104  Algeria 
105  Philippines 
106  El Salvador 
107  Syrian Arab Republic 
108  Fiji 
109  Turkmenistan 
110  Occupied Palestinian Territories 
111  Indonesia 
112  Honduras 
113  Bolivia 
114  Guyana 
115  Mongolia 
116  Viet Nam 
117  Moldova 
118  Equatorial Guinea 

200

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

495  
443  
403  
433  
438  
93  
226  
373  
428  
237  
127  
404  
446  
311  
387  
367  
454  
534  
171  
461  
130  
292  
214  
285  

 
112  
298  
67  
223  
406  
76  
140  
289  
144  
254  
188  
742  
257  
151  
214  
218  
127  
131  
105  
198  
146  
88  
227  
52  
199  
172  
..  
44  
116  
128  
223  
124  
86  
107  
219  

11.5   
11.9   
9.5   
12.4   
6.9   
20.1   
7.0   
14.3   
10.2   
10.2   
11.3   
10.8   
16.5   
9.2   
9.5   
7.2   
14.0   
17.0   
13.1   
16.5   
7.3   
9.2   
10.4   
11.3   

9.7   
8.8   
3.6   
11.3   
9.2   
5.6   
9.5   
9.3   
9.9   
10.9   
10.5   
14.0   
9.5   
8.0   
6.5   
11.1   
4.2   
13.2   
8.3   
13.9   
9.5   
6.4   
15.6   
5.9   
9.1   
14.9   
.. 
 
5.3   
15.0   
11.6   
8.3   
11.0   
6.8   
11.8   
7.0   

..  
2,045  
..  
941  
..  
..  
1,324  
..  
1,196  
949  
..  
..  
..  
..  
766  
1,005  
..  
1,257  
446  
1,059  
..  
1,205  
..  
402  

 

 

..  
..  
356  
..  
927  
..  
644  
1,227  
..  
846  
..  
..  
695  
..  
1,581  
..  
547  
518  
..  
..  
692  
418  
478  
611  
1,143  
..  
..  
..  
..  
435  
752  
261  
..  
..  
..  

8.9   
6.2   
12.7   
8.6   
13.4   
..   
25.2   
..   
9.3   
19.1   
8.4   
12.9   
15.6   
..   
12.9   
14.5   
..   
14.2   
15.4   
..   
8.0   
12.7   
12.1   
9.6   

15.0   
19.3   
17.4   
25.0   
19.5   
9.3   
16.8   
16.1   
..   
18.1   
13.7   
15.0   
..   
..   
20.8   
13.5   
8.8   
10.0   
..   
..   
..   
15.2   
20.0   
..   
20.0   
..   
..   
17.2   
..   
18.1   
15.5   
..   
..   
19.8   
4.0   

.. 

.. 

47.1   
 
.. 
58.7  
 
69.9  
50.8  
30.9  
60.6  
85.4  
14.7  
67.2  
 
57.4  
4.9   
18.4  
46.3  
73.2  
61.6  
38.5  
49.9  
65.4  
43.8  
32.8  
33.8  

54.6  
64.0  
45.7  
36.5  
71.7  
40.7  
57.7  
9.3   
56.4  
32.6  
70.8  
29.7  
67.0  
15.1  
52.2  
51.7  
26.6  
37.0  
27.5  
49.6  
56.1  
23.1  
53.6  
79.6  
72.5  
79.9  
58.4  
33.6  
47.4  
57.3  
67.7  
56.8  
34.9  
52.5  
84.5  

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

66.0  
40.4  
 
47.3  
 
22.6  
61.3  
 
 
 
63.0  
 
52.2  
88.8  
 
70.4  
 
64.7  
53.7  
76.8  
 
79.2  
29.5  
 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

23.1   
41.3   
 
43.6   
 
61.4   
27.1   
 
 
 
29.6   
 
35.6   
5.7   
.. 
 
21.2   
 
25.4   
26.0   
14.7   
 
17.7   
56.1   
 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

18.4  
25.6  
16.5  
 
 
16.3  
 
 
 
74.2  
 
 
 
 
 
25.9  
 
72.6  
 
 
92.1  
62.6  
75.6  
89.6  
 
 
68.8  
 
 
61.6  
 
46.6  
 
 
 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

61.2   
36.0   
70.2   
 
 
57.8   
 
 
 
13.6   
 
 
 
 
 
66.2   
 
23.6   
 
.. 
.. 
 
7.6   
26.4   
13.8   
5.1   
 
.. 
.. 
 
12.8   
 
 
23.8   
 
41.1   
 
 
 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

.. 

10.4   
18.0   
..   
9.0   
..   
16.1   
8.0   
..   
..   
..   
7.4   
..   
12.2   
5.0   
..   
8.1   
..   
9.7   
16.3   
8.5   
..   
2.6   
14.4   
..   

20.4   
38.0   
13.3   
..   
..   
25.8   
..   
..   
..   
10.9   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
7.9   
..   
3.7   
..   
..   
..   
8.4   
10.6   
5.3   
..   
..   
18.4   
..   
..   
14.0   
..   
12.2   
..   
..   
..   

..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
99 e 
..  
39  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  

52  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
53  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
30  
..  
..  
..  
..  
57 e 
..  
93  
..  
66  
..  
22  
..  
106  
..  
77  
50  
105  
..  
..  
53  
29  
..  

..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
33 e 
..  
16  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  

23  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
28  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
27  
..  
..  
..  
..  
20 e 
..  
55  
..  
21  
..  
20  
..  
70  
..  
22  
20  
32  
..  
..  
16  
17  
..  

..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
119 e 
..  
51  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  

..  
..  
68  
..  
..  
..  
57  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
78 e 
..  
112  
..  
105  
..  
..  
..  
133  
..  
90  
55  
145  
..  
..  
66  
..  
..  

..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
37 e 
..  
20  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  

..  
..  
58  
..  
..  
..  
29  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
29 e 
..  
87  
..  
29  
..  
..  
..  
88  
..  
37  
20  
48  
..  
..  
29  
..  
..  

68  
69  
67  
68  
64  
66  
66  
66  
66  
69  
64  
65  
66  
67  
62  
66  
68  
69  
67  
67  
66  
65  
60  
64  

63  
64  
60  
65  
62  
67  
64  
66  
68  
63  
63  
64  
64  
64  
67  
62  
66  
66  
65  
53  
63  
64  
63  
65  
64  
57  
..  
61  
64  
59  
55  
62  
66  
63  
46  

10
6
..
6
8
11
11
11
4
6
16
2
11
..
18
9
9
5
8
7
12
10
8
11

14
6
14
5
13
6
12
8
7
17
12
10
12
7
9
14
8
8
12
12
13
11
12
12
7
12
..
13
11
10
17
6
11
8
8

TABLE

N

Public expenditure

Public expenditure

on health

on education

Aid 

allocated 
to social 
sectorsa

Educational attainment levelsb

(% of the population
aged 25 and above) 

Under-five mortality rate
(per 1,000 live births)

Low

Medium

High

Wealth quintile

mother

Educational level of 

 

as % of
total 

per capita
PPP US$

government 
expenditure

per pupil 
in primary 
education 
PPP US$

as % of 

total

government 
expenditure

as % of 
total aid

less than 

upper 

secondary

upper

secondary 
or post-
secondary 
non-tertiary

tertiary

lowest 

highest

education)

lowest
(no 

Healthy

life 

highest 

(secondary 
or higher)

expectancy 
at birthc                                           
(years)

Unhealthy 

life

expectancy 
as a % of 
total life 
expectancyd

HDI rank

2006

2006

2003–2006

2000–2007

2007

2000–2007 2000–2007 2000–2007 2000–2007 2000–2007 2000–2007 2000–2007

2007

2007

 119  Uzbekistan 
 120  Kyrgyzstan 
 121  Cape Verde 
 122  Guatemala 
 123  Egypt 
 124  Nicaragua 
 125  Botswana 
 126  Vanuatu 
 127  Tajikistan 
 128  Namibia 
 129  South Africa 
 130  Morocco 
 131  Sao Tome and Principe 
 132  Bhutan 
 133  Lao People’s Democratic Republic 
 134  India 
 135  Solomon Islands 
 136  Congo 
 137  Cambodia 
 138  Myanmar 
 139  Comoros 
 140  Yemen 
 141  Pakistan 
 142  Swaziland 
 143  Angola 
 144  Nepal 
 145  Madagascar 
 146  Bangladesh 
 147  Kenya 
 148  Papua New Guinea 
 149  Haiti 
 150  Sudan 
 151  Tanzania (United Republic of) 
 152  Ghana 
 153  Cameroon 
 154  Mauritania 
 155  Djibouti 
 156  Lesotho 
 157  Uganda 
 158  Nigeria 

LOW HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 
 159  Togo 
 160  Malawi 
 161  Benin 
 162  Timor-Leste 
 163  Côte d’Ivoire 
 164  Zambia 
 165  Eritrea 
 166  Senegal 
 167  Rwanda 
 168  Gambia 
 169  Liberia 
 170  Guinea 
 171  Ethiopia 
 172  Mozambique 
 173  Guinea-Bissau 
  174  Burundi 
 175  Chad 
 176  Congo (Democratic Republic of the) 
 177  Burkina Faso 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

89  
55  
227  
98  
129  
137  
487  
90  
16  
218  
364  
98  
120  
73  
18  
21  
99  
13  
43  
7  
19  
38  
8  
219  
61  
24  
21  
26  
51  
111  
65  
23  
27  
36  
23  
31  
75  
88  
39  
15  

 
20  
51  
25  
150  
15  
29  
10  
23  
134  
33  
25  
14  
13  
39  
10  
4  
14  
7  
50  

8.0   
8.7   
13.2   
14.7   
7.3   
16.0   
17.8   
10.9   
5.5   
10.1   
9.9   
5.5   
12.2   
7.3   
4.1   
3.4   
12.6   
4.0   
10.7   
1.8   
8.0   
5.6   
1.3   
9.4   
5.0   
9.2   
9.2   
7.4   
6.1   
7.3   
29.8   
6.3   
13.3   
6.8   
8.6   
5.3   
13.4   
7.8   
10.0   
3.5   

6.9   
18.0   
13.1   
16.4   
4.1   
10.8   
4.2   
6.7   
27.3   
8.7   
16.4   
4.7   
10.6   
12.6   
4.0   
2.3   
9.5   
7.2   
15.8   

..  
..  
1,052  
390  
..  
331  
1,158  
..  
106  
944  
1,383  
1,005  
..  
..  
61  
..  
..  
39  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
484  
..  
119  
57  
115  
237  
..  
..  
..  
..  
300  
107  
224  
..  
663  
110  
..  

 

 

..  
90  
120  
..  
..  
55  
99  
299  
109  
..  
..  
..  
130  
156  
..  
132  
54  
..  
328  

..   
18.6   
16.4   
..   
12.6   
15.0   
21.0   
26.7   
18.2   
21.0   
17.4   
26.1   
..   
17.2   
14.0   
10.7   
..   
8.1   
12.4   
18.1   
24.1   
32.8   
11.2   
..   
..   
14.9   
16.4   
14.2   
17.9   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
17.0   
10.1   
22.4   
29.8   
18.3   
..   

13.6   
..   
17.1   
..   
21.5   
14.8   
..   
26.3   
19.0   
8.9   
..   
25.6   
23.3   
21.0   
..   
17.7   
10.1   
..   
15.4   

69.4  
54.4  
44.7  
38.6  
28.1  
46.1  
72.2  
54.5  
53.4  
68.9  
62.8  
54.2  
49.0  
46.8  
41.8  
46.6  
84.2  
39.5  
59.1  
57.9  
68.8  
77.4  
53.0  
56.8  
78.4  
51.8  
28.6  
50.0  
54.0  
58.9  
56.0  
24.1  
31.0  
45.6  
11.5  
37.8  
46.5  
64.0  
50.8  
38.9  

75.9  
48.4  
51.6  
72.2  
55.3  
57.5  
56.1  
52.0  
53.9  
72.5  
43.9  
53.8  
53.9  
46.2  
34.8  
30.8  
26.1  
38.4  
35.1  

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

 
23.0  
 
84.8  
 
 
 
 
21.0  
 
73.0  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
76.7  
 
 
 
 
82.9  
 
 
 
 
98.4  
 
 
 
 
 
93.5  
 

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

 
62.1   
 
11.2   
 
 
 
 
68.3   
 
18.1   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
17.1   
 
 
 
 
12.9   
 
.. 
 
.. 
 
.. 
.. 
 
0.7   
 
.. 
 
.. 
 
.. 
.. 
 
.. 
 
1.6   
.. 
 

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 

.. 

 
94.8  
85.6  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

 
.. 
4.7   
12.2   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

..   
14.9   
..   
3.7   
..   
..   
..   
..   
10.6   
..   
8.9   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
6.3   
..   
..   
..   
..   
4.2   
..   
..   
..   
..   
0.9   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
4.8   
..   

..   
0.5   
2.2   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   

72  
..  
..  
78 e 
75  
64  
..  
..  
..  
92  
..  
78  
..  
..  
..  
101  
..  
135  
127  
..  
129 e 
118  
121  
118  
..  
98  
142  
121  
149  
..  
125  
.. e 
137  
128  
189  
98  
..  
114  
172  
257  

150  
183  
151  
..  
..  
192  
100  
183  
211  
158  
138  
217  
130  
196  
..  
..  
176  
184  
206  

42  
..  
..  
39 e 
25  
19  
..  
..  
..  
29  
..  
26  
..  
..  
..  
34  
..  
85  
43  
..  
87 e 
37  
60  
101  
..  
47  
49  
72  
91  
..  
55  
.. e 
93  
88  
88  
79  
..  
82  
108  
79  

62  
111  
83  
..  
..  
92  
65  
64  
122  
72  
117  
113  
92  
108  
..  
..  
187  
97  
144  

..  
..  
..  
79 e 
68  
72  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
63  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
202  
136  
..  
121 e 
..  
102  
150  
..  
93  
149  
114  
127  
..  
123  
152 e 
160  
125  
186  
111  
..  
161  
164  
269  

145  
181  
143  
..  
..  
198  
121  
152  
210  
140  
151  
194  
139  
201  
..  
..  
200  
209  
198  

..  
..  
..  
42 e 
31  
25  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
27  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
101  
53  
..  
75 e 
..  
62  
95  
..  
32  
65  
68  
63  
..  
65  
84 e 
76  
85  
93  
86  
..  
82  
91  
107  

64  
86  
78  
..  
..  
121  
59  
60  
95  
66  
119  
92  
54  
86  
..  
..  
143  
112  
108  

60  
59  
64  
62  
62  
66  
48  
62  
57  
53  
48  
63  
54  
56  
54  
57  
60  
49  
55  
52  
58  
55  
55  
42  
47  
55  
53  
55  
48  
57  
55  
50  
45  
50  
45  
52  
50  
41  
44  
42  

52  
44  
50  
55  
48  
40  
56  
52  
44  
53  
49  
48  
51  
42  
43  
43  
40  
46  
43  

11
13
10
12
11
9
10
11
14
12
7
11
17
15
16
10
9
8
9
15
11
12
17
7
..
17
12
16
10
6
10
14
18
12
12
8
9
9
15
12

16
16
18
9
16
10
5
6
11
5
15
16
7
12
9
14
18
3
18

201

N

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009

Health and education

Public expenditure

Public expenditure

on health

on education

Aid 

allocated 
to social 
sectorsa

Educational attainment levelsb

(% of the population
aged 25 and above) 

Under-five mortality rate
(per 1,000 live births)

Low

Medium

High

Wealth quintile

mother

Educational level of 

 

as % of
total 

per capita
PPP US$

government 
expenditure

per pupil 
in primary 
education 
PPP US$

as % of 

total

government 
expenditure

as % of 
total aid

less than 

upper 

secondary

upper

secondary 
or post-
secondary 
non-tertiary

tertiary

lowest 

highest

education)

lowest
(no 

Healthy

life 

highest 

(secondary 
or higher)

expectancy 
at birthc                                           
(years)

Unhealthy 

life

expectancy 
as a % of 
total life 
expectancyd

HDI rank

2006

2006

2003–2006

2000–2007

2007

2000–2007 2000–2007 2000–2007 2000–2007 2000–2007 2000–2007 2000–2007

2007

2007

178  Mali 
179  Central African Republic 
180  Sierra Leone 
181  Afghanistan 
182  Niger 

OTHER UN MEMBER STATES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

  Iraq 
  Kiribati 
  Korea (Democratic People’s Rep. of) 
  Marshall Islands 
  Micronesia (Federated States of) 
  Monaco 
  Nauru 
  Palau 
  San Marino 
  Somalia 
  Tuvalu 
  Zimbabwe 

 

 

 

34  
20  
20  
8  
14  

 
90  
268  
42  
589  
444  
5,309  
444  
1,003  
2,765  
8  
189  
77  

12.2   
10.9   
7.8   
4.4   
10.6   

3.4   
13.0   
6.0   
15.1   
18.9   
15.6   
25.0   
16.4   
13.3   
4.2   
16.1   
8.9   

183  
88  
..  
..  
178  

 

 

..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  

16.8   
..   
..   
..   
17.6   

..   
..   
..   
15.8   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   

39.6  
22.5  
28.7  
49.0  
37.4  

.. 

22.7  
41.7  
19.0  
42.4  
42.5  
 
48.5  
11.0  
 
.. 
23.8  
60.1  
50.7  

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

 
 
 
 
 

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
89.5  

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

 
 
 
 
 

 
.. 
 
.. 
 
.. 
 
.. 
 
.. 
 
.. 
 
.. 
 
.. 
 
.. 
 
.. 
.. 
 
8.8   

..   
..   
..   
..   
..   

..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
..   
1.5   

233  
223  
..  
..  
206  

..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
72  

124  
112  
..  
..  
157  

..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
57  

223  
187  
279  
..  
222  

49  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
69  

102  
107  
164  
..  
92  

37  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
..  
68  

43  
42  
37  
36  
45  

58  
60  
61  
53  
62  
76  
57  
67  
76  
46  
58  
38  

11
10
22
17
11

15
..
9
..
9
..
..
..
..
7
..
12

SOURCES
Columns 1–2 and 9–13:  WHO (2009).
Columns 3 and 4: UNESCO Institute for Statistics 
(2009c).
Column 5: OECD-DAC (2009).
Columns 6–8: UNESCO Institute for Statistics. (2008b).
Column 14: calculated based on data on healthy 
life expectancy from WHO (2009) and data on life 
expectancy from UN (2009e).

NOTES

a  Refers to allocation of aid to social infrastructure 
and services including health, education, water 
and sanitation, government and civil society and 
other services. Out of the total, an estimated 50% 
is allocated to health and education. Differences in 
allocation of funds exist between countries.

b Percentages may not sum to 100% as those whose 

educational attainment levels are unknown are 
excluded.

c  Average number of years that a person can expect to 
live in ‘full health’ by taking into account years lived in 
less than full health due to disease and/or injury.

d Refers to the difference between life expectancy and 

healthy life expectancy, expressed in percentage 
terms.

e  Data refer to a year other than that specified. 

202

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Reader’s guide

Reader’s guide

Human development indicators
The human development indicators provide an 
assessment of country achievements in different 
areas of human development. Where possible the 
tables include data for 192 UN member states 
along with Hong Kong Special Administrative 
Region of China, and the Occupied Palestinian 
Territories. 

In the tables, countries and areas are ranked by 
their human development index (HDI) value. To 
locate a country in the tables, refer to the Key to 
countries on the inside back cover of the Report, 
where countries with their HDI ranks are listed 
alphabetically. Most of the data in the tables are 
for 2007 and are those available to the Human 
Development Report Office (HDRO) as of 10 
June 2009, unless otherwise specified. 

This year the Statistical Annex begins with 
a series of tables A–F related to the main theme 
of the report—migration. They are followed by 
tables G–K on the human development compos-
ite indices: the HDI and its trends; the Human 
Poverty  Index  (HPI),  the  Gender-related 
Development  Index  (GDI)  and  the  Gender 
Empowerment Measure (GEM). Finally there 
are three tables (L–N) on demographic trends, 
the economy and inequality, and education and 
health. Additional selected human development 
indicators—including time series data and re-
gional  aggregates—will  be  available  at  http://
hdr.undp.org/en/statistics.

All of the indicators published in the tables 
are available electronically and free of charge in 
several formats: individually, in pre-defined ta-
bles or via a query tool that allows users to design 
their own tables. Interactive media, including 
maps of all the human development indices and 
many of the migration-related data and selected 
animations,  are  also  provided.  There  are  also 
more descriptive materials such as country fact-
sheets, as well as further technical details on how 
to calculate the indices. All of these materials are 
available in three languages: English (at http://
hdr.undp.org/en/statistics), French (at http://hdr.
undp.org/fr/statistiques) and Spanish (http://hdr.
undp.org/es/estadisticas).

Sources and definitions 
HDRO is primarily a user, not a producer, of 
statistics. It relies on international data agencies 
with the mandate, resources and expertise to col-
lect and compile international data on specific 
statistical indicators. Sources for all data used 
in  compiling  the  indicator  tables  are  given  at 
the end of each table. These correspond to full 
references in the Bibliography. In order to allow 
replication, the source notes also show the origi-
nal data components used in any calculations by 
HDRO. Indicators for which short, meaning-
ful definitions can be given are included in the 
Report’s Definition of statistical terms and indi-
cators. Other relevant information appears in the 
notes at the end of each table. For more detailed 
technical  information  about  these  indicators, 
please consult the relevant websites of the source 
agencies, links to which can be found at http://
hdr.undp.org/en/statistics.

Comparisons over time and across edi-
tions of the Report 
The HDI is an important tool for monitoring 
long-term trends in human development. To 
facilitate trend analyses across countries, the 
HDI is calculated at five-year intervals for the 
period 1980–2007. These estimates, presented 
in Table G, are based on a consistent methodol-
ogy using the data available when the Report 
is prepared. 

As  international  data  agencies  continually 
improve  their  data  series,  including  updating 
historical  data  periodically,  the  year-to-year 
changes in the HDI values and rankings across 
editions  of  the  Human  Development  Report 
often reflect revisions to data—both specific to 
a country and relative to other countries—rather 
than real changes in a country. In addition, oc-
casional changes in country coverage could affect 
the HDI ranking of a country. For example, a 
country’s HDI rank could drop considerably be-
tween two consecutive Reports, but when com-
parable revised data are used to reconstruct the 
HDI for recent years, the HDI rank and value 
may actually show an improvement. 

For these reasons HDI trend analysis should 
not be based on data from different editions of 

203

Reader’s guide

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

the Report. Table G provides up-to-date HDI 
trends based on consistent data time series and 
methodology. 

Inconsistencies between national and 
international estimates 
When compiling international data series, inter-
national data agencies apply international stan-
dards and harmonization procedures to national 
data  improve  comparability  across  countries. 
When data for a country are missing, an inter-
national agency may produce an estimate if other 
relevant information can be used. In some cases, 
international data series may not incorporate the 
most recent national data. All these factors can 
lead to substantial differences between national 
and international estimates. 

When  data  inconsistencies  have  arisen, 
HDRO has helped to link national and inter-
national data authorities to address these incon-
sistencies. In many cases this has led to better 
statistics becoming available. HDRO continues 
to  advocate  improving  international  data  and 
plays an active role in supporting efforts to en-
hance data quality. It works with national agen-
cies  and  international  bodies  to  improve  data 
consistency through more systematic reporting 
and monitoring of data quality. 

Country groupings and aggregates
In addition to country-level data, a number of 
aggregates  are  shown  in  the  tables.  These  are 
generally weighted averages that are calculated 
for the country groupings as described below. 
In general, an aggregate is shown for a country 
grouping  only  when  data  are  available  for  at 
least  half  the  countries  and  represent  at  least 
two-thirds of the available weight in that clas-
sification. HDRO does not impute missing data 
for the purpose of aggregation. Therefore, un-
less otherwise specified, aggregates for each clas-
sification represent only the countries for which 
data are available. Occasionally aggregates are 
totals rather than weighted averages (and are in-
dicated by the symbol T). 

The country groupings used include: human 
development  levels  (very  high,  high,  medium 
and low), the world and at least one geographic 
grouping—either the continents (in the migra-
tion tables) or UNDP Regional Bureaux groups 
(in the remaining tables).

204

Human  development  classifications.  All 
countries  or  areas  included  in  the  HDI 
are  classified  into  one  of  four  categories  of 
achievement in human development. For the 
first  time,  we  have  introduced  a  new  cate-
gory—very high human development (with an 
HDI of 0.900 or above)—and throughout the 
Report we have referred to this group as ‘de-
veloped countries’. The remaining countries 
are referred to as ‘developing countries’ and 
are classified into three groups: high human 
development  (HDI  value  of  0.800–0.899), 
medium human development (HDI of 0.500–
0.799) and low human development (HDI of 
less than 0.500). See box 1.3.

Continents To assist the analysis of migra-
tion  movements,  this  year’s  HDR  has  classi-
fied the world into six continents: Africa, Asia, 
Europe,  Latin  America  and  the  Caribbean, 
Northern America and Oceania, based on the 
Composition of Macro Geographical Regions 
compiled  by  the  Statistical  Division  of  the 
United Nations Department of Economic and 
Social  Affairs  (see  http://unstats.un.org/unsd/
methods/m49/m49regin.htm).

UNDP Regional Bureaux As in past Reports, 
for  the  majority  of  our  tables  we  present  the 
UNDP  Regional  Bureaux  geographic  groups: 
Arab States, Central and Eastern Europe and 
the  Commonwealth  of  Independent  States, 
East Asia and the Pacific, Latin America and the 
Caribbean, South Asia, and sub-Saharan Africa.

Country notes
Unless otherwise noted, data for China do not 
include  Hong  Kong  Special  Administrative 
Region of China, Macao Special Administrative 
Region of China, or Taiwan Province of China. 
Data for Sudan are often based on information 
collected from the northern part of the country 
only. While Serbia and Montenegro became two 
independent States in June 2006, data for the 
union of the two States have been used where 
data do not yet exist separately for the indepen-
dent States. Where this is the case, a note has 
been included to that effect. In the migration 
tables, data prior to 1990 for the Czech Republic 
refer to the former Czechoslovakia, those for the 
Russian Federation refer to the former Soviet 
Union and those for Serbia refer to the former 
Republic of Yugoslavia.

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Reader’s guide

Symbols 
A dash between two years, such as in 2005–2010 
indicates that the data presented are estimates 
for the entire period, unless otherwise indicated. 
Growth rates are usually average annual rates of 
growth between the first and last years of the 
period shown.

The following symbols are used in the tables: 

.. 

data not available

0 or 0.0 

nil or neglegible

—

< 

T 

not applicable

less than

total

Primary international data sources 
Life expectancy at birth. The life expectancy at 
birth estimates are taken from World Population 
Prospects 1950–2050: The 2008 Revision (UN 
2009e),  the  official  source  of  UN  population 
estimates  and  projections.  They  are  prepared 
biennially by the United Nations Department 
of  Economic  and  Social  Affairs  Population 
Division using data from national vital registra-
tion systems, population censuses and surveys. 
In the 2008 Revision, countries where HIV 
prevalence  among  persons  aged  15  to  49  was 
ever equal to or greater than one percent dur-
ing 1980–2007 are considered affected by the 
HIV epidemic, and their mortality is projected 
by modelling the course of the epidemic and pro-
jecting  the  yearly  incidence  of  HIV  infection. 
Also  considered  among  the  affected  countries 
are those where HIV prevalence has always been 
lower than one percent but whose population is 
so large that the number of people living with 
HIV in 2007 surpassed 500,000. These include 
Brazil, China, India, the Russian Federation and 
the  United  States.  This  brings  the  number  of 
countries considered to be affected by HIV to 58.
For  more  details  on  World  Population 
Prospects  1950–2050:  The  2008  Revision,  see 
www.un.org/esa/population/unpop.htm.

Adult  literacy  rate.  This  Report  uses 
data  on  adult  literacy  rates  from  the  United 
Nations  Educational,  Scientific  and  Cultural 

for 
Organization  (UNESCO)  Institute 
Statistics  (UIS)(UNESCO  Institute  for 
Statistics 2009a) that combine direct national 
estimates  with  recent  estimates  based  on  its 
global  age-specific  literacy  projections  model, 
which was developed in 2007. The national es-
timates, made available through targeted efforts 
by UIS to collect recent literacy data from coun-
tries,  are  obtained  from  national  censuses  or 
surveys between 1995 and 2007. Where recent 
estimates are not available, older UIS estimates 
have been used. 

Many developed countries, having attained 
high levels of literacy, no longer collect basic lit-
eracy statistics and thus are not included in the 
UIS data. In calculating the HDI, a literacy rate 
of 99.0% is assumed for these countries if they do 
not report adult literacy information. 

Many countries estimate the number of lit-
erate people based on self-reported data. Some 
use educational attainment data as a proxy, but 
measures of school attendance or grade comple-
tion may differ. Because definitions and data col-
lection methods vary across countries, literacy 
estimates should be used with caution. 

The UIS, in collaboration with partner agen-
cies,  is  actively  pursuing  an  alternative  meth-
odology  for  generating  more  reliable  literacy 
estimates,  known  as  the  Literacy  Assessment 
and Monitoring Programme (LAMP). LAMP 
seeks to go beyond the current simple categories 
of ‘literate’ and ‘illiterate’ by providing informa-
tion on a continuum of literacy skills. 

Combined gross enrolment ratios in primary, sec-
ondary and tertiary education. Gross enrolment ra-
tios are produced by the UIS (UNESCO Institute 
for Statistics 2009b) based on enrolment data col-
lected from national governments (usually from ad-
ministrative sources) and population data from the 
World Population Prospects 1950–2050: The 2006 
Revision (UN 2007). The ratios are calculated by 
dividing the number of students enrolled in pri-
mary, secondary and tertiary levels of education by 
the total population in the theoretical age group 
corresponding to these levels. The theoretical age 
group for tertiary education is assumed to be the 
five-year age group immediately following the end 
of upper secondary school in all countries. 

Combined gross enrolment ratios do not re-
flect the quality of educational outcomes. Even 
when  used  to  capture  access  to  educational 

205

Reader’s guide

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

opportunities, combined gross enrolment ratios 
can hide important differences among countries 
because  of  differences  in  the  age  range  corre-
sponding to a level of education and in the dura-
tion of education programmes. Grade repetition 
and dropout rates can also distort the data. 

As currently defined, the combined gross en-
rolment ratio measures enrolment in the country 
of  study  and  therefore  excludes  from  the  na-
tional figure students who are studying abroad. 
For many smaller countries, where pursuit of a 
tertiary education abroad is common, access to 
education or educational attainment of the pop-
ulation could be underestimated. 

GDP per capita (PPP US$). GDP per capita 
data are provided by the World Bank and re-
leased  in  its  World  Development  Indicators 
database.  In  comparing  standards  of  living 
across  countries,  economic  statistics  must  be 
converted into purchasing power parity (PPP) 
terms to eliminate differences in national price 
levels. The current estimates are based on price 
data from the latest round of the International 
Comparison  Program  (ICP),  which  was  con-
ducted in 2005 and covers a total of 146 coun-
tries and areas. For many countries not included 
in  the  ICP  surveys,  the  World  Bank  derives 
estimates through econometric regression. For 
countries not covered by the World Bank, PPP 
estimates provided by the Penn World Tables 
of  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  (Heston, 
Summers and Aten 2006) are used. 

The new PPP estimates were released for the 
first  time  during  2008  and  represented  sub-
stantial revisions to those used in our Reports 
published in 2007 and earlier years that were 
based on the prior round of ICP surveys—con-
ducted in the early 1990s—covering only 118 
countries. The new data indicated that price 
levels  in  many  countries  (especially  develop-
ing  countries)  were  higher  than  previously 
thought. For 70 countries, per capita incomes 
were revised downwards by at least 5 percent. 
Many of these are in sub-Saharan Africa, in-
cluding seven of the eight countries where the 
downward revision was at least 50 percent. By 
contrast, for around 60 countries there was an 
upward revision of at least 5 percent, includ-
ing many oil-producing countries where revi-
sions exceeded 30 percent and four countries 
where the values were doubled. Such massive 

206

revisions in GDP per capita clearly affect HDI 
values and also HDI ranks. A halving (or dou-
bling)  of  GDP  per  capita  changes  the  HDI 
value by 0.039. 

Consequently, at the end of 2008, we released 
a  short  report  entitled  Human  Development 
Indices: A statistical update 2008 explaining the 
reasons for this revision and its effects on the 
HDI  and  our  other  composite  indices.  More 
details can be found at http://hdr.undp.org/en/
statistics/data/hdi2008. For details on the ICP 
and the PPP methodology, see the ICP website 
at www.worldbank.org/data/icp.

Migration data. Migration data in this report 

have been sourced from different agencies. 

The main source for trends in international 
migrant stocks is the Population Division of the 
United  Nations  Department  for  Social  and 
Economic  Affairs  (UNDESA).  The  data  are 
from Trends in Total Migrant Stocks: The 2008 
Revision  (UN  2009d)  and  are  based  on  data 
from  population  censuses  conducted  between 
1955 and 2008. This source provides broad data 
(sex and type) over time on migrants according 
to their countries of destination.

As far as possible, international migrants are 
defined as foreign-born. In countries where data 
on place of birth were not available, country of 
citizenship provided the basis for the identifica-
tion of international migrants. 

For data on countries of origin (as well as des-
tination) of the international migrant stock, we 
have used the Global Migrant Origin Database 
(version  4)  compiled  by  the  Development 
Research  Centre  on  Migration,  Globalisation 
and Poverty based at the University of Sussex, 
England (Migration DRC 2007). The estimates 
are based national censuses conducted during 
the 2000 round of censuses and provide an esti-
mate for the period 2000–2002. It is important 
to note that the database presents data on mi-
grant stocks—i.e. the total number of migrants 
both by country of origin and country of desti-
nation—and not the annual (or periodic) flows
of migrants between countries. The stocks are 
the cumulative effect of flows over a much longer 
period of time than a year and hence are gener-
ally much greater than the annual flows would 
be. For details see http://www.migrationdrc.org/
research/typesofmigration/global_migrant_ori-
gin_database.html

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Reader’s guide

For more detailed data on the characteristics 
of international migrants we used the OECD 
Database on Immigrants in OECD Countries 
(OECD 2009b). This database has been com-
piled from data collected during the 2000 round 
of censuses, supplemented in some cases by data 
from labour force surveys. As far as possible in-
ternational migrants are defined as the foreign-
born, although for some countries of destination 
the  definitions  may  differ  slightly  from  those 
that were used by the UN Population Division. 
We  have  chosen  to  present  results  according 
to  the  countries  of  origin  of  these  migrants; 
therefore it is not possible to make a direct com-
parison with the estimates from the other two 
sources. We have presented data on education 
levels and economic activity, as well as highly-
skilled (tertiary) emigration rates according to 
the countries of origin of migrants aged 15 years 
and above in OECD countries.

Cross-nationally  comparable  data  on  in-
ternal migrants (i.e. people who move within 
the borders of a country) are not readily avail-
able.  For  this  reason,  during  the  preparation 
of this report we commissioned analyses from 
(Bell and Muhudin 2009) based on national 
censuses that produced comparable estimates 
for 24 countries of the percentage of the total 
population  that  has  moved.  These  data  have 
been supplemented by estimates compiled by 
the  UN  Statistics  Division  (UNSD)  in  col-
laboration with the Economic Commission for 
Latin  America  and  the  Caribbean  (ECLAC 
2007), which are based also on censuses and 
total population, as well as by World Bank data 
based on household surveys and the population 
of working age (World Bank 2009e). Because of 
the differences in definitions across these three 
sources,  comparisons  should  be  treated  with 
caution. Where estimates were available from 
more than one source for a country, we have 

given precedence to the estimates of Bell and 
Muhudin over the other two sources.

Data on conflict-induced migration are from 
several  sources,  depending  on  the  type  of  mi-
grant: those who have moved across international 
borders (refugees and asylum-seekers) and those 
who  have  moved  within  a  country  (internally 
displaced people). Data on refugees are from the 
United Nations High Commission for Refugees 
(UNHCR 2009b), with the exception of refu-
gees from Palestine, who fall mainly under the 
mandate  of  United  Nations  Relief  and  Work 
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East 
(UNRWA 2008). Data are compiled from various 
sources, including national censuses and surveys. 
However, routine registration, which is created to 
establish a legal or administrative record or to ad-
minister entitlements and deliver services, consti-
tutes the main source of refugee data. UNHCR 
also provides estimates for 27 developed coun-
tries  that  have  no  dedicated  registers.  These 
estimates are based on the recognition of asylum-
seekers and estimated naturalization rates over a 
10-year period. The most notable challenges of 
this estimation method pertain to its underlying 
assumption  that  all  recognised  asylum  seekers 
are  indeed  refugees  and  the  harmonization  of 
its cut-off period to 10 years. This is particularly 
true for the ‘traditional’ immigration countries 
where it takes less than 10 years for migrants—
including refugees—to obtain citizenship. Data 
on internally displaced persons are sourced from 
the  Internally  Displaced  Monitoring  Centre 
(IDMC 2009a). They are compiled from differ-
ent sources, including the United Nations Office 
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs 
(OCHA),  estimates  from  UNHCR  and  from 
national governments. Because of the difficulty 
in tracking IDPs, estimates are associated with 
high levels of uncertainty and should therefore 
be interpreted with caution.

207

Technical note

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Calculating the human development indices
The diagrams here summarize how the five human development indices are constructed, highlighting both their similarities and their differences.

Full details of the methods of calculation can be found at: www.hdr.undp.org/en/statistics/tn1

208

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Statistical terms

Definition of
statistical terms and indicators

Asylum The grant, by a state, of protection on its territory to 
individuals or groups of people from another state fleeing 
persecution or serious danger.

Asylum seekers Individuals or groups of people who apply 

for asylum in a country other than their own. They retain 
the status of asylum-seeker until their applications are 
considered and adjudicated.

Child dependency ratio The population aged under 15 years 

expressed as a percentage of the population of working 
age (15–64 years of age). 

Conflict-induced movement Human movement resulting 
in a change of usual place of residence in response to 
an ongoing or imminent violent or armed conflict that 
threatens lives or livelihoods.

Consumer price index, average annual change in Reflects 

changes in the cost to the average consumer of acquiring a 
standard or fixed basket of goods and services.

Country of origin The country from which an international 

migrant originally moves to another country, with the 
intention of settling temporarily or indefinitely. 

Country of destination The country to which an international 
migrant moves, from another country, with the intention of 
settling temporarily or indefinitely.

Earned income (PPP US$), estimated Derived on the basis 

of the ratio of the female non-agricultural wage to the 
male non-agricultural wage, the female and male shares 
of the economically active population, total female and 
male population and total GDP (in purchasing power parity 
terms in US dollars; see PPP (purchasing power parity). 
The estimated earned income is used in the calculation of 
both the Gender-related Development Index and the Gender 
Empowerment Measure. For details of this estimation, 
seehttp://hdr.undp.org/en/ technicalnote1.pdf.

Earned income, ratio of estimated female to male The ratio 

of estimated female earned income to estimated male 
earned income. See Earned income (PPP US$), estimated. 

Economically active population (or the labour force ) All 
persons aged 15 years and above who, during a given 
reference period, were either employed or did not have a 
job but were actively looking for one. See Labour force.
Education expenditure per pupil in primary education 

Public current expenditure on primary education in PPP 
US$ at constant 2005 prices divided by the total number 
of pupils enrolled in primary education.

Education expenditure as percentage of total government 

expenditure Total public expenditure on the education 
sector expressed as a percentage of total public 
expenditure by all levels of government.

Education index One of the three indices on which the 

human development index is built. It is based on the adult 
literacy rate and the combined gross enrolment ratio for 
primary, secondary and tertiary schools. See Literacy rate, 
adult, and Enrolment ratio, gross combined, for primary, 
secondary and tertiary schools.

Education levels Categorized as pre-primary (ISCED 0), 
primary (ISCED 1), secondary (ISCED 2 and 3), post-
secondary (ISCED 4) and tertiary (ISCED 5 and 6) in 
accordance with the International Standard Classification 
of Education (ISCED). 

Educational attainment Percentage distribution of population 

of a given age group according to the highest level of 
education attained or completed, with reference to 
education levels defined by ISCED. Typically expressed as 
high (ISCED 5 and 6), medium (ISCED 2, 3 and 4) and low 
(less than ISCED 2) levels of attainment. It is calculated 
by expressing the number of persons in the given age 
group with a particular highest level of attainment as a 
percentage of the total population of the same age group.
Emigrant An individual from a given country of origin (or birth) 

who has changed their usual country of residence to 
another country.

Emigration rate The stock of emigrants from a country at a 
particular point in time expressed as a percentage of the 
sum of the resident population in the country of origin and 
the emigrant population. 

Enrolment ratio, gross combined, for primary, secondary 
and tertiary education The number of students enrolled 
in primary, secondary and tertiary levels of education, 
regardless of age, expressed as a percentage of the 
population of theoretical school age for the three levels. 
See Education levels.

Fertility rate, total The number of children that would be born 

to each woman if she were to live to the end of her child-
bearing years and bear children at each age in accordance 
with prevailing age-specific fertility rates in a given year/
period, for a given country, territory or geographical area. 

Foreign direct investment, net inflows of Net inflows of 

investment to acquire a lasting management interest (10% 

209

Statistical terms

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

or more of voting stock) in an enterprise operating in an 
economy other than that of the investor. It is the sum of 
equity capital, reinvestment of earnings, other long-term 
capital and short-term capital.

GDP (gross domestic product) The sum of value added by all 
resident producers in the economy plus any product taxes 
(less subsidies) not included in the valuation of output. It is 
calculated without making deductions for depreciation of 
fabricated capital assets or for depletion and degradation 
of natural resources. ‘Value added’ is the net output of 
an industry after adding up all outputs and subtracting 
intermediate inputs. 

GDP (US$) Gross domestic product converted to US dollars 
using the average official exchange rate reported by the 
International Monetary Fund. An alternative conversion 
factor is applied if the official exchange rate is judged to 
diverge by an exceptionally large margin from the rate 
effectively applied to transactions in foreign currencies and 
traded products. See GDP (gross domestic product). 
GDP index One of the three indices on which the human 

development index is built. It is based on gross domestic 
product per capita (in purchasing power parity terms in US 
dollars; see PPP ). 

GDP per capita (PPP US$) Gross domestic product (in 

purchasing power parity terms in US dollars) divided by 
mid-year population. See GDP (gross domestic product), 
PPP (purchasing power parity) and Population, total. 

GDP per capita (US$) Gross domestic product in US dollar 

terms divided by mid-year population. See GDP (US$) and 
Population, total. 

GDP per capita annual growth rate Least squares annual 

growth rate, calculated from constant price GDP per capita 
in local currency units. 

Gender empowerment measure (GEM) A composite index 
measuring gender inequality in three basic dimensions 
of empowerment—economic participation and decision-
making, political participation, and decision-making and 
power over economic resources. 

Gender-related development index (GDI) A composite index 

measuring average achievement in the three basic dimensions 
captured in the human development index—a long and 
healthy life, knowledge and a decent standard of living—
adjusted to account for inequalities between men and women. 

Gini index Measures the extent to which the distribution 

of income (or consumption) among individuals or 
households within a country deviates from a perfectly 
equal distribution. A Lorenz curve plots the cumulative 
percentages of total income received against the 
cumulative number of recipients, starting with the poorest 
individual or household. The Gini index measures the 
area between the Lorenz curve and a hypothetical line 

of absolute equality, expressed as a percentage of the 
maximum area under the line. A value of 0 represents 
absolute equality, a value of 100 absolute inequality. 

Health expenditure per capita (PPP US$) Public expenditure 
on health by all levels of government (in purchasing power 
parity US dollars), divided by the mid-year population. 
Health expenditure includes the provision of health services 
(preventive and curative), family planning activities, 
nutrition activities and emergency aid designated for 
health, but excludes the provision of water and sanitation. 

Health expenditure, public as percentage of total 

government expenditure Public expenditure on health by 
all levels of government expressed as a percentage of total 
government spending. 

Healthy life expectancy at birth Average number of years 
that a person can expect to live in ’full health’ by taking 
into account years lived in less than full health due to 
disease and/or injury.

Human development index (HDI) A composite index 

measuring average achievement in three basic dimensions 
of human development—a long and healthy life, access to 
knowledge and a decent standard of living.

Human poverty index (HPI-1) A composite index measuring 
deprivations in the three basic dimensions captured in the 
human development index—a long and healthy life, access 
to knowledge and a decent standard of living. 

Human poverty index for OECD countries (HPI-2) A 

composite index measuring deprivations in the three basic 
dimensions captured in the human development index—a 
long and healthy life, access to knowledge and a decent 
standard of living—and also capturing social exclusion.

Illiteracy rate, adult Calculated as 100 minus the adult literacy 

rate. See Literacy rate, adult.

Immigrant An individual residing in a given host country (country 

of destination) that is not their country of origin (or birth).
Income or expenditure, shares of The shares of income 
or expenditure (consumption) accruing to subgroups 
of population, based on national household surveys 
covering various years. Expenditure or consumption 
surveys produce results showing lower levels of inequality 
between poor and rich than do income surveys, as poor 
people generally consume a greater share of their income. 
Because data come from surveys covering different years 
and using different methodologies, comparisons between 
countries must be made with caution. 

Income poverty line, population below The percentage of 

the population living below the specified poverty line: 

US$1.25 a day and US$2 a day— at 2005 international prices 

adjusted for purchasing power parity;

National poverty line—the poverty line deemed appropriate for 

a country by its authorities. National estimates that are 

210

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Statistical terms

based on population-weighted subgroup estimates from 
household surveys; 

same throughout the child’s life. 

Life expectancy index One of the three indices on which the 

50% of median income—50% of the median adjusted 

human development index is built. 

disposable household income.

Literacy rate, adult The proportion of the adult population aged 

Internal migration Human movement within the borders of 
a country usually measured across regional, district or 
municipality boundaries resulting in a change of usual 
place of residence. 

Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs) Individuals or groups 
of people who have been forced to leave their homes or 
places of usual residence, in particular as a result of or in 
order to avoid the effects of armed conflict, situations of 
generalized violence, violations of human rights or natural 
or human-made disasters, and who have not crossed an 
international border. 

International migration Human movement across international 
borders resulting in a change of country of usual residence. 

International migrants as a percentage of the population 

Estimated number of international migrants expressed as a 
percentage of the total population.

International movement rate The sum of total stock of 

immigrants into and emigrants from a particular country, 
expressed as a percentage of the sum of that country’s 
resident population and its emigrant population.

Labour force All people employed (including people above a 
specified age who, during the reference period, were in 
paid employment, either at work, self-employed or with 
a job but not at work) and unemployed (including people 
above a specified age who, during the reference period, 
were without work, currently available for work and actively 
seeking work). See Economically active population.

Labour force participation rate A measure of the proportion 

of a country’s working-age population that engages 
actively in the labour market, either by working or actively 
looking for work. It is calculated by expressing the number 
of persons in the labour force as a percentage of the 
working-age population. The working-age population is the 
population above 15 years of age (as used in this Report). 
See Labour force and Economically active population. 

Legislators, senior officials and managers, female 

Women’s share of positions defined according to the 
International Standard Classification of Occupations 
(ISCO-88) to include legislators, senior government 
officials, traditional chiefs and heads of villages, senior 
officials of special-interest organizations, corporate 
managers, directors and chief executives, production and 
operations department managers and other department 
and general managers. 

Life expectancy at birth The number of years a newborn 
infant could expect to live if prevailing patterns of age-
specific mortality rates at the time of birth were to stay the 

15 years and older which is literate, expressed as a percentage 
of the corresponding population (total or for a given sex) in a 
given country, territory, or geographic area, at a specific point 
in time, usually mid-year. For statistical purposes, a person is 
literate who can, with understanding, both read and write a 
short simple statement on their everyday life.

Medium-variant projection Population projections by the United 
Nations Population Division assuming medium-fertility path, 
normal mortality and normal international migration. Each 
assumption implies projected trends in fertility, mortality and 
net migration levels, depending on the specific demographic 
characteristics and relevant policies of each country or 
group of countries. In addition, for the countries highly 
affected by the HIV epidemic, the impact of HIV is included 
in the projection. The United Nations Population Division 
also publishes low- and high-variant projections. For more 
information, see http://esa.un.org/unpp/assumptions.html. 

Migrant An individual who has changed their usual place of 
residence, either by crossing an international border or 
moving within their country of origin to another region, 
district or municipality.

Migrant stock, annual rate of growth Estimated average 

exponential growth rate of the international migrant stock 
over each period indicated, expressed in percentage terms. 

Migrant stock as a share of population Estimated number 

of international migrants, expressed as a percentage of the 
total population. 

Mortality rate, under-five The probability of dying between 
birth and exactly five years of age, expressed per 1,000 
live births. 

Natural increase, annual rate of The portion of population 

growth (or decline) determined exclusively by births 
and deaths.

Net international migration rate The total number of 

immigrants to a country minus the number of emigrants 
over a period, divided by the person-years lived by the 
population of the receiving country over that period. It is 
expressed as net number of migrants per 1,000 population 
or as a percentage.

Official development assistance (ODA), net Disbursements 
of loans made on concessional terms (net of repayments  
of principal) and grants by official agencies of the members 
of the Development Assistance Committee (DAC), by 
multilateral institutions and by non-DAC countries to 
promote economic development and welfare in countries 
and territories in Part I of the DAC List of Aid Recipients. 
For more details see www.oecd.org/dac/stats/daclist.

211

Statistical terms

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Official development assistance (ODA) allocated to basic 

social services Aid funds allocated to social infrastructure 
and services (including health, education, water and 
sanitation, government and civil society and other services) 
expressed as a percentage of total official development 
assistance (ODA).

Old age dependency ratio The population aged 65 years 

and above expressed as a percentage of the population of 
working age (15–64 years of age). 

Population, annual growth rate The average annual 

exponential growth rate of the population for the period 
indicated. See Population, total. 

Population, total The de facto population in a country, area 
or region as of 1 July of the year indicated. The de facto
population includes those who are usually present, 
including visitors but excluding residents, who are 
temporarily absent from the country, area or region.

country of origin because of a well-founded fear of being 
persecuted for reasons of race, religion, nationality, 
political opinion or membership of a particular social group 
and who cannot or do not want to return.

Remittances are earnings and material resources transferred 

by international migrants or refugees to recipients in 
their country of origin or countries in which the migrant 
formerly resided.

Seats in parliament held by women Seats held by women in 

a lower or single house and, where relevant, in an upper 
house or senate. 

Tertiary emigration rate Total number of emigrants aged 

15 years and older from a particular country with tertiary 
education, expressed as a percentage of the sum of 
all persons of the same age with tertiary education in  
the origin country and the emigrants population with 
tertiary education.

Population, urban The de facto population living in areas 

Treaties, ratification of In order to enact an international 

classified as urban according to the criteria used by each 
area or country. Data refer to 1 July of the year indicated. 
See Population, total. 

PPP (purchasing power parity) A rate of exchange that 

accounts for price differences across countries, allowing 
international comparisons of real output and incomes. At 
the PPP US$ rate (as used in this Report), PPP US$1 has 
the same purchasing power in the domestic economy as 
US$1 has in the United States. 

Probability at birth of not surviving to a specified age 
Calculated as 100 minus the probability (expressed  
as a percentage) of surviving to a specified age for 
a given cohort. See Probability at birth of surviving to a 
specified age. 

treaty, a country must ratify it, often with the approval of 
its legislature. Ratification implies not only an expression 
of interest as indicated by the signature, but also the 
transformation of the treaty’s principles and obligations 
into national law.

Unemployed All people above a specified age who are not in 
paid employment or self-employed, but who are available 
for work and have taken specific steps to seek paid 
employment or self-employment. 

Unemployment, long-term rate People above a specified 
age who have been unemployed for at least 12 months, 
expressed as a percentage of the labour force (those 
employed plus the unemployed). See Unemployed and 
Labour force. 

Probability at birth of surviving to a specified age The 

Unemployment rate The unemployed, expressed as a 

probability of a newborn infant surviving to a specified age 
if subject to prevailing patterns of age-specific mortality 
rates, expressed as a percentage. 

Professional and technical workers, female Women’s 

share of positions defined according to the International 
Standard Classification of Occupations (ISCO-88)  
to include physical, mathematical and engineering 
science professionals (and associate professionals), 
life science and health professionals (and associate 
professionals), teaching professionals (and associate 
professionals) and other professionals and 
associate professionals. 

Refugees Individuals or groups of people who have fled their 

percentage of the labour force (those employed plus the 
unemployed). See Unemployed and Labour force. 

Water source, improved, population not using Calculated 
as 100 minus the percentage of the population using an 
improved water source. Improved sources include household 
connections, public standpipes, boreholes, protected dug 
wells, protected springs, and rainwater collection. 

Women in government at ministerial level Includes deputy 

prime ministers and ministers. Prime ministers are 
included if they hold ministerial portfolios. Vice-presidents 
and heads of ministerial-level departments or agencies are 
also included if they exercise a ministerial function in the 
government structure.

212

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Country classification

Human development 
categories

Very high human development
(HDI 0.900 and above)
Andorra
Australia
Austria
Barbados
Belgium
Brunei Darussalam
Canada
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Hong Kong, China (SAR)
Iceland
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Japan
Korea (Republic of)
Kuwait
Liechtenstein
Luxembourg
Malta
Netherlands
New Zealand
Norway
Portugal
Qatar
Singapore
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom
United States
(38 countries or areas)

High human development
(HDI 0.800–0.899)
Albania
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina
Bahamas

Bahrain
Belarus
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Brazil
Bulgaria
Chile
Colombia
Costa Rica
Croatia
Cuba
Dominica
Ecuador
Estonia
Grenada
Hungary
Kazakhstan
Latvia
Lebanon
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
Lithuania
Macedonia (the Former Yugoslav Rep. of)
Malaysia
Mauritius
Mexico
Montenegro
Oman
Panama
Peru
Poland
Romania
Russian Federation
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saudi Arabia
Serbia
Seychelles
Slovakia
Trinidad and Tobago
Turkey
Uruguay
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
(45 countries or areas)

Medium human development
(HDI 0.500–0.799)
Algeria
Angola
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Bangladesh
Belize

Bhutan
Bolivia
Botswana
Cambodia
Cameroon
Cape Verde
China
Comoros
Congo
Djibouti
Dominican Republic
Egypt
El Salvador
Equatorial Guinea
Fiji
Gabon
Georgia
Ghana
Guatemala
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
India
Indonesia
Iran (Islamic Republic of)
Jamaica
Jordan
Kenya
Kyrgyzstan
Lao People’s Democratic Republic
Lesotho
Madagascar
Maldives
Mauritania
Moldova
Mongolia
Morocco
Myanmar
Namibia
Nepal
Nicaragua
Nigeria
Occupied Palestinian Territories
Pakistan
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay
Philippines
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Samoa
Sao Tome and Principe
Solomon Islands

South Africa
Sri Lanka
Sudan
Suriname
Swaziland
Syrian Arab Republic
Tajikistan
Tanzania (United Republic of)
Thailand
Tonga
Tunisia
Turkmenistan
Uganda
Ukraine
Uzbekistan
Vanuatu
Viet Nam
Yemen
(75 countries or areas) 

Low human development
(HDI below 0.500)
Afghanistan
Benin
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Central African Republic
Chad
Congo (Democratic Republic of the)
Côte d’Ivoire
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Gambia
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Liberia
Malawi
Mali
Mozambique
Niger
Rwanda
Senegal
Sierra Leone
Timor-Leste
Togo
Zambia
(24 countries or areas)

213

Country classification

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Continents

Africa
Algeria
Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon
Cape Verde
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros
Congo
Congo (Democratic Republic of the)
Côte d’Ivoire
Djibouti
Egypt
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Gabon
Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Morocco
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Réunion
Rwanda
Saint Helena
Sao Tome and Principe
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Somalia
South Africa
Sudan

Swaziland
Tanzania (United Republic of)
Togo
Tunisia
Uganda
Western Sahara
Zambia
Zimbabwe
(56 countries or areas)

Asia
Afghanistan
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Brunei Darussalam
Cambodia
China
Cyprus
Georgia
Hong Kong, China (SAR)
India
Indonesia
Iran (Islamic Republic of)
Iraq
Israel
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Korea (Democratic People’s Rep. of)
Korea (Republic of)
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Lao People’s Democratic Republic
Lebanon
Macao, China (SAR)
Malaysia
Maldives
Mongolia
Myanmar
Nepal
Occupied Palestinian Territories
Oman
Pakistan
Philippines
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
Singapore
Sri Lanka

Syrian Arab Republic
Taiwan Province of China
Tajikistan
Thailand
Timor-Leste
Turkey
Turkmenistan
United Arab Emirates
Uzbekistan
Viet Nam
Yemen
(51 countries or areas)

Europe
Albania
Andorra
Austria
Belarus
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Faeroe Islands
Finland
France
Germany
Gibraltar
Greece
Holy See
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland
Isle of Man
Italy
Latvia
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia (the Former Yugoslav Rep. of)
Malta
Moldova
Monaco
Montenegro
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania

214

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Country classification

Northern America
Canada
United States
(2 countries or areas)

Oceania
Australia
Fiji
Kiribati
Marshall Islands
Micronesia (Federated States of)
Nauru
New Zealand
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Tonga
Tuvalu
Vanuatu
(14 countries or areas)

Russian Federation
San Marino
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Svalbard and Jan Mayen Islands
Sweden
Switzerland
Ukraine
United Kingdom
(49 countries or areas)

Latin America and the Caribbean
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina
Bahamas
Barbados
Belize
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Costa Rica
Cuba
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador
Grenada
Guatemala
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Suriname
Trinidad and Tobago
Uruguay
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
(33 countries or areas)

UNDP regional 
bureaux

Arab States
Algeria 
Bahrain 
Djibouti 
Egypt 
Iraq 
Jordan 
Kuwait 
Lebanon 
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya 
Morocco 
Occupied Palestinian Territories
Oman 
Qatar 
Saudi Arabia 
Somalia 
Sudan 
Syrian Arab Republic 
Tunisia 
United Arab Emirates 
Yemen 
(20 countries or areas)

Central and Eastern Europe  
and the Commonwealth 
of Independent States (CIS)
Albania 
Armenia 
Azerbaijan 
Belarus 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Bulgaria 
Croatia 
Cyprus
Czech Republic 
Estonia 
Georgia 
Hungary 
Kazakhstan 
Kyrgyzstan 
Latvia 
Lithuania 
Macedonia (the Former Yugoslav Rep. of))
Malta
Moldova 
Montenegro
Poland 

215

Country classification

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Lesotho 
Liberia 
Madagascar 
Malawi 
Mali 
Mauritania 
Mauritius 
Mozambique 
Namibia 
Niger 
Nigeria 
Rwanda 
Sao Tome and Principe
Senegal 
Seychelles 
Sierra Leone 
South Africa 
Swaziland 
Tanzania (United Republic of)
Togo 
Uganda 
Zambia 
Zimbabwe 
(45 countries or areas)

South Asia 
Afghanistan 
Bangladesh 
Bhutan 
India 
Iran (Islamic Republic of)
Maldives 
Nepal 
Pakistan 
Sri Lanka 
(9 countries or areas)

Romania 
Russian Federation 
Serbia
Slovakia 
Slovenia 
Tajikistan 
Turkey
Turkmenistan 
Ukraine 
Uzbekistan 
(31 countries or areas)

East Asia and the Pacific
Brunei Darussalam 
Cambodia 
China 
Fiji 
Hong Kong, China (SAR)
Indonesia 
Kiribati 
Korea (Democratic People’s Republic of)
Korea (Republic of)
Lao People’s Democratic Republic
Malaysia 
Marshall Islands 
Micronesia (Federated States of)
Mongolia 
Myanmar 
Nauru 
Palau 
Papua New Guinea 
Philippines 
Samoa
Singapore 
Solomon Islands 
Thailand 
Timor-Leste
Tonga 
Tuvalu 
Vanuatu 
Viet Nam 
(28 countries or areas)

Latin America and Caribbean
Antigua and Barbuda 
Argentina 
Bahamas 
Barbados 
Belize 
Bolivia 
Brazil 

Chile 
Colombia 
Costa Rica 
Cuba 
Dominica 
Dominican Republic 
Ecuador 
El Salvador 
Grenada 
Guatemala 
Guyana 
Haiti 
Honduras 
Jamaica 
Mexico 
Nicaragua 
Panama 
Paraguay 
Peru 
Saint Kitts and Nevis 
Saint Lucia 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines 
Suriname 
Trinidad and Tobago 
Uruguay 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) 
(33 countries or areas)

Sub-Saharan Africa
Angola 
Benin 
Botswana 
Burkina Faso 
Burundi 
Cameroon 
Cape Verde 
Central African Republic 
Chad 
Comoros 
Congo 
Congo (Democratic Republic of the)
Côte d’Ivoire 
Equatorial Guinea 
Eritrea 
Ethiopia 
Gabon 
Gambia 
Ghana 
Guinea 
Guinea-Bissau 
Kenya 

216

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2009
Overcoming barriers: Human mobility and development

Country classification

Other country 
groupings

Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC)
Bahrain
Kuwait
Qatar
Oman
Saudi Arabia
United Arab Emirates
(6 countries or areas)

European Union (EU27)
Austria
Belgium
Bulgaria
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Ireland
Italy
Latvia
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Malta
Netherlands
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
United Kingdom
(27 countries or areas)

Organisation of Economic 
Cooperation and 
Development (OECD)
Australia
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Czech Republic
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Korea (Republic of)
Luxembourg
Mexico
Netherlands
New Zealand
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Slovakia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
United Kingdom
United States
(30 countries or areas)

217

