Department of Economic and Social Affairs

E/2013/50/Rev. 1
ST/ESA/344

World Economic and Social Survey 2013

Sustainable Development Challenges

United Nations
New York, 2013

DESA

The Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the United Nations Secretariat is 
a  vital  interface  between  global  policies  in  the  economic,  social  and  environmental 
spheres and national action. The Department works in three main interlinked areas:  
(i) it compiles, generates and analyses a wide range of economic, social and environmental 
data and information on which States Members of the United Nations draw to review 
common problems and to take stock of policy options; (ii) it facilitates the negotiations 
of Member States in many intergovernmental bodies on joint courses of action to address 
ongoing or emerging global challenges; and (iii) it advises interested Governments on 
the  ways  and  means  of  translating  policy  frameworks  developed  in  United  Nations 
conferences and summits into programmes at the country level and, through technical 
assistance, helps build national capacities.

Note

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of  
capital letters combined with figures.

E/2013/50/Rev. 1
ST/ESA/344
ISBN 978-92-1-109167-0
eISBN 978-92-1-056082-5 

United Nations publication
Sales No. E.13.II.C.1
Copyright @ United Nations, 2013
All rights reserved

Preface

iii

The present edition of the World Economic and Social Survey rightly focuses on the ma-
jor  issue  of  our  time:  sustainable  development.  As  we  work  to  reach  the  Millennium 
Development Goals by 2015 and shape a global vision for the period beyond, we must 
evaluate progress and look ahead to emerging challenges.

The global goal of halving poverty was achieved in 2010. We have seen remark-
able gains in access to improved sources of water, the fight against malaria and tuberculo-
sis, improved conditions for slum dwellers in cities, enrolment in primary education and 
the advancement of women. 

At the same time, we must acknowledge that progress has been uneven and 
insufficient.  Environmental  sustainability  is  under  threat,  with  accelerating  growth  in 
global  greenhouse  gas  emissions  and  biodiversity  loss.  More  than  a  billion  people  still 
live in extreme poverty. Nearly all of them suffer from hunger. Eradicating poverty must 
remain central to the international development agenda. 

The United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development (Rio+20) reaf-
firmed commitment to sustainable development and adopted a framework for action and 
comprehensive follow-up. The World Economic and Social Survey 2013 serves as a valuable 
resource  as  we  look  towards  translating  the  outcome  of  Rio+20  into  concrete  actions. 
In particular, it offers in-depth analyses of some of the cross-sectoral issues identified at 
the Conference, notably urban sustainability, food and nutrition security and access to 
modern energy services for all.   

Eradicating  extreme  poverty,  promoting  sustainable  consumption  and  pro-
duction, and managing the planet’s natural resource base for the benefit of all are the 
overarching challenges of sustainable development. I commend the World Economic and 
Social Survey 2013 and emphasize its value to all those seeking a solid understanding of 
these major issues which will underpin our progress towards the future we want.

BAN KI-MOON 
Secretary-General

iv

Acknowledgements

The World Economic and Social Survey is the annual flagship publication on major develop-
ment issues prepared by the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the United 
Nations Secretariat (UN/DESA).

The Survey was prepared under the general supervision and direction of Rob 
Vos, former Director of the Development Policy and Analysis Division (DPAD) of UN/
DESA, and Willem van der Geest, Chief of the Development Strategy and Policy Unit 
of  DPAD.  The  core  team  at  DPAD  included  Diana  Alarcón,  Nicole  Hunt,  S.  Nazrul 
Islam, Alex Julca, Marco V. Sánchez, Oliver Schwank, Sergio Vieira and Eduardo Zepeda. 
Administrative support was provided by Lydia Gatan. Michael Brodsky of the Department 
of General Assembly Affairs and Conference Management copy-edited the original manu-
script. Israel Machado of DPAD and Ramona Kohrs and Jose Tatad of the Department of 
Public Information provided bibliographic support.

Substantive  contributions  were  also  made  by  Chantal  Line  Carpentier  and 
Richard Alex Roehrl of the Division for Sustainable Development (DSD) of UN/DESA 
and by Shari Spiegel of the Financing for Development (FfD) Office of UN/DESA.  

We gratefully acknowledge the background research contributions of Martín 
Cicowiez,  Stephany  Griffith-Jones,  Mark  Howells,  Helena  Molin  Valdes,  José  Antonio 
Ocampo, Matteo Pedercini, Vladimir Popov, John Toye, Tom van der Voorn and David 
Woodward.  Substantive  feedback  was  also  received  from  Rodolfo  Lacy,  Jorge  Nunez, 
Paulo Saad, David Satterthwaite and Claudia Sheinbaum. Further thanks are due to the 
participants of several workshops, organized to facilitate the preparation of this Survey, 
for  the  insights  they  provided.  They  include,  apart  from  the  contributors  mentioned 
above,  Jorge  Bravo,  Barney  Cohen,  Sarah  Cook,  Barry  Herman,  Pingfan  Hong,  Bela 
Hovy,  Ronald  Lee,  Eduardo  Lopez  Moreno,  Deepak  Nayyar,  David  O’Connor,  Elina 
Palm, Jonas Rabinovitch, Hamid Rashid, Nikhil Seth, John Shilling, Maximo Torero and  
John Winkel.

Critical  overall  guidance  was  provided  by  Shamshad  Akhtar,  Assistant 

Secretary-General for Economic Development at UN/DESA.  

Overview

Summary

 y

 y

 y

The world is faced with challenges in all three dimensions of sustainable develop-
ment—economic,  social  and  environmental.  More  than  1  billion  people  are  still 
living in extreme poverty, and income inequality within and among many countries 
has  been  rising;  at  the  same  time,  unsustainable  consumption  and  production 
patterns  have  resulted  in  huge  economic  and  social  costs  and  may  endanger  life 
on  the  planet.  Achieving  sustainable  development  will  require  global  actions  to 
deliver on the legitimate aspiration towards further economic and social progress, 
requiring  growth  and  employment,  and  at  the  same  time  strengthening  environ - 
mental protection. 
Sustainable development will need to be inclusive and take special care of the needs 
of the poorest and most vulnerable. Strategies need to be ambitious, action-oriented 
and collaborative, and to adapt to different levels of development. They will need 
to  systemically  change  consumption  and  production  patterns,  and  might  entail, 
inter alia, significant price corrections; encourage the preservation of natural endow-
ments; reduce inequality; and strengthen economic governance.   
The  World  Economic  and  Social  Survey  2013  aims  towards  contributing  to  the 
deliberations  on  sustainable  development  with  a  focus  on  three  important  cross-
sectoral  issues:  sustainable  cities,  food  security  and  energy  transformation.  While 
the entire range of thematic areas identified for action and follow-up in section V 
of the outcome document of the 2012 United Nations Conference on Sustainable 
Development, entitled “The future we want” (General Assembly resolution 66/288, 
annex), cannot be covered comprehensively in this Survey, highlighting three of the 
cross-sectoral issues may hopefully contribute to the addressing of sustainable de-
velopment challenges in the follow-up to the Conference. 

Global sustainable development  
challenges post-2015

In September 2000, world leaders adopted the United Nations Millennium Declaration1 
which provided the basis for the pursuit of the Millennium Development Goals. A global 
consensus was successfully forged around the importance of poverty reduction and human 
development. Since then, the global community has managed to uplift a large segment of 

1 

See General Assembly resolution 55/2.

vi

the poor and vulnerable. The world reached the poverty target five years ahead of the 2015 
deadline. In developing regions, the proportion of people living on less than $1.25 a day 
fell from 47 per cent in 1990 to 22 per cent in 2010. About 700 million fewer people lived 
in conditions of extreme poverty in 2010 compared with 1990.  Still, results fall short of 
international expectations and of the global targets set to be reached by the 2015 dead-
line. It remains imperative that the international community takes bold and collaborative  
actions to accelerate progress in achieving the Millennium Development Goals.

Continuation  of  current  development  strategies  will  not  suffice  to  achieve 
sustainable development beyond 2015. Moreover, relying on “business as usual” scenarios 
presents clear risks, because evidence is mounting that: 

(a)  The impact of climate change threatens to escalate in the absence of adequate 
safeguards  and  there  is  a  need  to  promote  the  integrated  and  sustainable 
management  of  natural  resources  and  ecosystems  and  take  mitigation  and 
adaptation action in keeping with the principle of common but differentiated 
responsibilities;

(b)  Hunger and malnourishment, while decreasing in many developing countries, 
remain persistent in other countries, and food and nutrition security continues 
to be an elusive goal for too many;
Income inequality within and among many countries has been rising and has 
reached an extremely high level, invoking the spectre of heightened tension 
and social conflict;

(c) 

(d)  Rapid urbanization, especially in developing countries, calls for major changes 
in the way in which urban development is designed and managed, as well as  
substantial increases of public and private investments in urban infrastructure 
and services;

(e)  Energy needs are likely to remain unmet for hundreds of millions of house-
holds, unless significant progress in ensuring access to modern energy services 
is achieved; 

(f)   Recurrence of financial crises needs to be prevented and the financial system 
has to be redirected towards promoting access to long-term financing for in-
vestments required to achieve sustainable development.
Over  the  past  years,  the  global  challenges  to  sustainable  development  have 
been  driven  by  a  broad  set  of  “megatrends”,  such  as  changing  demographic  profiles, 
changing economic and social dynamics, advancements in technology and trends towards 
environmental deterioration.  A better understanding of the linkages among these trends 
and the associated changes in economic, social and environmental conditions is needed. 
The  United  Nations  Conference  on  Sustainable  Development,  held  in  Rio  de  Janeiro, 
Brazil, from 20 to 22 June 2012, highlighted a range of interlinked challenges which call 
for priority attention, including decent jobs, energy, sustainable cities, food security and 
sustainable agriculture, water, oceans and disaster readiness.2 The present Survey focuses 
on three of these cross-sectoral issues with immediate implications for realizing sustainable 
development, namely: (a) sustainable cities, (b) food and nutrition security and (c) energy 
transformation. The other challenges are important, but a comprehensive discussion of 
them is beyond the scope of this Survey.

2 

See http://www.uncsd2012.org/about.html.

World Economic and Social Survey 2013Partial convergence and persistence of inequalities

vii

The  progress  that  has  been  achieved  in  recent  decades—and  its  unevenness—are  tied 
intrinsically  to  changes  in  the  global  economy.  Fast  growth  in  some  large  emerging 
economies has led to a partial convergence in living standards, which exists side by side 
with abject poverty and a persistence of inequalities. Inequality undermines prospects for 
inclusive growth, equal access to social protection, and broader sustainable development 
by negatively affecting aggregate demand, investments in health care and education, and 
sociopolitical and economic stability.

In  the  decades  ahead,  diverse  population  dynamics  have  the  potential  to 
further  exacerbate  inequalities,  both  in  developing  and  in  developed  countries,  and  at 
the global level. Increased urbanization, and rapid population growth, as well as popula-
tion ageing, while reflecting rising prosperity in many countries, will put major stress on 
national and local infrastructures and public finance, as well as caregiving, health and 
education systems.

To address these challenges and to position for global sustainable development 
after 2015, a strengthened global development agenda will have to facilitate transforma-
tion in the way goods and services are produced, in the way jobs are created, in global 
consumption patterns, in the management of natural resources, and in the mechanisms 
of governance.

Strategies for pursuing sustainable development 

Agenda 21 (United Nations, 1993) emphasized the interconnectedness among the three 
dimensions of sustainable development. Its actual implementation, however, arguably did 
not occur in the integrated manner envisaged. While the Millennium Development Goals 
focused attention on selected social and human development priorities, the world today 
witnesses emerging new challenges, aggravated by multiple financial, economic, food and 
energy  crises,  which  have  threatened  the  ability  of  all  countries  to  achieve  sustainable 
development. The United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development reaffirmed the 
political commitments of the international community to pursue sustainable development, 
under the principles of Agenda 21, including the principle of common but differentiated 
responsibilities.

Implementation process of Agenda 21 and the  
United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development

It is now clear that economic, social and environmental implementation efforts need to 
be reintegrated, and the tracks of discussion currently unfolding under the rubrics of the 
Millennium  Development  Goals  and  future  sustainable  development  goals  need  to  be 
thought of as dimensions of the sustainable development paradigm.

An  important  sustainable  development  challenge  arises  from  unsustainable 
consumption and production patterns that have evolved in developed countries, a pattern 
that is increasingly being followed by developing countries. For example, per capita green-
house gas emissions levels in developed countries are 20-40 times greater than needed for 
stabilization of the atmospheric greenhouse gas concentration. The per capita ecological 
footprints in developed countries are 4-9 times greater than their bio-capacity. The high 

Overviewviii

degree of inequality that accompanies and promotes these patterns makes them socially 
unsustainable and constrains achievement of the human development goals. Without an 
effective global agenda, high-income households, in developed as well as developing coun-
tries, are likely to continue to adopt unsustainable consumption practices.

Need for inclusive strategies and technology innovation

The outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development3 
provides guidance for achieving the transition to sustainable development as a means of 
increasing the well-being of current and future generations in all countries. Sustainable 
development strategies need to be inclusive and take special care of the needs of the poorest 
and most vulnerable. Strategies need to be ambitious, action-oriented and collaborative, 
taking into account different national circumstances. 

They will need to systemically change consumption and production patterns, 
and might entail, inter alia, significant price corrections; encourage the preservation of natu-
ral endowments; reduce inequality; and strengthen economic governance. Such a process 
will need to minimize the types of consumption and production that have negative exter-
nalities, while simultaneously seeking to maximize the types of consumption and produc-
tion that create positive externalities. Examples of minimizing negative externalities include 
reduction of environmental pollution, while examples of positive externalities include, for 
example, technology adaptation, reduction of food waste and enhanced energy efficiency.

Technology will certainly play a major role in this transformation. Changes in 
consumption patterns can drive the creation of new technologies necessary for sustainabi-
lity and their adoption and diffusion at the desired pace. Success in bringing about these 
changes will require substantial reorganization of the economy and society and changes 
in lifestyles. Economic and financial incentives for the creation and adoption of new tech-
nologies will be needed which may include innovative policy reforms. 

Poverty  eradication,  changing  unsustainable  and  promoting  sustainable 
patterns  of  consumption  and  production,  and  protecting  and  managing  the  natural 
resource base of economic and social development are the overarching objectives of and 
essential requirements for sustainable development.  In this large context, protection of 
climate and environment will need to be pursued as a universally shared goal. The global 
relocation of manufacturing and services sectors will also mean that appropriate technical 
regulation and social standards need to be adopted by developing and developed countries, 
with technical and financial support for developing countries.

The global sustainable development transformation entails, inter alia, signifi-
cant price corrections, a strong commitment to preserving natural endowments, a reduc-
tion of inequalities, introduction of environmental accounting, strengthening of public 
spheres of life, redirection of the financial sector to the real economy and sharing of profit 
and employment.  Transformation along these lines may be expected to increase the well-
being of people, especially the poorest. 

Sustainable  development  strategies  of  developing  countries  will  continue  to 
give priority to human development, with the eradication of poverty as its central goal. 
Human  development  requires  more  attention  to  be  directed  towards  quality  issues  as 
well as coherence at the national level. Human development success depends to a large 
extent on using the opportunities created by globalization and on minimizing its negative 

3 

General Assembly resolution 66/288, annex.

World Economic and Social Survey 2013ix

effects. In this context, better management of capital flows and macroeconomic regula-
tions may be necessary and coherence between national development strategies and global 
decision-making is important. Global institutions have to accommodate the special needs 
of developing countries, especially those of the least developed countries, the small island 
developing States, the landlocked developing countries and the countries in post-conflict 
situations. The global agenda will also need to attach greater importance to human rights, 
conflict prevention, good governance and reduction of inequality. 

Developing countries have in fact put forward initiatives that are more ad-
vanced  than  those  implemented  by  developed  countries  so  far.  For  example,  Ecuador 
and  the  Plurinational  State  of  Bolivia  enshrined  the  “rights  of  nature”  in  their  recent 
constitutions. Many developing countries are developing their own sustainable lifestyle 
and consumption patterns, and offer aspirational models. Drawing on their traditional 
knowledge, they can in many areas leapfrog to more sustainable means of production, in-
cluding greening of agriculture, industry and services. Developed countries can facilitate 
this process by offering appropriate cooperation in means of implementation, for example, 
through technology adaptation and transfer. Thus, both developed and developing coun-
tries can enter into a virtuous cycle of cooperation and engagement so as to ensure global 
sustainable development. 

Towards sustainable cities

Urbanization provides new jobs and new opportunities for millions of people in the world, 
and has contributed to poverty eradication efforts worldwide.  At the same time, rapid 
urbanization adds pressure to the resource base, and increases demand for energy, water, 
and sanitation, as well as for public services, education and health care.

Since 2007, more than half of the world’s population has lived in urban centres 
and it is estimated that the proportion will have exceeded 70 per cent by 2050. Eighty per 
cent of the world’s urban population will live in developing regions, especially in cities of 
Africa and Asia. 

During 1950-2010, a net 1.3 billion people was added in small cities, more 
than double the number of people added in medium cities (632 million) or large cities 
(570 million). The policy implications of the rising significance of middle and large settle-
ments in the next 15-20 years are worth noting. In the future, these cities will be primarily 
located in low- and middle-income countries. In many developing countries, rapid urbani-
zation calls for additional resources, and capacity development of local governments has 
become a pressing issue. It should also be noted that urban areas are constantly evolving 
as a result of people’s mobility, natural population growth, socioeconomic development, 
environmental changes, and local and national policies.

The number of people living in slums might triple by 2050  
if no policy framework is established to address this issue 

In many cities of low- and middle-income countries, access to public services (e.g., water, 
sanitation, electricity and health care) remains inadequate. Challenges to the institutional 
capacities for improving access to sound infrastructure, decent employment, and reducing 
vulnerability to pollution, natural disasters and other risks, loom large. Upper middle-  

Overviewx

and high-income countries with urban centres that already have access to basic public ser-
vices face the challenge of becoming more efficient in the use of energy and water, reducing 
the generation of waste and improving their recycling systems. Large and wealthier cities,  
in particular, may have well-managed resource systems but they also have larger ecolo -
gical footprints.

Climate change impacts increase cities’ vulnerabilities and put further stress 
on the adaptive capacities of the poor. Similarly, the ongoing economic crisis has increased 
underemployment of the educated youth in cities of poor and rich nations. Inequalities 
between rural and urban areas and within urban areas have been persistent features in 
many developing countries. About 1 billion people still live in slums lacking access to basic 
infrastructure and services such as water, sanitation, electricity, health care and education. 
There might be 3 billion slum dwellers by 2050 unless decisive actions are taken. 

Effective urban management is a condition  
for cities’ sustainability 

The policy framework for the sustainable development of urban areas requires multilevel 
cooperation  among  local,  national  and  global  communities  and  partnerships  to  mobi-
lize  public  and  private  resources.  Democratic  legitimacy  and  stakeholder  consultation  
are important.

Sustainable development of urban areas requires integration and coordination, 
including regarding land-use issues, food security, employment creation, transportation 
infrastructure development, biodiversity conservation, water conservation, renewable en-
ergy sourcing, waste and recycling management, and the provision of education, health 
care and housing. 

Synergies  can  be  identified,  e.g.,  between  waste  and  recycling  management 
(environmental management) and access to water and sanitation (social development), be-
tween air quality conservation and green public transportation, and between production 
and distribution of renewable energy sources and green energy access, as well as between 
the goal of reducing inequities (effective urban governance) and access to education and 
health care (social development).

The Survey proposes an integrated set of investments in infrastructure, public 
services  and  capacity  development  for  different  groups  of  countries.  An  integrated  ap-
proach  to  rural  and  urban  development  is  critical.  Investment  in  economic  and  social 
infrastructure in rural areas might improve productivity, reduce poverty and inequity and 
create additional opportunities for sustainable livelihoods.

Sustainable development of cities in poor countries entails investment in in-
frastructure such as roads, water, sewers, electricity and services such as schools, public 
transportation and health care. Leapfrogging investment in a green industrial transforma-
tion  can  generate  youth  employment.  In  cities  of  middle-  and  high-income  countries, 
investment in infrastructure, renewable energy, buildings, and improved electricity and 
water efficiencies is important.  Investment in the reduction of waste production and im-
provement of waste collection and recycling systems is needed in most cities across the 
world. Providing access to modern energy services is a real challenge to urban authorities 
in  developing  countries  which  often  do  not  have  enough  capacity  to  respond,  nor  the 
ability to raise the needed long-term financial resources for investment.

World Economic and Social Survey 2013xi

A  “one  size  fits  all”  approach  towards  sustainable  development  in  cities  is 
precluded, since cities’ priorities, objectives and paths are highly diverse. Policy frame-
works need to promote a common integrated approach, while differentiating among the 
responsibilities of upper-, middle- and low-income countries. Consequently, measures of 
sustainable development progress also need to be tailored to the particular challenges and 
opportunities identified and prioritized by the cities’ main stakeholders.

Ensuring food and nutrition security

It is essential to ensure that everyone in the world has access to enough nutritious food. 
The Survey highlights the challenges in this regard and the changes to the food system that 
are needed to ensure food and nutrition security by 2050.

The target of halving the proportion of people suffering 
from hunger in sub-Saharan Africa will not be met

Basic food insecurity still affects 1 billion people, as many as in 1970. However, the pro-
portion of people who are undernourished declined from about 20 per cent in 1990-1992 
to 15 per cent in 2008-2010. Progress has been uneven across regions and the 2007-2008 
food and financial crisis posed additional challenges. Under current conditions, the target 
of halving the proportion of people suffering from hunger by 2015 will not be met in 
sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia. 

Because of low quality and low diversity of available food, the challenge of 
malnutrition is broader than the issue of hunger or undernourishment. Individuals may 
take in enough calories for daily subsistence, but still suffer from “hidden hunger” with low 
levels of micronutrients owing to the lack of diversification of diets. This is a problem in 
both developing and developed countries, affecting 30 per cent of the world’s population. 
The excess of calories is another rising major global public-health concern, as overweight 
and obesity result in more than 2.8 million deaths among adults every year.

Estimates  indicate  that  food  production  will  have  to  increase  70  per  cent 
globally to feed an additional 2.3 billion people by 2050. Food demand is anticipated  
to continue to shift towards more resource-intensive agricultural products, such as live-
stock and dairy products, thereby exerting additional pressure on land, water and bio-
diversity resources.

On the supply side, meeting an increasing food demand is a major concern, 
given the rise of resource constraints. Current agricultural practices are a leading source of 
greenhouse gas emissions, while also leading to other problems, such as loss of soil fertil-
ity and water pollution from run-off. Increased temperatures and more volatile weather 
patterns caused by climate change may already be affecting crop yields, affecting incomes 
and agricultural production.

Increased land use for biofuels will increase constraints on the supply side and 
may lead to higher food prices, further affecting the most economically disadvantaged. 
Similarly, current urbanization trends accelerate the diversion of land use from agricul-
tural production.

Overviewxii

The food, water, energy, environment and climate nexus

An integrated approach to food security and the environment should take into consid-
eration the food, water, energy, environment and climate nexus, while reorienting food 
production, distribution and consumption. Food security, while minimizing environmen-
tal impacts and increasing natural resource efficiency, will require increasing agricultural 
productivity, in particular in developing countries where agriculture accounts for a large 
share of gross domestic product (GDP) and where large productivity gaps still exist. Rapid 
increases in yields are deemed feasible, in particular where productivity gaps are high. At 
the same time, the protection of soil quality and crop and grazing land management, in-
cluding restoration of degraded lands, have been identified as having the greatest agricul-
tural potential to mitigate climate change, in addition to being cost-effective. Additional 
public  investments  in  agriculture-related  research  and  development  will  be  crucial  to 
increasing productivity. 

The private sector will need to play a major role in expanding research, particu-
larly in biotechnology, with a focus on food security. Special efforts are also needed to close 
the  productivity  gap  of  smallholder  farms,  which  offer  great  potential  for  engagement 
in sustainable agricultural practices. Faster productivity gains among a large number of 
small-scale producers in very different agroecological regions will require improved dis-
semination and adaptation of technology to meet their specific needs.

A broad-based rural development strategy has to include infrastructural in-
vestments to better connect producers to output markets, including in rural-urban link-
ages and the improvement of distribution systems and storage facilities. The prospect of 
new economic opportunities, including institutional changes that facilitate access to input 
markets, as well as credit and insurance markets, will also encourage smallholders, espe-
cially women farmers, in developing countries to increase their productivity. 

Social protection mechanisms, including social safety nets, must also be part 
of a broader rural development strategy to facilitate access of low-income households to 
food. This will not only protect the most vulnerable against short-term economic shocks, 
but  also  contribute  to  long-term  resilience  by  facilitating  their  access  to  food  and  by 
strengthening  the  ability  of  smallholders  to  manage  risks  and  adopt  new  technologies 
with higher productivity. 

Reducing food wastage may contribute to the  
sustainability of the food system

To reorient food consumption towards diets that are less-resource intensive and more 
nutritious will also be crucial for food sustainability. In particular, reducing food wast-
age may contribute significantly to the sustainability of the food system. Currently, it 
is estimated that 32 per cent of the total food produced globally is wasted. In order to 
substantially reduce the quantity of food lost and wasted, changes have to take place 
at different levels of the food chain: production, storage, transportation and consump-
tion. In developed countries, efforts are most needed at the retail and consumer end,  
owing in part to management practices and consumption habits. In developing coun-
tries, interventions are needed at the producer end, before food reaches the market, to 
address inadequate harvesting techniques and storage conditions. Speculation in land 
and water has to be addressed at both the national and the international level. More 

World Economic and Social Survey 2013xiii

investment  funds  will  be  needed  to  help  implement  these  strategies  and  to  support 
other countries in developing their own strategies for reinforcing the resilience of food 
production systems.

The international community can help developing countries in their efforts 
to design and implement policies that increase resilience to food price volatility and to 
climate variability. Priority actions should include reviewing trade policies to ensure that 
they support food and nutrition security, while establishing a transparent food market 
information system with timely information on regional and international stocks. The reli-
ability and timeliness of early warning systems need to be improved at both the national 
and  regional  levels,  with  a  focus  on  countries  that  are  particularly  vulnerable  to  price 
shocks and food emergencies. The current global trading system also needs to be reformed 
so that the poorest can be provided with just and fair access to markets.

Changing the production and consumption patterns of wealthier countries 
and consumers, including dietary habits, could make a remarkable contribution to en-
suring food and nutrition security. The livestock sector, which has grown rapidly to meet 
the increasing demand for meat, is a prime contributor to water scarcity, pollution, land 
degradation and greenhouse gas emissions. This trend will need to be reversed in the 
context of more sustainable diets, but as long as market prices do not reflect such scarci-
ties, there will be insufficient incentives for behavioural changes. Publicity, advocacy, 
education and legislation will need to be used to bring about such cultural changes so as 
to reduce high levels of retail and domestic food waste in high- and upper middle income 
countries;  furthermore,  better  policy  instruments  for  promoting  sustainable  diets  are 
still needed.

The energy transformation challenge

The transformation of the energy system needs to be a core element of the sustainable 
development agenda, in order to improve the living standards of people with equity and 
environmental sustainability. Under the Secretary-General’s Sustainable Energy for All 
Initiative  and  in  other  contexts,  explicit  energy  goals  (or  targets)  have  been  suggested 
to end the dependence on traditional biomass as a source of thermal energy; to improve 
access to reliable, adequate and high-quality electricity; to facilitate convergence to best 
practices in the provision of energy services; and to ensure that unreliable or low-quality 
energy sources do not compromise the opportunities of the working poor who are self-
employed or run household enterprises.

Transformation of the energy system needs to be a core 
element of the sustainable development agenda

The latest estimates confirm that emissions trends will likely lead to temperature increases 
with potentially catastrophic consequences. Even if all currently planned mitigation poli-
cies were fully implemented—including expanded use of renewable energy sources and 
improvements  in  energy  efficiency—a  stabilization  of  greenhouse  gas  emissions  at  450 
parts per million (ppm) will not have been achieved by 2050.

If one focuses on the rise in renewable energy, the advances in reducing pol-
lution in some cities, the implementation of policies to improve sustainable development, 

Overviewxiv

and  the  adoption  of  international  sustainability  agreements,  the  world  is  undoubtedly 
greener today than it would have been if no actions had been taken. However, even after 
taking into account all of these factors, the likely outlook is that the desired emissions 
reduction targets will not be met.

According to some projections, emissions concentrations might reach between 
650 and 700 ppm of carbon dioxide equivalent (CO2e) by 2050 and between 800 and 
1,300 ppm of CO2e by 2100 (Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, 
2012c). These increases would be associated with increases in global average temperature 
of 2°C -3°C by 2050 and of 3.7°C -5.6°C by 2100. 

Multiple pathways towards sustainable energy have been identified. There are 
many  existing  energy  technology  options  for  mitigating  emissions  and  increasing  wel-
fare.  Hundreds  of  scenarios  have  shown  that  the  world  can  follow  a  large  number  of 
energy paths towards sustainable development which require, however, ambitious policies, 
improved international cooperation, including in means of implementation, behavioural 
changes and unprecedented levels of investment.

Sustainable development pathways share common features

Despite their variety, sustainable development pathways share common features. First, the 
sooner the implementation of policies starts, the greater the technological flexibility and 
the less costly the actions required. Second, policies increasing efficiency in the delivery of 
energy services can go a long way. Perhaps the most important insight provided by scenario 
analyses is that the world can go a long way towards controlling emissions, if it invests 
decisively in energy efficiency. Scenarios emphasizing improvements in end-use efficiency 
tend to meet sustainable development goals, such as ensuring (almost) universal access 
to electricity, maintaining air quality, and limiting global average temperature increases. 
However, if efficiency gains turn out to be small, the world will become highly dependent 
on  rapidly  improving  innovation  and  increasing  the  supply  of  “clean”  energy.  Another 
insight is that sustainable development pathways have been devised that exclude nuclear 
power, and carbon capture and storage (and its bioengineering variants), technologies that 
face great sociopolitical and technical challenges. However, their exclusion would make 
the attainment of sustainable development much more challenging and require special 
measures to improve energy efficiencies and reduce demand.  

Scenario results indicate that, in the absence of additional targeted pro-poor 
energy policies, by 2030, some 2.4 billion people will still rely on solid fuels for cooking, 
or  300  million  more  than  the  2.1  billion  so  reliant  in  2005.  The  implementation  of  a 
highly ambitious package of policies directly addressing the energy-poverty nexus has the 
potential to ensure access to modern energy of an additional 1.9 billion of people. The 
policy package would have to combine financing (including microfinancing), to cover the 
upfront costs of enabling access to modern energy and the purchase of appliances, with a 
50 per cent fuel subsidy in relation to market prices. Even such an ambitious set of policies, 
however, would still leave 500 million people without access to modern energy, most of 
them in rural Africa and in remote areas. Additional specific targeted programmes im-
plemented through international development cooperation would be needed for modern 
energy services.

World Economic and Social Survey 2013Energy transformation can be compatible with  
economic and social inclusion

xv

The sustainable energy transformation can be compatible with economic and social inclu-
sion.  In  particular,  near  universal  access  to  clean  cooking  fuels  and  electricity  can  be 
achieved  in  harmony  with  measures  devised  to  contain  the  increase  of  emissions  and, 
pertinently, at a comparatively modest investment cost.

The Survey does not view technology as the main limiting factor for energy 
transformation, but is less sanguine about the economic, social and cultural hurdles as-
sociated with the implementation of national policies and achievement of a commensurate 
level of international cooperation. 

The complex challenges that a sustainable energy transformation faces range 
from issues of growth, macroeconomic balances, and technology innovation and its diffu-
sion, to human development concerns. They confer great importance on policy coherence. 
Moreover, industrial policies, technological innovation, transfer and adaptation, and en-
ergy plans based on integrated energy assessments require decisive, ingenious and coherent 
national policymaking and international cooperation.

Low-carbon,  inclusive  growth  requires  that  the  set  of  conditions  needed  to 
create the “enabling environment” for change be in place: policy space and coherence; 
international  financing;  international  cooperation;  and  enabling  international  institu-
tions, establishing rules and norms. It requires an enabling environment for the industrial 
policies needed to accelerate economic growth and foster green sectors, as well as for large 
public  and  private  investment  projects.  Adequate  international  financing  needs  to  be 
available, especially to developing countries and the least developed countries. Domestic 
sources should be tapped to the extent possible, but the size of required investments will 
make international finance necessary. Designing national sustainable development strate-
gies demands the integration of complex processes across the macroeconomy, the energy 
sector, and the deployment of technology, policies for social and economic inclusion, and 
the environment. Building national capacities and international cooperation in these areas 
will be important. The world needs a big push—one that is public investment-led, based 
on international development cooperation, and capable of catalysing private sector invest-
ment and innovation so as to sustainably transform the energy system.

Financing sustainable development

Responding  to  the  above-mentioned  challenges  requires  large-scale  investments.  It  is 
recognized that the fulfilment of official development assistance (ODA) commitments 
is crucial.  Innovative financing mechanisms can also make contributions to developing 
countries  in  respect  of  mobilization  of  additional  resources  for  financing  for  develop-
ment.  Sustainable  financing  needs  to  be  ensured  across  sectors,  including  agriculture, 
forestry,  energy,  health  and  education,  as  well  as  across  economic  segments,  such  as 
small and medium-sized enterprises, infrastructure and innovation, in both developed 
and developing countries. Special attention needs to be directed towards financing the 
global commons (e.g., the atmosphere, oceans, biodiversity and forests) and global health. 
This Survey shows that delivering on present commitments to achieve the Millennium 
Development  Goals  already  requires  substantial  additional  public  expenditure.  It  also 

Overviewxvi

identifies financing challenges related to the Survey’s three focus areas: sustainable cities, 
food security and energy transformation. 

Achieving the Millennium Development Goals  
requires stepping up public spending

Evidence drawn from country-level economy-wide modelling analyses for 27 developing 
countries suggests that achieving the Millennium Development Goals by 2015 requires 
significantly stepping up upfront public spending in developing countries.4  First, a busi-
ness-as-usual scenario assessed progress towards meeting the Millennium Development 
Goals under expected economic growth, existing public spending priorities and budget 
financing  policies.  This  baseline  scenario  assessed  whether  the  countries  would  be  “on 
track”  or  “off  track”  to  achieve  the  targets,  taking  into  account  non-linearities  in  the 
effectiveness  of  social  spending  in  achieving  those  targets.  All  27  country-level  studies 
found that, while substantial human development progress would be made with the cur-
rent public expenditure scenario, only two countries (Chile and Cuba) would fully meet, 
by 2015, a set of targets for primary school completion, reduction of child and maternal 
mortality rates, and expanded coverage of drinking water and basic sanitation.

For  the  cases  in  which  business  as  usual  was  found  not  to  be  sufficient  to 
achieve the goals, the analyses examined a number of policy scenarios under which public 
spending was stepped up as much as needed to achieve those goals from 2010 to 2015. 

Meeting the human development targets was found to be affordable for only a 
minority of countries: 18 countries would need to raise their public spending by an extra  
2 percentage points or more of GDP relative to the baseline with current policies. The 
public spending needed to meet the targets in the countries studied was estimated at about 
7 per cent of GDP and, in some cases, the estimate was even higher. 

An update of these analyses for six of the countries of Latin America and the 
Caribbean took into consideration the global financial crisis, by comparing social indica-
tors under two scenarios, with and without the growth slowdown. It was found that the 
additional public spending requirements would have to rise by 1.6 -3.4 per cent of GDP 
per year between 2010 and 2015 as a result of the economic growth slowdown—on top of 
the spending requirements that had been estimated for these six countries. 

As indicated in the Survey, mitigation policies designed to curb carbon emis-
sions  through  the  adoption  of  renewable  sources  of  energy  will  require  substantial  ad-
ditional investments. Given the existing financing constraints, accelerated investments for 
sustainable development could overstretch countries’ public finances. 

Sustainable development requires coherence  
of fiscal policy and public investment allocations

Coherent policies for greenhouse gas mitigation, economic growth and human develop-
ment need to be devised. The Survey presents evidence that taxing of greenhouse gas emis-
sions in developed and developing countries can be useful. Not only could fiscal policy 

4 

These analyses were conducted by national researchers and government experts, with technical 
support from the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the United Nations Secretariat and 
the World Bank. While Latin America has been comprehensively covered, only nine case studies for 
countries in Africa and Asia have been completed to date.

World Economic and Social Survey 2013xvii

contribute to GHG mitigation, but—combined with a set of coherent policies—it could 
also change unsustainable consumption patterns, promote human development, and off-
set some of its potential economic costs. Three policy scenarios were simulated to illustrate 
that this may be the case, using the examples of three oil-importing developing countries. 
These scenarios are compared with a baseline which represents a continuation of currently 
expected economic growth and public spending interventions up to 2030. 

The results show that, keeping all other things equal, unilateral taxes on the 
domestic price of fuel oil would depress intermediate and especially final consumption of 
fuel oil in the three countries. It is likely that carbon emissions would consequently be 
reduced and industries that supply oil-intensive goods for the domestic market and exports 
would be penalized. In fact, GDP growth is likely to be negatively affected.

If,  alternatively,  the  new  tax  revenues  were  allocated  to  investing  in  public 
infrastructure, or expanding service delivery in education, instead of being used to reduce 
the budget deficit, the output loss would be offset partially or in some cases fully, mainly 
because such investments could spur productivity growth. Increased availability of public 
infrastructure or better-educated workers would tend to raise productivity growth above 
the baseline. 

Increased public infrastructure or service delivery in education could also have 
a positive impact on human development. Without coherent policy interventions, taxing 
fuel oil consumption alone could reduce promotion rates in primary education, as house-
holds’ demand for education decreases with decreasing economic activity. 

Financing the sustainability of cities will  
require multilevel cooperation

A close partnership between local and national authorities is needed to finance the sus-
tainable development of cities. While cities need to raise financial resources from capital 
markets directly, financial oversight mechanisms must be in place to manage risks so that 
municipal borrowing does not result in an excess of non-performing loans in the banking 
system or the incurring of huge financial liabilities by the central government.    

Poorer cities need international cooperation and additional resources to sup-
port  green  technology  adaptation,  and  capacity  development,  and  to  provide  access  to 
public  transportation,  housing  of  sound  construction,  water  and  sanitation,  electricity, 
health care and education. It is indeed a daunting task to finance investment in public 
infrastructure,  including  adaptation  to  and  mitigation  of  climate  change,  which  often 
demands  large  sums  of  upfront  finance  whose  returns  would  be  reaped  mainly  in  the 
medium and long terms.

Richer cities need policies to encourage renewable energy and to reduce inef-
ficiency and wasteful consumption. Regulatory measures are important for determining 
pricing structures, taxes and subsidies for households and industry—for the development, 
for example, of compact neighbourhoods and the retrofitting of buildings. Various types 
of taxes can be used to finance the gap between the financial outlay and the actual cost of 
services, for example, lower fares for public transportation.

Thus, for poor and rich cities alike, part of the financing would have to be di-
rected towards addressing global environmental challenges and the livelihoods of present 
and future generations.  

Overviewxviii

City financing may entail the use of a wide  
variety of instruments

Financing strategies for sustainable development in cities can draw upon a wide range of 
instruments. Bond banks and resource pooling can be useful instruments for reducing 
risk. Cities in developing countries have successfully issued bonds (without a guarantee 
from the national Government) to finance water supply and sewerage projects. Public-
private  partnerships  can  also  help  raise  funds  for  infrastructure  projects,  particularly 
in developing countries with limited access to long-term credit. Public-private partner-
ships have been used to finance the production of renewable sources of energy and waste 
management. Cities may also leverage the value of land to finance infrastructure, either 
through the outright sale of land by auction or by issuing leaseholds to leverage the land’s 
value. These instruments can generate the initial capital needed to cover start-up costs of 
infrastructure investments. However, land-based financing instruments require relatively 
strong and effective institutions and well-articulated legal frameworks. 

Sources of finance can have different degrees of stability and predictability.  
Taxation tied to business profits, which can fall during times of crisis, incurs greater risks 
than  real  estate  taxes,  because  the  revenues  from  the  latter  are  more  stable  and  easier  
to predict.

Agricultural development will require  
significant investments

Investment needs for primary agriculture and its downstream industries in developing 
countries were estimated at US$ 9.2 trillion (2009 dollars) over the 44-year period from 
2005-2007 to 2050. 

There are obstacles preventing higher investment in primary agriculture and 
especially in small farms. The insufficiency of public services limits potential returns to 
farmers’ investments. Another issue is related to the lack of price incentives for small-scale 
producers,  in  particular  when  there  are  price  controls  on  food  products  which  reduce 
their potential net revenue. A third issue is the lack of access by smallholders to formal 
insurance protection against risks. 

Private sector investments will be needed

Private  investments  in  agriculture,  particularly  international  private  investments,  are 
needed and can play an important role in boosting productivity and ensuring food se-
curity, when directed towards strategic needs. However, in order to increase the positive 
impact  of  these  investments,  Governments  need  to  design  policies  and  legislation  that 
can  create  a  more  conducive  climate  for  inclusive  and  sustainable  investments.  Direct 
incentives, for instance, such as tax incentives, can encourage investments that directly 
support local smallholders. Contract farming can also lead to positive investment, when 
small-scale farmers are assisted in contract negotiation and dispute resolution. 

It is clear that public sources alone are not sufficient to address the needs in 
these domains.  A framework for financing sustainable development needs to ensure that 
financing from private and public sources at the national, regional and international levels 
is  secured.  Financing  has  fallen  short  in  areas  that  are  critical  for  sustainable  growth: 

World Economic and Social Survey 2013xix

long-term investment, including infrastructure financing, research and development and 
investment in riskier sectors, such as small and medium-sized enterprises and innovation; 
and financing of international cooperation.

Further, the long time-frame necessary for infrastructure investments is out-
side the investment parameters of many institutional investors, even those considered to be 
“long-term” investors. The issue of a very long investment time-horizon arises in particular 
for low-carbon infrastructure projects, owing to higher risks and lower expected returns 
over the life of the project. In general, low-carbon technologies cannot compete with ex-
isting technologies, and this is unlikely to change unless market prices incorporate, to a 
much greater extent, the societal costs of using brown technologies, with their high levels 
of greenhouse gas emissions and other environmental risks.

Sustainable development will require significant  
investment from international private actors

A significant share of the investments necessary to achieve sustainable development will 
have  to  come  from  private  sources,  which  nonetheless  will  depend  on  the  availability 
of public funds to match those investments, through the provision of guarantees and/
or regulation to assure future revenue streams. Public financing, regulation and private 
market-based financing will therefore have to be combined, based on the specific charac-
teristics of the newly created assets.  

A  framework  for  the  financing  of  sustainable  development  will  need  to  be 
supported by an enabling policy environment at national and international levels and by 
renewed commitments to ODA. Such a framework will need to include policy initiatives 
to internalize externalities, better align private incentives with public goals, and finance 
efforts to address global challenges.  Policy coherence across domestic, regional and in-
ternational  initiatives  is  crucial,  as  international  and  regional  policy  agreements  shape 
national strategies, while national policies are part and parcel of the international and 
regional framework.

Overviewxxi

Contents

Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . iii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . iv
Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .v
Contents  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xxi
Explanatory notes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  xxvii

I 

II 

Global trends and challenges to sustainable development post-2015  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . 1
A more challenging context for global development  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1
Underlying global megatrends  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2
A more integrated, but multipolar and heterogeneous global economy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .3
A deeper globalization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .3
Financial globalization and financialization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .5
Convergence, but greater vulnerability and heterogeneity in the global economy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .7
Persistent inequalities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .9
Demographic changes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Environmental degradation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
Threats to global ecosystems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
A strong sustainability challenge?  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
Sustainable development in a more interdependent world . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
Mutually reinforcing trends and challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
Strategies for sustainable development  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21

Strategies for development and transformation  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 23
Process tracks of implementation of Agenda 21 and its consequences  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
The impasse with regard to climate change mitigation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  25
Worries regarding poverty eradication and other human development goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
Millennium Development Goals and Sustainable Development Goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
Means of achieving an integrated post-2015 agenda  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
Causes of the climate change mitigation impasse . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
Causes of human development concerns   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
Towards reintegration of human development and environment protection goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
Strategies for transformation in developed countries  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
Role of technology in ensuring sustainability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34

xxii

III 

Shifts in consumption patterns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
Means of bringing about shifts in consumption patterns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
Environmental accounting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
Shifts in consumption and quality of life . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
Shifts in consumption patterns and the implications for employment and income . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
Sustainable development strategies in developing countries  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
A heterogeneous developing world . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
Further progress in achieving the current Millennium Development Goals  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
Human development through more equitable  
distribution post-2015  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
Development in a more environmentally constrained post-2015 world . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
The South’s initiatives towards sustainable development  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
Challenges of financing human and sustainable development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
A new type of global cooperation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50

Towards sustainable cities  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 53
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
The city and main urbanization trends . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
The scale and scope of urbanization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
Diverse paths and paces of urbanization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
Changing patterns of urban settlements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
Is there a twin path between urbanization and economic growth? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
A framework for sustainable cities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
The challenges associated with building sustainable cities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
Socioeconomic inequalities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
Sprawl and weakened capacities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
Energy access . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
Common and differentiated impacts of natural hazards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
Opportunities for building sustainable cities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
An integrated and coordinated approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
Trade-offs between investments? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
Learning by doing in building sustainable cities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
Act locally with national support and global coordination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76
Financing sustainable cities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
The scale and scope of needed finance  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
A policy framework for sustainable financing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78
Examples of financing strategies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78

Annex: Examples of plans and policies for building sustainable cities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80

World Economic and Social Survey 2013xxiii

IV 

Ensuring food and nutrition security  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 85
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
Multiple dimensions of malnutrition: undernourishment, micronutrient deficiencies and over-nutrition  . . . . 87
Under-nutrition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 88
Food insecurity persists  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 88
Impacts of under-nutrition: undernourishment and micronutrient deficiencies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89
Over-nutrition  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91
Obesity on the rise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91
Impacts of over-nutrition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92
Increasing food availability  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93
Increasing agricultural productivity  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93
Extension services . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93
Increasing investment in R&D . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 94
Sustainable management of natural resources  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 97
Current unsustainable practices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 97
Improving management of natural resources  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
Investments in rural infrastructures  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
Improving access to food . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
Limited access to food  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
Generating income in rural areas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
Improving agricultural income . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
Non-farm economy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
Social security and safety nets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
Safety nets in the short term  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
Social security in the long term  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
A pro-food security international trade system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
The trade system  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
Food security stocks and information transparency   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108
Diets and consumption patterns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
Sustainable diets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
Health and education policies to enhance nutrition security . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110
Health  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111
Information campaigns and educational programmes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111
Consumption patterns: reducing waste . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112
Increasing financing for the agricultural sector  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 114
The importance of increasing public investment in agriculture. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 114
Incentives for private investment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 116
International support for agriculture  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 117

Contentsxxiv

V 

The energy transformation challenge  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 121
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 122
The evidence for climate change and human-activity generated emissions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 122
The room for effective action is shrinking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 123
The many paths to a sustainable energy transformation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 124
The IPCC special report on renewables (2012) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 125
United Nations Environment Programme emissions gap report . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 125
OECD Environmental Outlook to 2050 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 125
Global Energy Assessment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 127
Sustainable energy with economic and social inclusion  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 128
The challenge of transforming the energy system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 132
The technology challenge  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 132
The investment challenge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 136
Implementing sustainable development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 141
Sustainable development pathways . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 141
The enabling conditions for the transformation of the energy system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 145
Coherent national policies for sustainable development  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 145
Sustainable energy systems in a global development agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 157

 

Bibliography  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 159

World Economic and Social Survey 2013xxv

Boxes
System of Environmental-Economic Accounting 2012 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
Sustainable development initiatives from the South . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
Definition of a city and data issues  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
How Curitiba became a reference point for sustainable development. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  70
Plan Verde of Mexico City  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
The 10 essentials for urban resilience . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
A partnership in Dhaka to convert organic waste to a resource and generate carbon credits . . . . . . . 77
Purchase of large extensions of land . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 98
Infrastructure’s potential to drive productivity and sustainable food  
production: the case of Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
Sustainable diets and reduced food waste . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110
The energy system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 134
 Tax oil to invest in education . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 147
Policies and markets may provide unintended welcoming effects:  
Sweden is importing garbage to generate electricity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 152
Bangladesh: between a coal-based energy system at hand and  
a promising but distant sustainable energy system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 153
Mauritius: coping with climate and land-use, energy and water resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 154
Burkina Faso adds energy in order to reduce emissions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 156

  II.1 
  II.2 
 III.1  
 III.2 
 III.3 
 III.4  
 III.5  
 IV.1 
 IV.2 
 
 
 IV.3 
 V.1 
 V.2 
 V.3 
 
 
 V.4 
 
 
 V.5 
 V.6 

Contentsxxvi

Figures

  more than half of those gains went to the top 5 per cent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
Share of the poor in per capita growth, 1981-2008 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
Framework for integrating human development and environmental protection goals  
and making them universal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
Average ecological footprint per person in developed and developing countries, 1961 and 2007 . . 32
Increased share of plastic in gross domestic product, 1900-2000 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
Factors influencing subjective well-being  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
Unemployment rate of the most skilled labour under the baseline scenario and  

I.1  World non-fuel merchandise exports by type of goods, 1998-2011  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .5
 
Annual growth of GDP per capita, high-, low- and middle-income countries, 1990-2011 . . . . . . . . . . . . .7
I.2 
 
Income share of the top 1 per cent for a sample of developed  
I.3 
 
 
and  developing countries, 1915-2010 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
 
Projected population by development region, medium variant, 1950-2050  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
I.4 
 
Urban and rural population growth, high-, low- and middle-income  
I.5 
 
 
countries, 1950-1955 to 2045-2050  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
 
CO2 emissions of developed and developing countries, as allocated to production  
I.6 
 
and consumption (production plus net exports), 1990-2010 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
 
 
  II.1 
Different tracks of the implementation process of Agenda 21 and the consequences . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  25
Income of the poorest decile, World (excluding China), 2000-2250 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
  II.2 
  II.3 
Distribution of global absolute gains in income, 1988-2008:  
 
  II.4 
  II.5 
 
 
  II.6 
  II.7 
  II.8 
  II.9 
 
  III.1 
  III.2 
 
 
  III.3 
 
 
  III.4 
  IV.1 
  IV.2 
  IV.3 
 
 
  IV.4 
  IV.5 
  IV.6 
 
 
  IV.7 
  V.1 

  Millennium Development Goals-financing scenario, Costa Rica and Yemen, 2005, 2015 and 2030 . . 50
Population trends and projections, 1950-2050 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
Urbanization and economic growth, developed regions and  
Latin America and the Caribbean, 1970-2010 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
GDP per capita and urban share of total population,  
sub-Saharan Africa and least developed countries, 1970-2010 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
Pillars for achieving sustainability of cities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
Number of people undernourished and prevalence of undernourishment,  1990-2012 . . . . . . . . . . . . . 88
Distribution of undernourished people in the world, by region,  1990-1992 and 2010-2012 . . . . . . . . . 90
Age-standardized prevalence of obesity among adults aged  
20 years or over, by WHO region, 1980 and 2008 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92
Public research expenditure on food and agriculture, 1981-2008 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 95
Lost and wasted food, by type of product . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113
Agricultural expenditures and the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture  
Development Programme (CAADP) 10 per cent target, 2008. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 116
Trends in aid to agriculture: commitments, 1973-2008  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 118 
Global energy-related CO2 emissions by scenario, OECD and non-OECD, 2010, 2020 and 2035 . . . . 124

World Economic and Social Survey 2013xxvii

  V.2 
 
 
  V.3 
  V.4 
 V.5a 
 V.5b 
 V.5c 
  V.6 
  V.7 
  V.8 
 
  V.9 

Global renewable primary energy supply (direct equivalent)  
versus fossil fuel and industrial CO2 emissions, 2030 and 2050 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 126
Income per capita, and social and economic inclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 130
Impact of access policies on cleaner cooking in three developing regions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 131
Additional investments in sustainable pathways, by supply, mix and  efficiency policies  . . . . . . . . . . . 139
Additional investments in sustainable pathways, by technology portfolio . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 139
Additional investments in sustainable pathways, by region . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 139
Green growth diagnostic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 142
Impact on real GDP growth of a tax on oil and investment in education  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 146
Growth impact of policies aimed towards achieving the  

  Millennium Development Goals, selected countries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 150
Energy and the post-2015 vision . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 151

Contentsxxviii

Tables
Additional public spending requirements for meeting human development targets under  
two alternative financing scenarios, 2010-2015   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .47
Regional figures for share of urban population, 1975, 2000, 2012, 2025, 2050  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .57
Challenges to and opportunities for building sustainable cities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .64
Proportion of urban population lacking access to electricity and modern fuels, and proportion  
using particular fuels for cooking, developing and least developed countries, circa 2003-2007 . . . . . .67
Additional investments for sustainable development, 2010-2050 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 137
Some guiding principles for establishing green growth strategies  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 143

 II.1 
 
 
 III.1 
 III.2 
 III.3 
 
 
 V.1 
 V.2 

World Economic and Social Survey 2013xxix

Explanatory notes

The following symbols have been used in the tables throughout the report:
..
–
-
−
.
/
-

Two dots indicate that data are not available or are not separately reported.
A dash indicates that the amount is nil or negligible.
A hyphen indicates that the item is not applicable.
A minus sign indicates deficit or decrease, except as indicated.
A full stop is used to indicate decimals.
A slash between years indicates a crop year or financial year, for example, 2013/14.
Use of a hyphen between years, for example, 2013-2014, signifies the full period involved, including the 
beginning and end years.
Reference to “dollars” ($) indicates United States dollars, unless otherwise stated.
Reference to “billions” indicates one thousand million.
Reference to “tons” indicates metric tons, unless otherwise stated.
Annual rates of growth or change, unless otherwise stated, refer to annual compound rates.
Details and percentages in tables do not necessarily add to totals, because of rounding.

The following abbreviations have been used:  

AMIS
BECCS
BMI
BRT
CAADP

CCS
CERs
CF

CGIAR

CLEW
CO2
CO2e
EJ
FAO

FDI
G8
G20
GAFSP

GCARD

GDP
GEA
gha
GNH
GNP
Gt
ICT
IEA

Agricultural Market Information System
bio-energy with carbon capture and storage
body mass index
bus rapid transit
Comprehensive Africa Agriculture 
Development Programme
carbon capture and storage
certified emissions reductions
Central Framework ((System of  
Environmental-Economic Accounting) (SEEA))
formerly Consultative Group on International 
Agricultural Research 
climate-land-energy-water
carbon dioxide
carbon dioxide equivalent
exajoule
Food and Agriculture Organization  
of the United Nations
foreign direct investment
Group of Eight
Group of Twenty
Global Agriculture and Food Security 
Programme
Global Conference on Agricultural Research  
for Development
gross domestic product
Global Energy Assessment
global hectare
gross national happiness
gross national product
gigaton
information and communications technologies
International Energy Agency

ILO
IMF
kg
kWh
MAMS
NNP
ODA
OECD

ppm
PPP
PRSP
R&D
ReSAKSS

SAGCOT

SEEA
SEEA-E

SNA
SUV
tCO2
UN/DESA

International Labour Organization
International Monetary Fund
kilogram
kilowatt-hour
Maquette for MDG Simulations
net national product
official development assistance
Organization for Economic Cooperation  
and Development
parts per million
purchasing power parity
poverty reduction strategy paper
research and development
Regional Strategic Analysis and Knowledge 
Support System
Southern Agricultural Growth Corridor of the 
United Republic of Tanzania
System of Environmental-Economic Accounting
System of Environmental-Economic Accounting 
for Energy
System of National Accounts
sport utility vehicle
ton of carbon dioxide
Department of Economic and Social Affairs  
of the United Nations Secretariat
United Nations Environment Programme

UNEP
UN-Habitat United Nations Human Settlements Programme
UNSD
WFP 
WHO
WIDER

United Nations Statistics Division
World Food Programme
World Health Organization
World Institute for Development Economics 
Research (United Nations University)

Explanatory Notesxxx

The designations employed and the presentation of the material in this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion 
whatsoever on the part of the United Nations Secretariat concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its 
authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.

The term “country” as used in the text of this report also refers, as appropriate, to territories or areas.

For analytical purposes, unless otherwise specified, the following country groupings and subgroupings have been used:

Developed economies (developed market economies):

Developing economies:

Australia, Canada, European Union, Iceland, Japan, New 
Zealand, Norway, Switzerland, United States of America.

Group of Eight (G8): 

Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Russian Federation, 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, 
United States of America.

Group of Twenty (G20):

Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Canada, China, France, Germany, 
India, Indonesia, Italy, Japan, Mexico, Republic of Korea, 
Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Turkey, United 
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States 
of America, European Union.

European Union (EU):

Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, 
Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, 
Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Netherlands, 
Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.

EU-15:

Africa, Asia and the Pacific (excluding Australia, Japan, New 
Zealand and the member States of CIS in Asia), Latin America 
and the Caribbean. 

Subgroupings of Africa:

Northern Africa:

Algeria, Egypt, Libya, Morocco, Tunisia.

Sub-Saharan Africa:

All other African countries, except Nigeria and South 
Africa, where indicated.

Subgroupings of Asia and the Pacific:

Western Asia:

Bahrain, Iraq, Israel, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Occupied 
Palestinian Territory, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Syrian 
Arab Republic, Turkey, United Arab Emirates, Yemen.

South Asia:

Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of ), 
Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan, Sri Lanka.

Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, 
Greece, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Portugal, 
Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain and 
Northern Ireland.

East Asia:

All other developing economies in Asia and the Pacific.

Subgroupings of Latin America and the Caribbean:

New EU member States:

South America:

Bulgaria, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, 
Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia.

Economies in transition:

South-Eastern Europe:

Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Montenegro, 
Serbia, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.

Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS):

Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia,a Kazakhstan, 
Kyrgyzstan, Republic of Moldova, Russian Federation, 
Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Ukraine, Uzbekistan.

Argentina, Bolivia (Plurinational State of ), Brazil, Chile, 
Colombia, Ecuador, Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay, Venezuela 
(Bolivarian Republic of ). 

Mexico and Central America: 

Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico, 
Nicaragua, Panama.

Caribbean:

Barbados, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Guyana, Haiti, 
Jamaica, Trinidad and Tobago.

a 

As of 19 August 2009, Georgia officially left the Commonwealth of Independent States. However, its performance is discussed in 
the context of this group of countries for reasons of geographical proximity and similarities in economic structure.

World Economic and Social Survey 2013xxxi

Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on 
Climate Change: 

Annex I parties:

Australia, Austria, Belarus, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, 
Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, European 
Union, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, 
Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, 
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Monaco, Netherlands, New 
Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Russian 
Federation, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, 
Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and 
Northern Ireland, United States of America.

Annex II parties:

Annex II parties are the parties included in Annex I 
that are members of the Organization for Economic 
Cooperation and Development but not the parties 
included in Annex I that are economies in transition.

Least developed countries:

Afghanistan, Angola, Bangladesh, Benin, Bhutan, Burkina 
Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Central African Republic, Chad, 
Comoros, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, 
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gambia, Guinea, Guinea-
Bissau, Haiti, Kiribati, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, 
Lesotho, Liberia, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Mauritania, 
Mozambique, Myanmar, Nepal, Niger, Rwanda, Samoa, Sao 
Tome and Principe, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Solomon Islands, 
Somalia, Sudan, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tuvalu, Uganda, United 
Republic of Tanzania, Vanuatu, Yemen, Zambia.

Small island developing States and areas:

American Samoa, Anguilla, Antigua and Barbuda, Aruba, 
Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, British Virgin Islands, Cape Verde, 
Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, Comoros, 
Cook Islands, Cuba, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Fiji, 
French Polynesia, Grenada, Guam, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, 
Haiti, Jamaica, Kiribati, Maldives, Marshall Islands, Mauritius, 
Micronesia (Federated States of ), Montserrat, Nauru, 
Netherlands Antilles, New Caledonia, Niue, Palau, Papua New 
Guinea, Puerto Rico, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint 
Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, 
Seychelles, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Suriname, Timor-
Leste, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tuvalu, United States 
Virgin Islands, Vanuatu.

Explanatory NotesChapter I 
Global trends and challenges 
to sustainable development 
post-2015

Summary

 y

 y

 y

 y

The global community has made great strides in addressing poverty, but a mere con-
tinuation of current development strategies will not suffice to achieve sustainable 
development.  Economic  and  social  progress  remains  uneven,  the  global  financial 
crisis has revealed the fragility of progress, and accelerating environmental degrada-
tion inflicts increasing costs on societies.
There are a number of economic, social, technological, demographic and environ-
mental megatrends underlying these challenges—a deeper globalization, persistent 
inequalities,  demographic  diversity  and  environmental  degradation—to  which  a 
sustainable development agenda will have to respond. 
These trends influence and reinforce each other in myriad ways and pose enormous 
challenges. Urbanization is proceeding rapidly in developing countries, globalization 
and financialization are perpetuating inequalities, while exposing countries to great-
er risks of contagion from crises, and food and nutrition as well as energy security 
is threatened by competing demands on land and water, as well as environmental 
degradation. 
Most important, environmental degradation has reached critical levels. Business as 
usual  is  therefore  not  an  option,  and  sustainable  development  will  require  trans-
formative change at the local, national and global levels. 

A more challenging context for  
global development 

Significant progress has been made in the new millennium in achieving global develop-
ment goals. Poverty was decreasing in all regions of the world, at least until the onset of the 
global financial crisis, underpinned by strong economic growth in developing countries 
and  emerging  economies.  As  a  result,  the  first  target  of  the  Millennium  Development 
Goals—halving the proportion of people living in extreme poverty globally—has already 
been  met.  Improvements  in  school  enrolment  rates  and  health  outcomes  demonstrate 
similar progress in the dimension of social development. 

2

Rising inequalities, the 
food, fuel and financial 
crises, and the breaching of 
planetary boundaries have 
made clear that a mere 
continuation of current 
strategies will not suffice 
to achieve sustainable 
development after 2015

Nonetheless, a mere continuation of current strategies will not suffice to meet 
all the Millennium Development Goals by their 2015 deadline and to achieve sustainable 
development after 2015. In important areas, development is falling short and targets will 
be missed, including the reduction of hunger, vulnerable employment and maternal mor-
tality, and improvements in the lives of slum dwellers, among others. Even where global 
goals have been reached, there are wide disparities between and within countries. Thanks 
in part to the remarkable growth rates in Asia, the region has made a large contribution 
to the achievement of global goals. Other regions, and particularly the least developed 
countries within them, have been less successful. Within countries, economic growth was 
frequently  accompanied  by  rising  income  inequality,  and  the  very  poor  and  those  dis-
criminated against owing to their sex, age, ethnicity or disability have benefited least from 
overall progress (United Nations, 2011a). Income inequality is mirrored by very unequal 
social development and access to health services and education. Such intragenerational 
inequalities  pose  an  equally  important  challenge  to  sustainable  development,  which  is 
primarily associated with intergenerational equity. 

The fragility of progress became apparent during the food, fuel and financial 
crises in 2008 and 2009. The global recession of 2009 was triggered by a global financial 
crisis engendered by the financial systems of developed countries, engulfing their finan-
cial and banking sectors. The resulting shock to economic activity passed through the 
global economy quickly, with international trade, investment and other financial flows 
collapsing. The recession and the slow subsequent recovery have increased unemployment 
worldwide and have slowed or partly reversed the decline in poverty. The fact that the 
global financial crisis coincided with a peak in food and energy prices aggravated its im-
pacts in many countries. Food prices had risen rapidly since 2003, largely driven by rising 
energy prices and the increased production of biofuels, which became competitive owing 
to very high oil prices. Exacerbating factors such as extreme weather events in Australia, 
Ukraine and countries in other regions of the world, as well as increased speculative ac-
tivity  in  commodity  markets,  highlight  the  intertwined  risks  between  the  three  crises 
and the multidimensional nature of the challenges they posed (Headey, Malaiyandi and  
Fan, 2010).

Last, accelerating environmental degradation indicates that the world is facing 
a strong sustainability challenge; that is to say, there are limits to the substitutability of 
certain  forms  of  natural  capital,  and  thus  to  the  extent  to  which  technologies  will  be 
available to overcome environmental and planetary challenges in future (Ayres, 2007). 
As many forms of this natural capital are absolutely essential to human survival in the 
long  run,  its  preservation  is  critical.  A  future  global  agenda  has  to  address  this  strong 
sustainability challenge and facilitate transformative change at all levels—local, national 
and global. 

Underlying global megatrends 

These challenges to sustainable development are driven by broad underlying economic, 
social, technological, demographic and environmental megatrends. Megatrends are under-
stood in this context as major shifts in economic, social and environmental conditions 
which change societies and substantially impact people at all levels. 

Both the progress in development that has been achieved in recent decades and 
its uneven nature are tied intrinsically to changes in the global economy and globalization. 

World Economic and Social Survey 20133

Many countries have benefited from access to global markets and the spread of knowledge 
and technology, but others remain marginalized. Tighter trade, investment and financial 
links have also increased interdependence between countries and led, particularly in combi-
nation with financialization, to greater risks of contagion in times of crisis. At the same time, 
economic growth has been accompanied by rising income inequalities in many countries.   
In the years ahead, extremely diverse population dynamics have the potential 
to  further  exacerbate  inequalities,  both  in  developing  and  developed  countries,  and  at 
the global level. With countries at different stages of the demographic transition, further 
population growth, urbanization and rapid ageing put major stresses on the national infra-
structure and health and education systems. If necessary investments are not made, such 
demographic changes will also heighten the vulnerability of countries and populations to 
economic, social and environmental crises.       

In  addition  to  globalization,  inequalities  and  major  demographic  changes, 
there is a fourth megatrend, accelerating environmental degradation, which introduces 
critical challenges for sustainable development. This megatrend is driven by unsustain-
able production and consumption patterns, and already impacts development at all levels. 
Extreme weather events contributed to the food crisis, and environmental problems often 
affect the poor disproportionally, since they are the least well equipped to deal with them. 
In the long run, a continuation of current trends and the breaching of planetary bounda-
ries in particular would undermine all efforts to achieve sustainable development. 

A more integrated, but multipolar and  
heterogeneous global economy

A deeper globalization

Globalization is not a new phenomenon. In the nineteenth century, the world economy 
underwent its first process of globalization, driven by technological progress in the form 
of  lower  transportation  and  communication  costs.  World  trade  expanded  at  close  to  
4  per  cent  annually  on  average  throughout  the  century,  much  faster  than  in  previous 
centuries (O’Rourke and Williamson, 2004). In addition, capital flows boomed and mi-
gration between continents occurred on a large scale. Today’s globalization is therefore 
not entirely unprecedented in terms of trade levels, but it is qualitatively different. Beyond 
the mere expansion of trade and investment flows, underlying global production patterns 
have changed in recent decades, in particular since the turn of the millennium, driven 
by the rise of transnational corporations and global value chains. Instead of shallow inte-
gration, characterized by trade in goods and services between independent corporations 
and portfolio investments, this new phase of globalization has brought deep integration, 
organized by transnational corporations which link the production of goods and services 
in cross-border value adding networks (Gereffi, 2005). 

Assembly-oriented  export  production  in  newly  industrializing  economies  in 
East Asia marked the beginning of this geographical fragmentation of production. The 
movement of labour-intensive operations of manufactures production to low-wage loca-
tions upended the traditional international division of labour, creating opportunities for 
industrialization  in  developing  countries.  Successful  insertion  into  global  value  chains 
contributed to rapid and sustained growth in numerous countries, accounting for much of 
the overall progress in the global fight against poverty. 

Global trends and challenges to sustainable development post-20154

Deepening globalization 
is characterized by tighter 
trade and investment 
links and geographically 
fragmented production 
processes organized by 
transnational corporations 

The  fragmentation  of  production  was  made  possible  by  a  favourable  global 
political environment which gradually reduced barriers to trade and investment, and by 
major  advances  in  transportation  and  in  information  and  communication  technology. 
The latter in particular is widely seen as the key general-purpose technology of the glo-
balization age, driving technological progress in a wide range of sectors (Jovanovic and 
Rousseau, 2005). Those advances enabled corporations to manage complex global supply 
chains and was thus a precondition for the outsourcing and offshoring of production tasks, 
initially in manufacturing sectors such as apparel and simple electronics, but gradually in 
more and more sectors including, most recently, services and knowledge work (see, for 
example, Sturgeon and Florida, 2000, for the automotive industry; and Gereffi, 2005, for 
an overview). 

Information and communications technologies have also made the diffusion 
of  information  easier,  and  have  facilitated  better  access  by  developing  countries  to  the 
global knowledge pool. Because of the critical role of science and technology in addressing 
the social, economic and environmental challenges faced by countries, this wider diffu-
sion is contributing to the progress of development in a wide range of areas. At the same 
time, innovative activity and technology development continue to be concentrated in a 
small number of advanced economies. Only very few countries such as Brazil, China and 
India, have entered this segment in recent decades, because core research and develop-
ment activities are very rarely outsourced and remain overwhelmingly centred at corporate 
headquarters in developed countries (Castaldi and others, 2009). 

The changes in global production are reflected in changing global trade pat-
terns. Overall trade has grown at rates much faster than those of world domestic product, 
and not only did developing countries expand their share in world trade, but they were 
able to diversify and increasingly export manufactured products (United Nations, 2010a). 
However, these patterns are far from uniform—diversification is largely limited to de-
veloping  and  emerging  economies  in  Asia,  whereas  traditional  trade  patterns  based  on 
commodity exports and imports of manufactures and capital goods prevail in Africa and, 
to a lesser extent, in Latin America. The rise of China in particular has contributed to this 
trend, both directly owing to China’s large demand for commodities and the traditional 
sectoral patterns exhibited by rising South-South trade, and indirectly by contributing to 
high commodity prices, particularly for oil and minerals (Erten and Ocampo, 2012).  

The disintegration of production, and its acceleration since the turn of the mil-
lennium, is visible also in a rapid increase of trade in intermediate goods (figure I.1). As a 
result, the income elasticity of trade has increased as lead firms react to changes in demand 
and pass shocks on to their downstream suppliers more quickly (Milberg and Winkler, 
2010), thus further increasing interdependence in the global economy. However, since their 
collapse during the 2008 and 2009 crisis, trade flows have recovered but slowly, and trade 
expansion is likely to remain significantly slower than before the crisis, indicating a poten-
tial weakening of globalization of trade (United Nations, 2013).

Deep  globalization  is  also  characterized  by  increasing  foreign  direct  invest-
ment (FDI) and financial flows of deep globalization. FDI flows grew as a number of coun-
tries offered conducive environments for investment and served the needs of corporations 
competing based on the transnationalization of production. Growth in FDI has outpaced 
even the rapid growth in world trade. Global FDI inflows reached $ 1.5 trillion in 2011, 
although they have yet to reach the pre-crisis peak of 2007 (United Nations Conference 
on  Trade  and  Development,  2012b).  Fifty-one  per  cent  of  total  FDI  was  destined  for 

World Economic and Social Survey 20135

Figure I.1
Figure I.1 World non-fuel merchandise exports by type of goods, 1998-2011
World non-fuel merchandise exports by type of goods, 1998-2011

Billions of United States dollars

Intermediate goods
Consumption goods
Capital goods

8
9
9
1

9
9
9
1

0
0
0
2

1
0
0
2

2
0
0
2

3
0
0
2

4
0
0
2

5
0
0
2

6
0
0
2

7
0
0
2

8
0
0
2

9
0
0
2

0
1
0
2

1
1
0
2

Source: United Nations 
Commodity Trade Statistics 
Database (UN Comtrade).

14,000

12,000

10,000

8,000

6,000

4,000

2,000

0

developing countries and transition economies, which have steadily and rapidly increased 
their share of overall FDI owing to their dynamic development. Yet, not all developing 
countries benefit from this trend. The least developed countries in particular remain mar-
ginalized, having attracted only $15 billion, or less than 1 per cent of global FDI. 

Financial globalization and financialization

Globalization  has  progressed  furthest,  perhaps,  in  finance,  where  the  liberalization  of 
capital  markets  and  short-term  capital  flows  has  been  promoted  since  the  1980s,  most 
prominently  by  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF).  The  rationale  was  to  enable 
global savings to be allocated to their most productive use, and thus to provide develop-
ing countries in particular with access to scarce savings. The actual outcome of financial 
liberalization was quite different, however. The increased volatility of capital flows, global 
macroeconomic imbalances, and multiple financial crises—typically followed by severe 
recessions, most recently on a global level—have highlighted both the large risks and the 
very uncertain gains of financial globalization for development. 

Capital controls and restrictions to short-term capital flows were an essential 
part of the post-war Bretton Woods regime. With the Great Depression and the financial 
crisis that had preceded it in mind, policymakers agreed to restrict international capital 
mobility and thus prioritize trade and production over finance and give countries greater 
macroeconomic policy space. However, this essentially Keynesian vision was undermined 
by the ascendancy of financial interests in key developed countries, a broader move to-
wards deregulation and liberalization, and growing trade links between countries, which 
made it more difficult to administer capital controls (Rodrik, 2011). 

Global trends and challenges to sustainable development post-20156

Financial globalization has  
led to rapidly increasing 
and more volatile 
international capital 
flows, macroeconomic 
imbalances and more 
frequent crises. And since 
the global financial crisis, 
cross-border financial flows 
have declined by more than 
60 per cent 

Capital  market  liberalization  proceeded  first  in  developed  economies  and 
then  in  developing  countries,  and  international  capital  flows  did  increase  significantly 
subsequently,  from  an  average  of  below  5  per  cent  of  global  gross  domestic  product 
(GDP) between 1980 and 1999 to a peak of about 20 per cent in 2007. At the same time, 
short-term flows—portfolio and bank-related investments—have become a much more 
prominent part of total capital flows, particularly in the period between 2003 and 2007 
(International Monetary Fund, 2012). 

Developing  countries  that  opened  their  capital  accounts  and  relied  more  
heavily on foreign finance did not promote growth and investment, however; in fact, they 
grew more slowly than their peers (Prasad, Rajan, and Subramanian, 2007). At the same 
time, the volatility of capital flows increased, their procyclical nature exacerbated macro-
economic instability, and financial crises became much more frequent. These crises gener-
ally follow a similar pattern. Capital inflows based on market optimism fuel credit bubbles, 
leading to increases in the values of real estate and the currency; but over-indebtedness 
soon undermines the capacity to repay. Once the bubble bursts, capital inflows stop and 
the ensuing credit crunch leads to economic contraction (Kindleberger and Aliber, 2011). 
The social costs of such crises are extremely high. Laeven and Valencia (2012) find that 
since the onset of the global financial crisis, the median output loss from systemic banking 
crises, which often coincide with currency crises, has amounted to 25 per cent of GDP.

Financial  market  liberalization  has  also  increased  macroeconomic  insta-
bility, at both the national and the global levels. Capital flows are procyclical and thus 
exacerbate the business cycle. At the same time, they limit policymakers’ ability to use 
macroeconomic policies to smooth out the business cycle (Ocampo, Spiegel and Stiglitz, 
2006). Consequently, many countries have built up their international reserves to protect 
themselves against the risks associated with volatile capital flows. The massive increase in 
reserves held by developing and emerging countries—which amounted to $7 trillion in 
2011 (United Nations, 2012a)—leads to global macroeconomic imbalances however.

Tightly related to capital market liberalization is the process of financializa-
tion. Broadly described, financialization entails the increasing role of financial motives, 
actors, markets and institutions in the economy, as evidenced in the increase in profits 
of financial institutions relative to non-financial corporations and the overall increase in 
rentiers’ share of national income (Epstein, 2005). In the 1970s, starting in the United 
States of America followed by other advanced economies, financialization was driven by 
financial interests that sought profitable investments in the context of slowing economies. 
It led to changes in corporate behaviour in line with principles of shareholder value and 
shorter time horizons of corporations in their investment decisions, changes in financial 
markets  which  facilitated  increased  indebtedness  and  asset-price  bubbles,  and  changes 
made in economic policy, not least of all to facilitate financial globalization (Palley, 2007). 
More recently, and in parallel to the recent slowdown in trade globalization, 
the global crisis may have ushered in an era of weakening financial globalization. In fact, 
cross-border financial flows have declined by more than 60 per cent from their peak in 
2007 (Lund and others, 2013). Financial regulation is being strengthened worldwide, both 
in  major  developed  and  emerging  economies  and  at  the  international  level,  and  major 
advocates of financial globalization have modified their position. Most prominently, IMF 
adopted a new institutional view on capital controls, highlighting the risks associated with 
rapid  capital  inflows  and  outflows,  and  embracing  capital  flow  management  measures 
under specific circumstances (International Monetary Fund, 2012). 

World Economic and Social Survey 20137

Deepening globalization 
has facilitated growth in 
developing and emerging 
economies, but has also 
made national economies 
more vulnerable to  
external shocks

Convergence, but greater vulnerability and heterogeneity  
in the global economy

Overall, globalization has provided opportunities for emerging economies and developing 
countries, and in recent years their growth rates have been consistently higher than growth 
rates in the developed world. There are two critical caveats with respect to this broad trend 
of convergence, however. It has not made developing countries immune to cyclical shocks: 
indeed, globalization has increased countries’ vulnerabilities; and it is far from uniform, 
with some developing countries not only excluded from this convergence process but fall-
ing further behind. Average per capita growth also hides increasing inequalities within 
countries, which are also partly related to globalization. A significant part of the global 
population therefore does not benefit from convergence (Dervis, 2012). 

Since the 1990s, per capita incomes in emerging economies have grown con-
sistently faster than in the developed world. Since the turn of the millennium, growth in 
developing countries has accelerated as well, leading an overall trend of convergence in 
the global economy (figure I.2). Convergence is partly driven by globalization, which has 
facilitated access to technology and know-how through tighter trade and investment links 
and thus higher productivity growth in manufacturing. In fact, manufacturing sectors 
have experienced an unconditional convergence in labour productivity, that is to say, a 
convergence independent of geography or policies (Rodrik, 2012). Since this does not hold 
for other sectors of the economy, structural transformation—a decreasing reliance on the 
primary sector and a shift of resources to higher value adding manufacturing and modern 
services activities—will remain a necessary condition of sustained economic growth.  

As a result of rapid growth in developing and emerging economies, the world 
economy is becoming more multipolar, which inevitably leads to the creation of a world that 
is more multipolar politically. These changes will have to be accommodated within a global 

Figure I.2 Annual GDP growth per capita, high-, low- and middle-income countries, 
Figure I.2
1990-2011 
Annual growth of GDP per capita, high-, low- and middle-income countries, 1990-2011
Growth of GDP per capita (percentage)

High-income countries
Low-income countries
Middle-income countries

0
9
9
1

1
9
9
1

2
9
9
1

3
9
9
1

4
9
9
1

5
9
9
1

6
9
9
1

7
9
9
1

8
9
9
1

9
9
9
1

0
0
0
2

1
0
0
2

2
0
0
2

3
0
0
2

4
0
0
2

5
0
0
2

6
0
0
2

7
0
0
2

8
0
0
2

9
0
0
2

0
1
0
2

1
1
0
2

Source: World Bank World 
Development Indicators.

Source:  World Bank World Development Indicators.

8

6

4

2

0

-2

-4

-6

Global trends and challenges to sustainable development post-20158

governance regime. The expansion of global trade associated with the fragmentation of produc-
tion also adds to global carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions, with the transport sector a significant 
source of those emissions. On average, internationally traded goods generate emissions that 
are 50 per cent higher than those generated by locally traded goods (United Nations, 2013). 
Relatedly, the vast expansion of global consumption and of changing consumption patterns 
in emerging economies will add to the strong environmental sustainability challenge driven 
originally by unsustainable consumption patterns in developed countries (see further below). 
Economically, continued growth in emerging economies in particular can be an engine of 
growth for the world economy and provides opportunities for other developing countries, but 
the gravity shift to China and India, the major drivers of this process, will also change the 
nature of end markets and is likely to pose new challenges for economic development. 

Deepening  globalization  has  also  increased  the  cyclical  interdependence  of 
national economies. Owing to tighter links, they are more vulnerable to external shocks, 
and crises like the 2008-2009 global financial crisis spread quickly. Global value chains 
are partly responsible for this, as demand shocks in one region are passed on much more 
quickly through tightly integrated global value chains (see, for example, Cattaneo, Gereffi 
and Staritz, 2010). Reductions in consumer demand in end markets are transmitted in real 
time to producers, often with large and immediate effects on employment in exporting 
countries (Keane, 2012). 

Perhaps even more important is the fact that financial globalization has in-
creased countries’ vulnerability to financial crises, as evidenced by the frequency of fi-
nancial crises in recent years and the contagion effects arising from such crises. Many 
countries have taken the lessons learned from the crisis to heart—most notably developed 
economies such as the United States—and have taken steps to strengthen financial regula-
tion. Interdependence in the global economy, however, also implies that the externalities 
of  national  economic  policies  are  increasing  and  thus  require  better  management  and 
coordination at the global level. Again, notable first steps in this regard have been taken 
since the crisis, for example, through the establishment of the Financial Stability Board, 
and through the issuance of new rules by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision.   
There are concerns not only about external shocks, but also about heterogeneity 
in growth experiences, i.e., about the fact that progress is not uniform. Growth in many 
countries is not sufficient to enable them to be part of the overall convergence process, or 
they remain dependent on low value adding resource exports for growth. Yet, development 
strategies based on industrialization and structural transformation following the example 
of East Asia have become more challenging as rents for simple manufacturing and as-
sembly procedures within global value chains have eroded and as prices for manufacturing 
goods typically exported by low-income countries have fallen more rapidly with the entry 
of China into global markets (Kaplinsky, 2006). In future, shifting end markets will also 
lead to shifting patterns of global import demand, with a heavier emphasis on demand for 
commodities and raw materials as well as unprocessed goods, likely rendering upgrading 
strategies within value chains more difficult (Kaplinsky and Farooki, 2010). 

The  2008-2009  crisis  has  also  accelerated  the  consolidation  of  global  value 
chains, which began as early as the 1990s in some sectors, but can now be observed across 
sectors (Cattaneo, Gereffi and Staritz, 2010). Many lead firms used the crisis to end rela-
tions with marginal suppliers, relying on globally operating suppliers instead. This may 
preclude, or at least render significantly more difficult, the future entry of new firms, in 
particular those based in marginal countries, into global value chains. In combination 

World Economic and Social Survey 20139

Income inequalities within 
many countries have 
been increasing, while 
global inequality, although 
it has receded slightly 
in recent years, remains 
extremely high

with continuing global macroeconomic imbalances and the related pressure on countries 
with current-account deficits to rebalance their external positions, as well as the slowdown 
in  trade  expansion  already  observed,  these  changes  will  render  development  strategies 
based on export-led growth, so successfully implemented in many of the best performing 
developing countries in recent decades, much more difficult in the years ahead. 

Persistent inequalities

The heterogeneity among countries exists side by side with persistent inequalities, of which 
income inequality is only one, if the most visible, dimension. While global income inequal-
ity has receded slightly in recent years, inequalities within many countries have been rising. 
These trends are complex and driven by many, often structural and country-specific factors, 
and they are tightly linked to social, environmental and political inequalities. Nonetheless, 
globalization has important direct and indirect impacts on inequality. Left unaddressed, 
these inequalities threaten sustainable development prospects in multiple ways. 

Owing  to  the  convergence  of  mean  incomes  of  developing  and  developed 
economies, global income inequality has been falling in recent years, albeit to a very small 
degree, and from a very high level. In the wake of the great global divergence in incomes 
that started with the industrial revolution in the nineteenth century, location rather than 
socioeconomic  status  or  class  is  still  responsible  for  the  overwhelming  share  of  overall 
income inequality. More than two thirds of global inequality is explained by differences 
in income between countries, and only one third by the distribution patterns within coun-
tries (Milanovic, 2011a). 

The more recent stabilization and slight narrowing of global income inequal-
ity  largely  reflect  economic  growth  in  China  since  the  1990s,  and  growth  in  India, 
other emerging economies and developing economies since the turn of the millennium 
(Milanovic, 2012). At the same time, income inequalities are increasing at the national 
level in most regions of the world (figure I.3; see also Vieira, 2012). While national in-
come inequalities had for the most part decreased after the Second World War, this trend 
was reversed in the 1980s, when inequality started to rise sharply again, particularly in 
developed and emerging economies, with the largest gains going to the top 1 per cent of 
households. The extent of within-country inequalities, while growing in most countries, 
varies widely between them. In several countries in Latin America, the major exceptions 
to the overall trend, social programmes and improvements in labour productivity have 
played a major role in reducing income inequality since 2000. Distributional diversity, 
however, applies to the developed world as well as to developing countries, which suggests 
that in addition to global economic forces, institutional factors play an important role in 
explaining it (Palma, 2011). 

Changes  in  the  global  economy—while  not  the  only  driver  of  trends  in  
inequality—play an important role in the context of many of its underlying causes. In 
developed countries, the outsourcing and offshoring of jobs requiring mid-level skills—
facilitated by changes in global production patterns and technological changes—have led 
to a hollowing out of labour markets from the middle and may be partly responsible for 
stagnating wages for low-skilled workers (Abel and Deitz, 2012). At the same time, finan-
cialization has increased executive compensation and wages at the very top of the income 
distribution (for the United States, see Piketty and Saez, 2003). A significant decline in the 
share of wages in the functional income distribution, reflecting lower bargaining power 

Global trends and challenges to sustainable development post-201510

25

20

15

10

5

0

Figure I.3 Income share of the top 1 per cent for a sample of developed and 
developing countries, 1915-2010

Figure I.3
Income share of the top 1 per cent for a sample of developed and  developing countries, 1915-2010
Developed countries’ income share (percentage)

Developing countries’ income share (percentage)

China
India
Indonesia
South Africa
Argentina

France
Germany
United Kingdom
United States
Japan

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

5
1
9
1

0
2
9
1

5
2
9
1

0
3
9
1

5
3
9
1

0
4
9
1

5
4
9
1

0
5
9
1

5
5
9
1

0
6
9
1

5
6
9
1

0
7
9
1

5
7
9
1

0
8
9
1

5
8
9
1

0
9
9
1

5
9
9
1

0
0
0
2

5
0
0
2

0
1
0
2

5
1
9
1

0
2
9
1

5
2
9
1

0
3
9
1

5
3
9
1

0
4
9
1

5
4
9
1

0
5
9
1

5
5
9
1

0
6
9
1

5
6
9
1

0
7
9
1

5
7
9
1

0
8
9
1

5
8
9
1

0
9
9
1

5
9
9
1

0
0
0
2

5
0
0
2

0
1
0
2

Source: World Top  
Incomes Database.

of immobile labour versus mobile capital, exacerbates these trends, as capital ownership 
is typically highly concentrated (United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, 
2012a). For this reason, the collapse in stock prices during the global financial crisis led 
to a temporary fall in the share of the top percentile in total income in the United States. 
However, during the uneven recovery from 2009 to 2011, incomes in the top percentile 
bounced back and grew by 11.2 per cent, while the average incomes of the bottom 99 per 
cent of households fell by 0.4 per cent (Saez, 2013). 

In developing countries, income inequality is often due to insufficient employ-
ment generation, if, for example, growth is based on commodity exports, as was the case 
in some regions in Africa. In East and South-East Asia, structural change from a primarily 
agricultural to a modern economy—as famously described by Kuznets—is an important 
driver of inequality. In addition, global economic developments such as financialization 
and rapidly rising capital flows, as well as a global policy agenda with very different pri-
orities, had long constrained national policymakers in their use of macroeconomic, tax 
and redistributive, labour-market and other policies to directly tackle inequalities (United 
Nations Conference on Trade and Development, 2012a). 

Not  only  are  rising  income  inequalities  at  the  national  level  undesirable  in 
their own right, but they may also undermine prospects for sustained growth and broader 
sustainable  development.  Empirically,  higher  levels  of  inequality  are  associated  with  a 
shorter duration of growth spells. Many developing countries have been able to initiate 
and  sustain  high  growth  for  several  years,  but  sustaining  steady  growth  over  a  longer 
period has proved to be much more challenging. Such longer growth spells are robustly 
associated with more equality in income distribution (Berg and Ostry, 2011). Potential 
reasons for this are inequality’s negative impact on the composition of aggregate demand, 
investments in social services and education, and sociopolitical and economic stability. 

In  terms  of  social  development,  large  inequalities  constrain  life  choices  for 
individuals and perpetuate unequal economic and social opportunities, i.e., inequality of 
outcome translates into inequality of opportunity. Several studies have emphasized that 
increasing  inequalities  are  detrimental  to  child  development.  Beyond  the  psychosocial 

Rising inequalities 
undermine prospects for 
sustained growth and 
sustainable development 
by threatening economic 
and social stability and by 
constraining the life choices 
of individuals

World Economic and Social Survey 201311

and cognitive consequences for children (Hoff and Pandey, 2004), persistent inequalities 
increase the chances of lower development outcomes in health, including under-nutrition 
and stunting, and in education, including in school enrolment and learning outcomes. 
These inequalities may solidify over time, as the political influence of wealthier groups 
increases, leading to institutional arrangements that favour their interests (World Bank, 
2005). Such economic and social inequalities are strongly intertwined with and often ex-
acerbated by horizontal inequalities, i.e., inequalities based on disability, gender, ethnicity, 
caste or other hereditary characteristics. Conversely, in more equal societies, better social 
outcomes can be expected: people are more likely to live longer and to achieve higher 
grades at school, and less likely to suffer from obesity and violence (Pickett and Wilkinson, 
2009). For instance, there is evidence that the proportion of the population with obesity 
is higher in developed countries with higher income inequality (Pickett and others, 2005). 
Last,  income  inequality  can  threaten  economic  stability  (see,  for  example, 
Rajan, 2010; and Stiglitz, 2012). In the United States, stagnating real wages for the middle 
class lowered the purchasing power of households. Low interest rate policies were intro-
duced to spur consumption, which contributed to the mounting of household debt beyond 
sustainable levels (Rajan, 2010). The increase in debt in turn generated profitable activities 
in the financial sector, widening wealth and income gaps, while contributing to asset-price 
bubbles and ultimately to the financial crisis. 

Demographic changes

The global population reached 7 billion in 2011 and will continue to grow, albeit at a 
decelerating rate, to reach a projected 9 billion in 2050 (United Nations, Department of 
Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division, 2011). Beyond aggregate global popu-
lation growth, demographic development is characterized by heterogeneity, as countries 
are at different stages of their demographic transition. While global population growth 
is slowing, it is still high in some developing countries, and while the world population 
as a whole is ageing rapidly, some countries are witnessing an increase in the proportion 
of youth in their overall population. Such diversity, combined with persistent inequali-
ties, in turn creates migratory pressures both within countries and internationally. These 
demographic trends pose major challenges for future development strategies at all levels: 
local development will be shaped by further urbanization, national development strategies 
will have to adapt to evolving demographic structures, and migratory pressures will have 
to be addressed at the global level. 

Population dynamics are driven by fertility rates and mortality rates—changes 
in which are often described as jointly constituting the demographic transition—and mi-
gration patterns. Historical patterns in developed countries suggest a demographic transi-
tion from an initial state of high fertility and high mortality to a state of low fertility and 
low mortality, where mortality typically declines first followed at a later stage by a more 
abrupt decline in fertility. At the global level, fertility rates have long been falling from 
their peak and the global fertility rate currently stands at 2.52 children per woman. It is ex-
pected to fall further, to 2.17 children per woman, in 2045-2050. However, these averages 
mask great heterogeneity between countries. Fertility is below replacement level in coun-
tries that account for almost half of the global population, namely, most developed coun-
tries, but also China. It has fallen rapidly in many developing countries as well, whereas it 
remains at 4.41 for least developed countries, and is projected to stay significantly above 

Global trends and challenges to sustainable development post-201512

While mortality is declining 
throughout the world, 
fertility rates remain high 
for some countries, notably 
least developed countries, 
and as a result, future 
population growth will be 
extremely concentrated 
geographically

replacement level in coming decades (ibid.). The empowerment of women, better access to 
birth control and the postponement of marriage are immediate drivers of fertility declines, 
but fertility rates are also dependent on economic development, mortality declines and 
improvements in education levels.  

Owing to improvements in nutrition and public health and social development 
more  broadly,  mortality  is  declining  throughout  the  world.  Life  expectancy  at  birth  is 
currently at 67.9 years, and is expected to increase to 75.6 years by 2045-2050, based on 
increases in all regions and development groups. Even though mortality trends have been 
more uniform, there is regional diversity nonetheless, with the impact of HIV/AIDS on 
life expectancy in sub-Saharan Africa particularly visible. 

Migration  is  the  third  driver  of  population  dynamics.  Net  migration  from 
less developed to more developed regions has been increasing steadily from 1960 onward. 
Between 2000 and 2010, developed regions attracted 3.4 million migrants annually on 
average. While these flows dominate global migration patterns, migration between de-
veloping countries is also significant, and several of them have attracted migrants in large 
numbers, for example, as guest workers (in the Middle East) and as refugees (in Africa). 
Looking forward, migration patterns are more difficult to predict, as they are influenced 
by  a  complex  interplay  of  economic,  social,  demographic,  environmental  and  political 
factors; but overall migration from less to more developed regions is projected to continue, 
albeit at a slower pace, in the decades ahead (United Nations, Department of Economic 
and Social Affairs, Population Division, 2011).  

These demographic drivers lead to four major global population trends: the 
world population will continue to grow; it will grow at a much slower pace than previ-
ously; it will become older; and it will be increasingly urban (Cohen, 2010). These global 
trends mask large underlying heterogeneity between countries, and they pose important 
challenges to sustainable development, both globally and in specific regions and countries. 
With regard to population growth, it reached its peak between 1965 and 1970, and has 
decelerated ever since. This trend will continue, and by 2050 population in developed 
countries is expected to almost stagnate, and population growth in developing countries 
other than least developed countries will be 0.50 per cent annually, while the popula-
tion of the least developed countries will grow at the rate of 1.42 per cent annually, sig-
nificantly below today’s rate, but still high enough to enable populations to double every  
49  years  (United  Nations,  Department  of  Economic  and  Social  Affairs,  Population 
Division, 2011; see also figure I.4). 

This  diversity  implies  that  future  increases  in  world  population  will  be 
highly  concentrated  geographically.  Only  eight  countries—the  Democratic  Republic  of 
the  Congo,  Ethiopia,  India,  Nigeria,  Pakistan,  the  Philippines,  the  United  Republic  of 
Tanzania, and the United States—will account for half of the projected global population 
increase. More worrisome is the fact that rapid population growth continues in countries 
that are the least well equipped to provide the necessary investments to deal with larger 
populations. Populations are expected to more than double in the least developed countries 
between now and 2050, and short of major development progress in these countries, this is 
likely to challenge their sustainable development prospects in a number of ways. A vicious 
circle of poverty, lack of education, ill health, high fertility and high infant mortality can 
perpetuate inequalities. Breaking it will require further investments in health and educa-
tion systems, as well as better access to reproductive health services and the protection of 
women’s reproductive rights. At the same time, these investments have to be complemented 

World Economic and Social Survey 201313

Population ageing will 
lead to sharp increases 
in dependency ratios, 
while global disparities 
in population dynamics 
and persistent income 
disparities will increase 
migratory pressures at  
the global level

by expanding productive employment opportunities, as a growing number of young people 
enter labour markets. Last, population growth, in particular in combination with climate 
change, can add to local environmental stresses and resource and land scarcity. 

Owing to the decline in fertility and mortality rates, the global population 
will also become older at an accelerating pace (Lutz, Sanderson and Scherbov, 2008). The 
share of persons aged 60 years or over will increase to 22 per cent in 2050 globally, up from  
11.2 per cent in 2011 and from only 8 per cent in 1950. However, countries are at very 
different stages in their demographic transition. Population ageing is most advanced in 
developed countries, leading to sharp increases in dependency ratios and putting a strain 
on  those  countries’  health  and  pension  systems.  Developing  countries  are  younger  on 
average, but their populations are growing older as well. Critically, the ageing process is 
projected to occur at a much higher speed than was the case in developed countries, while 
family structures undergo major changes and family support systems consequently play 
a smaller role. If basic pension systems are lacking, a growing share of older persons will 
therefore be at risk of falling into poverty. 

On the other hand, because of their continuously high fertility rates, the least 
developed countries will continue to see the number of youth and adolescents rising. A 
growing share of young people presents opportunities for reaping a demographic dividend, 
if a demographic transition occurs and fertility rates and dependency ratios fall, which, 
at this point, is projected to happen in least developed countries in Asia (United Nations 
Population Fund, 2011). However, this dividend will pay out only if those economies can 
create  employment  opportunities,  which  will  be  a  major  challenge  for  least  developed 
countries in the decades ahead. Such disparities in international population dynamics, in 
combination with existing income disparities, are also contributing to continued migratory 
pressures at the global level. If addressed in a coherent manner, migration can be beneficial 
for  both  countries  of  origin  and  countries  of  destination,  by  alleviating—although  by 
no means eliminating—problems arising from demographic trends, and contributing to 

Figure I.4 
Figure I.4 Projected population by development region, medium variant, 1950-2100 
Projected population by development region, medium variant, 1950-2050 
Population (billions)

More developed regions
Less developed regions
Least developed countries

0
5
9
1

0
6
9
1

0
7
9
1

0
8
9
1

0
9
9
1

0
0
0
2

0
1
0
2

0
2
0
2

0
3
0
2

0
4
0
2

0
5
0
2

Source:  Population Division, UN/DESA (2011).

Source: United Nations, 
Department of Economic and 
Social Affairs, Population  
Division (2011).

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

Global trends and challenges to sustainable development post-201514

transfers of knowledge and resources. Yet, at this point, there are no adequate mechanisms 
at the global level for addressing these concerns. 

As noted above, the fourth major trend is increasing urbanization. Already, 
more than half of the world’s population live in towns and cities, and most future popula-
tion growth will occur in the urban areas of developing countries (figure I.5). In the least 
developed countries, the rate of growth in urban areas is 4 per cent per year, mostly driven 
by  rural-urban  migration  in  search  of  employment  (United  Nations  Population  Fund, 
2011). Many of these migrants live in informal settlements and urban slums where they 
are exposed to environmental hazards and increased health risks. Climate change can fur-
ther increase these risks, as many cities are in locations particularly exposed to its effects 
(Satterthwaite, 2009). On the other hand, urbanization offers opportunities to provide 
better access to services and employment at lower cost and with a lower environmental 
impact.  While  building  the  infrastructure  that  would  allow  those  opportunities  to  be 
realized entails huge investment and planning needs, the reality of continued population 
growth will render such an undertaking critical to any sustainable development strategy.  

Environmental degradation 

While  an  unusually  stable  global  environment  has  been  the  precondition  for  unprec-
edented human development over the last ten thousand years, this stability is now under 
threat from human activity. Most critically, energy consumption has skyrocketed owing to 
rapid population and economic growth, resulting in unprecedented concentrations of CO2 
in the atmosphere and anthropogenic climate change. If greenhouse gas emissions, global 

Figure I.5 
Figure I.5 Urban and rural population growth, high-, low- and middle-income countries, 
Urban and rural population growth, high-, low- and middle-income countries,  
1950-1955 to 2045-2050
1950-1955 to 2045-2050 
Millions of persons
Population growth (millions)

450
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
-50
-100
-150

Urban, middle- and low-income countries
Urban, high-income countries
Rural, all countries

Source: Population  
Division, UN/DESA.

5
5
9
1
-
0
5
9
1

0
6
9
1
-
5
5
9
1

5
6
9
1
-
0
6
9
1

0
7
9
1
-
5
6
9
1

5
7
9
1
-
0
7
9
1

0
8
9
1
-
5
7
9
1

5
8
9
1
-
0
8
9
1

0
9
9
1
-
5
8
9
1

5
9
9
1
-
0
9
9
1

0
0
0
2
-
5
9
9
1

5
0
0
2
-
0
0
0
2

0
1
0
2
-
5
0
0
2

5
1
0
2
-
0
1
0
2

0
2
0
2
-
5
1
0
2

5
2
0
2
-
0
2
0
2

0
3
0
2
-
5
2
0
2

5
3
0
2
-
0
3
0
2

0
4
0
2
-
5
3
0
2

5
4
0
2
-
0
4
0
2

0
5
0
2
-
5
4
0
2

Source:  Population Division, UN/DESA (2012).

World Economic and Social Survey 201315

The stability of the global 
environment is under 
threat from human 
activity, owing largely to 
unsustainable consumption 
patterns that reflect 
extreme inequalities 

resource consumption and habitat transformation continue at or above current rates, a state 
shift in the Earth’s biosphere is likely (Barnosky and others, 2012), irreversibly changing 
the environmental conditions so favourable to human development in recent millenniums.  
The  environmental  impact  of  human  activity  and  the  strong  sustainability 
challenge that it poses are tightly related to the megatrends identified above. To decom-
pose their overall effects and shed more light on the many interlinkages, it is useful to 
draw on the ImPACT identity, which relates demographic, socioeconomic and technologi-
cal changes to their environmental impact. More specifically, ImPACT specifies that the 
product of total population (P), world product per person or affluence (A), the intensity 
of use of GDP or consumption patterns (C) and the efficiency of producers determined 
by  technology  (T)  together  determine  overall  environmental  impact  (Im)  (Waggoner 
and Ausubel, 2002).1 These forces influence each other in important and multiple ways. 
Population  dynamics  impact  on  per  capita  income  and  vice  versa,  income  levels  affect 
consumption patterns and efficiency in production, and environmental changes in turn 
exert an impact on economies, to give just a few examples. 

Within this framework, the contribution of the megatrends to environmental 
degradation  can  be  delineated.  Population  dynamics  determine  the  overall  number  of 
persons whose material needs have to be met, both at the local and national levels, and at 
the global level. Diverse demographic trends present highly diverse challenges to sustain-
able development at the local and national levels. Globally, however, population growth is 
slowing. More important, population growth is concentrated in countries whose contribu-
tion to global environmental challenges is comparatively small. 

Economic  growth  lies  at  the  heart  of  the  global  development  agenda,  and 
the persistence of large unmet material needs implies that sustainable development re-
quires further increases in income and affluence for many. At the same time, humanity’s 
overall demand for natural resources already exceeds Earth’s bio-capacity (WWF, 2012). 
Contributions to this excessive environmental footprint are extremely uneven, however: 
the global inequalities in incomes and wealth described above translate directly into starkly 
differing environmental impacts (see chap. II). 

The impact of per capita income on the environment is mediated by the inten-
sity of GDP use, which is a reflection of consumption patterns, and by the efficiency of 
production of goods, or technology. Consumption patterns and technological progress are 
sometimes called sustainability levers, as they can mitigate the environmental impact of 
income growth (Waggoner and Ausubel, 2002). Growth itself can be a driver of such tech-
nological progress, of structural change entailing movement away from material-intensive 
industries towards services, and of changes in consumer preferences. An environmental 
Kuznets curve hypothesis suggests that for these reasons, resource use would increase in 
the early stages of development, but fall in later stages (Rothman, 1998). However, there 
is no evidence of such an absolute decoupling of growth in resource use from economic 
growth at the global level, and only very limited evidence for relative decoupling, where 
resource use grows more slowly than the economy. Most importantly, global CO2 emis-
sions have grown as fast as or faster than global GDP since the turn of the millennium, as 
large emerging economics industrialize (see below and chap. II). 

1 

The  well-known  Kaya  identity—expressing  total  global  CO2  emissions  as  a  product  of  total 
population,  GDP  per  capita,  energy  consumption  per  gross  world  product,  and  global  CO2 
emissions  per  global  energy  consumption—is  the  basis  of  a  specific  exercise  in  decomposing 
overall environmental impact—in this case global emissions—into contributing driving factors P, 
A, C and T. 

Global trends and challenges to sustainable development post-201516

Threats to global ecosystems

Damage to the global 
environment is reaching 
critical levels and threatens 
to lead to irreversible 
changes in global 
ecosystems. Most visibly 
in climate change, critical 
thresholds have already 
been exceeded

In a number of areas, damage to the global environment is reaching critical levels and 
threatens  to  lead  to  irreversible  changes  in  global  ecosystems.  Rockstroem  and  others 
(2009) have identified interlinked planetary boundaries, and found that in some areas, in-
cluding most prominently climate change, boundaries have already been exceeded. There 
is also strong evidence for tipping points to exist for ocean acidification, the phosphorous 
cycle, and stratospheric ozone depletion, while in other areas, the impacts of environmen-
tal degradation may be limited to local and regional ecosystems (Nordhaus and others, 
2012). Overwhelmingly, these changes are driven by the reliance on fossil fuels to power 
economic growth, and by industrialized forms of agriculture, necessary to feed a growing 
and increasingly wealthy global population.

The  overarching  environmental  challenge  is  anthropogenic  climate  change. 
The increased concentration of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere—most importantly, 
CO2—is  leading  to  a  warming  of  the  planet.  The  atmospheric  CO2 concentration  has 
increased from 260-280 parts per million (ppm) in pre-industrial times to 391 ppm in 
September 2012, and global mean warming is already 0.8º C above pre-industrial lev-
els (World Bank, 2012a). Projections of future global warming depend on assumptions 
regarding future development pathways and demographic, economic and technological 
developments, and thus vary widely, but further warming is predicted in all scenarios. The 
business-as-usual scenario produced by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
(2007a) arrives at a best estimate of a 4º C increase of global average surface temperature 
in 2100 as compared with the period 1980-1999. 

There is also a strong scientific consensus that global warming is induced by hu-
man behaviour, predominantly by fossil fuel use and, to a smaller extent, by changes in land 
use and deforestation. The extent of future global warming will therefore primarily depend 
on successfully using the sustainability levers by reducing the energy intensity of GDP 
growth and the carbon intensity of energy, assuming that GDP per capita and population 
continue to grow. However, current trends are not favourable. While the carbon intensity 
of global growth decreased and thus slowed down the overall growth in CO2 emissions up 
until 2000, emission growth has accelerated in the new millennium because of a reduc-
tion—and, partly, even a cessation—in the long-term decreasing trends of carbon intensity 
of energy and energy intensity of GDP, largely owing to the high energy requirements of 
intensive growth in developing and emerging economies (Raupach and others, 2007). 

This  challenge,  in  its  starkness  and  immediacy,  clearly  requires  a  global  re-
sponse.  Rockstroem  and  others  (2009)  propose  a  CO2  concentration  boundary  in  the 
atmosphere of 350 ppm, which has already been breached. Yet, reaching agreement on 
this global response entails addressing difficult equity questions, as contributions to global 
emissions have varied widely historically and continue to do so. While developed countries 
are responsible for almost 60 per cent of cumulative emissions and therefore bear the brunt 
of the blame historically, they now contribute little to emissions growth, which is driven by 
China, India and other developing countries (Raupach and others, 2007). In fact, China 
is now the single largest contributor to global CO2 emissions, having emitted 9.7 billion 
tons in 2011, representing 29 per cent of all emissions (Olivier, Janssens-Maenhout and 
Peters, 2012). At the same time, the stabilization of emissions in developed countries can 
be explained in part by growing imports of emissions-intensive products from developing 
countries. If these emissions transfers are taken into account, developed countries have 
not been able to stabilize their contribution to global emissions (figure I.6). The picture is 

World Economic and Social Survey 201317

further complicated by stark differences in per capita emissions. While per capita emissions 
in the United States are about five times the global average, per capita emissions in least 
developed countries are a mere tenth of the global average (Raupach and others, 2007). 

Climate change poses numerous and stark challenges for sustainable develop-
ment,  and  its  effects  will  be  felt  in  all  regions  of  the  globe,  although  the  intensity  of 
exposure will vary. Degree of vulnerability will vary even more, with developing countries 
and the poor, which have contributed the least to global warming, likely to suffer the most. 
Coastal  communities,  notably  in  small  islands  and  megadeltas,  mountain  settlements 
and urban communities in megacities of developing countries are particularly vulnerable 
(Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2012a). Agriculture will also be negatively 
impacted by the increasing frequency of extreme weather events such as heatwaves and 
droughts, and the intensification of the water cycle, further intensifying aridity of already 
dry zones and thus reducing the amount of arable land. Growing average temperatures 
and changes in precipitation trends are already having a significant negative impact on 
yields of global maize and wheat crops (Lobell, Schlenker and Costa-Roberts, 2011).   

Arguably even more important in the functioning of the Earth system, albeit 
less visibly, are the world’s oceans. They, too, are dramatically affected by increased CO2 
emissions, which lead, through the effects of warming and thermal expansion, to a rise in 
sea levels, as well as to ocean acidification. The latter would, if current trends continued,  
halt or even reverse coral reef growth, undermining marine ecosystems, and, in combina-
tion with sea-level rises, would endanger coastal regions worldwide (World Bank, 2012a). 
Climate change is also exacerbating biodiversity loss. Biodiversity is critical 
for the resilience of ecosystems and thus important for the provision of often-irreplaceable 
ecosystem services, encompassing, inter alia, food, water and cultural services (Steffen and 

Figure I.6 
Figure I.6 CO2 emissions of developed and developing countries, as allocated to 
CO2 emissions of developed and developing countries, as allocated to production  
production and consumption (production plus net exports), 1990-2010
and consumption (production plus net exports), 1990-2010
CO2 emissions (petagrams of carbon)

Developed: production
Developed: consumption
Developing: production
Developing: consumption

5.0

4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

2.5

2.0

0
9
9
1

5
9
9
1

Source: Peters and others (2012).

0
0
0
2

5
0
0
2

0
1
0
2

Source: Peters and others 
(2012).

Global trends and challenges to sustainable development post-201518

Once certain thresholds 
have been crossed, there 
are substantial risks of 
large-scale non-linear 
impacts, which could 
irreversibly alter the state  
of the planet’s biosphere 

others, 2011). While current losses in biodiversity are mostly caused by habitat destruction, 
climate change could soon become an even bigger threat to the survival of species and is 
expected  to  accelerate  the  overall  trend  in  biodiversity  loss  (Bellard  and  others,  2012).  
Causal chains are complex and multiple, and include the increase in average temperatures 
and changes in precipitation patterns, the higher frequency of extreme weather events such 
as droughts and flooding, ocean acidification and further land-use changes.

The  expansion  and  modernization  of  agriculture  are  largely  responsible  for 
interference with the planetary nitrogen and phosphorus cycle, and contribute to global 
land-use change. Fertilizer use, a major driver of the green revolution in agriculture, has 
increased by 700 per cent since 1960 (Foley and others, 2005). Fertilizer production in-
volves the conversion of nitrogen from the atmosphere into reactive forms through which 
it becomes usable nutrient for plants. This has allowed for the remarkable expansion of 
agriculture, but at the same time it has led to the widespread dispersion and accumula-
tion of reactive nitrogen in the environment. The same is true for phosphorus, which is 
mined from rock and also used in fertilizers. The excess concentration of nitrogen and 
phosphorus degrades water quality and threatens biodiversity and thus the resilience of 
marine ecosystems. Increasing nitrogen concentrations also contribute to acidification of 
rivers and streams, to stratospheric ozone depletion and to climate change (Galloway and 
others, 2003). Land-use change, which is driven not only by agriculture but also by the 
expansion of urban areas, further contributes to change in the global and regional climates 
and to biodiversity loss. 

Most  worrisome  are  the  substantial  risks  of  large-scale  non-linear  impacts 
of  climate  change  and  the  breaching  of  other  planetary  boundaries.  Once  certain  en-
vironmental thresholds are crossed, biological changes might interact in multiple ways, 
through feedback mechanisms which are not yet fully understood, and move the planet’s 
biosphere irreversibly into a different state. Such state shifts have occurred multiple times 
in the Earth’s history, most recently about thirteen thousand to eleven thousand years ago, 
when the planet transitioned from its last glacial into the present interglacial condition, 
or the Holocene, characterized by exceptionally benign conditions for human develop-
ment.  Planetary  state  shifts  are  irreversible,  and  cause  dramatic  changes  in  the  global, 
regional and local assemblage of species (Barnosky and others, 2012). Some of the better-
understood potential feedback mechanisms encompass a rapid loss in rainforest coverage 
and dieback, of the Amazon rainforest in particular; disruptions in the ocean ecosystem; 
abrupt loss of Arctic summer sea-ice; irreversible meltdown of the Greenland ice sheet; 
disintegration of the west Antarctic ice sheet; and melting of permafrost in the northern 
hemisphere (Lenton and Ciscar, 2012). 

A strong sustainability challenge? 

Climate change also puts pressure on natural resources that are essential for sustaining hu-
man civilization. In the past, resource scarcity was often presented as a critical challenge, 
but for much of the twentieth century, resource prices actually fell. The combination of 
rapid economic expansion, continued population growth and a changing climate raises the 
spectre of resource scarcities. In the medium and long term, it may lead to a strong sus-
tainability challenge. There is significant scope for substitution in many areas, yet certain 
forms of natural capital including the ecological services they provide cannot be replaced 
by man-made capital. Their exploitation has thus to be limited so as to preserve the overall 
capacity of ecosystems to provide those services (Ayres, 2007). 

World Economic and Social Survey 201319

Economic growth and 
changes in consumption 
and urbanization patterns 
are the main drivers of 
rising global resource 
demand, which— in 
combination with climate 
change—could lead to 
increasing pressure on 
arable land and water 
supplies

Land, water and energy in particular are critical resources for humanity, and 
their  availability  and  use  are  tightly  interconnected,  with  multiple  feedback  channels 
between them. All of them have strong links to agriculture and food production. Large 
unmet needs at the global level require and will inevitably lead to a further expansion in 
their use and exploitation. Combined with the additional impact of climate change, this 
expansion may very well lead to much tighter supplies, and thus to price volatilities and 
sustained price increases. If scarcities arise and if limits to substitutability are reached, 
distributional conflicts will have to be addressed at the national and global levels, as well 
as with respect to purposes of use. 

The  common  drivers  of  resource  use  are  population  growth  and  economic 
expansion  and  the  associated  lifestyle  changes.  The  global  population  will  continue  to 
expand, but population growth will take place largely in the poorest countries, adding 
comparatively small additional pressure at the global level. Resource use is strongly cor-
related with income, however. Currently, per capita material and energy use in developed 
countries is higher than in developing countries by a factor of 5-10. Population density 
also appears to be a significant determinant, with densely populated areas needing fewer 
material resources to achieve the same standard of living (Krausmann and others, 2009). 
For these reasons, the major drivers of global resource demand in the decades ahead will 
be economic growth and changes in consumption and urbanization patterns.  

Competing demands for land stem from increasing global demand for food 
and feed, for livestock in particular, increasing biofuel production, and the expansion of 
cities, and from the need to protect forests so as to meet the demand for fibre, as well as 
the need for carbon sequestration (Evans, 2010). Climate change may further reduce the 
amount of arable land, particularly in low-lying regions susceptible to flooding (World 
Bank, 2012a). Increasing pressure on land is already occurring worldwide, as evidenced by 
the dramatic increase in land deals. The Global Commercial Pressures on Land Research 
Project estimates that 203 million hectares of farmland worldwide have been sold or leased 
since 2001, with the pace of acquisitions accelerating markedly since 2008. Africa is the 
biggest target for these land deals, accounting for reported sales of 134 million hectares. 
(Anseeuw and others, 2012; see also chapter IV). 

Stresses in water supplies arise from the increase in consumptive use and pollu-
tion of freshwater, for which agriculture is overwhelmingly responsible.  The consumption 
of agricultural products accounts for 92 per cent of the global freshwater footprint, an 
indicator for humans’ appropriation of freshwater resources (Hoekstra and Mekonnen, 
2012).  Different commodities and types of food in particular differ dramatically in their 
water intensity; therefore, going forward, changes in food consumption patterns will have 
a major impact on global water stress. 

In addition, energy production is likely to become thirstier in coming years, 
as biofuels become a more prominent part of the energy mix. The International Energy 
Agency (2012) estimates that water consumption for energy production will increase by  
85 per cent between now and 2035. Overall, global energy demand is projected to in-
crease by about one third in this time period. While technological advances are unlocking 
previously inaccessible fossil fuels for extraction, their exploitation is at odds with global 
emissions reduction goals. In fact, only a third of proved reserves of fossil fuels can be con-
sumed by 2050, if CO2 concentration in the atmosphere is to be limited to 450 ppm (ibid.). 
All three factors—land, water and energy—have a direct impact on agricul-
ture and food production. Food prices have already increased and become more volatile 

Global trends and challenges to sustainable development post-201520

Huge investments will be 
necessary to increase the 
food and energy supply 
in an environmentally 
sustainable manner

in recent years, partly driven by higher prices and tighter supplies of those factors. By 
2050, global food production will have to further expand by 70 per cent, in order to feed 
a growing world population and simultaneously address existing malnutrition and hunger 
(Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2011a). Competing demands 
for land, water and energy, and the impact of climate change, are exacerbating the scale 
of this challenge. At the same time, the expansion of food production has to be achieved 
in an environmentally sustainable way, so as not to contribute to further degradation of 
the environment. This will entail dramatic improvements in food production, processsing, 
and distribution (Godfray and others, 2010). 

The  implications  of  resource  scarcities  are  manifold.  Increasing  prices  and 
price volatility will not only heighten the vulnerability of poor and net food consuming 
households, but also raise issues of food and energy security for countries, and globally as 
well. Poor households are particularly vulnerable to rising food prices, at least in the short 
run, as they spend a much larger proportion of their total income on food. For this reason, 
they are also less well equipped to deal with price volatility and sudden price spikes, which, 
by possibly requiring them to sell assets, can exert permanent effects (Evans, 2010). 

At the national level, higher food and energy prices dampen growth prospects 
for food-deficit countries and net energy importing countries. Globally, higher expendi-
ture in resource-exporting countries is unlikely to compensate for the fall in aggregate 
demand in importing countries (Dobbs and others, 2011a). At the same time, tighter trade 
links and lower buffers associated with more integrated production patterns cause local 
or regional shocks triggered by resource scarcities to reverberate more quickly in other 
regions of the world. Lastly, the prospect of scarcity could also increase concerns about the 
security of supply of food, energy and water and lead to more “resource nationalism”. The 
recent spike in cross-border land acquisition can be interpreted in this light, as can export 
restrictions on crops or mineral resources, which have increased in recent years (ibid.).

To address these issues, huge investments will be necessary to increase supply 
in an environmentally sustainable manner. Securing long-term financing at an adequate 
scale to finance these investments will be a major challenge. Yet, expansions of supply, 
technological progress and efficiency gains at all levels may not be sufficient. In this case, 
distributional questions will inevitably arise. Access to resources is already extremely un-
equal, even in an age of relative plenty, as evidenced by the large number of people who go 
hungry or remain without access to modern forms of energy. With scarcity, distributional 
conflicts over access to natural resources will become much more pressing, both within 
and between countries (Evans, 2011). 

Sustainable development in  
a more interdependent world

Achieving sustainable development post-2015 will entail progress in its four dimensions—
inclusive economic development, inclusive social development, environmental sustainabi-
lity and effective governance and peace and security (United Nations System Task Team 
on the Post-2015 UN Development Agenda, 2012). The megatrends discussed above raise 
multiple  challenges  which  threaten  our  ability  to  achieve  such  progress  in  the  decades 
ahead. They also reinforce each other in myriad ways, and therefore have to be addressed 

World Economic and Social Survey 201321

Megatrends have increased 
interdependence among 
countries without 
any commensurate 
strengthening of global 
governance, while 
heterogeneity has 
increased both within  
and between countries 

in a broad and holistic manner, by achieving transformative change in production and 
consumption patterns, natural resource management, and mechanisms of governance. 

Mutually reinforcing trends and challenges

Global  socioeconomic,  demographic  and  environmental  megatrends  have  increased  in-
terdependence among countries, but without any commensurate strengthening of global 
governance.  As  a  result,  global  macroeconomic  imbalances,  migratory  pressures  and 
environmental  challenges  are  insufficiently  addressed,  and  crises  occur  with  increasing 
frequency. At the same time, countries with growing exposure and interlinkages become 
more  vulnerable  to  such  external  shocks,  and  crises  spread  more  quickly,  threatening  
development progress.  

At the national and subnational levels, these tighter links have facilitated socio-
economic progress, but not everybody is benefiting to the same degree. Rather, inequali-
ties both within and between countries persist. While growth has accelerated in many 
developing countries, often it has been non-inclusive, failing to create sufficient employ-
ment opportunities and exacerbating inequalities. The consolidation of value chains and 
the related deceleration of trade growth may render the implementation of export-based 
growth strategies even more difficult in the years ahead, at the same time as demographic 
deve lopments make accelerated employment generation an imperative in countries with 
large  youth  cohorts.  Population  dynamics  will  also  impose  additional  stresses  on  local 
governments and rapidly growing cities and national health and education systems. Rapid 
ageing  in  numerous  countries,  in  particular,  will  require  further  investments  in  social 
protection systems. The persistence of inequalities, whether in incomes, or in access to 
services, decent jobs, land or technology, also hints at their entrenched structural causes. 
Discrimination and exclusion, based on gender, age, disability or ethnicity, have to be tack-
led directly in order that greater inclusiveness and transformative change may be achieved.   
These challenges are exacerbated in multiple ways by accelerating environmen-
tal degradation. The poor are most vulnerable to environmental hazards and, owing to the 
unequal distribution of assets, will also suffer the most from resource scarcities. In terms 
of the medium and long run, threats to the stability of the global climate overshadow  
all  other  challenges,  as  they  would  fundamentally  undermine  the  preconditions  for  
human development. 

Strategies for sustainable development 

World Economic and Social Survey 2013 discusses the changes required in local, national 
and  global  policies  to  achieve  sustainable  development  post-2015.  The  transformative 
change  necessary  to  address  the  challenges  set  out  above  will  be  driven  mainly  by  ac-
tors at the local and national levels. Coherence between local and national strategies will 
therefore remain critical. Policy decisions in one country have regional and often global 
repercussions,  but  currently  such  externalities—be  they  positive  or  negative—are  not 
taken sufficiently into account in decision-making processes.

Coherence  in  national  development  strategies  implies  most  fundamentally 
that  socioeconomic  development  strategies  aim  to  avoid  further  environmental  distress. 
Developed  countries  in  particular  have  to  address  unsustainable  consumption  and  pro-
duction patterns and their continuously rising environmental impact, while emerging and 

Global trends and challenges to sustainable development post-201522

developing economies need to pursue the goal of greening their catch-up growth. At the 
global  level,  the  human  development  agenda  and  the  goal  of  environmental  protection 
have to be jointly pursued. Developed countries in particular would make moves towards 
sustainable production and consumption, while developing countries would offer greater 
cooperation in meeting climate and other global challenges. Such a global consensus on 
sustainable development will be based on solidarity, with human development and environ-
mental protection as integrated and universal goals for all countries (chap. II). 

Meanwhile, many specific measures will be designed and implemented at the 
local level and in towns and cities in particular (chap. III). Urbanization offers the oppor-
tunity to achieve socioeconomic progress in a more environmentally sustainable manner; 
but for that opportunity not to be wasted, enormous investments will be necessary. 

Many of the major trends and challenges reinforce each other, as was starkly 
revealed by the 2008-2009 global food, fuel and financial crises. Therefore, policy coherence 
between areas is equally important. The availability and use of land, water, and energy, in 
particular, are tightly interconnected. They all impact on agriculture and food production, 
and that impact, in combination with the additional impact of climate change, will require 
a rethinking of food and nutrition security strategies (chap. IV). Achieving food security 
while minimizing the environmental impact will require increasing agricultural productiv-
ity, particularly in developing countries. At the same time, reductions in food waste and less 
resource-intensive diets could make a remarkable contribution to food and nutrition security. 
A transformation of the energy system will be necessary to achieve near uni-
versal access to energy in an environmentally sustainable manner (chap. V). Current emis-
sions trends of greenhouse gases will likely lead to further increases in global temperatures, 
with potentially catastrophic consequences. To avert further warming, major investments 
in  energy  efficiency  are  critical,  while  industrial  policies  and  technological  innovation, 
transfer  and  adaptation  can  support  a  low-carbon  inclusive  growth  path  to  facilitate  a 
global energy transformation that is compatible with economic and social inclusion in 
developing countries.

To  achieve  this  energy  transformation  together  with  food  and  nutrition  se-
curity, sustainability of cities and other development goals after 2015, large-scale invest-
ments will be needed. Such investments will require sufficient levels of supply of long-term 
financing, and they will have to be carried out both by public actors through increased 
public expenditure and by the private sector, which will depend critically on creating the 
right incentives for investments in sustainable development. 

World Economic and Social Survey 2013Chapter II
Strategies for development 
and transformation

Summary

 y

 y

 y

 y

While  technology  will  play  an  important  role  in  the  transition  to  sustainable  con-
sumption,  conscious  efforts  will  still  have  to  be  made  to  move  away  from  more 
resource-intensive to less resource-intensive consumption, from a private to a public 
mode of consumption, from use of non-biodegradable to use of natural and biode-
gradable material, and from unequal to more equitable consumption.

Sustainable and equitable consumption patterns, with appropriate reorganization of 
the economy and society, including a redefinition of output and the sharing of pro-
ductivity gains, can ensure income and employment and a better quality of life for all.

Human development will remain the main focus of developing countries post-2015. 
In  this  regard,  the  transition  of  developed  countries  to  equitable  and  sustainable 
consumption  will  make  it  easier  for  developing  countries  to  pursue  their  human 
development goals in a more environmentally sustainable way. 

Some  developing  countries  have  been  implementing  initiatives  directed  towards 
sustainability  that,  so  far,  are  more  advanced  than  those  of  developed  countries, 
which suggests that developing countries can provide real leadership in the transi-
tion to sustainability.

Process tracks of implementation of Agenda 21 
and its consequences 

As the period for the Millennium Development Goals expires in 2015, the world communi-
ty faces the challenge of implementing strategies to address the concerns that have become 
more global and more pressing. The international community faced a similar situation 
when it gathered at the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, 
held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, in June 1992. One outcome of the Conference was Agenda 
21 (United Nations, 1993), which constituted a comprehensive and integrated programme 
encompassing all three dimensions of sustainable development. 

24

Implementation of  
Agenda 21 proceeded 
along different tracks

The actual implementation of Agenda 21, proceeded, however, along different 
tracks (figure II.1). On the one hand, during the 1990s, some of the concerns regarding 
economic and social development took the form of advocacy for “human development”, 
which crystallized in the Millennium Development Goals through the adoption of the 
United  Nations  Ministerial  Declaration1  (Nussbaum,  2011;  Sen,  1999).  On  the  other 
hand, concerns regarding the environment (global warming, for example) were reflected 
in the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change,2 which was opened 
for signature at the 1992 Rio Conference. This was followed by the adoption, in 1977, of 
the Kyoto Protocol to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change,3 
by the Conference of the Parties to the Convention at its third session. Another response to 
environment-related concerns was the Convention on Biological Diversity,4 which was also 
opened for signature at the Rio Conference. Yet another example of global environmental 
protection effort is the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification. Also, the 
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) has been working on environmental 
issues since 1972.

The Millennium Development Goals focused on some aspects of economic and 
social deve lopment, which are both dimensions of sustainable development.5 However, 
they were weak on environ mental protection.6

The  above-mentioned  separate  tracks  of  the  implementation  process  of  
Agenda 21 were also associated with very different domain configurations. For example, 
the domain of action of the Millennium Development Goals was confined to develop-
ing  countries.  By  contrast,  the  Kyoto  Protocol,  following  principle  7  on  common  but 
differentiated responsibilities of the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development 
(United Nations, 1993), required only developed countries to undertake greenhouse gas 
emissions reduction targets, while exempting developing countries from the requirement 
of undertaking such targets.

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

See General Assembly resolution 55/2.

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1771, No. 30822.

Ibid., vol. 2303, No. 30822. In fact, the Kyoto Protocol may be regarded as having set out the first 
major sustainable development goal, not counting that contained in the 1987 Montreal Protocol 
on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer (United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1522, No. 26369).

United Nations, Treaty Series; vol. 1760, No. 30619.

It should be noted that the Millennium Development Goals did not exhaust the United Nations 
development  goals,  which  have  a  broader  range.  The  latter,  often  referred  to  as  constituting 
the  United  Nations  development  agenda  (United  Nations,  2007)  or  the  internationally  agreed 
development  goals,  represent  all  of  the  development  goals  adopted  at  various  international 
conferences held under the auspices of the United Nations.  Also, economic development goals 
are not explicitly encompassed by the Millennium Development Goals. Instead, they are implicit, 
in the sense that achievement of the Millennium Development Goals would require an increase in 
per capita income, the traditional indicator of economic development. However, since an increase 
in per capita income is not sufficient for poverty reduction and other social goals, the Millennium 
Development  Goals  have  focused  directly  on  those  goals,  omitting  conventional  indicators  of 
economic development. 

The Millennium Development Goal directly related to the environment is Goal 7, which focused 
originally on reduction of slums and greater access to clean drinking water. Later on, biodiversity 
protection targets, among others, were added. However, these targets did not achieve prominence 
and  were  not  pursued  vigorously  within  the  Millennium  Development  Goals  framework.  For 
example, although the expanded list of Goal 7 targets included a carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions 
reduction, the main international effort to reduce CO2  proceeded  under the auspices of the United 
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.

World Economic and Social Survey 2013Figure II.1 Bifurcation of the implementation process of Agenda 21 
Figure II.1 
and its consequences
Different tracks of the implementation process of Agenda 21 and the consequences 

25

Economic development

Human development:

Millennium 
Development 

Goals

Sustainable 
development

Social 

development

Poverty 

eradication

worries 

Environmental 

protection

United Nations Framework 

Convention on Climate Change
Convention on Biological Diversity

Climate change 

mitigation 

impasse

Source: UN/DESA, 
Development Policy and 
Analysis Division.

Source:  UN/DESA, Development Policy and Analysis Division.

The impasse with regard to climate change mitigation 

The eighteenth session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change held in Doha in November and December 2012 again 
illustrated that climate change mitigation efforts are insufficient to achieve the goal of hold-
ing the global temperature increase below 2º Celsius above the pre-industrial level. In Doha, 
countries agreed and launched the second commitment period for the Kyoto Protocol that 
was to commence from 1 January 2013 and end on 31 December 2020. However, several 
countries that had ratified the Kyoto Protocol for its first commitment period withdrew 
from it and decided not to join the second commitment period. The remaining states parties 
to the protocol with obligations to reduce greenhouse gas emissions currently account for 
only 15 per cent of global emissions (Toye, 2012). 

Second, the greenhouse gas reduction goals set out in the Kyoto Protocol re-
main largely unachieved. If the economies in transition are not taken into account, most 
of the developed countries (Annex B to the Protocol) have failed to achieve their reduction 
targets. Countries that apparently have achieved their targets have often done so mainly 
through offshoring greenhouse gas-intensive production operations to developing coun-
tries (chap. I; Li and Hewitt, 2008; Peters and Hertwich, 2008). Meanwhile, since produc-
tion  technologies  in  developing  countries  are  generally  more  greenhouse  gas-intensive, 
offshoring has led to an increase rather than a decrease in the total (global) volume of 
emissions, thus frustrating the very purpose of the Protocol. 

Third, although countries agreed to continue the Kyoto Protocol via the sec-
ond commitment period through 2020, the post-2020 comprehensive regime, which is to 
be universal and applicable to all countries, is yet to be negotiated and concluded by 2015.7 

7 

See, FCCC/KP/CMP/2012/13/Add.1, decision 1/CMP.8.

Strategies for development and transformation26

Worries regarding poverty eradication and other human 
development goals

Worries  regarding  poverty  eradication  emanate  from  the  weaknesses  with  respect  to 
poverty reduction achievement so far. First, although the world as a whole is on track 
towards achieving Millennium Development Goal 1, this has been largely due to China, 
which succeeded in raising about 600 million people out of poverty. By contrast, South 
Asia and sub-Saharan Africa have been less successful, and the absolute number of the 
poor  in  these  regions  has  in  fact  increased.  Chen  and  Ravallion  (2010)  indicate  that 
“the developing world is poorer than we thought”, reporting that the number of poor in 
2005 was 1.4 billion (using $1.25/day as the poverty line). They further indicate that if 
the higher, $2/day definition is used, the number of the poor in developing countries in 
2005 increased to 2.6 billion (representing 47.6 per cent or almost half, of the developing 
world’s population). 

Second, those who have risen above the poverty level still remain very close to 
it, so that negative shocks can easily wipe out the poverty reduction gains, which was what 
occurred during the recent food price spike. 

Third, despite progress, the overall rate of poverty reduction is proving too 
slow to be satisfactory. For example, recent calculations by Woodward (2013) show that 
based  on  the  average  growth  rate  of  income  of  the  lowest  decile  of  population  during 
1993-2008 (leaving out China), eradication of poverty, as measured by the $1.25/day line, 
would require another century; and it will take even longer if a higher income threshold 
(such as $5/day) is used (figure II.2). It is difficult to see how the world can wait that long 
to  eradicate  poverty  without  meanwhile  becoming  embroiled  in  major  social  conflicts, 
both internal and external. 

Relying on the poverty reduction trends that held during 1990-2010, Ravallion 
(2012) suggests that an “optimistic” target would be to reduce the poverty rate (poverty 
line of $1.25/day) to 9 per cent in the next 10 years. Woodward (2013), however, points 
out that progress in poverty reduction during that period was dominated by China’s ex-
ceptional performance, and that it is difficult to believe that this record can be replicated 
with China largely out of the world poverty picture post-2015. It is therefore not by chance 
that Ravallion himself deems this target “optimistic”. 

Meanwhile, projections (see discussion below) show that decreasing marginal 
returns to additional public interventions over time increase the marginal costs of achiev-
ing the Millennium Development Goals. In addition, there are concerns with regard to 
quality. For example, while progress has been made in school enrolment rates (goal 2), 
concerns remain regarding the quality of schooling. Thus, significant human development 
challenges persist.

More importantly, the current course of the human development effort ap-
pears to be on a collision course with the environment protection goal. The reduction in 
forest cover, biodiversity, stock of various mineral and other natural resources, etc., and 
the huge increase in various types of waste (including non-biodegradable plastic waste) 
have also been unintended consequences of the current type of human development effort. 
Thus, proceeding along different tracks to implement Agenda 21 has also led 

to problems with regard to both human development and environ  mental protection. 

World Economic and Social Survey 201327

Source: Woodward (2013).
Note:  The graph shows a 
projection of incomes for the 
lowest decile of the world 
population excluding China, 
based on extrapolation 
of the trend of mean per 
capita income in this decile 
between 1993 and 2005. 
The upper limit of the range 
of incomes is the income 
marking the division between 
the 9th and 10th deciles 
($0.85 per day in 2005). The 
lower limit is a conservative 
(high) estimate of the lower 
band, set at half the mean 
income for the tenth decile 
($0.30 per day in 2005) and 
corresponding with the 
upper bound of the  
100th percentile.

Discussions on the 
Millennium Development 
Goals and the Sustainable 
Development Goals reflect 
different tracks of the 
Agenda 21 implementation 
process, but the two sets of 
goals need to be integrated

Figure II.2 
Figure II.2 Income of the poorest decile, World (excluding China), 2000-2250
Income of the poorest decile, World (excluding China), 2000-2250
Dollars per day (2005 purchasing power parity)

25

20

15

10

5

$5.00-a-day poverty line

$1.25-a-day poverty line

Upper limit of range 

of incomes

Mean income for the decile

Range of incomes

Lower limit
of range of 
incomes

0
2000

2050

2100

2150

2200

2250

Source: Woodward (2013).

Millennium Development Goals and  
Sustainable Development Goals

Discussions  on  the  Millennium  Development  Goals  track  have  been  prompted  by  the 
impending expiry of the Millennium Development Goals deadline in 2015. A large litera-
ture—including AIV (2011), Institute of Development Studies (2010), Kenny and Sumner 
(2011), Melamed (2012), Vandemoortele (2012) and World Vision (2011)—has emerged 
concerning this track. The report of the United Nations System Task Team on the Post-
2015 UN Development Agenda (2012) carries forward this discussion. 

The other track is represented by the outcome document of the United Nations 
Conference on Sustainable Development entitled “The future we want”,8 pursuant to which 
a process of formulation of sustainable development goals was initiated. This has led to 
the establishment of the Open Working Group of the General Assembly on Sustainable 
Development Goals (see Assembly decision 67/555 of 22 January 2013). 

These two tracks often present two different perspectives. Some of the pub-
lications associated with the Millennium Development Goals track were written before 
the Conference and hence did not consider the concept and the process of formulation 
of  Sustainable  Development  Goals.  They  generally  continued  to  assign  environmental 
goals a rather limited role in the post-2015 extension of the Millennium Development 
Goals,  similar  to  what  has  been  the  case  in  the  context  of  the  existing  Millennium  
Develop      ment Goals. 

 8 

 General Assembly resolution 66/288, annex.

Strategies for development and transformation28

There is a view that these two tracks, under which discussion is proceeding, 
need to converge so that the international community can emerge with one integrated 
set of goals. This conviction was reflected by the call, in the report of the United Nations 
System Task Team on the Post-2015 UN Development Agenda (2012), for a rebalancing 
of the post-2015 agenda by giving more importance to the goal of environmental protec-
tion (and to peace, security and governance issues). Similar feelings were reflected in the 
recommendation of the inter-agency technical support team of the Open Working Group 
that technical input be sought from the Task Team.  

Means of achieving an integrated  
post-2015 agenda 

Causes of the climate change mitigation impasse

It is well known that one reason for the climate change mitigation impasse is the demand 
by some developed countries that large, fast-growing developing countries, such as China, 
India,  Brazil,  and  South  Africa,  also  accept  greenhouse  gas  emissions  reduction  goals. 
Those developed countries argue that developing countries as a whole currently produce 
more greenhouse gas emissions than developed countries (chap. I) and that large, fast-
growing developing countries have now become major emitters of greenhouse gases. As a 
result, effective climate change mitigation is no longer possible without the agreement of 
those developing countries to reduce the growth of their greenhouse gas emissions. 

In response, developing countries point out that their per capita greenhouse 
gas emissions are still very low and of recent origin. By contrast, developed countries have 
been emitting at a high per capita level for several centuries (Raupach and others, 2007). 
Accordingly, it is unfair to impose restrictions on developing countries’ greenhouse gas 
emissions, which need to increase as these countries try to reduce poverty and raise the 
material standard of living of their populations. Reconciling these two opposing view-
points has so far proved difficult. 

Causes of human development concerns  

One main reason for the concerns regarding poverty eradication is unequal distribution of 
wealth and income (figure II.3). Within-country inequality has generally increased across 
the world in recent decades (United States of America, Congress of the United States, 
Congressional  Budget  Office,  2011;  Galbraith,  2012;  Milanovic,  2012;  Stiglitz,  2012; 
Wilkinson, 2005; Wilkinson and Pickett, 2008). Owing to this inequality, the elasticity 
of poverty reduction with respect to increases in total or average income (of the country) is 
very low. For small improvements in poverty, large increases in the income of people in up-
per income groups are necessary. According to Simms, Johnson and Chowla (2010, p. 18) 
and Woodward and Simms (2006, pp. 16-17), of every $100 worth of growth in world 
per capita income, the poor received only $2.20, during 1981-1990. This figure decreased 
to $0.60 during 1990-2001, because in the meantime, inequality had increased and the 
poor’s share of income decreased further (figure II.4). As a result, to reduce poverty by $1, 
it was necessary to raise global production and consumption by $166 during the latter 

World Economic and Social Survey 2013Figure II.3 
Figure II.3  Distribution of the global absolute gains in income, 1988-2008: 
Distribution of global absolute gains in income, 1988-2008: more than half of those 
more than half of those gains went to the top 5 per cent
gains went to the top 5 per cent
Distribution (percentage) of gain

29

27

25

10

0

5

0

1

1

1

1

1

2

2

2

3

3

5

4

4

5

3

1

0
1

5
1

0
2

5
2

0
3

5
3

0
4

5
4

0
5

5
5

0
6

5
6

0
7

5
7

0
8

5
8

0
9

5
9

9
9

0
0
1

Ventile/percentile of global income distribution

Source: Milanovic (2012).

Source: Based on Branko Milanovic, Global income inequality by the numbers: in history and now--an overview, 
World Bank Working Paper No. 6259, November 2012, Washington, D.C.
Figure II.4 
Figure II.4   Share of the poor in per capita growth, 1981-2001
Share of the poor in per capita growth, 1981-2008
Percentage

1981-1990

1990-1999

1999-2008

$1.25 per day

$2 per day

Source: Woodward (2013).

Source: Woodward (2013).

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

Strategies for development and transformation30

Integration of the 
Millennium Development 
Goals and the Sustainable 
Development Goals 
is possible through a 
consensus under which 
developed countries would 
genuinely move towards 
sustainable consumption 
and developing countries 
would assume a more 
proactive role in dealing 
with global environmental 
problems

decade. Furthermore, the fact that poverty is now concentrated in middle-income coun-
tries, instead of low-income ones, also shows the limits of the current approach to reducing 
poverty (through raising total and average output). 

The low elasticity of poverty reduction is problematic from another angle. It ex-
acerbates the current conflict between the human development (e.g., poverty reduction) goal 
and the environmental protection goal. According to Simms, Johnson and Chowla (2010), 
human beings are already consuming nature’s services 44 per cent faster than nature can 
regenerate (to replenish resources consumed) and reabsorb (the waste generated). Ironically, 
the poor suffer the most from the environmental stress resulting from this process. 

The  climate  change  impasse,  the  continuing  challenge  of  human  develop-
ment and the tension between current human development and environmental protection  
efforts all demonstrate the pressing need for the integration of human development and 
environmental protection goals in the post-2015 agenda.

Towards reintegration of human development  
and environment protection goals

The  process  may  start  with  the  movement  of  developed  countries  towards  sustainable 
consumption with equitable distribution (figure II.5, step (a)).9 How to determine what 
constitutes  sustainable  consumption  is  an  issue,  and  there  is  no  consensus  criterion  in 
this regard. However, given that, of current challenges, climate change has emerged as 
the most destabilizing, one may use per capita greenhouse gas emissions as the criterion  
of sustainability. This criterion is objective and has been well accepted as a relatively ac-
curate measure. 

Pre-industrial data suggest that the atmosphere’s sustainable CO2 absorption 
capacity (i.e., the absorption that does not cause a rise in CO2 concentration) is about  
5 gigatons. According to the United Nations Population Division projection (medium-
fertility variant), the world population will stabilize at about 10 billion by 2080 (United 
Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division, 2011). This 
suggests a little over 0.5 ton of CO2 (tCO2) as the sustainable level of annual per capita 
emissions. However, expecting the per capita greenhouse gas emissions level to be brought 
down to about 0.5 tCO2 may appear unrealistic at this stage. Therefore, some scholars, 
based on the generally accepted goal of 450 ppm (parts per million) (instead of the pre-
industrial level of about 270 ppm), have put forward 3 tCO2 as the per capita annual 
emissions level that needs to be achieved by 2050, assuming that the population will have 
reached 9 billion in that year.

These sustainable levels of greenhouse gas emissions may be contrasted with 
the current per capita emissions level of the United States (about 19 tCO2) and of most 
other developed countries (about 10 tCO2). The differences illustrate the enormity of the 
challenge  faced  by  developed  countries  in  climbing  down  to  sustainable  levels  of  CO2 
emission. Yet, this is a challenge that needs to be accepted, if sustainability is to be attained 
(figure II.5, step (b)). 

Another often-suggested criterion of sustainability relies on the concept of the 
ecological footprint, which measures the biological space (expressed in terms of area) re-
quired to produce the resources that a person consumes and to absorb the waste that his 

9 

See Islam (2012) for details.

World Economic and Social Survey 2013Figure II.5 Integrating the Millennium Development Goals and Sustainable 
Development Goals: means of integrating human development and 
Figure II.5  
environmental protection goals and making them universal
Framework for integrating human development and environmental protection goals  
and making them universal

31

(h)
Sustainable 
greenhouse gas
emissions levels
emerge as a 
universal goal

(e)

New “aspiration
model” emerges 

(b)
Developed 
countries move
towards
sustainable
greenhouse
gas emissions

(a)
Developed
countries 
move towards
sustainable
consumption

(c)
Developed 
countries 
accept human
(re) development
goals

(d)
Human
development
goals become
universal

(g)
Developing
countries agree
to sustainable
greenhouse gas
emissions levels
with scope for
overshooting for
a certain period

(f)
Developing
countries adopt
sustainable
consumption as
an aspiration model

(i)
Developing 
countries adopt
more sustainable
human 
development
strategies

Source: UN/DESA, Development Policy and Analysis Division.

or her consumption generates (Global Footprint Network, 2010; Rees, 1992; Wackernagel, 
1994). According to this measure, the bio-capacity of the earth is limited to 11.5 billion 
hectares of biologically productive space (Woodward and Simms, 2006, p. 3). With the 
current population standing at 6.4 billion, this implies only 1.8 hectares (often referred to as 
global hectares (gha)) of “environmental space” per person. Yet, the ecological footprint (also 
measured in gha) per person has already exceeded this limit and continues to increase.10 

There is an enormous difference between the ecological footprints of developed 

10 

Put in another way, humanity’s total ecological footprint for 2007, for example, was equivalent to 
1.5 planet Earths, implying that humanity uses ecological services 1.5 times as quickly as the Earth 
can renew them. See the Global Footprint Network website (http://www.footprintnetwork.org/
en/index.php/GFN/page/data_sources/).

Source: UN/DESA, 
Development Policy and 
Analysis Division.

Strategies for development and transformation32

and developing countries (figure II.6). The average ecological footprint (per person) in 
Europe in 2007 was 4.7 gha, compared with an actual availability of 2.9 gha, implying 
that people in Europe are using up bio-space of other parts of the world. The same is true 
for the United States, where the average ecological footprint is 8 gha, compared with avail-
able bio-capacity of 3.9 gha. In comparison, the average ecological footprint in developing 
countries is 1.8 gha, which is equal to the global average (Woodward and Simms, 2006, 
p. 3; Global Footprint Network, 2010).

Furthermore, the ecological footprint in developed countries seems to be rising 
at  a  faster  pace  than  in  developing  countries.  For  example,  the  ecological  footprint  in 
developed countries increased from 3.8 global hectares in 1961 to 5.3 global hectares in 
2007, representing an overall increase of 39 per cent. By contrast, the per capita ecological 
footprint in developing countries increased from 1.4 global hectares in 1961 to 1.8 global 
hectares in 2007, representing an increase of 28 per cent (Woodward and Simms, 2006,  
p. 3, and global Footprint Network, 2010).11 

Compared with the greenhouse gas criterion, the ecological footprint criterion 
of sustainability has both advantages and disadvantages. One advantage is that it is more 
comprehensive, reflecting a wider range of impacts of humans on the environment. The 
disadvantage is that it is less precisely measured and hence is subject to disputes (Toye, 
2012). In contrast, the greenhouse gas criterion is more narrowly focused, but more ac-
curately measured and hence less controversial.

Figure II.6   Average ecological footprint per person in developed and 
Figure II.6  
developing countries, 1961 and 2007
Average ecological footprint per person in developed and developing countries,  
1961 and 2007
Global hectares

Developed countries
Developing countries

1961

2007

8

6

4

2

0

Source: Woodward and 
Simms (2006); Global 
Footprint Network, “Ecological 
Footprint Atlas” (Oakland, 
California, 13 October 2010). 

Source: Woodward and Simms (2006), and Ecological Footprint Atlas 2010, Global Footprint Network.

In  fact,  between  1981  and  2001,  the  ecological  footprint  per  person  in  developing  countries 
actually decreased (Woodward and Simms, 2006, p. 3).

11 

World Economic and Social Survey 201333

However, both the greenhouse gas criterion and the ecological footprint cri-
terion reflect the same facts. First, the impact of human activities has already exceeded 
the capacity of the Earth to absorb it. Second, this breach has been due mainly to un-
sustainable  consumption  in  developed  countries.  Third,  as  developing  countries  try  to 
emulate the consumption patterns and levels of developed countries, the breaches in the 
Earth’s planetary boundaries are becoming larger. For example, under current produc-
tion technology, if the whole world wanted to consume at the 2001 level of the United 
States, resources equivalent to that of 15 planets like the Earth would be required (Simms, 
Johnson and Chowla, 2010, p. 5).

Thus, genuine movement by developed countries towards sustainable consump-
tion will require sweeping changes in these countries. Until now, human development 
has generally been understood to consist in reduction of poverty, mortality rates, gender 
disparities in education, etc. The concept has therefore been perceived to be relevant to de-
veloping countries only. However, a shift towards sustainable and equitable consumption 
will require significant changes in lifestyles and reorganization of the economy and society 
in developed countries too. Taken together, these changes will make up another phase of 
human development (figure II.5, step (c)). Understood in this way, human development 
will become a universal goal, instead of something applicable to developing countries only 
(figure II.5, step (d)). 

Meanwhile,  genuine  moves  towards  sustainable  and  equitable  consump-
tion  by  developed  countries  may  give  rise  to  a  new  “aspiration  model”  for  developing 
countries (figure II.5, step (e)), invoking a reciprocal response from the latter (figure II.5,  
step (f)). With regard to climate change, the new context may make it possible for develop-
ing countries to accept sustainable greenhouse gas emissions levels as the ultimate goal, 
with the scope for overshooting those levels for a while (figure II.5, step (g)). It may be 
expected that the overshooting will not be as large in extent or for as long a period as 
has  been  the  case  for  currently  developed  countries.  Thus,  sustainable  greenhouse  gas 
emissions levels may become a universal goal shared by both developed and developing 
countries (figure II.5, step (h)). A similar process may unfold with regard to other envi-
ronmental goals.

On the human development side, the conventional goals of reduction of pover-
ty, mortality, gender disparity, etc., will continue to be very much a part of the agenda for 
developing countries. However, these goals would now be pursued in a more sustainable 
way (figure II.5, step (i)). To the extent that the new aspiration model promotes equitable 
distribution in developing countries, it will become easier to achieve poverty reduction 
and other human development goals. 

Overall, figure II.5 presents a framework within which both human develop-
ment and environmental protection can become universal goals and be integrated, ending 
the current separation between their domains of application. This framework can provide 
the basis for the post-2015 agenda. 

The ideas and the causal linkages presented in figure II.5 are abstract and very 
general. It is necessary to make them more concrete. By considering in some detail the 
changes that are necessary in developed and developing countries in order for the proposed 
framework to be effective, the next two sections attempt to provide that concreteness.

Strategies for development and transformation34

While technology has a  
key role to play in transiting 
to sustainable consumption, 
developed countries need 
to make conscious shifts 
from material to non-
material consumption, 
from a private to a public 
mode of consumption, from 
one-time to multiple use of 
products, and from use of 
non-biodegradable to use of 
biodegradable material

Strategies for transformation in  
developed countries 

Role of technology in ensuring sustainability

The fact that the consumption pattern in developed countries is unsustainable has been 
known for quite some time. However, efforts to move away from this unsustainable pat-
tern have so far focused mainly on technology.

The  technological  route  to  sustainability  was  supported  by  the  concept  of 
“decoupling”  of  economic  growth  from  resource  requirements  (Pearce,  Markandya 
and  Barbier,  1989;  Ocampo,  2009).  The  concept  has  in  turn  been  interpreted  in  two 
ways. “Relative decoupling” implies an increase in output with a “less than proportion-
ate” increase in the inputs required. “Absolute decoupling” implies an increase in output 
with “no” increase in inputs required. While there has been some progress in achieving 
relative decoupling, there is no evidence to support absolute decoupling (United Nations, 
2011b). The aggregate volume of both resources used and waste generated continues to 
rise (Meadows and others, 1972; Meadows, Randers and Meadows, 2002; Turner, 2008). 
The evidence, however, does not suggest that the importance of technology is 
to be discounted. Earlier predictions of resource exhaustion have been invalidated by tech-
nological progress; and the advent of new technologies can serve as a “game changer” in 
future, too. For example, breakthroughs in hydrogen fuel technology and in technologies 
allowing extraction of carbon from the atmosphere to produce fuel can greatly reduce the 
greenhouse gas content of consumption. However, simply waiting for such technologies 
to arrive on the scene cannot be deemed a strategy (Brookes, 1990; Huesemann, 2003, 
2004; Stern, 2007; United Nations, 2009). More importantly, the pace of development 
and adoption of new technologies depend on societal demand. Once the society decides 
on the kind of transformations that it wants to achieve, necessary technologies can develop 
in response to the demand. On the other hand, without such societal demand, even tech-
nologies feasible in principle may remain undeveloped and unused (Jackson, 2010). It is 
therefore important to ascertain the ways in which consumption patterns need to change 
in order to achieve sustainability. 

Shifts in consumption patterns

It may be anticipated that necessary changes in consumption patterns would move in some 
general directions.12 One desirable change would entail movement away from material 
towards non-material consumption. For example, reading e-books may be less greenhouse 
gas-intensive than cutting down forests and filling up wetlands in order to construct large 
houses, and commuting to work in sport utility vehicles (SUVs). It is instructive to note 
that some shift towards non-material consumption is occurring even within the current 
order of things, owing to the impact of Internet-based communications technology and as 
a result of increased awareness of the environmental impact of human activities. However, 
it is necessary to accelerate this shift through implementation of policies. 

12 

It should be noted in this regard that considerable variations across countries need to be accepted, 
as a reflection of their different physical and social conditions.

World Economic and Social Survey 201335

Another desirable change would entail movement away from private to public 
modes of consumption. For example, use of public modes of transportation is less greenhouse 
gas-intensive than use of private cars. Similarly, use of a community pool is less energy- and 
resource-intensive than use by individual families of the private pool in their backyard. 

Movement in a third direction of desirable change would consist in the reversal 
of the “one time use” mode of consumption. While this mode of consumption has its 
usefulness in certain spheres, such as health care, questions of overuse may be raised even 
here. In most other spheres, utilization of this mode of consumption is often unjustifiable, 
as it leads to overuse of resources and over-generation of waste. 

A fourth direction of desirable change would entail discouraging development 
of spurious new models of essentially the same product, leading to unwarranted obsoles-
cence of products and hence to wastage of resources and to generation of excessive waste. 
Another  important  direction  of  desirable  change  would  require  movement 
away  from  non-biodegradable  materials  to  either  natural  or  biodegradable  materials. 
While much of the discussion of sustainability focuses on greenhouse gas emissions, the 
threat posed to the environment by increased use of non-biodegradable plastic materials 
also deserves attention. As figure II.7 demonstrates, while the weight per unit GDP of 
conventional materials such as steel, timber and paper has decreased, that of plastic has 
increased sharply. Easy availability of plastic has been one reason for the spread of the one 
time use mode of consumption and also for the “spurious new models” phenomenon. 

Most of the plastics in use are non-biodegradable. Even the ones that purport 
to  be  biodegradable  will  take  centuries  to  decompose  and  be  absorbed  by  the  Earth’s 
natural elements. Until then, plastic wastes will exert their harmful physical and toxic 

100

10

1

0.1

0.01

Figure II.7
Figure II.7   Increased share of plastic in gross domestic product, 1900-2000
Increased share of plastic in gross domestic product, 1900-2000
Kilograms per dollar of GDP (indexed to 1940)

Plastic

Aluminum

Potash

Phosphate

Lead

Paper

Timber

Copper

Steel

0
0
9
1

5
0
9
1

0
1
9
1

5
1
9
1

0
2
9
1

5
2
9
1

0
3
9
1

5
3
9
1

0
4
9
1

5
4
9
1

0
5
9
1

5
5
9
1

0
6
9
1

5
6
9
1

0
7
9
1

5
7
9
1

0
8
9
1

5
8
9
1

0
9
9
1

5
9
9
1

0
0
0
2

Source: United Nations 
(2011b).

Source:  United Nations (2011).

Strategies for development and transformation36

Means of bringing about 
desirable changes in 
consumption include 
price corrections, taxes, 
subsidies, environmental-
economic accounting, and 
emphasis on the strong 
concept of sustainability

chemical influence on the Earth’s soil and water (Kaeb, 2011). Plastic waste has become 
a serious threat to inland water bodies, such as rivers and lakes, and even to the oceans 
and marine environment. Hence, substitution of plastic by natural fibre and production 
and use of rapidly decomposing plastic (in cases where natural substitutes are not avail-
able) would represent an important direction of change in consumption and production 
practices post-2015. 

The above discussion of desirable directions of change in consumption pat-
terns is certainly not exhaustive. However, the general idea is clear: the changes have to 
be such that fewer resources are required and less waste is generated. The question is how 
such changes can be brought about.

Means of bringing about shifts in consumption patterns

In a market economy, prices can play an important role in moving consumption towards 
sustainability. It is well known that in the presence of externalities, market prices do not 
ensure efficient resource allocation and need to be corrected so as to internalize the exter-
nalities. Thus, commodities and services involving high levels of greenhouse gas emissions 
need to be priced in such a way as to reflect the cost they impose through climate change. 
Similarly, products and services having a high plastic content need to be priced so as to 
reflect the cost that the disposal of plastic waste imposes on the environment. In most 
cases, necessary price corrections will have to take the form of taxes and subsidies.

There  is  strong  evidence  of  the  influence  of  price  corrections  on  consump-
tion behaviour. For example, high gasoline taxes in European countries and Japan have 
played a role in creating an environment where urbanization is more compact and public 
transportation is more important than in the United States, for example, and, currently, 
in China. 

The  necessity  and  importance  of  price  correction  are  generally  not  denied. 
The  challenge  lies  in  determining  which  prices  are  to  be  changed  and  by  how  much, 
and in making these changes politically feasible. This in turn requires calculation of the 
damages and benefits from a particular product or activity to nature and society that are 
not captured by market prices. Environmental accounting therefore becomes important 
(Burritt, Hahn and Schaltegger, 2002; Nordhaus and Kokkelenburg, 1999; Owen, 2008; 
Pemberton and Ulph, 2000; Schaltegger and Burritt, 2000). 

Environmental accounting

The report of the World Commission on Environment and Development (the Brundtland 
Commission) entitled Our Common Future (1987), had defined sustainable development 
as  the  process  that  “meets  the  needs  of  the  present  generation  without  compromising 
the  ability  of  future  generations  to  meet  their  own  needs”  (World  Commission  on 
Environment  and  Development,  1987).  The  concept  inherent  in  this  definition  led  to 
two  versions  of  sustainability:  “strong  sustainability”,  which  does  not  allow  substitut-
ability  between  natural  capital  and  produced  capital  (either  physical  or  human),  and 
“weak sustainability”, which allows such substitutability. In either case, proper account-
ing (quantification and valuation) of natural capital and the services that it provides is 

World Economic and Social Survey 2013a precondition for determining whether sustainability is ensured. The United Nations 
Environment Programme (UNEP) (2010a; 2011) has rightly noted that the world’s natu-
ral capital “deserves a seat at the table”. 

Preservation  of  capital  for  future  generations  also  requires  paying  more  at-
tention  to  depreciation,  in  particular  of  natural  capital  (Kates,  Parris  and  Leiserowitz, 
2005). In fact, economists have shown that net concepts of output, such as net national 
product (NNP), are better measures of welfare than the corresponding gross measures, 
such as gross national product (GNP) (Asheim and Weitzman, 2001; Dasgupta, 1994; 
Dasgupta, Kristrom and Maler, 1997; Weitzman, 1976, 2000, 2003). One reason for the 
lesser prominence of the net measures of output, despite their theoretical optimality, is the 
difficulties encountered in the computation of depreciation (Hartwick, 1990; Weitzman, 
1997). These difficulties are more salient in the case of natural capital, which itself has yet 
to be properly quantified and valuated (United Nations Environment Programme, 2005).
Fortunately, considerable progress has been made in this regard by the United 
Nations  Statistics  Division  (UNSD),  the  Division  for  Sustainable  Development  of  the 
United  Nations  Secretariat,  UNEP  and  other  organizations,  and  individual  scholars. 
Through  its  System  of  Environmental-Economic  Accounting  (SEEA)  project,  UNSD 
has formulated guidelines for the quantification and valuation of natural capital and the 
various non-marketed services that it offers (box II.1). An important post-2015 goal may 
be to implement those guidelines and to make an estimation of natural capital and its 
depreciation part of national income accounts. 

The fact that, initially, many difficulties and disagreements will remain with 
respect to the estimation of natural capital and its non-marketed services, is one reason 
why the concept of strong sustainability needs to be upheld. Otherwise, natural capital 
will quite possibly be underestimated and the decrease in natural capital will appear to be 
more than compensated by growth in produced capital. It is therefore important, within 
the context of encouraging implementation of environmental-economic accounting, that 
such undesirable unintended consequences be prevented. 

Shifts in consumption and quality of life

There is concern that efforts to make consumption sustainable will lead to a decline in the 
quality of life. However, recent research indicates that the opposite may be true. Surveys 
of citizens of developed countries show that life satisfaction does not necessarily increase 
with increase in material consumption and that the non-material aspects of life, such as 
family and community relationships, play a more important role in ensuring subjective 
well-being (figure II.8). Since the relentless drive to increase production and consumption 
of material goods has affected family and community relationships adversely, the increase 
in material consumption has failed to increase life satisfaction and instead, has resulted in 
a “social recession” (Thompson and others, 2009). 

Thus, shifts away from material to non-material, from private to public, and 
from unequal to more equitable consumption, may actually improve the quality of and 
satisfaction with life and provide a win-win solution to problems of both environmental 
unsustainability and social recession (Lyubormirsky, Sheldon and Schkade, 2005). 

37

It is sustainable 
consumption, instead of 
a relentlessly increasing 
material consumption, 
that can ensure greater life 
satisfaction and, through a 
redefinition of output and 
the sharing of profit and 
employment, can promote 
greater stability of the 
economy and society

Strategies for development and transformation38

Figure II.8
Figure II.8   Factors in(cid:31)uencing subjective well-being  
Factors influencing subjective well-being 

Community and friends 

(5 per cent)

Work ful(cid:30)lment
(2 per cent)

Religious/spiritual life 

(6 per cent)

Don't know/other

(1 per cent)

Money and 

(cid:30)nancial situation

(7 per cent)

A nice place 

to live

(8 per cent)

Partner/spouse 

and family 
relationships
(47 per cent)

Source: Jackson (2009).

Health

(24 per cent)

Source:  Jackson (2009). 

Shifts in consumption patterns and the implications for  
employment and income

Concerns  remain,  however,  with  regard  to  the  impact  of  the  transformation  proposed 
above on the economic growth, employment and income of populations. Some scholars 
have coined the expression “growth dilemma” to capture these concerns (Jackson, 2009). 
This expression encapsulates the fact that, on the one hand, relentlessly increasing output 
and consumption is not environmentally sustainable and that, on the other hand, without 
growth, employment and income are likely to suffer and thus prove socially unsustainable. 
Active research is under way on this issue (Simms, Johnson and Chowla, 2010; Jackson, 
2009. However, several observations can already be made.

First, as the “transformation” of consumption is not the same as its “reduction”, 
the focus needs to be on the “pattern” of consumption and not necessarily on its “level”. 
Accordingly, the move towards sustainable consumption may not necessary imply a fall in 
income and employment even in a conventional setting, which is not, however, to ignore 
the fact that there are limits to material consumption arising from the very real physical 
limitations of human beings. For example, there is a limit to the amount of food a person 
can consume, the number of items of clothes he or she can wear, and the amount of dwell-
ing space he or she can effectively use. Beyond a certain point, an increase in consumption 
along these lines may prove unnecessary or even harmful. Non-material consumption has 
its limits as well, inasmuch as there are only 24 hours in a day. The number of e-books 
that a person can read, the number of films downloaded from the Internet he or she can 

World Economic and Social Survey 201339

view and the amount of time he or she can spend with family and friends are all limited. 
Thus, the issue of reorganization of the economy and society to deal with a situation where 
relentless quantitative growth of consumption is no longer desirable cannot be entirely 
sidestepped (Daly, 1991, 1996; Patel, 2010).

Second, the above considerations also point to the fact that the current meas-
ures  of  output  and  income  are  not  absolutes  but  rather  social  constructs  of  somewhat 
recent origin. As they reflect a particular arrangement of the economy and society, it is 
quite possible that those measures will be modified in the light of changing contexts and 
demands (Layard, 2005; Stiglitz, Sen and Fitoussi, 2010).13 

Third, it may be noted that a shift of consumption towards non-material items 
may be complementary to an increase in productivity, because non-material consumption 
may require more leisure time. 

The answer to the question of the potential impact of proposed changes in 
consumption on income and employment may therefore depend to a great extent on how 
distribution and the organization of the economy and society are carried out. If produc-
tivity gains are shared widely, people may experience an increase in leisure time (to be 
devoted to non-material consumption, and family, friends, community and society) with-
out suffering from a diminished income or unemployment. Thus, institutional changes 
facilitating sharing of employment and profit may be helpful in this regard. Weitzman 
(1984;  1985)  and  others  have  created  models  showing  that  a  shared  economy  (where  
workers share profits of enterprises) produces better outcomes with regard to both employ-
ment and productivity. Many business leaders are calling for a move away from profit and 
towards making “three P” (namely, people, planet and profit) the driving force behind 
business activities (Rahman, 2012). There is also a rising call for “social business”, under 
which entrepreneurs will be motivated by the desire to earn social recognition rather than 
private profit (Yunus, 2007; 2010). Implementing some of these concepts might be part of 
the post-2015 agenda. Strengthened political egalitarianism may be helpful in achieving 
wider distribution of productivity gains and in facilitating the move towards more socially 
motivated business operations.

Finally,  it  may  be  noted,  in  this  connection,  that  transition  to  sustainable 
development will require development and diffusion of many new technologies, and that 
developed countries can provide leadership in this regard. Thus, the transition to sustain-
able consumption may lead to the expansion of employment and income even within the 
traditional framework. 

Having examined the broad directions of transformation necessary in devel-
oped countries for sustainability, we now turn to a discussion of the directions of changes 
necessary for sustainability in developing countries. 

13 

In fact, some shifts from work and time devoted to the market to work and time devoted to non-
market  pursuits  (family,  community  and  society)  can  be  helpful  in  improving  life  satisfaction. 
Devotion of more time to non-market activities may not imply unemployment per se but rather a 
more satisfying use of time. Redefining GDP to include non-marketed output with imputed values 
may ensure that the shifts mentioned above do not appear to signal a fall in a nation’s output level 
(see below).

Strategies for development and transformation40

Box II.1

The United Nations 
Statistics Division has 
developed a System of 
Environmental-Economic 
Accounting (SEEA), which 
helps to reveal connections 
between the environment 
and the economy. The 
SEEA Central Framework 
is ready for use by all 
countries. SEEA has now 
been extended to include 
Experimental Ecosystem 
Accounting

*  Prepared by the United 
Nations Statistics Division. 
**  Available from  
http://unstats.un.org.
a  System of National  
Accounts 2008 (United 
Nations publication,  
Sales No. E.08.XVII.29).
b  United Nations  
publication, forthcoming.  
The pre-edited text, issued as 
a white-cover publication.**
c  See Official Records of the 
Economic and Social Council, 
2012, Supplement No. 4 
(E/2012/24), chap. I, sect. B, 
decision 43/105. See also 
the background document, 
entitled “Implementation 
strategy for the System of 
Environmental-Economic 
Accounting (SEEA)”.** 
d  See the background 
document, entitled 
“System of Environmental-
Economic Accounting: 
SEEA Applications and 
Extensions”.**

System of Environmental-Economic Accounting 2012*

The System of Environmental-Economic Accounting 2012 (SEEA) provides a measurement framework 
within which to integrate environmental data in physical and monetary terms with economic data. 
SEEA  organizes  environmental  information  adopting  a  systems  approach  to  stocks  and  flows,  us-
ing definitions and classifications that are consistent with those of the System of National Accounts 
(SNA).a The strength of the framework lies in the derivation of high-quality aggregates, which are 
comparable across countries, consistent over time and go beyond gross domestic product (GDP).  

The System of Environmental-Economic Accounting 2012 Central Frameworkb (SEEA Central 
Framework  (CF))  provides  the  statistical  framework  for  categorizing  and  analysing  stocks  of  indi-
vidual environmental assets such as water, mineral and energy resources, timber, fish, land and soil, 
the flows of resources into the economy, the exchanges of products within the economy and the 
return of residuals from the economy. At its forty-third session in 2012, the Statistical Commission 
adopted the SEEA Central Framework as the initial version of the international statistical standard for 
environmental-economic accounts, on a par with the SNA, and encouraged a flexible and modular 
approach to its implementation, depending on country priorities and policy demands.c 

Box II.2 
Figure 2   Regional and global CO2-emissions per capita, from the production 
and consumption perspectives, based on data compiled for 27 European Union 
Regional and global CO2 emissions per capita, from the production and consumption 
countries in 2006
perspectives, based on data compiled for 27 European countries in 2006
Tons of CO2 per capita

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

Direct by private

households 

Consumption
expenditure 

Final use 
in region 

Capital formation

Exports

Consumption

Source: Eurostat.
Source: Eurostat.

Domestic 
industries

Imports

Direct by private

households 

Production

SEEA  Applications  and  Extensions  describes  many  indicators  that  may  be  generated 
through use of the SEEA Central Framework.d For example, the SEEA Central Framework may be used 
to calculate environmental efficiency (e.g., tons of CO2 generated per unit of GDP) and its evolving 
pattern over time so as to evaluate decoupling trends. Through its defined system for incorporating 
use  of  resources  by  industry,  SEEA  also  permits  evaluation  of  resource  use  over  time  by  different 
industries and may be used to evaluate the generation of wastes discharged into the environment, 
by industry or sector. The figure above presents an application of data analysis through the SEEA 

World Economic and Social Survey 201341

Box II.1 (cont’d)

e  United Nations 
publication, Sales No. E.11.
XVII.12.**
f  United Nations 
publication, forthcoming. 
g  See the background 
document entitled “System 
of Environmental-Economic 
Accounting (SEEA) 
Experimental Ecosystem 
Accounting”.**
h  See Official Records of the 
Economic and Social Council, 
2013, Supplement No. 4 
(E/2013/24), chap. I, sect. C, 
decision 44/104. See also 
the background document, 
entitled “Research agenda 
for SEEA Experimental 
Ecosystem Accounting”.**

for  27  countries  of  the  European  Union  in  2006,  using  data  obtained  from  Eurostat.  It  shows  the 
decomposition of CO2 emissions from the perspectives of production and consumption. Information 
derived from this exercise can be helpful in studying many policy questions. 

Water and energy have been identified as two priority areas in many countries. The System 
of Environmental-Economic Accounting for Water (SEEA-Water)e and the System for Environmental-
Economic Accounting for Energy (SEEA-E)f are subsystems of the SEEA Central Framework and provide 
a more in-depth discussion of the statistical framework for water and energy. These subsystems also 
provide examples of indicators that can assist in tracking progress towards national policy goals in 
these areas.

The  SEEA  Central  Framework  is  accompanied  by  the  SEEA  Experimental  Ecosystem 
Accounting, which provides a robust statistical framework for countries seeking to measure the con-
tributions of ecosystems to economic activities and human well-being as well as track the condition 
of ecosystems, changes in conditions, and the impact of those changes on the provision of services.g  
The SEEA Experimental Ecosystem Accounting builds on well-established disciplines, including na-
tional accounting, economics and ecological sciences. A research agenda designed to advance the 
methodology  based  on  testing  and  practical  experimentation  in  several  countries  was  approved 
by the Statistical Commission.h Selected modules of ecosystem accounts, in particular those focus-
ing on the measurement of biodiversity, flows of ecosystem services and ecosystem conditions, will 
provide, in due course, useful indicators for policy analysis.

SEEA accounts and resulting indicators can provide information to decision makers on 
progress in meeting goals and targets, including the movement towards sustainable consumption 
and production. Those accounts and indicators will therefore be helpful in monitoring the achieve-
ment of progress towards meeting the sustainable development goals that may be adopted through 
the post-2015 consultation process. 

Sustainable development strategies  
in developing countries 

A heterogeneous developing world

Developing countries have become more heterogeneous than they were when Agenda 21 
was formulated. Some of them have proved successful in achieving industrialization and 
have reached per capita income levels close to those of developed countries. Others have 
not been so successful, and the difference between their per capita income levels and those 
of developed countries has increased further. This diversity among developing countries 
can be seen with regard to the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals as well. 
While some countries have made remarkable progress in achieving the Goals, others have 
lagged behind. These varied performances with regard to achievement of the Goals could be 
a point of departure in discussions concerning future efforts for sustainable development. 

Human development will 
remain the pre-eminent 
goal of developing 
countries, and further 
progress along existing 
dimensions of the 
Millennium Development 
Goals will require a more 
equitable distribution of 
endowments and income

Further progress in achieving the current  
Millennium Development Goals 

An important priority for developing countries post-2015 is therefore to consolidate the 
progress made, to overcome the weaknesses that remain and to strive to achieve further 
progress  along  the  dimensions  encompassed  by  the  current  Millennium  Development 
Goals. With regard to Goal 1, as noted earlier, even countries that have done well in terms 

Strategies for development and transformation42

of the $1.25/day poverty line need to raise the income of their poor population further; 
otherwise, they may easily fall back into poverty, particularly because $1.25/day is a very 
low threshold for measuring poverty. 

Second, in the post-2015 phase, it will be necessary to pay more attention to 
quality issues than was possible during the current phase. For example, as noted earlier, 
in an effort to achieve Millennium Development Goals 2 and 5, many countries made 
significant progress in raising school enrolment. However, less attention was paid to the 
quality of schooling. Quality issues are also important with regard to several other Goals, 
targets and indicators. 

Third, more attention must be paid to coherence and compatibility of achieve-
ment made along different dimensions. For example, improvement in schooling enrolment 
rates needs to match job creation rates. Thus, greater policy coherence at the national level 
must be an important characteristic of post-2015 development strategies. 

The above discussion also suggests that it will be important in post-2015 strate-
gies to pay greater attention to variations in temporal characteristics (such as duration, 
gestation  lag,  etc.)  of  various  dimensions  of  human  development  efforts.  For  example, 
cash transfer programmes can exert rapid effects on poverty rates, and enrolment rates 
may also respond quickly to investments. However, for investment in education and health 
to be reflected (through human capital development) in a country’s economic (growth) 
performance, more time is required. It will therefore be important that a lack of return to 
investment in education and health in the short run not become a source of frustration. 
This also implies that much of the investment made by developing countries in health and 
education during the current Millennium Development Goals period may actually yield 
returns post-2015. The issues of policy coherence and gestation lags will be discussed in 
more detail later in this chapter.

Human development through more equitable  
distribution post-2015 

An  important  lesson  for  post-2015  strategies  learned  from  the  current  Millennium 
Development Goals experience is that equitable distribution of income, wealth and access 
to opportunities and resources helps greatly in achieving human development goals. This 
lesson was clear from the low elasticity of poverty reduction with respect to the increase 
in average and total income of a nation. Cross-country evidence provides additional sup-
port for this lesson. For example, among Latin American countries, Brazil has been more 
successful in poverty reduction in part because it also succeeded in reducing inequality, 
countering the general trend in most other countries of an increase in inequality. 

Research  shows  that  redistribution  of  only  1  per  cent  of  the  income  of  the 
richest 20 per cent can provide as much additional income to the bottom 20 per cent of 
the population as would be derived from per capita income growth rate of between 8 and 
25 per cent in the majority of developing countries, including almost all countries of Latin 
America and sub-Saharan Africa (Woodward and Simms, 2006, p. 19).

The fact that inequality in China rose as it succeeded in reducing the poverty 
rate does not negate the importance of equitable distribution for human development. It 
is well known that China and several other East Asian countries started off with a highly 
egalitarian distribution of physical and human capital which allowed the growth benefits 
to  be  distributed  more  widely  and  led  to  poverty  reduction.  A  comparison  with  India 

World Economic and Social Survey 201343

Intense local consequences 
are another reason why 
developing countries 
may foster environmental 
protection

illustrates the point more clearly. Since India did not begin with an egalitarian distribution 
of its initial endowment, the impact on poverty reduction of its recent growth has been 
less dramatic than in China. Furthermore, the experiences of both China and India show 
that a highly unequal distribution is socially unsustainable. According to many observers, 
rising inequality is one reason behind the spread of insurgency in some parts of India. 

The unequal distribution observed in developing countries is often the result of 
the imitation of the economic model and policies of developed countries. Moves towards 
more equitable distribution by developed countries will therefore be helpful in facilitating 
the switch towards greater equality in developing countries, too. 

Development in a more environmentally constrained  
post-2015 world

While emphasis on further progress along existing dimensions of Millennium Development 
Goals is necessary, it is important to recall that unless human development and environ-
mental protection goals are integrated, they will remain in competition, jeopardizing both 
sets of goals. It is therefore important that post-2015 strategies of human development 
internalize and reflect more thoroughly the environmental protection goal.

First  of  all,  developing  countries  cannot  ignore  global  environmental  prob-
lems, such as climate change. As a whole, they are no longer minor contributors to these 
problems. Without their playing an effective role, it will no longer be possible to solve 
global environmental problems.

At the same time, it is important to recall the heterogeneity of the developing 
world.  There  are  now  vast  differences  across  developing  countries  with  regard  to  their 
contribution  to  environmental  problems  and  their  potential  role  in  resolving  them.  In 
particular, fast-growing large developing countries, such as China, India, Brazil and South 
Africa, currently assume an important role in dealing with global environmental as well 
as other problems. Their inclusion in the Group of Twenty (G20) reflects recognition of 
this changed reality.  

On the other hand, a vast number of developing countries remain as marginal 
as before with regard to their role in creating global environmental problems and their po-
tential for resolving them. Yet, many of them are, ironically, the worst sufferers from global 
environmental problems. Thus, many small island developing States, such as Maldives, 
face submergence due to the sea-level rise caused by climate change. The same situation is 
found in many least developed countries, such as Bangladesh, which is the world’s seventh 
largest country in terms of population (about 160 million inhabitants). 

Industrialization causes not only global environmental problems but also severe 
local environmental problems. The processes that increase greenhouse gas emissions also 
lead to other types of air pollution whose impact is more local. Similarly, countries that 
engage  in  large-scale  deforestation  not  only  increase  greenhouse  gas  emissions,  but  also 
suffer from landslides, the filling up of water bodies, and the diminution of biodiversity, 
etc. Rampant use and inappropriate disposal of plastic waste clog local drainage systems. 
Chemicalization of agriculture damages local water bodies, fish stock and the aquatic envi-
ronment. Local adverse impact is another reason why developing countries may pay more 
attention to the environmental problems in their post-2015 strategies, within the framework 
of “common but differentiated responsibilities”.

Strategies for development and transformation44

Many countries of 
the South are going 
beyond developed 
countries in promoting 
sustainable consumption 
and protecting the 
environment. The 
cooperation of developed 
countries can make these 
initiatives of developing 
countries more successful

The South’s initiatives towards sustainable development 

In fact, in recent years, many developing countries have been implementing initiatives 
that  are  more  advanced  than  those  of  developed  countries.  For  example,  Ecuador  has 
included the “rights of nature” in its 2008 constitution, thereby recognizing the inalien-
able rights of ecosystems to exist and flourish. Under this initiative, individual citizens and 
organizations can petition and seek remedy in case of the violation of those rights, and 
the Government is obliged to offer such remedy (box II.2). Nature is thus considered a 
“subject” rather than, as in the traditional view, an “object”, to be conquered, occupied and 
exploited—or, at best, managed. Ecuador’s declaration of the rights of nature is part of the 
general initiative towards fostering buen vivir (the good life), which encompasses an alter-
native view of development—one that, instead of focusing on material wealth, emphasizes 
harmony in the community and with nature. On the basis of this alternative philosophy 
of development, Ecuador has decided not to exploit the oil reserves in its Yasuni National 
Park in order to protect the forests of the Amazon. Many other developing countries have 
come forward with pioneering initiatives aimed towards sustainable development. Several 
developing countries, such as Bhutan, Costa Rica, Maldives and Tuvalu, have announced 
their goal of becoming carbon-neutral.14 

The economics historian Alexander Gerschenkron coined the phrase “advan-
tages  of  backwardness”  to  conceptualize  the  phenomenon  whereby  late  industrializing 
countries benefit from technologies that were already developed by early industrializing 
countries.15 This concept may also be used in arguing for the leapfrogging of developing 
countries to more sustainable post-industrial consumption patterns and lifestyles. 

There are several directions in which developing countries can go in making 
use of these advantages. One option is related to the fact that, in many cases, develop-
ing countries face the task of “building anew” rather than modifying what has already 
been built. A clear example in this regard is provided by urbanization. Many developing 
countries  need  to  create  new  urban  spaces.  In  doing  so,  they  can  “plan  from  scratch” 
and make their cities environmentally more sustainable. Many developing countries are 
indeed doing just that. For example, China is creating brand-new “eco-cities”, which rely 
on public transportation and renewable energy, achieve high degrees of conservation and 
recycling and minimize carbon emissions and other waste. Similar initiatives can also be 
seen in Brazil, Cameroon, the Republic of Korea, the United Arab Emirates, etc.

Another  direction  along  which  such  leapfrogging  may  be  possible  is  that  of 
promoting sustainable life practices. Members of the more environment-conscious segments 
of society in industrialized countries often revert to the practices of pre-industrial societies, 
albeit upgraded to a new level. They are returning to organic agriculture, non-motorized 
modes  of  transportation  (walking  and  biking),  use  of  non-fossil  fuels  as  a  source  of  en-
ergy, vegetable-oriented diets, use of natural fibres instead of non-biodegradable ones, etc. 
Developing countries can make creative use of their pre-industrial heritage to promote these 
features of sustainable living. This does not mean, however, that sustainable development has 
to be a throwback to the past. Indeed, sustainable development has to be a forward-looking 
post-industrial goal which builds on the positive achievements of the industrial revolution.

14 

15 

Other  countries  and  areas  that  have  pledged  carbon  neutrality  include  Iceland,  New  Zealand, 
Norway, the Holy See and British Columbia.

Economists later used this conceptualization to explain the faster growth rates of many developing 
countries compared with richer economies.

World Economic and Social Survey 201345

Box II.2

Many developing 
countries have 
been implementing 
advanced initiatives 
aimed at promoting 
sustainable development 
and protecting the 
environment. Ecuador’s 
initiative to include the 
“rights of nature” in its 
constitution and Bhutan’s 
initiative to develop the 
gross national happiness 
index are good examples

Sustainable development initiatives from the South 

Many developing countries have been implementing significant initiatives aimed at promoting sus-
tainable development. Ecuador, for example, has included the “rights of nature” in its constitution, 
adopted in 2008. In declaring that nature and ecosystems have the right to exist and flourish, Ecuador 
empowers its citizens to petition whenever those rights are violated, and obliges the Government to 
remedy such violations. 

Recognition of the rights of nature reflects the concept of buen vivir (the good life) which 
is now gaining popularity in many countries of South America. The concept, which originated among 
the indigenous peoples of South America, focuses on social, environmental and spiritual rather than 
material wealth. It recasts the relationship between humans and nature as a bio-pluralistic one, and 
emphasizes harmony with other people and nature. Buen vivir is, in a sense, a response to conven-
tional development efforts, which often failed to improve the conditions of the common people 
and damaged the environment. It constitutes an alternative concept of development, suggesting 
that the good life can be achieved only in a community that includes nature. The constitution of 
Ecuador embodies buen vivir in a set of rights, including the rights of nature. Proceeding from the 
concept of the rights of nature, Ecuador has decided to leave the oil reserves (valued at approximately  
3.5 billion United States dollars) in its Yasuni National Park untapped in order to protect the forests of 
the Amazon. 

In a similar vein, the King of Bhutan, Jigme Singye Wangchuck, coined the term “gross 
national happiness (GNH)” in 1972 as a more holistic measure of quality of life and social progress than 
the conventional gross domestic product (GDP). Inspired by the idea, the Centre for Bhutan Studies 
developed a survey instrument to measure the well-being of the population, and policies in Bhutan 
must pass a GNH review. 

The four pillars of GNH are the promotion of sustainable development, preservation and 
promotion of cultural values, conservation of the natural environment, and establishment of good 
governance. Support for the concept of GNH is not limited to Bhutan. In fact, so far, five international 
conferences have been held on GNH, in Japan, Canada, Thailand, Brazil and Bhutan itself. 

These initiatives show that developing countries are not waiting for developed coun-
tries to provide initiatives that promote sustainable development. Instead, based on their own herit-
age and experience, they themselves are offering “aspiration models” of sustainable development. 

Success in leapfrogging of the above types will depend, to some extent, on the 
cooperation of developed countries. First, as shown in figure II.5, by presenting a new 
“aspiration model”, developed countries can encourage the leapfrogging process. Second, 
developed countries can provide technologies and market opportunities necessary for this 
process to be successful. For example, developing countries are eager to expand and switch 
to non-renewable sources of energy. Developed countries can develop large-capacity and 
cost-effective wind-power and solar-power technologies and make them available to devel-
oping countries on favourable terms. Similarly, developed countries can open their market 
for organic produce from developing countries. 

Diffusion of new energy technologies and expansion of organic agriculture in 
developing countries may also help developed countries switch to sustainable consumption. 
Thus, a virtuous cycle may unfold, confirming that achieving sustainable development has 
to be a joint task of both developing and developed countries. However, as shown above, 
the new aspiration model (based on sustainable consumption) does not necessarily have to 
be derived from developed countries. Based on their heritage and experience, developing 
countries are themselves offering aspiration models of sustainable development (box II.2).

Strategies for development and transformation46

Challenges of financing human and  
sustainable development

As  noticed  above,  overcoming  the  weaknesses  in  the  achievement  of  the  Millennium 
Development  Goals  on  which  apparent  progress  has  been  satisfactory  and  accelerating 
the  pace  with  regard  to  the  Goals  on  which  progress  so  far  has  not  been  satisfactory 
remain  important  tasks  for  developing  countries  and  the  world  community.  Research 
shows that considerable financial challenges will have to be overcome if these tasks are to 
be accomplished. Evidence drawn from country-level economy-wide modelling analyses 
for 27 developing countries (with 18 from Latin America and 9 from Africa) suggests that 
achieving the Millennium Development Goals by 2015 will require a significant increase 
in public spending in developing countries.16 The analyses started with the establishment 
of  a  “business  as  usual”  scenario  which  projected  the  progress  towards  targets  of  the 
Millennium  Development  Goals  that  would  be  achieved  under  the  currently  expected 
pace  of  economic  growth  and  existing  public  spending  priorities  and  budget  financ-
ing  policies.  This  baseline  scenario  allows  non-linearities  in  the  effectiveness  of  social 
spending in achieving various targets of the Goals. The results showed that, although all  
27 countries would make substantial progress towards achieving the Goals even under the 
business-as-usual scenario, only two countries (Chile and Cuba) would fully meet by 2015 
a set of targets for primary school completion, reduction of child and maternal mortality 
rates, and expanded coverage of drinking water and basic sanitation.

The modelling analyses also probed a number of policy scenarios under which 
public spending was stepped up as much as needed to create a path towards meeting the 
human development goals by 2015. From a comparison of these policy scenarios and the 
business-as-usual scenario, it was found that 18 countries would need to raise their public 
spending by 2 percentage points of GDP on average for each year until 2015. For some 
countries, many of them least developed countries, this figure increases to about 7 per cent. 
The modelling analyses were redone for six countries of Latin America and the 
Caribbean to take into consideration the effects of the recent global financial crisis which 
caused a growth slowdown in many countries, thereby requiring changes in the baseline 
assumptions (see Sánchez and Vos, 2010). It was found that the additional public spending 
requirements specifically owing to the crisis would range between 1.6 and 3.4 per cent of 
GDP per year between 2010 and 2015. These spending requirements are on top of those 
that were estimated for those six countries (table II.1).

 

16 

These analyses were conducted by national researchers and government experts with technical 
support  from  UN/DESA  and  the  World  Bank.  At  the  core  of  the  economy-wide  modelling 
framework  used  is  a  dynamic  computable  general  equilibrium  (CGE)  model  called  Maquette 
for MDG Simulations (MAMS). This model was developed originally at the World Bank and was 
subsequently improved in numerous country-specific applications in collaboration with UN/DESA 
and national experts (Lofgren, Cicowiez and Diaz-Bonílla, 2013). The main results of the modelling 
analyses have been reported in Sánchez and Vos, eds. (2013) and Sánchez and others, eds. (2010) 
who covered, respectively, 9 case studies of countries of Africa and Asia and 18 case studies of 
countries of Latin America and the Caribbean. 

World Economic and Social Survey 2013Table II.1 
Additional public spending requirements for meeting human development targets under 
two alternative financing scenarios,a 2010-2015 
Percentage of GDP

47

Baseline  

Additional public spending requirements
Foreign financing 
Domestic direct 
taxation scenario

scenario 

public spendingb 
3.71
4.30
7.32
2.33
6.48
7.30
11.40
2.50
3.38
1.50
5.09
3.11
6.83
5.21
4.88
3.37
5.65
4.92
1.18
2.00
7.18
3.07
5.09
4.24
5.34
6.28
16.04

Argentina
Bolivia (Plurinational State of )
Brazil 
Chile
Colombia 
Costa Rica
Cuba 
Dominican Republic 
Ecuador 
Egypt 
El Salvador 
Guatemala 
Honduras 
Jamaica 
Kyrgyzstan
Mexico 
Nicaragua 
Paraguay 
Peru 
Philippines
Senegal
South Africa 
Tunisia 
Uganda
Uruguay 
Uzbekistan
Yemen
Source: UN/DESA, based on studies presented in Sánchez and others, eds. (2010) for countries of Latin America 
and the Caribbean; and Sánchez and Vos, eds. (2013) for all other countries.
a  Referring to the difference between the estimate for public spending in primary education, health, and water 
and sanitation under each of the financing scenarios and the estimate for the same spending under the baseline 
scenario. Targets are set for net (on time) primary completion rate, child and mortality rates, and access of the 
population to drinking water and basic sanitation.
b  Lack of detailed information on public spending in primary education, health, and water and sanitation, as 
required to set up the modelling analyses’ accounting framework, may have caused baseline public spending to 
appear low for some countries (Chile, Egypt, Peru and the Philippines).

1.30
2.00
1.70
0.00
1.40
1.10
0.00
3.30
1.30
0.26
2.60
4.80
4.30
1.30
7.83
2.90
3.60
2.00
0.90
6.30
8.04
-
5.56
6.73
2.50
4.76
10.39

1.40
2.80
2.20
0.00
1.70
1.40
-
3.70
1.50
0.28
2.80
6.10
4.60
1.40
8.21
5.50
4.70
2.10
0.90
7.41
-
9.08
6.09
9.21
3.30
4.62
17.39

Strategies for development and transformation48

The  modelling  analyses  also  yield  results  that  help  in  examining  and  com-
paring the implications of alternative ways of financing the additional spending require-
ments mentioned above. The implications were gauged by the differential impact on GDP 
growth. It was found that domestic financing, using, for example, direct taxation, tends 
to yield a less positive impact on GDP growth than does foreign financing (except for 
Uzbekistan). This result is due to the fact that increased government taxation decreases 
private disposable incomes and hence aggregate domestic demand. Investors may foresee 
lower net profits for the future and therefore choose to reduce investments. The crowding 
out of private consumption and investment is what reduces GDP growth and employ-
ment,  hurting  in  the  process  private  provisioning  of,  as  well  as  the  demand  for,  social 
services. This feedback effect requires the government to invest more to compensate for 
the loss of private spending in social sectors in order to ensure achievement of the human 
development  goals,  thereby  incurring  even  more  public  spending.17  The  “crowding  in” 
from using tax revenues to finance public expenditures and investments may not take full 
effect in a short period of time, as explained further below.

There  are  trade-offs  associated  with  foreign  financing  too.  It  is  well  known 
that the inflow of foreign currency, whether from borrowing or from receiving grant aid, 
may  lead  to  real  exchange-rate  appreciation,  harming  the  tradable  sector.  This  will  be 
particularly the case when the amounts are spent on non-tradable social services, as would 
be required to achieve the Millennium Development Goals. The appreciation of the real 
exchange rate may result in what is often labelled as Dutch disease if it leads to resource 
allocation away from export industries, resulting in an undesirable structural change en-
tailing the move away from dynamic production activities.18 This shift would typically be 
difficult and time-consuming to reverse should other neutralizing and coherent policies 
not be put in place at the same time.

Regarding investments made to achieve the Millennium Development Goals, 
another important issue concerns the gestation lag for the fruition of these investments 
in terms of higher GDP growth. This is particularly true for investments in the education 
and health sectors. For example, children need to go through one or more educational 
cycles and there needs to be improved child and maternal health care today for there to 
be a pay-off in terms of healthier students and workers several years from now. Countries 
will require more rapid and sustained economic growth to reduce the costs associated with 
stepping up upfront public spending.

Important insights in this regard have also surfaced from another update of 
the modelling analyses for 4 of the 27 developing countries (Bolivia (Plurinational State 
of), Costa Rica, Uganda and Yemen) (see Sánchez and Cicowiez, 2013). These updates 
also extended the time frame of simulated scenarios to determine long-term pay-offs of 
Millennium Development Goals-related investments. First of all, it was found that, be-
cause of the trade-offs discussed above, the growth effects of the increased Millennium 
Development Goals-related investment remain limited during the period up to 2015. The 
GDP growth rate in these countries was found to increase by 0.6-1.8 percentage points 

17 

18 

The scenario analyses also indicate that tax financing would still be less costly as compared with 
the case where the government resorts to domestic borrowing in most cases, excluding countries 
where the “demand compression” effect of higher direct taxation appears to be particularly strong.  

Repayment of newly acquired loans under a foreign borrowing scenario may offset some of the 
appreciation of the real exchange rate in the long term. The most important resource allocation 
effects from the relative price shift will occur, however, in the short term before the economy has 
had enough time to adjust.  

World Economic and Social Survey 201349

per year. One possible explanation of this low growth effect is the long gestation period 
required for education- and health-related investment to bear fruit. To examine this hy-
pothesis, the modelling analysis was used to trace growth effects over the period 2015-2030, 
assuming that the public investment levels associated with the Goals (as a percentage of 
GDP) reached in 2015, when a number of Goals are set to be achieved, remain unchanged 
for future years. 

It  was  found  that  GDP  could  experience  an  additional  percentage  point 
growth of 0.2-1.0. This growth effect beyond 2015 is explained by the delayed impact 
of human capital investments made before 2015. Enough time would have elapsed for 
children to have gone through one or more educational cycles and for better education 
and better health to have led to an improvement of human capital. As a consequence, the 
employment of newly available human capital, which is also more productive, generates 
additional GDP growth.

Furthermore,  whether  or  not  these  potential  additional  GDP  growth  effects 
were realized would depend on whether commensurate investments had been made in other 
areas of the economy, creating enough employment opportunities for the better-educated 
graduates entering the workforce. Lack of those investments may translate into higher levels 
of unemployment for the most skilled workers, as shown in the figure below, using two 
country cases as examples. This negative result points to the importance of complementary 
investments in different dimensions and the policy coherence that can ensure it. 

One additional challenge stands out, besides the cost in terms of additional 
public spending requirements and the macroeconomic trade-offs associated with financing 
it. This challenge arises from the issue of whether there is real access to, and the macroeco-
nomic feasibility of using, a particular source of finance. First of all, domestic financing 
through taxation is not an easy option, because existing tax burdens on taxable parts of the 
economy in many developing countries are already considered high. Second, the foreign 
financing route is also becoming problematic. On the one hand, if this financing comes 
in the form of loans, then it increases the debt burden. On the other hand, a continued 
financial crisis in developed countries is making prospects of aid and concessional financ-
ing for developing countries increasingly limited and uncertain.  

In  sum,  the  challenges  of  financing  human  development  (and  sustainable 
development in a broader context) are based on the following concerns: (a) pursuing de-
velopment goals might demand the investment of significant public resources and have 
macroeconomic consequences; (b) future potential crisis and sluggish growth could slow 
down development progress, especially if expected long-term pay-offs of past development 
investments are offset; (c) commensurate investments should take place in other areas of 
the economy, creating enough employment opportunities for the better-educated gradu-
ates entering the workforce, in order for the past development investments to bring about 
additional productivity improvement effects in the long term; (d) countries will need fiscal 
space to pursue human (as well as sustainable) development goals and will have to carefully 
assess their options in order to establish the feasibility or optimality of a financing strategy. 
Unfortunately, the world confronts a highly constrained financing situation—
one where developing as well as developed countries require a huge amount of upfront 
investment  in  order  to  realize  the  sustainable  development  emphasized  at  the  United 
Nations  Conference  on  Sustainable  Development  in  2012.  As  indicated  in  chapter  V, 
mitigation  policies  designed  to  curb  carbon  emissions  through  the  adoption  of  renew-
able sources of energy will also require substantial stepping up of new investments. And, 

Strategies for development and transformation50

A new type of global 
cooperation, based on 
solidarity, is needed

given existing financing constraints and challenges, accelerated investments for human 
and sustainable development could overstretch countries’ public finances, with potentially 
pernicious macroeconomic consequences.

Probably, most developing countries will have to consider a mixed financing 
strategy for their human and sustainable development goals. In most cases, the balance 
in this mix should be tilted towards broadening the domestic tax base, in view of the fact 
that public debt levels are already high (restricting the scope for domestic borrowing) and 
prospects regarding foreign aid are not bright. For a number of countries (particularly least 
developed countries), foreign financing will be needed because they have no real scope for 
further raising tax revenues. As a consequence, developed countries and the world commu-
nity will have to arrange adequate international financing for these countries so as to ensure 
that they make further progress in achieving human development in a sustainable way. 

A new type of global cooperation  

Global cooperation in the post-2015 era has to switch from the current framework, which 
is based predominantly on the donor-recipient relationship, and move to a new foundation 
of solidarity. Accordingly, global governance must become more democratic.

The role of the Millennium Development Goals in national development ef-
forts depended to a large extent on the degree of a country’s dependence on ODA (Toye, 
2012; Vandermoortele, 2012). Over time, however, the importance of ODA for develop-
ing countries has been decreasing. As a result, there is now less scope for adapting the 
post-2015 agenda to the donor-recipient framework (Vandermoortele, 2012). Instead, the 

8.0

7.0

6.0

5.0

4.0

3.0

2.0

1.0

0.0

Source: Sánchez and  
Cicowiez (2013).
a  Public spending is scaled 
up as necessary to meet a set 
of Millennium Development 
Goals targets and is financed 
through foreign sources in the 
Goals-financing scenario.

Figure II.9    Unemployment rate of the most skilled labour under the baseline 
Figure II.9
scenario and Millennium Development Goals-(cid:31)nancing scenario,a 
Unemployment rate of the most skilled labour under the baseline scenario  
Costa Rica and Yemen, 2005, 2015 and 2030
and Millennium Development Goals-financing scenario,a Costa Rica and Yemen,  
2005, 2015 and 2030
Percentage

Business-as-usual scenario
Goals scenario

2005

2015

Costa Rica

2030

2005

2015
Yemen

2030

Source: Sánchez and Cicowiez (2013).
a Public spending is scaled up as necessary to meet a set of Millennium Development Goal targets and is 
ﬁnanced through foreign sources in the Goals-ﬁnancing scenario.

World Economic and Social Survey 201351

framework has to be one of “solidarity”. The framework proposed in figure II.5 shows how 
this solidarity may be generated and utilized. 

The traditional imbalances between various groups of countries are shifting 
with  changes  in  economic  strength  (Toye,  2012).  Often,  as  noted  above,  more  of  the 
advanced  initiatives  for  achieving  sustainable  development  are  created  by  developing 
countries. Perhaps, through this changed reality, the old ways of thinking will ultimately 
be overcome, which will pave the way for cooperation among all countries of the world on 
the basis of solidarity. 

Strategies for development and transformationChapter III
Towards sustainable cities

Summary

 y

 y

 y

 y

Numerous challenges threaten the ability of cities to become viable pillars of sustain-
able development. Unequal access to, and inefficient use of, public services, as well 
as financial fragility and the harm inflicted by natural hazards, demand an integrated 
and coordinated response at the local, national and international levels. 
The  predominance  of  small-  and  medium-sized  cities  provides  an  opportunity  to 
invest  in  green  infrastructures,  bypassing  old  energy  technologies,  and  in  social 
deve lopment, before social inequities become unsustainable. 
Rural  development  is  critical  for  an  integrated  approach  to  sustainability  and  for 
reducing poverty. Ensuring wider and inclusive access to public services can reduce 
rural/urban inequalities, disaster risk and food insecurity, as well as strengthen net-
works between cities and villages.
Building sustainable cities requires investment in (a) renewable energy sources, (b) ef-
ficiency in the use of water and electricity, (c) design and implementation of compact 
cities, (d) retrofitting of buildings and increase of green areas, (e) fast, reliable and 
affordable public transportation and (f ) improved waste and recycling systems. Cities 
in poor countries need resources to support green technology transfer, and capac-
ity development, and to improve access to soundly constructed housing, water and 
sanitation, electricity, health and education.

Introduction

Cities and towns have become the primary human living space. Since 2007, more than 
half of the world’s population has been living in urban areas and the figure is estimated to 
exceed 70 per cent by 2050. This is a hallmark of the transformation of humans’ economic 
base and social structure, inasmuch as, previously, populations lived and worked primarily 
in rural areas. 

Cities  can  provide  many  socioeconomic  benefits.  By  concentrating  people, 
investment  and  resources  (a  process  known  as  agglomeration),  cities  heighten  the  pos-
sibilities for economic development, innovation and social interaction. More specifically, 
cities also make it possible to lower unit costs so as to provide public services such as water 
and sanitation, health care, education, electricity, emergency services and public recrea-
tional areas (Polèse, 2009; Satterthwaite, 2010). However, this requires a functioning city 

54

By 2050, the world urban 
population could reach 
6.25 billion, 80 per cent 
of whom would live in 
developing regions, and 
concentrated in cities of 
Africa and Asia

government able both to ensure that such benefits are realized, and to adopt a sustainable 
framework that encourages the city’s growth within ecological limits. Along these lines, 
cities also face challenges that threaten their efforts to achieve sustainability, for example, 
through improvement of access to, and efficiency in the use of, public services, as well as 
reduction of their ecological footprint and financial fragility, and the building of resilience 
against the adverse impact of natural hazards. 

The present chapter recommends an integrated strategy for making cities thriv-
ing centres of sustainable development and innovation. It starts by assessing what a city is, 
the scale and speed of urbanization in recent decades, and the main trends and projections 
of urban growth across regions. The trends and projections analysed serve as an introduction 
to the conception of future urbanization as a process that can enhance the benefits of cities, 
while reducing the threats to a more balanced and sustainable development. The evolution 
of the concept of urban sustainability is described and a framework is proposed based on 
four pillars: economic development, social development, environmental management and 
effective urban governance. The following section examines relevant challenges associated to 
the fulfilment of those objectives by different groups of countries. The last section examines 
urbanization through the lens of the investment opportunities that addressing those chal-
lenges involves. A proposal put forth for an integrated set of investments in infrastructure, 
public services and capacity development is complemented by an examination of relevant 
world experiences associated with urban sustainability at the sectoral level (e.g., disaster risk 
reduction, housing and green infrastructure) as well as a policy framework for a sustainable 
financing of cities.

The city and main urbanization trends

There  is  no  uniform  definition  of  what  constitutes  a  city,  given  the  diversity  of  urban 
realities around the world. Every country defines cities according to its own criteria. It 
should also be noted that gaps in and measurement issues connected with urban data limit 
the accuracy of projections and international comparisons of levels of urbanization and 
sizes of city populations. Box III.1 discusses the different criteria used in defining cities 
and data issues.

Cities  are  diverse  in  terms  of  their  size,  structure,  spatial  form,  economy, 
wealth, local resources availability and ecological impact. According to population size 
and conditions, urban centres can be, e.g., small, medium, large or mega. The popula-
tion  of  an  urban  centre  can  range  from  a  few  thousand  to  over  10  million  people  or 
more. According to relevant studies, “small urban centres” have a population less than 
or equal to 500,000 people; medium urban centres, a population  between 1 million and 
5 million people; and mega urban centres, a population of 10 million or more (United 
Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division, 2012; Dobbs 
and others, 2011b). For statistical comparison of urban centres’ sizes and development, 
this chapter uses the categories along with “large urban centres” defined as agglomerations 
with 5 million inhabitants or more. 

The scale and scope of urbanization

At the start of the twentieth century, just 16 cities had 1 million or more people, with the 
majority located in advanced industrialized countries (Montgomery and others, 2004). By 
2010, there were 449 cities with 1 million people or more, of which three quarters were 

World Economic and Social Survey 201355

Box III.1

Definition of a city and data issues

The majority of countries use a single characteristic or a combination of administrative, population 
size or density, economic and urban characteristics (e.g., paved streets, water-supply systems, sewer-
age systems and electric lighting) to define a city. The lower limit above which a settlement can be 
considered urban varies greatly, between 200 and 50,000 inhabitants, which can give rise to error 
when comparing urban populations (and urban areas) in different countries. For example, if India’s 
national  authorities  would  classify  populations  of  5,000  or  more  as  urban,  the  country  would  be 
considered predominantly urban and not rural. In Angola, Argentina and Ethiopia, all settlements 
with 2,000 people or more are classified as urban. In Benin, only areas with 10,000 people or more 
are considered urban. In Botswana, an agglomeration of 5,000 people or more where 75 per cent of 
the economic activity is non-agricultural can be considered urban (Cohen, 2006). Certain countries 
define the urban population as comprising people who live within certain administrative centres or 
municipios (El Salvador) or under the jurisdiction of municipality councils (Iraq). Others define cities as 
places with a municipality, municipal corporation, town committee or cantonment board (Bangladesh  
and Pakistan).

The population of any urban centre is influenced by how its boundaries are set—for 
instance, are they determined by the built-up area or are peri-urban areas which have little or no 
urban development included within them? The size of a city can be made significantly larger if fringe 
populations  are  included  in  official  statistics;  many  cities  have  boundaries  set  to  include  the  city 
and large areas around the city which may include small towns and large rural populations. Most 
large cities have more than one boundary—boundaries for the central city, for instance, for an entire 
metropolitan area, or for a wider planning region which often includes many rural settlements. In 
general, countries’ urban populations are defined as the residents whose main source of income is 
not from agriculture or forestry (Satterthwaite, 2010).

Inadequate  attention  paid  to  data  limitations  has  led  to  misconceptions  regarding 
urban  trends  which  can  ultimately  distort  urban  policies.  Urban  population  projections  often  do 
not  include  high-  and  low-variant  estimations,  which  are  typical  of  world  population  projections 
published by the United Nations (Satterthwaite, 2007; United Nations, Department of Economic and 
Social Affairs, Population Division, 2012). Moreover, the traditional urban/rural dichotomy has become 
increasingly  inadequate  for  distinguishing  between  urban  and  rural  settlements.  Increased  trade, 
labour mobility and innovation in communications have spread urban functions and influence over 
wide geographical areas, including rural ones. In parts of Asia and the Pacific, for example, intense 
economic activity in the intersection between urban and rural areas has blurred differences (Cohen, 
2006). Yet, in the case of countries in Latin America and the Caribbean, censuses and surveys that 
consider the urban/rural dichotomy are still valid since they persistently indicate social inequalities 
subsisting between rural and urban areas (United Nations, Economic Commission for Latin America 
and the Caribbean, 2012). Still, some of the most profound social inequalities are seen within cities or 
within nations’ urban populations.

To  improve  the  consistency  and  comparability  of  data  on  urban  populations  across 
countries and over time, the United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population 
Division  (2012)  uses  two  auxiliary  concepts:  (a)  urban  agglomeration,  which  refers  to  “population 
contained within the contours of contiguous territory” inhabited by, e.g., 750,000 inhabitants or more 
and (b) metropolitan region, which includes both the contiguous territory and “surrounding areas of 
lower settlement density” which are under the direct influence of the city through frequent transport, 
roads, commuting and so forth (p. 7). In addition, there is a potential for research on urban databases 
and data-collection mechanisms to support local policy, planning and investment decisions.

In general, caution is recommended regarding the interpretation and comparison of 
urban  population  statistics  between  nations,  owing  to  different  official  criteria  for  defining  urban 
areas, and setting city boundaries, and, in some cases, to the lack of census data.

Source: UN/DESA.

Towards sustainable cities56

In the next 10-15 years, for 
the first time in history, the 
rapid pace of urbanization 
would also usher in the 
absolute decline of the 
world rural population

located in developing countries (United Nations, Department of Economic and Social 
Affairs, Population Division, 2012). 

Pursuant to the caveats associated with urban population projections noted 
in box III.1, the following estimations should be interpreted as guidance only. During 
2000-2050,  developing  regions  could  add  3.2  billion  new  urban  residents,  a  figure 
larger than the world population in 1950 and double the urban population added dur-
ing  1950-2000.  By  2050,  the  world  urban  population  could  reach  a  total  of  6.25  bil-
lion,  80  per  cent  of  whom  may  be  living  in  developing  regions,  and  concentrated  in 
cities  of  Africa  and  Asia.  It  is  possible  that  African  urban  centres  would  house  over  
1 billion people by 2050, which would be about 3 times the figure for the urban popula-
tion of North America, twice the figure for the urban population of Latin America and 
the Caribbean or Europe, and comparable to the figure for China’s urban population at 
that time. These trends would challenge the institutional capacities of many of these cities 
to  provide  decent  employment,  public  services  and  a  clean  environment,  especially  for 
those that already have sizeable—and growing—numbers of underserved residents living 
in slums, under unsafe conditions (Satterthwaite, 2007). 

Urban population growth is expected to continue setting the pace of world 
population growth, and in the next 10-15 years, for the first time in history, the world rural 
population is expected to decline (figure III.1). 

Globally,  a  net  1.3  billion  people  was  added  to  small  urban  centres  during 
1950-2010, more than double the number of people added in medium (632 million) or 
large urban centres (570 million).1 This trend is important, since different sizes of urban 

Figure III.1 
Figure III.1    Population trends and projections, 1950-2050
Population trends and projections, 1950-2050
Millions of persons

Global population
Global rural population
Share of urban population
(secondary axis)

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

-

0
5
9
1

5
5
9
1

0
6
9
1

5
6
9
1

0
7
9
1

5
7
9
1

0
8
9
1

5
8
9
1

0
9
9
1

5
9
9
1

0
0
0
2

5
0
0
2

0
1
0
2

5
1
0
2

0
2
0
2

5
2
0
2

0
3
0
2

5
3
0
2

0
4
0
2

5
4
0
2

0
5
0
2

10,000

9,000

8,000

7,000

6,000

5,000

4,000

3,000

2,000

1,000

0

Sources: United Nations, 
Department of Economic 
and Social Affairs, Population 
Division (2011; 2012).

l

n
o
i
t
a
u
p
o
p
n
a
b
r
u

 

 
l

 

l

a
b
o
g
 
f
o
e
r
a
h
s
 
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
P

1 

Sources: United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Aﬀairs, Population Division (2012a; 2012b).
Note: A mid-variant projection was available only for the global population.

During a similar period, only 40 million people were added to urban settlements with populations 
between 500,000 and 1 million people.

World Economic and Social Survey 201357

The patterns and paces  
of urbanization have been 
diverse within developing 
regions and between 
developing and  
developed regions

By and large, urbanization 
in developing countries has 
followed a brisker pace and 
has often been concentrated 
in capital cities

settlements can affect the levels of provision of services needed to sustain growing popula-
tions.  The  challenges  and  policy  implications  of  the  likely  continued  predominance  of 
small urban centres and the rising significance of middle and large urban centres in the 
next 15 years are noteworthy and will be further analysed below. 

Diverse paths and paces of urbanization

There is considerable regional diversity in the patterns of urbanization and an even greater 
variation in the level and pace of urbanization of individual countries. For example, on 
average more than three quarters of the Latin America and the Caribbean region is highly 
urbanized, whereas least developed countries and landlocked developing countries are still 
predominantly agricultural—although their path towards urbanization is expected to ac-
celerate in the next decades (table III.1). The case of the small island developing States is 
worth mentioning because they have been able to achieve a balance through a mid-level ur-
banization path (60 per cent share) with economies that are based on industry and services.
On average, nearly 80 per cent of the population in developed regions resides 
in  urban  centres,  contrasting  with  an  average  share  of  urban  populations  in  Asia  and 
Africa of less than 50 per cent. At the country level, while urbanization in some African 
nations such as Burkina Faso, Burundi, Ethiopia and Malawi can be as low as 20 per cent, 
the urban population represents over 60 per cent of the total population in South Africa. 
Moreover,  urban  populations  in  low-income  nations  are  highly  concentrated  in  a  very 
small number of cities, which also contrasts with the urbanization pattern in developed 
regions. For example, 75 per cent, 60 per cent and 47 per cent of the urban populations 
in Sierra Leone, Kenya, and Guinea are concentrated in Freetown, Nairobi and Conakry, 
respectively (Grübler and Buettner, 2013; United Nations, 2010b).

Table III.1
Regional figures for share of urban population, 1975, 2000, 2012, 2025, 2050 

Percentage 

Country/region

2050
67.2 
85.9 
64.1 
57.7 
64.4 
82.2 

86.6 
88.6 

92.4
73.0 

49.8 

67.3 

45.6

2000
46.7 
74.1 
40.1 
35.6 
37.4 
70.8 

2012
52.6 
78.0 
47.1 
39.9 
45.7 
73.1 

2025
58.0 
81.1 
53.6 
45.3 
53.1 
76.1 

1975
37.7 
68.7 
27.0 
25.6 
25.0 
65.2 

World
More developed regions
Less developed regions
Africa
Asia
Europe
Latin America and  
the Caribbean
North America
Australia and  
New Zealand
Oceania
Least developed 
countries
Small island 
developing States
Landlocked 
developing States
Source: United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division (2012).

90.3
71.1 

60.7 
73.8 

86.9
70.4 

24.3 

35.2 

62.4 

82.5 
85.0 

75.5 
79.1 

79.4 
82.5 

88.9
70.7 

28.9 

59.5 

45.8 

22.2

55.5 

26.1

85.4
71.9 

14.7 

28.3

32.6

Towards sustainable cities58

Even though small urban 
settlements will still retain 
their predominance in 
2025, the importance of 
medium and large urban 
settlements will continue to 
grow at the global level

Yet, “late urbanization” in Asia and Africa is expected to gain speed and con-
centrate the majority of the additional 3 billion urbanites during 2010-2050. Similarly, 
the number of urban agglomerations (750,000 inhabitants or more) and the number of 
inhabitants per agglomeration are expected to grow significantly in Asia and Africa by 
2025 (United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division, 
2012). It is expected that over 80 per cent of the urban population added in the next 
15 years will be found in middle-income countries such as China, India, South Africa, 
Nigeria, Indonesia and Pakistan (ibid.). 

Changing patterns of urban settlements

Over 50 per cent of the world’s urban populations lived in settlements with 500,000 people 
or less by 2010. Although their significance will remain, the share will have been reduced 
to  42  per  cent  by  2025  (United  Nations,  Department  of  Economic  and  Social  Affairs, 
Population Division, 2012). Medium cities (those with 1 million - 5 million people), on the 
other hand, will increase their share of the urban population, from 21 to 24 per cent over 
a similar time interval. The share of the urban population in large cities (those with more 
than 5 million people), including megacities, will grow the most, from 17 to 22 per cent, 
with an absolute increase of more than 410 million people. By 2010, megacities of 10 mil-
lion inhabitants or more contained only 10 per cent of the global urban population (ibid.).
All of the types of growing cities will be located largely in low- and middle-
income countries. In many developing countries, the main challenge is to provide un-
derserved  urban  residents,  including  populations  in  large  cities,  with  affordable  access 
to adequate public services and job opportunities. Inhabitants in poor urban settlements 
typically reside on the outskirts as well as within large cities without adequate access to 
piped water, waste disposal, electricity and good schools. Evidence also suggests that rates 
of  poverty  and  infant  and  child  mortality  can  be  high  in  small  and  large  cities,  often 
indicating an inadequate access to public-health facilities and the lack of political will to 
invest in them (Mitlin and Satterthwaite, 2012).

Cities  in  low-income  countries  may  often  lack  the  institutional  capacity  to 
manage  growing  populations.  Although  some  national  Governments  in  developing 
countries have begun to decentralize service delivery and revenue-raising to regional and 
local levels of government, lower tiers of urban government often do not have enough re-
sources and adequate capacity to manage, e.g., health, education and poverty programmes 
(Montgomery and others, 2004). 

Is there a twin path between urbanization and  
economic growth?

The economic strength of countries lies in cities; in fact, urban gross domestic product 
(GDP) represents about 80 per cent of world GDP (Grübler and Fisk, 2013). Cities have 
been pivotal centres for economic growth, employment creation, innovation and cultural 
exchange. Cities in many developing countries (e.g., Bangladesh, Brazil, China, Honduras, 
India, Nigeria, Peru and South Africa) concentrate the core of modern productive activi-
ties and are the areas par excellence where income-earning opportunities are to be found 
(Satterthwaite, 2007). Cities are also the centres where women enjoy the highest labour 
participation, health access, literacy rates and upward social mobility (Cohen, 2006).

World Economic and Social Survey 201359

Nonetheless, urban population growth has outpaced economic growth as well 
as the needed improvement of competence and institutional capacity of city governments 
in many developing countries, which contrasts with the closer correlation found in de-
veloped countries (figure III.2). Thus, for an equivalent level of urbanization, the level of 
income per capita in developing regions is several times lower. This trend, which might be 
explained partly by different criteria used for defining urban centres, has implications for 
the actual capacities of poor countries to build sustainable cities. Figure III.2 illustrates 
this trend in relation to the urbanization of the region of Latin America and the Caribbean.
Figure III.2    
Figure III.2 
Urbanization and economic growth, developed regions and Latin America and the Caribbean, 1970-2010
Urbanization and economic growth, developed regions and Latin America and the 
Caribbean, 1970-2010

Developed regions, 1970-2010
Urban population as percentage of total population

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

1970

1980

1990

2010

2000

0

5000

10000

15000

20000

25000

30000

35000

GDP per capita at constant 2005 prices in United States dollars 

Latin America and the Caribbean, 1970-2010
Urban population as percentage of total population

1980

1990

2000

2010

1970

0

1000

2000

3000

4000

5000

6000

GDP per capita at constant 2005 prices  in United States dollars

Sources: UN/DESA; United 
Nations (2012a; 2012b).
Note: Data for each country 
have been aggregated to 
obtain regional figures.

Sources: UN/DESA; United Nations (2012a; 2012b).
Note: Data for each country have been aggregated to obtain regional ﬁgures.

Towards sustainable cities60

Sources: UN/DESA; United 
Nations (2012a; 2012b).
Note: Data for each country 
have been aggregated to 
obtain regional figures.

In particular, the urbanization process in least developed countries or coun-
tries  of  sub-Saharan  Africa  may  have  occurred  with  negative  or  almost  no  economic 
growth (figure III.3), which ultimately implies an increased precariousness of urban life.  
Population in slums almost doubled in sub-Saharan Africa between 1990 and 2010, ris-
ing from 103 million to 200 million (United Nations Human Settlements Programme  
(UN-Habitat),  2010).  Even  so,  Satterthwaite  (2010)  recommends  caution  in  the  inter-
pretation of the negative correlation between economic growth and urbanization in sub-
Saharan countries because of data shortcomings, which can prevent accurate measurement 
of urbanization patterns (see, also, Potts, 2006).

Figure III.3 
Figure III.3    GDP per capita and urban share of total population, sub-Saharan 
GDP per capita and urban share of total population, sub-Saharan Africa and least 
Africa and least developed countries, 1970-2010
developed countries, 1970-2010
Urban population as percentage of total population

40

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

0

2010

2000
1990

1980

1970

2010

2000

1990

1980

1970

Sub-Saharan Africa
Least developed countries

400

800

1200

GDP per capita at constant 2005 prices in United States dollars

Sources: UN/DESA; United Nations (2012a; 2012b).
Note: Data for each country have been aggregated to obtain regional ﬁgures.

Cities  are  constantly  evolving  as  a  result  of  dynamic  processes  heightened 
by  population  mobility,  natural  population  growth,  socioeconomic  development,  envi-
ronmental changes and local and national policies. The trends and projections described 
above serve as the basis for an introduction to the concept of future urbanization as a 
process that can enhance the benefits and synergies of cities, while reducing the threats to 
a more balanced and sustainable development. 

Within a framework of 
four pillars, effective 
urban governance 
can be combined with 
the achievement of 
social and economic 
development and 
effective environmental 
management

A framework for sustainable cities

It has been suggested that the building of a “green” city is equivalent to the building of 
sustainability (Beatley, ed., 2012). Many countries are planning and engaged in building 
green  cities  and  “eco-cities”  as  starting  points  for  the  building  of  sustainable  develop-
ment. Yet, it is important to understand cities’ sustainability as a broader concept which 
integrates social development, economic development, environmental management and 

World Economic and Social Survey 201361

urban governance, which refers to the management and investment decisions taken by 
municipal authorities in coordination with national authorities and institutions. In this 
regard, chapter II provides guidelines for possible sustainable development paths for coun-
tries at different stages of development. 

The 1987 report of the World Commission on Environment and Development, 
also known as the Brundtland Commission, defined sustainable development as develop-
ment that meets the needs of the present, without compromising the ability of future genera-
tions to meet their own needs. The report included a chapter on urban issues. In 1991, the 
United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (UNCHS) Sustainable Cities Programme 
attempted to define a sustainable city as one “where achievements in social, economic and 
physical development are made to last” (United Nations Human Settlements Programme 
(UN-Habitat), 2002, p. 6). However, this definition was still too general and neglected the 
fact that a sustainable city must have a low ecological footprint and reduce risk transfer 
(economic, social and environmental) to other locations and into the future (Rees, 1992).

The concept of sustainable cities and its links with sustainable development have 
been discussed since the early 1990s.2 Sustainable cities should meet their “inhabitants’ 
development needs without imposing unsustainable demands on local or global natural 
resources and systems” (Satterthwaite, 1992, p. 3). In this sense, consumption patterns of 
urban middle- and high-income groups as indicated in chapters I and II are responsible for 
the use of a significant portion of the world’s finite resources and contribute significantly to 
the production of polluting wastes. Sustainable development should focus on better living 
and working conditions for the poor, including affordable access to, and improvement of, 
housing, health care, water and sanitation, and electricity.

The first approximations to a concept of city sustainability noted above were re-
flected in the 1992 Rio de Janiero Conference on Environment and Development (United 
Nations, 1993) attended by more than 178 Governments. The 1992 Rio Declaration inte-
grated the economic, social, environmental and governability dimensions of sustainability 
and argued for the eradication of unsustainable patterns of production and consumption, 
the eradication of poverty, and the role of the State, civil society and international com-
munity in protecting the environment. 

Another  outcome  of  the  United  Nations  Conference  on  Environment  and 
Development was Agenda 21 (United Nations, 1993), which aimed at preparing the world 
for the challenges of the twenty-first century.  Agenda 21, which was built upon at subse-
quent United Nations conferences, defined sustainability in the context of economic, so-
cial, environmental and governance issues, noting the decisive role of authorities and civil 
society at the local, national and international levels for the implementation of sustainable 
development policies. Yet, Agenda 21 did not explain how the concept of sustainability 
could become the basis for the creation of sustainable cities.

The Habitat Agenda (United Nations, 1997), adopted by the United Nations 
Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II), held in Istanbul from 3 to 14 June 1996, 
echoed the concerns expressed in Agenda 21 with respect to the multidimensionality of 
development, and discussed urban sustainability as requiring a harmonious integration 
of economic, social and environmental issues. At this summit, nations reported on the 
progress towards achieving the sustainability of their cities. Yet, this Agenda still needed 
to include climate change as one of the main threats to building sustainable cities and to 
development in general.

2 

See, for example, Environment and Urbanization, vol. 4, No. 2 (October 1992).

Towards sustainable cities62

At the first session of the World Urban Forum convened at the headquarters of 
the United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-HABITAT) in Nairobi from 29 
April to 3 May 2002, an in-depth discussion was held on urbanization in the context of 
sustainable development. The Forum affirmed that addressing economic, social, environ-
mental and governance issues was integral to the creation of sustainable cities, and that the 
inability to address those issues would prevent the achievement of sustainable development 
(United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-HABITAT), 2002). The main mes-
sages of the Forum were comprehensively discussed and reaffirmed at the World Summit 
on Sustainable Development, held in Johannesburg, South Africa, from 26 August to 4 
September 2002. More recently, this approach to sustainable cities has been echoed the 
the Rio+20 Declaration (United Nations, 2012b, p.26) and by the United Nations System 
Task Team on the Post-2015 UN Development Agenda (2012), which includes governance 
under the broader umbrella of peace and security issues. In an increasingly urbanized world 
which demands more sustainable ways of living, urban governance entails the fostering of 
urban planning and environmental management, which includes the reduction of ecologi-
cal footprints, and the decentralization of decision-making, and resource allocation, as well 
as enhanced policy coordination between local and national authorities.

In this context, achieving the sustainability of cities can be conceived as entail-
ing the integration of four pillars: social development, economic development, environmen-
tal management, and urban governance. Figure III.4 presents the four pillars for achieving 
urban sustainability encompassing the balanced accomplishment of social and economic 
development, environmental management and effective governance.  Yet, the ways in which 
a city is able to build sustainability will reflect its capacity to adapt, within the context of its 
particular history, to the policy priorities and goals defined by each pillar.  

Figure III.4 
Figure III.4    Pillars for achieving sustainability of cities
Pillars for achieving sustainability of cities

Sustainable cities 

Social development

 

 
 Education and health
 
 
 Food and nutrition
 
 Green housing 
    and buildings
 
 Water and sanitation
 
 Green public
 
    transportation
 
 Green energy access

 

 

 

 

Economic development

 

 
 Green productive
    growth
 

 Creation of decent
    employment
 

 Production and
 
    distribution of
    renewable energy

 Technology and
 
    innovation (R&D)  

 

 

 Recreation areas and 
    community support  

Source: UN/DESA, Development Policy and Analysis Division.

Source: UN/DESA.

 

 

Urban governance
 
 Planning and 
 
    decentralization
 
 Reduction of
    inequities
 
 
 Strengthening of civil
    and political rights
 
 Support of local,
 
    national, regional and
    global links  

 

Environmental
management
 
 
 Forest and soil 
 
    management

 Waste and recycling
 
    management
 

 Energy eﬃciency
 
 
 Water management
 
    (including freshwater)

 Air quality 
    conservation
 

 Adaptation to and
 
    mitigation of climate 
    change   

 

 

World Economic and Social Survey 2013The integration of the four pillars can generate synergies, for example, between 
waste and recycling management (environmental management) and access to water and 
sanitation (social development); between air quality conservation and green public trans-
portation;  and  among  production  and  distribution  of  renewable  energy  sources,  green 
energy access, and adaptation to and mitigation of climate change, as well as between 
the goal of reducing inequities (urban governance) and that of ensuring adequate access 
to green housing, education and health (social development). Investment is the catalyst 
behind the realization of each of the component goals of urban sustainability. 

To build upon the four pillars can be a challenge for many cities and countries. 
Cities are often at different stages of development and have their own specific responses 
to policy priorities at the local and national levels. In this sense, the sets of sustainability 
challenges to be overcome by cities are diverse. 

The challenges associated with building 
sustainable cities

The present section analyses the main social, economic and environmental challenges as-
sociated with building sustainable cities in developing and developed countries. 

For city governments, the challenges include securing the necessary resources 
for investment in disaster-proof public infrastructure, and renewable sources of energy, 
and providing incentives to the private sector to create decent employment for large urban 
populations that are underemployed and have limited access to good housing conditions, 
clean water, sanitation, drainage and schools (table III.2). 

Upper middle income and high-income countries with urban populations that 
already have access to basic public services face the challenge of becoming more efficient in 
the use of energy and water, reducing the generation of waste, and improving their recycling 
systems. Growth of cities has often gone hand in hand with an increased use of natural 
resources and ecological systems, driven by economic growth and changes in the economic 
structure—in  terms  of  a  shift  from  agriculture  to  manufacturing  and  then  to  services. 
While wealthier cities and people, in particular, may have well-managed resource systems, 
they also have a greater ecological impact through drawing resources from larger areas. For 
example, wealthier residents in New York City, Los Angeles and Mexico City contribute 
greatly to the demand for freshwater from distant ecosystems, whose capacities are conse-
quently affected and whose use generates significant levels of pollution and greenhouse gas 
emissions at the national and global levels (McGranahan and Satterthwaite, 2003). Thus, 
urbanization can be an important contributor to high resource use and waste generation, 
both with ecological effects at the local, regional and global levels.

Some of the most significant challenges associated with building sustainable 

63

Social, economic and 
environmental challenges 
exert direct and indirect 
effects on cities and  
the lives of people in  
both developing and 
developed nations

cities are discussed more extensively below.

Socioeconomic inequalities

Inequalities between rural and urban areas as well as within urban areas have been features 
of development and urbanization in developing countries (Cohen, 2006; Baker., ed., 2012). 
The gap between rich and poor neighbourhoods can imply significant differences in access 
to  job  opportunities  and  basic  public  services  such  as  water  and  sanitation,  electricity, 

Inequalities in access to 
basic services between 
rural and urban areas 
as well as within urban 
areas have been typical 
features of urbanization in 
developing countries

Towards sustainable cities64

Table III.2
Challenges to and opportunities for building sustainable cities

 

Main urban trends

Challenges

Developing countries

Opportunities

Social

By 2025, urban 
population will live 
mainly in small cities 
(42 per cent) and 
medium-sized cities 
(24 per cent)
Number of urban 
people living in 
slums continues to 
grow

Improve access 
to housing, water, 
sanitation; improve 
public infrastructure; 
foster institutional 
capacity
Reduce number of 
urban poor and disease 
risk; improve social 
cohesion; reduce youth 
unemployment 

Investment in public infrastructure 
(including transportation); 
construction of compact buildings 
in middle-income countries; 
strengthen links between cities and 
rural areas
Investment in universal access to 
affordable water and sanitation; 
establishing public transportation, 
and creation of jobs to reduce 
growth of slums; employment of 
the “youth” dividend in low-income 
countries

Subsidies to households and small 
firms to reduce non-saving water 
systems and waste; incentives to 
local communities to improve 
recycling systems

Developed countries

Challenges

Opportunities

Social cohesion

Investment in compact 
urban development and 
decentralization

Reduce urban 
unemployment 
due to economic 
crises (of youth 
in particular); 
provide adequate 
housing in poor 
neighbourhoods
Change 
overproduction and 
overconsumption 
styles; improve 
waste and recycling 
management

Strengthening and 
widening social safety 
nets; upgrading 
investment in social 
protection for an 
effective response 
to crises and their 
aftermath
Investment in 
retrofitting of buildings; 
in water- and energy-
saving devices; 
upgrading of public 
infrastructure

Investment in universal pensions; 
extension of  working age; support 
for family networks

Fiscal pressure 
to reduce health 
costs; improve 
productivity

Investment in retraining 
older persons, and 
extending the working 
age

Economic

Improve waste and 
recycling management; 
support consumption of 
local produce; change 
overconsumption 
patterns of high-income 
households
Create productive 
employment for older 
persons

Inefficient use of 
public services 
(water, electricity)

Ageing

Inequality and 
financial fragility

Food insecurity

Energy access

Climate change

Create policy 
space for inclusive 
development; reduce 
underemployment; 
promote economic 
diversification
Improve access to food; 
increase productivity

Investment in green industry, 
adaptation to climate change, 
structural economic change 
(industrial and service leapfrogging 
for least developed countries); 
strengthening regional cooperation
Investment in urban agriculture, 
local crops, storage facilities; R&D

Reduce 
unemployment; 
boost economic 
growth; strengthen 
international 
cooperation
Reduce food waste

Reduce 
overproduction and 
overconsumption 
to sustainable levels

Provide access to clean 
energy and reduce use 
of “dirty” energy in poor 
households (e.g., least 
developed countries); 
discourage high-energy 
consumption in high-
income households
Reduce impact on 
livelihoods; reduce 
carbon emissions; 
generate financial 
resources for adaptation 

Environmental

Investment in capacity development, 
energy-saving devices, production 
and use of renewable sources of 
energy; subsidies and incentives 
for efficient energy use and water 
use for middle- and high-income 
households

Investment in health and 
education infrastructures and 
facilities; adaptation and mitigation 
technology, early warning systems, 
green public trans  por- tation; 
strengthen regional cooperation for 
green technology transfer

Upgrade disaster 
risk prevention 
systems; reduce 
carbon emissions 
to sustainable levels

Investment in 
mitigation, industrial 
green transformation; 
retrofitting of buildings; 
policy coordination

Investment on green 
infrastructure; policy 
coherence and 
coordination

Investment in storage 
infrastructure; reducing 
food subsidies; policy 
coordination

Investment and 
incentives to produce 
and use renewable 
energy sources; 
decentralization of 
energy production

Source: UN/DESA, Development Policy and Analysis Division.

World Economic and Social Survey 201365

education  and  health,  housing  and  communications.  As  a  consequence,  many  urban 
residents  in  developing  countries  suffer  to  varying  degrees  from  environmental  health 
issues associated to inadequate access to clean water, sewerage services, and solid waste 
disposal. In many cities of developing countries, adequate water and sanitation services 
are primarily channelled to upper- and middle-class neighbourhoods, while low-income 
neighbourhoods often depend on distant and unsafe water wells and private water vendors 
who charge higher prices than the public rate for water delivery (Cohen, 2006). The poor 
often live in highly overcrowded dwellings in shacks which lack basic infrastructure and 
services. On the whole, less than 35 per cent of cities in developing countries have their 
waste water treated, while globally, 2.5 billion and 1.2 billion people lack safe sanitation 
and access to clean water, respectively (United Nations Human Settlements Programme 
(UN-Habitat), 2012). For a broader overview and assessment of the impact of social and 
economic inequalities, see also chapters I and II.

Wider  urban  access  to  public  services,  income-earning  opportunities  and 
broader social interaction in cities has driven rural-urban internal migration in many de-
veloping countries for the past 60 years (Beall, Guha-Khasnobis and Kanbur, eds., 2012). 
The speed of urbanization has ultimately outstripped the limits of the economic oppor-
tunities provided by cities, making poverty a salient feature of urban life. Cohen (2006) 
suggests that congestion costs in large cities might be high, since the well-being advantage 
has declined in many cities of developing countries since the 1970s. Moreover, the rising 
urban inequalities in, e.g., Brazil, China and the Philippines in the 1990s is consistent 
with the existence of highly heterogeneous urban labour markets, which are in part the 
result of their high level of exposure to world markets.

Mitlin and Satterthwaite (2012) indicate that 1 out of 7 persons in the world 
lives in poverty in urban areas, mainly in informal settlements of the developing world, 
with inadequate provision of water, sanitation, health care and schools. Yet, urban poverty is 
still underestimated mainly owing to inadequate methodologies used to define and measure 
poverty. For example, the $1.25-per-day poverty line does not necessarily capture higher 
costs of food and non-food items in large cities, while indicators of improved water provi-
sion include public taps and standpipes which often do not provide safe and regular water.
About 1 billion people, lacking basic infrastructure and services, currently live 
in slums, whose number may multiply threefold by 2050 if no policy framework is in place 
to reduce their growth (United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat), 
2012). More than half of urban dwellers in countries of sub-Saharan Africa and 40 per 
cent  in  Asia  lack  access  to  basic  sanitation  (Baker,  ed.,  2012).  The  growth  of  cities  in 
least developed countries, in particular, often results in a rise in the number of people 
living under precarious conditions in respect of their livelihoods and employment, whose 
effect on the environment is harmful through their use of “dirty” energy, e.g., wood and 
charcoal, to meet basic energy needs.

At the regional level, data provided by the United Nations Human Settlements 
Programme (UN-Habitat) (2010) indicate that 62 per cent of urban populations in sub-
Saharan Africa live in slums, a proportion that is expected to rise in the next decades. 
Slums in Latin America and the Caribbean and regions of Asia house about 24 per cent 
and 30 per cent of the urban populations, respectively. 

 Further, international migrants working in low-skilled occupations have in-
creasingly joined the ranks of the poor in the main cities of both developed and developing 
countries. Key industries and trades such as food production and processing, construction 

Towards sustainable cities66

and repairs, buildings maintenance, taxi driving, the garment industry, household services, 
and agriculture often engage a significant share of immigrant workers.3 Frequently living 
in  insecure  and  low-quality  conditions  in  terms  of  housing  and  public  services,  many 
immigrants are undocumented and disenfranchised. In New York City and other cities in 
the United States of America, for example, unsafe labour conditions for many immigrant 
workers include working schedules of up to 60-72 hours per week and no social benefits 
such as health care and social security (Orrenius and Zavodny, 2009; Passel, 2006). 

Sprawl and weakened capacities 

Many large cities have also experienced rising sprawl over the past 50 years, challenging 
urban planning. Wealthier citizens have chosen to reside on the outskirts of cities where 
they enjoy greater privacy, have bigger homes and better schools for their children, and are 
spared having to use public transportation and endure the frenzied atmosphere of urban 
downtowns. As a consequence, the carbon footprint of wealthier inhabitants, households 
and  neighbourhoods  is  often  much  higher  than  that  of  the  rest  of  urban  inhabitants 
(McGranahan and Satterthwaite, 2003). 

Small cities with less than 500,000 inhabitants experience a different type of 
vulnerability. Although there is much diversity in their economic structure, many small 
cities in developing countries have very weak economies and inadequate communication 
with more economically dynamic cities. These cities tend to have inadequate infrastructure 
for provision of basic public services, which may be of low quality. Access may be time-
consuming, costly and risky (in the case, for example, of public transportation). Poor land 
management and weak urban planning capacities are part of the problem. The deficiencies 
in urban governance, institution-building and adjustment to changing land development 
conditions have reduced real possibilities for improving urban planning (Cohen, 2006).

Energy access

The present section highlights the differences between the energy needs of poor urban house-
holds and countries and rich ones. Access to cleaner sources of energy is intrinsically linked 
to development, and vice versa. Countries with higher gross domestic product (GDP) per 
capita (e.g., above US$ 4,000) are associated with the use of electricity by above 60 per cent 
of the urban population, and the use of wood and charcoal for cooking by a low proportion 
of urban households (e.g., 20 per cent or less).4 In fact, cities in the majority of middle-
income  countries  have  access  to  electricity,  including  Amman,  Bogota,  Buenos  Aires, 
Cairo, Caracas, Jakarta, Rabat, Rio de Janeiro and Santo Domingo (Satterthwaite and  
Sverdlik, 2013).

Similarly, while only 18 per cent of urban dwellers in developing countries use 
wood and charcoal for cooking, the proportion for least developing countries is almost 
four times higher. Overall, there are about 680 million people in developing countries 
with no access to modern fuels (table III.3). Lack of access to electricity is associated with 

3 

4 

At the same time, some of the “best and brightest” immigrants make up an increasing proportion 
of scientists, engineers, computer specialists and medical doctors in cities of developed countries 
(Kapur and McHale, 2005)

In countries with GDP per capita of US$ 6,000 or more, 95-100 per cent of their urban population 
have access to electricity. 

World Economic and Social Survey 2013Table III.3
Proportion of urban population lacking access to electricity and modern fuels, and 
proportion using particular fuels for cooking, developing and least developed countries, 
circa 2003-2007

67

Developing countries

10a 
30c

Developing countries

Percentage
Lack of access to:
Electricity
Modern fuels (mostly gas)
Fuel(s) used for cooking
Wood, charcoal, and dung 
Coal
Kerosene
Gas
Electricity
Source: UN/DESA, based on Satterthwaite and Sverdlik (2013).
a  Comprising 226 million people.
b  Comprising 116 million people.
c  Comprising 679 million people.
d  Comprising 130 million people.

18
8
7
57
6

Least developed countries

56b
63d

Least developed countries

68
3
4
20
4

informal urban settlements where dwellers typically have high transportation costs and 
poor-quality housing. The use of cheap fuels implies increased deforestation, pollution, 
health risks, energy cost and time burden. Poor people often have to spend a lot of time for 
travelling to purchase or gather those fuels. In contrast, regular electricity supplies would 
often be cheaper and safer, and could be used for household appliances (e.g., lights needed 
by children when doing their homework and for reading) and home enterprises. 

Common and differentiated impacts of natural hazards

The adverse impact of social inequalities on human health and the environment is multi-
plied when we factor in the adverse effects of “natural” disasters. Natural hazards linked 
to climate change events have also increased in intensity and frequency. Most disasters 
tend to occur in developing countries and the human cost in terms of both the number 
of persons affected and the loss of human lives is much higher in these countries. Yet, 
some developed countries have also started to be affected despite their generally greater 
resilience (United Nations, 2011b). Mutizwa-Mangiza (2012) indicates that 40 per cent 
of the world’s urban population, many of them poor and vulnerable to storms, floods and 
sea-level rise (e.g., southern Brazil, China, Viet Nam and Honduras), live less than 100 
kilometres from the coast (see also World Bank, 2009).

The combined impact of sea-level rise, floods, heatwaves and storms have ad-
versely affected millions of livelihoods, homes and lives in different countries, with projec-
tions indicating that the trend will continue and, in some cases, worsen (United Nations, 
2011b). Middle-income countries such as China, India, Indonesia, the Philippines and Viet 
Nam had the highest number of floods and storms combined during 2000-2009. Cities lo-
cated along the west Coast of Africa and the coastlines of South, East and South-East Asia 
have been affected by sea-level rise, flooding and salt intrusion in river flows and ground-
water, compromising the quality of clean water.  Endemic morbidity and mortality due to 
diarrhoeal disease are projected to increase in these regions. The reduction of the Andean 

Effects of climate change 
deepen the vulnerabilities 
of cities in poor nations and 
threaten the resilience and 
adaptation capacities of 
cities in richer nations

Towards sustainable cities68

Challenges also offer a 
strategic opportunity for 
an integrated approach 
to urban planning 
and investment in 
industrial transformation, 
infrastructure, social 
development and 
environmental management

glaciers and the melting of the Himalayan glaciers have disrupted the regular production of 
hydroelectric plants and reduced water supply in many cities (World Bank, 2010a). 

In  fact,  the  likelihood  of  mega-disasters  has  seized  the  attention  of  policy-
makers, particularly in countries that have long coastlines, including Australia, China, 
France, Indonesia, the Philippines and the United States. Coastal developments in urban 
centres are likely to sharpen disaster risks from sea-level rise and increased intensity and 
frequency of storms and floods (Lee and others, 2012). Although disaster risks such as 
droughts disproportionately affect rural areas, there have been recent disasters in urban 
areas—such as earthquakes in Japan (2011), Haiti (2010), Chile (2010) and China (2010); 
flooding in China (2010), Pakistan (2010), Brazil (2010, 2011) and Bangkok (2012); and 
the  extensive  damage  wrought  across  cities  along  the  East  Coast  of  the  United  States 
following Hurricane Sandy (2012)—which highlights the fact that urban disaster risk is 
also a reality. The concentration of people and economic activity in areas at risk from ex-
treme weather events or earthquakes can interrupt global supply chains, reduce economic 
output, reverse development gains, and affect the livelihoods of the poor who often live in 
those areas (Baker, ed., 2012; United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction, 2013).
Stronger storms and saltwater intrusion in water systems have weakened adap-
tive capacities in coastal cities of both developed and developing countries. The damages to 
infrastructure in the former and the weakening of resilience in the latter threaten their pol-
icy space for taking effective adaptation measures and developing capacities for rebuilding.
The integrated effects of the challenges described above threaten the economic 
resilience of cities and heighten their vulnerabilities. Cities have to start perceiving those 
challenges as opportunities for investment and building cities to serve as the main pillars 
for a sustainable world. 

Opportunities for building sustainable cities

As demonstrated above, there are both challenges and opportunities associated with build-
ing sustainable cities. The multidimensional impact of megatrends represents a strategic op-
portunity for taking an integrated approach to urban planning and a major opportunity for 
investment in industrial transformation, improved infrastructure, social development and 
environmental management. Sustainable development in growing cities, of poor countries 
in particular, implies investment in infrastructure such as roads, water, sewers, electricity 
and services such as schools, public transportation and health-care. Leapfrogging invest-
ment in green industrial transformation can generate employment for the “youth bulge” 
dividend experienced by those countries. In cities of middle- and high-income countries, 
investment  in  the  production  and  use  of  renewable  sources  of  energy,  as  well  as  in  the 
renovation of infrastructure, retrofitting of buildings and improved efficiency in the use of 
electricity and water, is important. At the same time, investment in strategies for the reduc-
tion of waste production and improvement of waste collection and recycling systems are 
needed in most cities across the world. Inevitably, there will be trade-offs between invest-
ments yielding benefits in the short term, e.g., infrastructure for development, and those 
with benefits in the long term, such as environmental protection and disaster risk reduction.
Cities’ contribution to sustainable development can be multipled if more countries 
are committed to that goal and when people are able to produce, consume and govern their 
behaviour in a sustainable manner. Thus, urban sustainability defined within the framework 
of a global integrated approach must include both developed and developing countries. 

World Economic and Social Survey 2013An integrated and coordinated approach

69

An integrated approach to urbanization will be based on a holistic view of its social devel-
opment, economic development, environmental management (at the local, national and 
global levels) and governance components. It will entail the coordination of objectives and 
programmes among different city stakeholders (e.g., citizens, government and the business 
sector), as well as the development of linkages between and within socioeconomic sectors 
and activities. In economic terms, the integrated approach tries to improve synergies and 
efficiencies among activities such as public transportation, energy consumption, biodiver-
sity and human health.

Further, under an integrative approach, city administrations would integrate in-
vestment in various types of infrastructures with the development of institutional and man-
agement capacities and the active participation of all stakeholders in the process of building 
sustainable cities. The city of Curitiba in Brazil has gained worldwide recognition for having 
successfully developed that kind of integrated approach to sustainability over the past 40 
years. A description of the relevant process involved in Curitiba is offered in box III.2.

At the national level, the integration of the rural and urban sectors is critical. 
Wider access to public services and development of linkages with industrial development 
can leverage rural sector capacities to exchange resources and information, and engage in 
social interaction, with urban areas. 

Investment in economic and social infrastructure in rural settlements can be 
a  catalyst  for  reducing  rural-urban  migration.  Although  every  area  is  characterized  by 
a different configuration of land use, resources and potentials, the systemic integration 
of  different  villages,  towns  and  cities  in  the  context  of  their  particular  specializations 
and strategic locations can bring sustainable development to both urban and rural areas.  
Box IV.2 illustrates the positive effects of investment in rural infrastructure on Uganda’s 
food sustainability.

Empirical evidence suggests that for the drivers of sustained development in 
some newly industrialized countries of South-East Asia (Cambodia, Indonesia, Malaysia 
and Viet Nam) within the past 50 years included improved social development in the rural 
sector, increased agricultural productivity, and food supply, and support of decision-making 
capacities of peasant farmers. In fact, macroeconomic stabilization was important insofar 
as it was directed towards reduction of poverty, which was understood to be concentrated 
in rural areas (Kees van Donge, Henley and Lewis, 2012). Henley (2012) argues that the 
economic success of South-East Asia was due to pro-poor agricultural development and 
historical consistency in respect of investment in agriculture, as was the case for Malaysia 
over the period 1956-1990. Pro-rural sector policies are not the same as pro-poor policies; 
for example, investment in land redistribution is not necessarily pro-poor when the money 
is allocated to purchase land and not to implement poverty-reduction programmes, as was 
the case in Kenya during the 1960s and 1970s. 

namely:
(a) 

(b) 

The road towards building sustainable cities covers two types of invest ment, 

Investment in infrastructure and capacity development to close social develop-
ment gaps linked to the issue of access to good-quality public transportation, 
water and sanitation, health, education, housing and energy services in urban 
and rural areas; 
Investment in urban resilience, including industrial transformation towards 
the use of renewable energy sources, creation of decent employment in green 
productive activities, and adoption of adaptation and mitigation strategies. 

Cities and nations need 
to engage in investment 
in public infrastructure, 
renewable energy, energy 
efficiency, adaptation, 
retrofitting of buildings, 
and better waste and 
recycling systems

Towards sustainable cities70

Box III.2

Source: Jonas Rabinovitch, 
Senior Adviser on 
Governance, Public 
Administration and 
e-Government Issues, 
United Nations  
Secretariat.

How Curitiba became a reference point  
for sustainable development  

Curitiba, a city in southern Brazil, has approximately 3 million residents (including in the metropolitan 
area). The implementation of the Curitiba Master Plan began during the first administration of Mayor 
Jaime Lerner in the early 1970s. The plan relied on the physical integration of a public transport sys-
tem, land-use legislation and a hierarchized road network. The urban growth structure is character-
ized by a linear expansion across five “structural geographical sectors” which are served by “express 
buses”.  It links the city centre with the periphery and other neighbour municipalities, with priority 
given to public transport. 

The implementation of the Master Plan was conducted incrementally, consonant with 
the perception of sustainable urban design as a long-term process. Curitiba first developed a modest 
express route system with dedicated bus lanes. It then sought out ways to improve and extend the 
system. The result was a surface networked system which provides high-quality service comparable 
with that of well-known underground systems but at a capital cost that is about 200 times less. As a 
result, mass transit is almost entirely financed by passenger fares. 

The  systematic  approach  to  urban  transportation  has  reduced  travel  times  and  in-
creased convenience for commuters and other travellers. Private companies operate public buses 
whose  intensive  use  continues  despite  the  fact  that  Curitiba  has  one  of  the  highest  automobile 
ownership rates in Brazil. Rider surveys suggest that at least 20 per cent of the new bus passengers 
previously commuted by automobile. The city has replaced several downtown streets with broad 
pedestrian  malls  and  shopping  areas.  Reduced  traffic  appears  to  result  in  substantial  fuel  savings 
as well as reduced carbon emissions. Estimates based on information from URBS, the public-private 
company that manages the system, suggest that the reduction in automobile traffic has saved 27 
million litres of fuel per year.

While Curitiba is best known for its innovative public transport system, this is only one 
among many initiatives that have improved the environment and reduced resource use.  For exam-
ple, residents of subsidized low-income housing have easy access to public transportation whose 
route is in the direction of the Curitiba Industrial City, where polluting industries are not allowed. 
Curitiba has 60 square metres of green area per inhabitant, one of the highest rates among all cities in 
the world. Curitiba’s green spaces are integrated with flood control; and artificial lakes in many public 
parks provide a flood control system for the entire city. A strictly enforced citywide policy ensures 
that rivers and streams are protected and rainwater is collected and recycled. 

Curitiba has also implemented relevant solid waste programmes. The “Garbage that is 
not garbage” initiative, created in 1989, promotes domestic recycling through the separate collection 
of more than one thousand tons of metal, plastic, glass and paper per month. Additional benefits of 
this programme have included the positive change in the attitude of the population towards recy-
cling and the extension of the life of landfills through the conservation of considerable space. The 
goal of the “Garbage purchase” programme is to clean up dense areas in low-income communities 
(favelas), where garbage collection vans do not have space to circulate. The community sells garbage 
to the city in exchange for bags of food, bus tokens, notebooks and tickets for soccer matches and 
plays. The innovative feature of these programmes is the integration of environmental improvement 
with social inclusion.

City planning is an ongoing challenge. Curitiba has grown more than fourfold in the 
last 30 years, which has resulted in social issues and the environmental challenges associated with 
traffic and transportation, land use, waste management and housing. Yet, Curitiba continues to stand 
out as a visible point of reference for integrated urban development based on sustainability princi-
ples.  The most important lesson is that Curitiba has taken control of its own destiny by embracing 
a sustainability approach which has brought important benefits. At the same time, it has become 
an inspiration for thousands of small and medium-sized cities worldwide which are about to make 
crucial choices for their future and the future of the planet.

World Economic and Social Survey 201371

The first area of investment applies mainly to cities located in low-income coun-
tries and should be part of a development agenda that is supported by the international 
community with a view to spurring sustainability. In particular, support should be directed 
towards infrastructure investment efforts made by poor countries in order to reduce poverty 
(see box III.5 for an example of investment in waste processing infrastructure (Dhaka)). 
The second area of investment applies mainly to cities located in middle- and high-income 
countries. In the case of economies with fast growth, for example, resources generated by 
sustained economic growth in the past decade can serve as a means of financing the produc-
tion and use of renewable energy as well as building resilience against natural hazards.

All  things  considered,  building  sustainable  cities  requires  an  integrated  ap-
proach  to  investment  in  (a)  rural  development  and  affordable  access  to  public  services 
by the urban poor, (b) rapid, reliable, accessible and affordable public transportation in 
all its forms, (c) industrial transformation based on the production and use of renewable 
energy sources and the creation of decent jobs, (d) retrofitting of buildings and increase in 
the number of green areas, (e) improved efficiency in the use of water and electricity and  
(f) effective management of waste and recycling systems.

A study of urban households in the United States by Holian and Kahn (2013) 
indicates that investment and effective measures to reduce air pollution and crime in down-
town areas have resulted in higher urban population density and reduced per capita carbon 
emissions. The Plan Verde of Mexico City is also making positive strides in reducing urban 
air pollution and carbon emissions (box III.3).

Green  investment  in  poor  countries  would  enable  them  to  leapfrog  from  
dirty/high-carbon energy use to a low/zero-carbon development path. Investment is needed 
in the renovation of infrastructures of transportation as well as in education programmes 
that value efficiency in the use of public services. Households and businesses in cities of 
middle- and high-income countries would need to continue investing in improving the 
quality of life in urban centres and to create incentives to retrofit buildings and subsidies 
for producing and consuming clean energy sources. Box III.4 lists 10 essentials for invest-
ments and measures to reduce disaster risk, including investment in critical infrastructure, 
and early warning systems, and direct involvement of communities in designating preven-
tion and reconstruction priorities.

Trade-offs between investments?

Cities  with  a  growing  number  of  informal  settlements  are  trying  to  meet  basic  urban 
infrastructure needs, such as for public transportation, clean piped water, drainage sys-
tems and waste management. As a result, investment in adaptation to climate change may 
take a back seat to investment in development. Moreover, building resilience has been 
constrained by poor infrastructure, weak institutions and lack of enforcement of planning 
regulations, e.g., in Pakistan. Similarly, in Narok and Kisumu (Kenya) and Moshi (United 
Republic of Tanzania), the municipalities’ limited capacity, knowledge and coordination, 
and competing priorities, have prevented the adoption of disaster risk reduction strategies 
(United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction, 2013).

Post-disaster reconstruction is another area where cities often face trade-offs 
between investing in sustainable development and re-establishing services. As observed 
by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (2012b), tensions frequently arise as a 
result of competing demands for speed of delivery and sustainability of outcome. Response 

Towards sustainable cities72

and  reconstruction  funds  tend  to  be  time-limited,  often  requiring  expenditure  within  
12 months or less from the time of disbursement, with disregard for long-term pay-offs. 
Such pressure is compounded by the fact that multiple agencies work with limited resourc-
es and coordination. Indeed, trade-offs are often a by-product of short-sighted approaches 
versus long-term investment in win-win sustainable development solutions.

In fact, trade-offs between investments are often associated with whether or 
not formal established incentives exist for a particular type of investment. Wu and others 
(2013) argue that, in China, investments in transportation infrastructure, e.g., roads and 
electrification, tend to attract more incentives and therefore more rewards than invest-
ments in the environment. For these reasons, local urban authorities often prioritize the 
former type of investment based on its higher correlation with real GDP growth, career 
promotion and cities’ revenues from land lease sales.  As a result, investments in the envi-
ronment tend to be negatively affected.

Box III.3

Plan Verde of Mexico City 

In 1990, Mexico City had had 333 days in which the ozone level rose above Mexico’s national standard.  
In 2006, the city developed a 15-year Plan Verde which included the goal of reducing greenhouse gas 
emissions by 7 million metric tons during 2008-2012, which was accomplished in a timely manner. 
The Plan also has a business and citizens education component. Nearly 20 city agencies have worked 
together to optimize the use of the $1 billion-per-year investment, which represents about 7 per cent 
of the city’s yearly budget. By 2009, the number of days with an ozone level above the standard had 
fallen to 180. Moreover, the average number of hours per day during which the ozone standard was 
above the norm fell from 4.9 in 1990 to just 1.5 in 2009.

In addition to improving air quality, the plan includes other “pillars” encompassing: land 
conservation; public spaces; waste management and recycling; water supply and sanitation; climate 
action planning; and transportation and mobility. The city’s efforts to control atmospheric pollutants 
have included replacing ageing taxis, microbuses and government fleets with lower-emissions vehi-
cles, introducing a bike-sharing programme, and building a bus rapid transit system. The city offers 
a tax incentive of 10 per cent of the value of a building for promotion of green roofs. By December 
2011, 21,000 square metres of green roofs had been installed in public buildings and private establish-
ments. The city has also implemented 22 programmes on 11,000 hectares of conservation land for 
improving water management by reducing soil loss due to water and wind erosion.

To reduce the effects of population growth and the increase in vehicle fleets, the city 
has plans to replace official Government vehicles with fuel-efficient and low-polluting units. By 2012, 
four lines of a bus rapid transit system which used clean-burning, ultra-low sulphur diesel fuel had 
been inaugurated. The city is investing $2 billion in constructing a twelfth metro line and is providing 
subsidies for replacing ageing taxis. By December 2011, 75,000 taxis had been replaced with more 
efficient vehicles and 12,695 taxis had been scrapped. The city has restricted vehicle usage on certain 
days and in certain high-traffic zones as part of the Hoy no circula programme which is designed to 
reduce both traffic and emissions. The city has also introduced a bicycle mobility strategy (EcoBici), 
which includes free bike rentals and the creation of 21 kilometres of new bicycle paths. The city has 
also built bicycle-parking infrastructures at major metro subway stations. By December 2011, EcoBici 
had made 1,200 bicycles available at 90 bike stations and had 35,000 registered users, who had taken 
a total of 3 million trips. 

By  focusing  on  improving  air  quality  across  multiple  dimensions  including  land  use, 
transportation,  waste  management  and  climate  action  planning,  the  city  has  produced  effective 
programmes in seemingly unrelated areas such as water use and supply.

Sources: United Nations 
(2010b); and http://www.
mexicocityexperience.com/
green_living/.

World Economic and Social Survey 2013Learning by doing in building sustainable cities

Building  sustainable  cities  entails  integration  and  coordination  among  sectors.  For  ex-
ample,  a  land  plan  would  need  to  include  space  for  industry,  residential  housing,  and 
green areas, to be integrated with adequate space for access to public transportation. Some 
overlaps would exist since investment in green infrastructure, for example, can imply a 
reduction of CO2 emissions, while protection of green areas can include management of 
groundwater sources. 

Similarly, integration within sectors such as transportation would include the 
development of linkages between various transportation modes (e.g., bus, tram, metro, bi-
cycle and walking) in order to reduce travel time, gas emissions and the use of private cars. 
China, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, for example, has an extensive network of 
privately owned minibuses; maintains a low-fare tram system in the traditional downtown; 
and  has  effective  pedestrian  connection  links  with  commercial  buildings  which  double 

The 10 essentials for urban resilience 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 
6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

10. 

Put in place the organization and coordination needed to promote the understanding 
and reduction of disaster risk, based on participation of citizens groups and civil society. 
Build local alliances. Ensure that all departments understand their role in disaster risk 
reduction and preparedness. 
Assign a budget for disaster risk reduction and provide incentives for homeowners, low-
income families, communities, businesses and the public sector to invest in reducing 
the risks they face. 
Maintain  up-to-date  data  on  hazards  and  vulnerabilities.  Prepare  risk  assessments,  to 
be used as the basis for urban development plans and decisions, and ensure that this 
information  and  the  plans  for  your  city’s  resilience  are  made  readily  available  to  the 
public and are fully discussed with them.
Invest in and maintain critical infrastructure which reduces risk, such as flood drainage, 
adjusted where needed to cope with climate change. 
Assess the safety of all schools and health facilities and upgrade them, as necessary.
Apply and enforce realistic risk-compliant building regulations and land use planning 
principles. Identify safe land for low-income citizens and upgrade informal settlements, 
wherever feasible. 
Ensure that education programmes and training on disaster risk reduction are in place 
in schools and local communities.
Protect ecosystems and natural buffers to mitigate the impact of floods, storm surges 
and other hazards to which your city may be vulnerable. Adapt to climate change by 
building on good risk reduction practices.
Install early warning systems and emergency management capacities in your city and 
hold regular public preparedness drills.
After any disaster, ensure that the needs of the affected populations are placed at the 
centre  of  reconstruction,  with  support  for  those  populations  and  their  community 
organizations in designing and helping to implement responses, including rebuilding 
homes and livelihoods.

73

Building sustainable 
cities entails integration 
and coordination among 
social, economic and 
environmental sectors as 
well as within sectors such 
as transportation

Box III.4

Source: United Nations 
Office for Disaster Risk 
Reduction (2012), chap. 4.

Towards sustainable cities74

pedestrian capacity, directing people away from the noise and fumes generated by motorized 
traffic. Similarly, Bangkok has adopted the bus rapid transit (BRT), “a transportation system 
that mobilizes high-capacity buses along routes with limited stops” (Lim, 2012, p. 36).

In respect of water management, cities face access and efficiency challenges. 
Phnom Penh and Cape Town have been able to meet challenges by providing clean water 
at affordable rates to all people, including the poor living on the outskirts. Singapore has 
overcome its long-term water dependency with multi-pronged actions which included the 
installation of desalination plants and the recycling of waste water (Lim, 2012).

The annex to this chapter sets out the different profiles and policy experiences 
of a sample of cities in respect of building urban sustainability. Independent of its size 
or  its  breadth  of  experience,  each  city  has  started  on  its  own  road  towards  urban  sus-
tainability. Cities such as Curitiba, Copenhagen and Freiburg have greater experience in 
building sustainability, and a few of their accomplishments have already served as models 
for other cities; for example, Curitiba’s integrated bus system has been emulated by the 
TransMilenio bus system of Bogotá, Metrovia in Guayaquil, and Metrobús in Mexico 
City. Other cities have just started to design and implement a sustainability plan. As stated 
earlier, cities are poised to become pillars of sustainable development. In this sense, urban 
governance (figure III.4) can promote a more balanced and inclusive development as well 
as ensure a more effective use of local and national resources. 

As policy areas, the sectors indicated in the annex capture the economic, social 
and environmental aspects of urban sustainability. The specific measures and activities 
listed in each cell do not necessarily constitute all of the actions taken by each city; rather, 
they reflect mainly the relevant information found and some of the agreed priority initia-
tives that cities have begun to carry out. In particular, some cities have been quite actively 
supporting green infrastructure (in buildings and transportation); renewable energy and 
reduction of CO2 emissions; and management of waste and recycling.

The sustainability challenges faced by each city are diverse and reflect the size of 
its economy, technology capacities and population (e.g., Shanghai has 21 million residents, 
while  Ilo  has  53,000  residents),  as  well  as  its  development  priorities.  Information  and 
communications technologies (ICT) can increase efficiencies, reduce costs and enhance 
quality of life; however, the adoption of ICT depends on the capacity to scale up and on 
flexibility for implementation in different urban settings. Indeed, ICT also offers an op-
portunity to integrate cities’ infrastructures, including utilities, real estate, transportation 
and other public services (Falconer and Mitchell, 2012).

Cities’ priorities are determined by their own urban planning capacities and by 
the pressing development challenges that they face. Different stakeholders, coming, e.g., 
from the business, professional, government and political sectors, often gather to discuss 
how to build a particular city’s sustainability. Their individual views on urban sustain-
ability have to be synthesized to yield common denominators, e.g., a common language 
and a unified approach to implementation. The survey presented in the annex reveals the 
existing gaps and the diversity of policy priorities adopted in different cities. For example, 
housing in Kampala is a priority owing to the fact that 60 per cent of its inhabitants reside 
in slums, while in Paris one priority is to ensure the implementation of insulation pro-
grammes for old buildings in order to improve households’ energy efficiency. On the other 
hand, it is the Clean Air Project that is of foremost importance in Ilo, a city whose mining 
activities have produced “one of the world’s highest levels of air pollution” (Boon, Alexaki 
and Herrera Becerra, 2001, p. 215). The improvement of water infrastructure is essential 

World Economic and Social Survey 201375

to improving the quality and efficiency of water use in a large urban area like Mexico City, 
while protection of groundwater to ensure a supply of safe drinking water and reduction of 
water consumption per capita are main priorities in Shanghai and Freiburg. 

In this context, the fact that cities differ in their complexities militates against 
a “one size fits all” approach towards sustainability, since such differences render their 
priorities, objectives and paths diverse as well. Thus, measures of progress will be tailored 
to the particular challenges and opportunities determined and prioritized by the cities’ 
main stakeholders. Yet, establishment of stakeholder roles must precede development of a 
sustainability plan. For example, Governments should develop technical standards, e.g., 
building codes while working closely with the private sector; in its turn, the private sector 
should develop processes for partnering with government, academia and non-governmen-
tal organizations “to ensure solutions that are both functional and economically feasible” 
(Falconer and Mitchell, 2012).

It is important to underscore the significance of ambitious housing plans and 
successful integration of public transportation infrastructures in some cities. In this regard, 
it is worth mentioning that China plans to build up to 36 million subsidized flats by 2015 
for low-income people, mainly for the rural workers who come to work temporarily in the 
city and cannot afford decent housing. Similar subsidized housing projects are planned 
in Bangkok and Kuala Lumpur in order to reduce slums and squatter settlements (Lim, 
2012). Of course, the quality of the housing to be built in terms of sustainability (based, 
for example, on the materials used and energy efficiency) will need to be assessed. The 
challenges faced by these cities in respect of providing adequate housing are enormous.  
For example, a vast floating population circulating among most of the cities in China, 
which is important for their economic success, do not have access to Government services 
(Mitlin and Satterthwaite, 2012). 

In general, the integration and coordination of different infrastructures and 
modes of public transportation save travel time and energy and reduce congestion and car-
bon emissions; the success of these measures has been reported in cities like Copenhagen, 
Curitiba, Freiburg and Paris. Other cities, like Bangkok, Lima, Mexico City and Singapore, 
are also working on integrating different forms of public mobility. In many of these cities, 
the goal is to reduce the transportation time between home, the city and the workplace, so 
as to reduce energy consumption and ensure that people have more time to be productive 
and enjoy urban life. 

Copenhagen’s Finger Plan 2007 includes protection of its green belt and limita-
tion of sprawl development through better use of city land, with new compact buildings 
located near public transportation and other services. The protection of green belts are im-
portant for reducing carbon emissions and supporting urban agriculture, which can provide 
employment to local farmers, bring fresh produce to urban residents, and stabilize food prices, 
since transportation and packaging costs are thereby reduced. More important, direct public 
participation has been vital for planning legislation in Copenhagen, through, for example, 
the Citizen’s Dialogue Project, which is being financed through the city’s annual budget.

Freiburg promotes the integration and mixing of functions within compact 
buildings and neighbourhoods which encompass shops, medical offices, schools, churches 
and children’s playgrounds, including nearby green spaces. Renewable energy production 
is encouraged through the tax credits from the federal Government and subsidies from 
the regional utility Badenova; grass-roots financing schemes also allow citizens to invest 
directly in renewable energy sources. 

Towards sustainable cities76

It is important to note the level of awareness that some cities have attained 
with respect to waste reduction and recycling for urban sustainability. Waste is treated 
as a raw material and energy source in Freiburg, while cities like Copenhagen, Curitiba, 
Kampala, Shanghai, Singapore and Stockholm, have made significant progress in recy-
cling and reducing waste. Private-public partnerships have often been the key to financing 
and improving waste collection and transformation. Although by many accounts, Dhaka 
exemplifies  a  city  with  an  unsustainable  growth  pattern,  box  III.5  indicates  that,  even 
under  those  circumstances,  it  is  possible  to  build  up  an  effective  partnership  on  solid  
waste management.

Lastly,  in  many  cities,  the  use  of  the  bicycle  is  becoming  an  essential  part 
of  public  transportation.  Education  and  initiatives  to  discourage  car  circulation  
(e.g.,  through  the  imposition  of  higher  tariffs  during  rush  hours  in  Singapore  and  the 
Hoy no circula programme in Mexico City), and the provision of adequate infrastructure, 
such as bike parks near metros and bike lanes, free bike rentals, and bike-sharing, have 
facilitated the rapid adoption of bicycles as a means of transport and the rapid spread of 
their use in cities of both developed and developing countries.

Act locally with national support and global coordination

To strengthen the financial and decision-making capacities of cities, national Governments 
need to adopt an inclusive and decentralized approach towards the use of resources and 
development. Issues such as rapid ageing in developing countries pose a real challenge to 
urban authorities, which often do not have sufficient resources to respond and therefore 
need  long-term  sources  of  finance.  National  authorities  need  to  enhance  decentraliza-
tion  and  share  the  resources  needed  for  economic  growth  to  increase  the  policy  space 
of local administrations. Effective dialogue between urban and national authorities on 
development priorities can be a means of identifying synergies and areas of development 
for national, regional and global coordination. 

National sustainable strategies of development should explicitly consider cities 
as main pillars for building sustainability. Some countries have already begun to build 
sustainable cities in country capitals such as Copenhagen, Oslo and Stockholm and in a 
selected group of cities including Tianjin, Chongqing and Shenzhen (eco-cities) in China.
A coordinated international response is necessary. Sustainable national strate-
gies  should  reflect  development  priorities  that  are  consistent  with  cities’  priorities.  For 
example, food security and adaptation to climate change are two of the most immediate 
priorities in poor countries, while recovery from financial fragility and measures for reduc-
ing the impact of ageing can be pressing priorities in rich countries. In both cases, upfront 
investment in green productive activities, infrastructure and efficient use of public goods 
is essential for building thriving and sustainable cities. 

Urbanization will be truly sustainable only when it engages the commitment 
of the global community. To overcome the challenges to building sustainable cities, the 
identification  of  common  and  differentiated  urban  development  priorities  should  itself 
be prioritized and those priorities should be consistent with common and differentiated 
responsibilities  for  addressing  the  impact  of  climate  change  among  countries.  Further, 
binding commitments between countries to confront cross-border challenges such as cli-
mate change can greatly improve the effectiveness of urban sustainability strategies. 

World Economic and Social Survey 201377

Box III.5

Source: United Nations 
(2010b).
a  United Nations, Treaty 
Series, vol. 1771, No. 30822.

A partnership in Dhaka to convert organic waste to a 
resource and generate carbon credits 

Economic development, population growth and urbanization have generated rising volumes and 
diverse streams of municipal solid waste in Dhaka, a city with limited urban infrastructure and capa-
bility. The city generates 3,500 metric tons of municipal solid waste daily, which is transported to a 
sanitary landfill. However, uncontrolled land filling has become a common practice in the city, which 
does not have adequate facilities for treatment, recycling and disposal of hazardous waste, a com-
mon problem in many cities of poor countries. Eighty per cent of municipal solid waste generated in 
Dhaka is organic in nature, with a moisture content ideal for recycling into compost.

Waste Concern, a local non-governmental research organization, works in partnership 
with  the  Government,  the  private  sector,  international  agencies  and  local  communities  to  imple-
ment  community-based  composting.  Its  services  include  waste  collection,  separation  and  com-
posting. Since its launch of solid waste management projects in 1998, Waste Concern has served 
30,000 people in Dhaka and 100,000 in 14 other cities and towns in Bangladesh, including low- and 
middle-income communities. The project has led to new job opportunities and better livelihoods in  
the communities.

Innovative financial arrangements have included community involvement and public-
private  cooperation.  Communities  utilize  a  door-to-door  collection  service  and  share  the  cost  of 
waste collection by paying a monthly fee based on affordability. The private sector stakeholder has 
joint venture partners which include Waste Concern and banking institutions. The investment re-
quired for the project was 12 million euros and the mode of financing was made up of equity (38 per 
cent), a soft loan (45 per cent) and a loan from a local bank (17 per cent).

A private company ensures the sale of compost by enriching the compost with nutri-
ents and effecting its subsequent distribution to the market (e.g., farmers). As a result, 75 per cent of 
the project’s revenue comes from the sale of compost. The partnership was also registered as a Clean 
Development  Mechanism  project  under  the  United  Nations  Framework  Convention  on  Climate 
Change;a as a result, the remaining 25 per cent of the revenue comes from community contributions 
in the form of a user fee and the sale of certified emissions reductions (CERs). 

The project had several positive effects: (a) reduction of the landfilling budget of the 
city; (b) creation of assured revenue for 10 years through the sale of compost and CERs; (c) creation 
of 800 jobs for poor urban residents; (d) production of 50,000 metric tons of compost for sustainable 
farming; and (e) achievement of knowledgeability by urban communities about the resource value 
of waste.

Financing sustainable cities

The scale and scope of needed finance

Building sustainable cities poses significant financial challenges to national and municipal 
authorities.  It entails commanding enough resources to finance the cost of infrastructure 
and the provision of a wide range of public services, within the context of major chal-
lenges such as ageing of populations and climate change threats. Urban authorities have to 
prioritize competing financing requirements, usually without sufficient budget resources 
to address the challenges of sustainable development simultaneously. 

The nature of the trade-offs between economic development and climatic pri-
orities varies from city to city. For cities located in poor countries (low-income and lower 

Towards sustainable cities78

middle income), sustainable development depends mainly on their capacities to finance 
investment in green infrastructure and access to basic services. For cities located in richer 
countries (upper middle income and high-income), financing is needed for restructuring 
cities’ design, infrastructure, transport and efficiency in the use of water and electricity. 
Similarly,  with  a  growing  number  of  international  migrants  and  rising  in-
equalities among countries, global and medium cities in both developed and developing 
countries are challenged to provide adequate public services. On the other hand, immigra-
tion has often stimulated the economic and cultural revival of urban neighbourhoods and 
has been a source of labour vital for the growth and competitiveness of the cities. At the 
same time, many cities across the world need resources to finance the industrial processing 
of waste and the improvement of recycling systems.

A policy framework for sustainable financing 

The creation of a policy framework for responding effectively to the challenge of financing 
the  sustainability  of  cities  requires  multilayered  cooperation  among  local  national  and 
global  communities,  including  the  development  of  partnerships  to  harness  public  and 
private resources for the purposes described above.

Financing  investment  in  public  infrastructure,  including  adaptation  to  and 
mitigation of climate change, is a daunting task, one that often demands large sums of 
upfront  finance  and  an  acceptance  of  the  fact  that  returns  will  be  seen  mainly  in  the 
medium and long terms.

Regulatory  measures,  including  market  and  non-market  mechanisms,  are 
important  for  determining  pricing  structures,  taxes  and  subsidies  for  households  and 
industry,  e.g.,  for  the  development  of  compact  neighbourhoods  and  the  retrofitting  of 
buildings. Various types of taxes—included, for example, in lower fares for public trans-
portation—can be used to finance the gap between the financial outlay and the actual 
cost of services.

Thus, for cities in poor and rich countries alike, part of the financing would 
have to be directed towards limiting the damaging effects of climate change on the envi-
ronment, biodiversity and the livelihoods of present and future generations.  In this sense, 
the principle of common and differentiated responsibilities can guide the establishment 
of an international cooperation framework capable of supporting the development and 
resilience of poor countries. 

Oil-exporting and emerging economies experiencing relatively high economic 
growth but with urban settlements vulnerable, for example, to sea-level rise, storms and 
droughts, should use part of the resources generated to finance cities’ risk reduction strate-
gies and improved infrastructure for adaptation, mitigation and provision of public services.

Examples of financing strategies

Bond banks and resource pooling can be useful instruments for reducing risk. In 1998, 
the Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation issued 1 billion rupees in bonds (without a State 
guarantee) to finance a water supply and sewerage project. The bond issue improved the 
city’s finances (World Bank, 2013).

Public-private  partnerships  can  also  serve  as  viable  instruments  for  raising 
funds  for  financing  infrastructure  projects,  particularly  in  developing  countries  with 

World Economic and Social Survey 201379

limited access to long-term credit.  Public-private partnerships can improve asset utiliza-
tion and favour cost recovery through user fees.  For example, improvement in the quality 
of  public  transportation  services  through  engagement  of  the  private  sector  can  justify 
higher fees (see the annex for information on the public-private partnership established in 
Freiburg, Germany, to finance the production of renewable sources of energy).

Cities in poor countries may also leverage the value of land to finance infra-
structure.  In  Cairo,  for  example,  the  auction  of  3,100  hectares  of  desert  land  in  2007 
generated  $3.1  billion.  This  amount  of  resources  was  to  be  used  to  reimburse  costs  of 
internal infrastructure and build a connecting highway to the road surrounding Cairo. 
Leaseholds can also leverage the value of land. These instruments can generate the initial 
capital needed to cover the start-up costs of infrastructure investments. In the long run, 
other instruments, such as property taxes, can finance maintenance and upgrade of public 
investments. However, land-based financing instruments require relatively strong and ef-
fective institutions and well-articulated legal frameworks.

Viet Nam has been able to finance universal access to electricity and achieve 
high  levels  of  access  to  water  and  sanitation.    In  the  poorest  provinces,  equalization 
has enabled access to basic services. Cities also finance themselves through taxes, land 
leases, short-term debt, investment funds and cross-subsidies from provincial public utility 
companies. Land leases, for example, are becoming an increasingly important source of 
finance. Yet, financing infrastructure services is still a challenging task for many cities 
(World Bank, 2013). 

Sources of finance can have different degrees of stability and predictability.  
Financing for Germany’s cities is largely derived from tax income tied to business profits, 
which can fall during times of crisis. For example, since Berlin is liable for high interest 
payments on past borrowing, it has requested debt relief from the federal Government. In 
contrast, city budgets in France and Italy rely more on real estate taxes, partly because the 
revenues are more stable and easier to predict.

However, the situation of cities in many poor countries is more problematic. 
Financial support from national Governments and donor agencies is often minimal, and 
provided, typically, only for the initial construction of infrastructure and not for ongoing 
operations. Thus, cities rely mainly on fees, tariffs and property taxes. However, property 
valuations can be out of date or incomplete, while capacities to collect taxes remain weak. 
Sprawling, in particular, can weaken tax systems in dynamic cities since, frequently, sub-
urban residents pay property taxes not in the city where they work but in a different—and 
smaller—community (PricewaterhouseCoopers, 2012).

In  a  context  of  policies  of  fiscal  restraint,  some  national  Governments  are 
pressed to grant more autonomy to cities in generating resources and determining their 
destiny.  For example, since 1988, the central Government of China has not financed local 
expenditure; hence, local governments have to provide and finance public services.

Towards sustainable cities80

 

n
o

 

i
t
a
t
i
n
a
s
 
,
r
e
t
a
W

m
e
t
s
y
s
o
c
e
d
n
a

t
n
e
m
e
g
a
n
a
m

 

t
n
e
m
e
g
a
n
a
m

 

 

d
n
a
e
t
s
a
W

 

g
n

i
l
c
y
c
e
r

y
c
n
e
i
c

ffi
e

 

y
g
r
e
n
E

 

2
O
C
 
f
o
n
o

 

i
t
c
u
d
e
r
 
d
n
a

s
n
o

i
s
s
i

m
e

 

 

y
g
r
e
n
e
e
l
b
a
w
e
n
e
R

 

e
r
u
t
c
u
r
t
s
a
r
f
n

i
 

n
e
e
r
G

 
c
i
l

b
u
p
 
,
s
g
n
d

i

l
i

u
b
(

)
n
o
i
t
a
t
r
o
p
s
n
a
r
t

)
y
c
n
e
i
c

ffi
e
(
 
s
e
Y

 

 

e
m
m
a
r
g
o
r
p
y
t
i
l
a
u
q
 
r
i
A

 

 

n
o
i
t
a
t
r
o
p
s
n
a
r
t
 
c
i
l

 
s
u
b
 
t
i
s
n
a
r
t
 
s
s
a
m

 

b
u
p
n
e
e
r
G

 
;
k
r
o
w
t
e
n

i

 
)
o
n
e
l
i

M
s
n
a
r
T
(
 

m
e
t
s
y
s

 
f
o
 
t
a
h
t
 
n
o
d
e
l
l
e
d
o
m

 

 

 

 

 
,
)
e
m
m
a
r
g
o
r
p
a
i
v
o
l
c
i
C
(
 
s
h
t
a
p

n
a
i
r
t
s
e
d
e
p
 
r
o
f
 
e
r
u
t
c
u
r
t
s
a
r
f
n

i

e
l
c
y
c
i
b

 
;
e
c
a
p
s
 
k
r
a
p

 
;
a
b
i
t
i
r
u
C

y
t
e
f
a
s

 
l
a
o
g
e
h
t
 
,

 

 

4
9
9
1
e
c
n
S

i

 

 

 

e
d
i
v
o
r
p
o
t
 
n
e
e
b
 
s
a
h

 
l
l
a
o
t
 
s
e
c
i
v
r
e
s
 
c
i
s
a
b

 
r
e
t
a
w
h
t
i

 

w
 
s
s
e
c
c
u
s
(

 
t
e
y
 
t
o
n

 
,
y
g
r
e
n
e
d
n
a

 

)
n
o
i
t
a
t
i
n
a
s
 
h
t
i

w

 

l

 
f
o
 
t
n
e
c
 
r
e
p
5
4
1

e
h
t
(
 
s
d
o
h
e
s
u
o
h

.

 

 

e
c
u
d
o
r
p
 
)
y
h
t
l
a
e
w

 
s
'
y
t
i
c
 
e
h
t
 
f
o
 
f
l
a
h

 

h
c
i
h
w

 
,
e
t
s
a
w

 
s
e
m

 

 

i
t
 
r
u
o
f
 
s
t
n
e
s
e
r
p
e
r

y
a
d
 
r
e
p
e
t
s
a
w
e
h
t

 

 

r
o
o
p
e
h
t
 
y
b
d
e
c
u
d
o
r
p

 

)
d
’
t
n
o
c
(

 

 

 

e
t
s
a
w
d
e
v
o
r
p
m

I

 

g
n

i
l
c
y
c
e
r
 
d
n
a

t
n
e
m
e
g
a
n
a
m

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

 

 

 

 
r
e
w
o
p
 
r
a
l
o
s
 
e
s
u
d
u
o
w

 
s
e
m
o
h
 
f
o
 
t
n
e
c
 
r
e
p
0
1

l

 

 

 
f
o
 
t
n
e
c
 
r
e
p
0
1

 

 
;

0
2
0
2
y
b

 

 

n
o
i
t
p
m
u
s
n
o
c
 
y
g
r
e
n
e

 
s
e
c
r
u
o
s
 
e
l
b
a
w
e
n
e
r
 

m
o
r
f

 
s
l
e
n
a
p
 
r
a
l
o
s
 
y
r
o
t
a
d
n
a
m

 

e
l
b
i
s
s
o
p

 
;

0
2
0
2
y
b

 

g
n
d

i

l
i

 

u
b
y
r
e
v
e
n

 

i

 
t
c
a
p
m

i
 
f
o
 
t
n
e
m

s
s
e
s
s
a

 

 

n
o
n
o
i
t
u

l
l

o
p
 
r
i
a
 
f
o

 

 

d
n
a
 
,
s
p
o
r
c
 
d
n
a
n
e
r
d

 

l
i

h
c

 

o
t
 
n
a
l
p
y
c
n
e
g
n
i
t
n
o
c
 
a

 

o
t
 
n
a
l
p

 
;
s
t
c
a
p
m

i
 
t
i

m

i
l

 
f
o
 
t
c
a
p
m

i
 

 

h
t
l
a
e
h
e
c
u
d
e
r

 

n
a
e
l
C
 
r
i
A
o

 

 
s
e
d
u
l
c
n

l
I
 
e
h
t
 
,
s
e
Y

i
 
 
t
c
e
j
o
r
P

s
n
o
i
s
s
i

m
e

 

O
C

2

 

 

 

w
e
n
d
n
a
e
c
i
v
r
e
s
 
s
u
b

 
i

i

T
C
y
M

 

e
l
a
c
s
-
n
a
m
u
h

 

d
n
a
 
s
g
n
d

i

l
i

 

 
;
s
e
n
a
l
 
e
l
c
y
c

u
b
 
f
o
n
g
i
s
e
d

s
e
c
a
p
s

 

 

 
,

g
n

i
l
c
y
c
 
s
e
d
u
l
c
n

i
 
y
t
i
l
i

b
o
M
o
c
E

 

n
o
i
t
a
t
r
o
p
s
n
a
r
t
 
s
u
b
 
c
i
l

b
u
p

 

 

d
n
a
g
n
i
k
l
a
w

 
,

g
n

i
l
e
e
h
w

)
y
t
i
l
a
d
o
m
r
e
t
n
i
(

 

n
e
e
r
g
 
,

 
c
i

m
o
n
o
c
E

h
t
w
o
r
g

 
,
s
b
o
j
 
,
y
m
o
n
o
c
e

i

 
/
g
n
n
i
a
r
t

i

g
n
n
i
a
r
t
e
r

 

 
r
e
p
8
2
 
r
o
f
 
s
t
n
u
o
c
c
a

 

y
m
o
n
o
c
e
n
e
e
r
G

 

 

P
D
G
y
t
i
c
 
f
o
 
t
n
e
c

 
c
i

m
o
n
o
c
e
h
g
H

i

 

h
t
w
o
r
g

 

g
n
i
s
u
o
H

 

 

 

d
n
a
 
,

h
c
r
a
e
s
e
r

 

n
o
i
t
a
m
r
o
f
n

s
e
m
m
a
r
g
o
r
p

i

 
,

n
o
i
t
a
c
u
d
E

i

 
,
g
n
n
i
a
r
t

e
s
u
-
r
e
t
a
w

 
r
o
f
(
 
s
e
Y

)
y
c
n
e
i
c

ffi
e

 

g
n
i
c
u
d
e
r
 
n
o
d
e
s
u
c
o
F

 

 
r
o
f
 
s
k
s
i
r
 
c
i

m

s
i
e
s

 

 

3
2
5
1

 
.

 

o
N
w
a
l
 
;
s
l
o
o
h
c
s

 

a
d
e
h
s
i
l

 

b
a
t
s
e
1
1
0
2
 
f
o

 

m
e
t
s
y
S
 
l
a
n
o
i
t
a
N
w
e
n

 

 

h
t
i

 

k
s
i
R
 
r
e
t
s
a
s
i
D
 
r
o
f

w

 
t
n
e
m
e
g
a
n
a
M

 

 

i

g
n
g
a
g
n
e
n
o
 
s
i
s
a
h
p
m
e

s
e
i
t
i
n
u
m
m
o
c
 
l
a
c
o

l

 
s
'
n
o
i
t
a
n
 
f
o
 
t
n
e
c

 

 
r
e
p
0
2
(
 
0
0
0
9

,

)
n
o
i
t
a
l
u
p
o
p

 

k
s
i
r
 
r
e
t
s
a
s
i
D

 
 

n
o

i
t
c
u
d
e
r

 

n
o

i
t
a
l
u
p
o
P

)
s
d
n
a
s
u
o
h
t
(

á
t
o
g
o
B

y
t
i
C

 

 

 

n
a
b
r
u
e
h
t
 
n
o
d
e
s
a
b

 

n
o
i
t
c
u
d
e
r
 
y
t
r
e
v
o
P

 
,
e
m
m
a
r
g
o
r
p

 
l
a
w
e
n
e
r

 

 

g
n
i
s
u
o
h
g
n
d
u
l
c
n

i

i

 
t
n
e
m
n
r
e
v
o
G
a
(

 

d
e
h
c
n
u
a
l
 
e
m
m
a
r
g
o
r
p

)
1
0
0
2
n

 

i

 

 

 

 

m
r
o
t
s
 
g
n
i
r
a
e
l
c
 
:
s
e
r
u
s
a
e
m

n
a
l
p
n
o
i
t
c
a
y
t
i
n
u
m
m
o
C

 

 

-
t
r
o
h
s
(
 
s
n
a
r
d
 
r
e
t
a
w

i

e
r
u
t
c
u
r
t
s
a
r
f
n

i
 
;
)

m
r
e
t

 

 

d
n
a
n
o
i
t
a
m
r
o
f
s
n
a
r
t

 
;
)

m
r
e
t
-

i

m
u
d
e
m

(

 
.
)

 

 
l
a
m
r
o
f
n

 

i
 
f
o
n
o
i
t
a
r
g
e
t
n

i

 

m
r
e
t
-
g
n
o
l
(
 
s
t
n
e
m
e
l
t
t
e
s

e
t
i
h
w
-
n
o
n
n
o
 
s
i
s
a
h
p
m
E

 
l
a
m
r
o
f
n

i
 

d
n
a
 
s
a
e
r
a

s
t
n
e
m
e
l
t
t
e
s

0
8
4
2

,

n
w
o
T
e
p
a
C

 

 

l

s
e
i
t
i
c
e
b
a
n
a
t
s
u
s
 
g
n
d

i

i

l
i

u
b
 
r
o
f
 
s
e
i
c
i
l

 

l

o
p
d
n
a
 
s
n
a
p
 
f
o
 
s
e
p
m
a
x
E

l

 
 

x
e
n
n
A

 

 

 

 

n
a
e
l
c
 
f
o
n
o
i
s
i
v
o
r
p
e
h
t

 

 

h
g
u
o
r
h
t
 
g
n
d
a
r
g
p
u

i

 

 
r
e
t
t
e
b
d
n
a
 
r
e
t
a
w

 

m
u
l
s
 
;

i

g
n
p
p
a
M

g
n
i
s
u
o
h

 

 

 

d
n
a
g
n
i
t
n
a
l
p
e
e
r
t
 
s
a
h
c
u
s

 

 

 

 
s
e
r
u
s
a
e
m
n
o
i
t
c
e
t
o
r
p

 
;

n
o
i
t
a
v
r
e
s
n
o
c
 
d
n
a
l
t
e
w

 
s
t
n
e
d
i
s
e
r
 
f
o
n
o
i
t
a
c
o
l
e
r

 

 
s
t
n
e
m
e
l
t
t
e
s
 
l
a
m
r
o
f
n

i
 

n

i

 

 

i

d
n
w
e
c
u
d
e
r
 
o
t
 
s
l
o
o
h
c
s

 

o
t
 
s
k
s
i
r
 
d
n
a
e
g
a
m
a
d

 

 
;
s
y
a
w
r
e
t
a
w
g
n
o
l
a

 
r
a
e
n
 
s
e
e
r
t
 
g
n
i
t
n
a
l
p

 

 
l
a
t
n
e
m
n
o
r
i
v
n
E

n
e
r
d

l
i

h
c

)
s

m
u
l
s
 
n

i
 

e
v
i
l
 
t
n
e
c

 

 
r
e
p
0
6
(
 
0
6
6
1

,

a
l
a
p
m
a
K

 

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

3
5

o

l
I

World Economic and Social Survey 2013 

 

 
s
k
r
a
P
4
0
0
2
 
s
'
y
t
i
c
 
e
h
T

n
o
i
t
a
e
r
c
e
r
 
d
e
c
n
a
h
n
e

 
s
e
z
i
s
a
h
p
m
e
y
c
i
l

 

o
P

 

 

 
r
u
o
b
r
a
h
e
h
t
 
g
n
o
l
a

 
l
l
e
w
 
s
a
 
t
s
a
o
c
 
d
n
a

 
f
o
 
t
n
e
m
e
v
o
r
p
m

i
 
s
a

 
;
s
s
e
n

i
l

n
a
e
l
c
 
r
e
t
a
w

n
o
i
t
p
m
u
s
n
o
c
 
r
e
t
a
w

 
r
e
p
 
s
e
r
t
i
l
 

7
2
1
 
s
i
 

e
t
a
r

 

y
a
d
 
r
e
p
 
t
n
e
d
i
s
e
r

 

h
c
a
e
r
 
o
t
 
s
i
 

e
v
i
t
c
e
j
b
o
(

)
s
e
r
t
i
l
 

0
1
1

 
r
e
t
a
w

 
,

0
2
0
2
y
b

 

 
:
l
a
o
G

 

 

l

 
l
a
u
q
e
d
u
o
w
d
e
s
u

 

 
t
a
h
t
 
r
e
t
a
w

 
f
o
 
t
n
u
o
m
a

 

y
l
l
a
u
n
n
a
y
t
i
c
 
n
o
 
s
l
l
a
f

81

)
d
’
t
n
o
c
(

 

 

s
e
Y

 

 

g
n
i
r
u
d

 

d
e
c
u
d
e
r
 
s
a
w
n
o
i
t
u

 

l
l

 
r
i
a
 
,

 
;
r
a
l
o
s
 
,

d
n
W

i

0
1
0
2
-
6
0
0
2

t
n
e
c
 
r
e
p
0
2

 

 
 

o
p

y
b

 

n
o

 

i
t
a
t
i
n
a
s
 
,
r
e
t
a
W

m
e
t
s
y
s
o
c
e
d
n
a

t
n
e
m
e
g
a
n
a
m

 

t
n
e
m
e
g
a
n
a
m

 

 

d
n
a
e
t
s
a
W

 

g
n

i
l
c
y
c
e
r

y
c
n
e
i
c

ffi
e

 

y
g
r
e
n
E

 

2
O
C
 
f
o
n
o

 

i
t
c
u
d
e
r
 
d
n
a

s
n
o

i
s
s
i

m
e

 

 

y
g
r
e
n
e
e
l
b
a
w
e
n
e
R

 

e
r
u
t
c
u
r
t
s
a
r
f
n

i
 

n
e
e
r
G

 
c
i
l

b
u
p
 
,
s
g
n
d

i

l
i

u
b
(

)
n
o
i
t
a
t
r
o
p
s
n
a
r
t

 

n
e
e
r
g
 
,

 
c
i

m
o
n
o
c
E

h
t
w
o
r
g

 
,
s
b
o
j
 
,
y
m
o
n
o
c
e

i

 
/
g
n
n
i
a
r
t

i

g
n
n
i
a
r
t
e
r

 

 

 

n
e
e
r
g
y
b
d
e
t
r
o
p
p
u
s

 
c
i

m
o
n
o
c
e
h
g
H

i

 

 

y
l
t
r
a
p

 
,

h
t
w
o
r
g

y
m
o
n
o
c
e

g
n
i
s
u
o
H

 

s
e
Y

 

 

m
r
a
w
o
t
 
r
e
d
r
o
n

 

I

 

 
,
s
a
e
r
a
n
w
o
t
n
w
o
d

 
s
e
s
u
e
r
 
y
t
i
c
 
e
h
t

 
s
r
o
t
a
r
e
n
i
c
n

i
 

e
t
s
a
w

 
s
t
n
a
l
p
 
r
e
w
o
p
d
n
a

 

 

m
o
r
f
 
t
a
e
h
 
s
s
e
c
x
e

 

n

i
 
s
g
n
d

i

l
i

u
b

 
;

 

2
0
0
2
-
2
9
9
1
g
n
i
r
u
d
 
t
n
e
c

 
s
l
l
a
c
 
1
1
0
2
n
a
l
P
e
t
a
m

 

 

i
l

C

 

 

 

 
r
e
p
5
1
y
b
d
e
s
a
e
r
c
e
d

 

 

 

n

i
 
t
u
c
 
t
n
e
c
 
r
e
p
0
2
 
r
o
f

 

y
b
 
s
n
o
i
s
s
i

 

m
e
n
o
b
r
a
c

 

e
m
o
c
e
b
o
t
 
:
l
a
o
g

 

 
;

1
0
0
2

5
2
0
2
y
b

 

 
l
a
r
t
u
e
n
-
O
C

2

 

e
t
a
r
 
;
y
g
r
e
n
e
d
n
W

i

 

 
s
n
o
i
s
s
i

m
e

 

O
C
 
f
o

2

 

 

5
9

 
 
:

5
1
0
2
 
r
o
f
 
l
a
o
G

 

 

 

e
m
o
h
 
f
o
 
t
n
e
c
 
r
e
p

l

d
u
o
w
 
s
t
n
e
d
i
s
e
r

 

o
t
 
k
l
a
w
o
t
 
e
l
b
a
e
b

 

 

 
r
o
h
c
a
e
b

 
,
k
r
a
p
a

 

 

 

i

 
s
e
t
u
n
m
5
1
n
a
h
t
 
s
s
e
l

 
s
a
w
n
o
i
t
r
o
p
o
r
p
e
h
t
(

 

 

)
0
1
0
2
n

 

i
 
t
n
e
c
 
r
e
p
0
6

 

 

n

i
 
l

 

i

o
o
p
g
n
m
m
w
s

i

 

e
d
i
s
b
r
u
C

 
l
a
i
t
n
e
d
i
s
e
R

 

 

e
c
i
v
r
e
S
n
o
i
t
c
e
l
l

o
C

 

 
s
a
h
e
m
m
a
r
g
o
r
P

 

 
t
n
e
c
 
r
e
p
0
4
d
e
c
u
d
e
r

 

 
;

2
1
0
2
n

 

i
 

e
g
a
b
r
a
g
 
f
o

 

 

 

5
8
g
n

i
l
c
y
c
e
r
 
s
t
n
e
d
i
s
e
r

e
l
b
a
l
c
y
c
e
r
 
f
o
 
t
n
e
c
 
r
e
p

 

o
t
 
l
a
o
g

 
 
;
s
l
a
i
r
e
t
a
m

 

 
t
n
e
c
 
r
e
p
0
9
 
r
e
v
o
c
e
r

 

 

y
b
e
t
s
a
w
 
s
'
y
t
i
c
 
f
o

 
r
e
w
e
f
 
:
l
a
o
g

 
;

0
3
0
2

 
f
o
 
s
t
e
e
h
s
 
0
0
0
5
n
a
h
t

d
e
l
c
y
c
e
r
 
t
n
e
c
 
r
e
p
0
0
1

,

 

 

 
r
a
e
y
 
r
e
p
 
t
n
e
m

t
r
a
p
e
d

 

 
r
e
p
d
e
s
u
 
r
e
p
a
p

5
1
0
2
y
b

 

 

 

 

 

0
5
d
n
a
 
r
e
w
o
p
n
e
e
r
g

 

n
o
i
t
c
u
d
e
r
 
t
n
e
c
 
r
e
p

 
t
n
e
c
 
r
e
p
0
0
1

 

 
:
l
a
o
G

 

o
t
 
e
v
i
t
a
l
e
r
 
0
2
0
2
y
b

 

 

i

p
h
s
r
e
n
t
r
a
p

 
;

7
0
0
2

 

 

e
s
u
y
t
i
c
i
r
t
c
e
l
e
n

 

i

 

 

d
n
a
y
t
i
c
 
e
h
t
 
n
e
e
w
t
e
b

 
s
k
r
o
W

 

y
g
r
e
n
E
n
a
e
l
C

 

 

 

y
g
r
e
n
e
e
v
o
r
p
m

 

0
0
0
6
n

,

 

i
 
y
c
n
e
i
c

i
 

o
t

ffi
e

 

 
:
l
a
o
g

 
;

 

3
1
0
2
y
b
 
s
e
m
o
h

0
1
 
t
s
a
e
l
 
t
a
e
v
e
h
c
a
o
t

i

 

 

 

d
e
l
l
a
t
s
n

 

 

y
b
y
t
i
c
a
p
a
c
 
r
a
l
o
s

i
 
f
o
 
s
t
t
a
w
a
g
e
m

 

e
c
u
d
e
r
 
o
t
 
n
a
l
p

 
;

3
1
0
2

 

 

 
r
e
p
0
8
y
b
 
s
n
o
i
s
s
i

m
e

 

 
s
a
g
e
s
u
o
h
n
e
e
r
g

 

0
5
0
2
y
b
 
t
n
e
c

 

 

n
a
l
P
n
o
i
t
a
t
r
o
p
s
n
a
r
T
 
l
a
n
o
g
e
R

i

 

g
n
i
r
a
h
s
-
r
a
c
 
;

m
e
t
s
y
s
 
l
i
a
r
 
t
h
g

i
l

 

 

 

d
n
a
 
s
u
b
y
b
n
o
i
t
a
t
r
o
p
s
n
a
r
t

 

i

d
e
t
a
n
d
r
o
o
c
 
;

0
2
0
2
-
0
0
0
2

 

 

d
n
a
l
t
r
o
P

 
;
e
m
m
a
r
g
o
r
p

 
:

 

0
1
5
 
f
o
k
r
o
w
t
e
n
e
l
c
y
c
i
b

 

0
3
0
2
 
r
o
f
 
n
a
l
P
e
l
c
y
c
i
B

 

 

 

d
n
a
g
n
i
k
r
a
p

 
,
s
e
r
t
e
m
o

l
i
k

 
r
e
h
t
o
h
t
i

 

 

w
n
o
i
t
a
r
g
e
t
n

i

 

s
e
d
o
m
n
o
i
t
a
t
r
o
p
s
n
a
r
t

 

 

 

g
n
i
s
u
o
h
e
m
o
c
n
i
-
w
o
L

e
m
m
a
r
g
o
r
p

 

 

8
6
5

d
n
a
l
t
r
o
P

 

 
,
s
e
l
c
y
c
i
b
 
f
o
n
o
i
t
a
t
r
o
p
s
n
a
r
t

 
f
l
a
h

 
;
s
i
x
a
t
 
d
n
a
 
s
n
a
r
t
 
,
s
u
b

i

 

 

e
m
o
c
e
b
o
t
 
t
e
e
fl
 
s
u
b
e
h
t
 
f
o

 

 
;
s
e
c
a
p
s
 
g
n
i
k
r
a
p
d
n
a
 
s
h
t
a
p

 

 

e
k
i
b

 
;

 

0
2
0
2
y
b
 
c
i
r
t
c
e
l
e

 

d
e
t
a
r
g
e
t
n

i
 
,
s
g
n
d

i

l
i

u
B

 

 
s
a
e
r
a
n
a
i
r
t
s
e
d
e
p

 
,

n
o
i
t
a
t
r
o
p
s
n
a
r
t
 
d
e
t
a
r
g
e
t
n

 

 
;
e
s
u
e
l
c
y
c
i
b
g
n
d
u
l
c
n

i

 

I

i

 

 
r
o
 
t
r
o
p
s
n
a
r
t
 
d
e
z
i
r
o
t
o
m
-
n
o
n

 

3
 
f
o
 
t
u
o
1

 

 
;
t
r
o
p
s
n
a
r
t
 
e
v
i
t
c
a

 

a
 
;
k
r
o
w
o
t
 
s
e
l
c
y
c
 
s
t
n
e
d
i
s
e
r

 
s
e
r
t
e
m
o

 

l
i
k
0
0
3
 
f
o
k
r
o
w
t
e
n

 

 

e
l
c
y
c
 
n
e
e
r
g

 
;
s
e
n
a
l
 
e
k
i
b
 
f
o

 

e
c
n
a
t
s
i
d
 
-
g
n
o

l
 
r
o
f
 
s
e
t
u
o
r

 

 
r
a
c
 
o
t
 
e
u
d
 
s
p
o
t
s
 
e
z
i

 

e
g
d
i
r
b
d
n
u
s
e
r
o
e
h
t
 
;
c

 

 

o
t
 
d
e
n
g
i
s
e
d

 
,

g
n

i

i
l
l
e
v
a
r
t

m
n
m

i

ffi
a
r
t

 

 

 

n
e
g
a
h
n
e
p
o
C
g
n
i
t
c
e
n
n
o
c
 
e
n

 

i

n
a
r
t
 
d
n
a
y
a
w
h
g
h
a
 
s
e
i
r
r
a
c

i

 

i
l

 
s
d
o
o
g
 
r
o
f
 
n
o
i
t
c
e
n
n
o
c
 
y
r
r
e
f
(

 
)
n
e
d
e
w
S
(
 
ö
m
l
a
M
d
n
a

 

 

 

n
e
e
w
t
e
b
n
o
i
t
a
t
r
o
p
s
n
a
r
t

)
d
e
s
o
l
c
 
s
a
w
 
s
e
i
t
i
c
 
e
s
e
h
t

 

d
n
a
 
,

h
c
r
a
e
s
e
r

 

n
o
i
t
a
m
r
o
f
n

s
e
m
m
a
r
g
o
r
p

i

 
,

n
o
i
t
a
c
u
d
E

i

 
,
g
n
n
i
a
r
t

 

k
s
i
r
 
r
e
t
s
a
s
i
D

 
 

n
o

i
t
c
u
d
e
r

 

 
f
o
n
o
i
t
a
n
m
e
s
s
i
D

i

 

 
,

i

e
c
r
o
f
n
e
r
 
o
t
 
a
t
a
d

g
.
e
 
,
s
t
i
b
a
h
d
o
o
g

 
t
n
u
o
m
a
e
h
t
 
n
o

 

 

 

n
o
b
r
a
c
 
f
o

 

 

h
c
a
e
y
b
 
s
n
o
i
s
s
i

m
e

 

 

e
t
u
o
r
 
d
n
a
e
d
o
m

 

n
o
i
t
a
t
r
o
p
s
n
a
r
t

 
 

n
o
i
t
p
o

 

n
a
t
i
l

o
p
o
r
t
e
m

 
l

u
o
e
S
e
h
T

 

 

 
s
r
e
t
s
a
s
i
d
o
t
 
d
e
d
n
o
p
s
e
r

 
s
n
o
o
s
n
o
m
y
b
d
e
r
e
g
g
i
r
t

 

 

 

 

d
n
a
m
r
o
t
S
e
h
t
 
h
t
i

 

w

 
s
s
e
n
d
e
r
a
p
e
r
P
d
o
o
l
F

 

 

g
n
i
v
o
r
p
m

i
 
,

n
a
l
P

 

d
n
a
 
s

m
e
t
s
y
s
 
e
g
a
n
a
r
d

i

i

 
l
a
c
i
t
i
r
c
 
g
n
n
e
h
t
g
n
e
r
t
s

 
s
a
h
 
t
n
e
m
n
r
e
v
o
g

e
r
u
t
c
u
r
t
s
a
r
f
n

i

 

 

l

d
u
o
c
 
1
1
0
2
n
a
l
P
e
t
a
m

 

 

i
l

C

 

 

 
s
r
a
e
y
0
0
1
 
r
e
v
o
n
o

 

i
l
l
i

b

3
€
 
f
o
 
s
g
n
i
v
a
s
 
r
e
v
i
l
e
d

 

e
r
u
t
u
f
 

m
o
r
f
 
s
e
s
s
o

l
 

n

i

 

i

m
o
r
f
 
g
n
d
o
o
fl
e
m
e
r
t
x
e

 

i

n
a
r
 
d
n
a
a
e
s
 
e
h
t

 

 

n
o

i
t
a
l
u
p
o
P

)
s
d
n
a
s
u
o
h
t
(

0
0
6
0
1

,

 

 

o
r
t
e
m

(
 
9
0
5

7
1

.

 
:

i

n
o
g
e
r

)
n
o

i
l
l
i

m

y
t
i
C

l

u
o
e
S

n
e
g
a
h
n
e
p
o
C

Towards sustainable cities82

 

n
o

 

i
t
a
t
i
n
a
s
 
,
r
e
t
a
W

m
e
t
s
y
s
o
c
e
d
n
a

t
n
e
m
e
g
a
n
a
m

 

t
n
e
m
e
g
a
n
a
m

 

 

d
n
a
e
t
s
a
W

 

g
n

i
l
c
y
c
e
r

y
c
n
e
i
c

ffi
e

 

y
g
r
e
n
E

 

2
O
C
 
f
o
n
o

 

i
t
c
u
d
e
r
 
d
n
a

s
n
o
i
s
s
i

m
e

 

 

y
g
r
e
n
e
e
l
b
a
w
e
n
e
R

 

e
r
u
t
c
u
r
t
s
a
r
f
n

i
 

n
e
e
r
G

 
c
i
l

b
u
p
 
,
s
g
n
d

i

l
i

u
b
(

)
n
o
i
t
a
t
r
o
p
s
n
a
r
t

 

n
e
e
r
g
 
,

 
c
i

m
o
n
o
c
E

h
t
w
o
r
g

 
,
s
b
o
j
 
,
y
m
o
n
o
c
e

i

 
/
g
n
n
i
a
r
t

i

g
n
n
i
a
r
t
e
r

g
n
i
s
u
o
H

 

d
n
a
 
,

h
c
r
a
e
s
e
r

 

n
o
i
t
a
m
r
o
f
n

s
e
m
m
a
r
g
o
r
p

i

 
,

n
o
i
t
a
c
u
d
E

i

 
,
g
n
n
i
a
r
t

 

k
s
i
r
 
r
e
t
s
a
s
i
D

 
 

n
o

i
t
c
u
d
e
r

 
l
a
n
u
m
m
o
c
 
s
i
 
y
r
o
t
i
r
r
e
t

 

 

d
e
t
p
o
d
a
y
t
i
c
 
;
t
s
e
r
o
f

 
t
s
e
r
o
f
 
e
l
b
a
n
a
t
s
u
s
 
r
o
f

i

 

 

 

i

g
r
u
b
e
r
F
0
1
0
2
e
h
t

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
n
o
C
 
t
s
e
r
o
F

 

 
f
o
 
t
n
e
c
 
r
e
p
0
4

 

 

n
e
e
r
g
 
t
n
e
c
 
r
e
p
7
4

 

 
 
;
t
n
e
m
e
g
a
n
a
m

s
k
r
a
p
/
e
c
a
p
s

 

e
r
o
m

 
s
e
l
c
y
c
e
r
 
y
t
i
C

 

 

d
n
a
e
t
a
t
S
e
h
t
 
n
a
h
t

 

 
r
e
t
a
e
r
g
 
s
i
 

e
r
u
g
fi
e
h
t

 

 
l
a
n
o
i
t
a
n
e
h
t
 
n
a
h
t

 

 
s
i
 

e
t
s
a
w

 
;
e
g
a
r
e
v
a

 

 
l
a
i
r
e
t
a
m
w
a
r
 
s
a
d
e
s
u

 

 
;
e
c
r
u
o
s
 
y
g
r
e
n
e
d
n
a

 

 
;

d
e
l
c
y
c
e
r
 
s
a
w
e
t
s
a
w

 

 
r
e
p
9
6

 

 
,

9
0
0
2
y
b

 

 

d
e
c
u
d
o
r
p
 
f
o
 
t
n
e
c

 
s
l
l

 

,

fi
d
n
a
l
 
f
o
 
r
e
b
m
u
n

0
0
0
0
5
m
o
r
f
 
l
l
e
f

 

 

o
t
 
s
0
7
9
1
e
h
t
 
n

 

i

 

h
c
a
e
 
;

0
1
0
2
n

 

i
 

0
0
2

 
s
e
c
u
d
o
r
p
n
o
s
r
e
p

 

 
f
o
 
s

m
a
r
g
o

 

l
i
k
4
2
1

 

 

d
n
a
e
t
s
a
w
e
s
u
o
h

 

 
r
e
w
o

l
 
,

h
s
i
b
b
u
r
 
k
l
u
b

 
l
a
n
o
i
t
a
n
e
h
t
 
n
a
h
t

 

 

n
o
i
t
a
r
e
n
i
c
n

i
 

g
n
i
r
u
d

 

 

e
t
a
r
e
n
e
g
o
t
 
d
e
s
u
 
s
i

 

e
t
s
a
w

 
l
a
u
d
i
s
e
r
 
f
o

 

h
c
i
h
w

 
,
y
t
i
c
i
r
t
c
e
l
e

 

 

o
t
 
d
i
r
g
e
h
t
 
s
d
e
e
f

 

,

0
0
0
5
2
y
l
p
p
u
s

 

 
;

 

 

3
4
1
 
f
o
e
g
a
r
e
v
a

d
e
c
u
d
o
r
p
 
t
a
e
h

l

s
d
o
h
e
s
u
o
h

 
t
r
o
p
p
u
s
 
;
r
e
w
o
p

 
r
o
f
 
e
m
m
a
r
g
o
r
p

 

n
o
i
t
a
l
u
s
n

i
 

e
m
o
h

 

y
g
r
e
n
e
d
n
a

 

 

h
g
u
o
r
h
t
 
s
t
fi
o
r
t
e
r

 
l
a
p
i
c
i
n
u
m

 

 
r
i
a
n
a
e
l
c
 
;
s
e
d
i
s
b
u
s

i

 
s
t
e
e
r
t
s
 
n

i
 
s
r
o
d
i
r
r
o
c

 

 

m
o
r
f
 
g
o
f
 
t
c
i
r
t
s
e
r

 
r
e
v
i
R
e
n
h
R
e
h
t

i

 

 

g
n
i
t
i

m

i
l
 
,
y
e
l
l
a
v

 

n

i
 

 

d
e
s
u
y
t
i
c
i
r
t
c
e
l
e

 
;
s
t
e
e
r
t
s
 
g
n
i
t
h
g

-
e
m

i
t
 
r
a
e
n

i
l

i
l

 

 

 
s
r
e
t
e
m
e
s
u
 
s
e
g
r
a
h
c

y
t
i
c
i
r
t
c
e
l
e
e
l
b
a
i
r
a
v

 

 

 

e
e
r
h
t
 
y
b
e
g
u
a
g
o
t

 

 

i

g
n
g
r
a
h
c
 
,
s
e
n
o
z

 

e
m

i
t
 
t
n
e
r
e
ff
d

i

 

 

 

 
t
n
e
c
 
r
e
p
0
5

y
t
i
c
i
r
t
c
e
l
e
 
f
o

y
b
d
e
c
u
d
o
r
p

 

 

i

d
e
n
b
m
o
c

 

d
n
a
 
t
a
e
h

i

 
;
y
l
g
n
d
r
o
c
c
a

 
s
r
e
m
u
s
n
o
c

 

d
e
v
o
r
p
m

 

 
f
o
n
o
i
t
a
l
u
s
n

 

y
g
r
e
n
e
 
-
w
o

n
o
i
t
c
u
r
t
s
n
o
c

l

 
;
s
g
n
d

i

l
i

u
b

i

i

 

 
r
a
l
o
S
e
h
t
 
f
o
 
s
e
m
o
h

 
"
y
g
r
e
n
e
 
s
u
p
"
 
0
6

l

 

 

e
t
a
e
r
c
 
t
n
e
m
e
l
t
t
e
S

n
a
h
t
 
y
g
r
e
n
e
e
r
o
m

 

 

d
n
a
 
,
e
m
u
s
n
o
c
 
y
e
h
t

 

 
f
o
 
t
e
g
r
a
t
 
;
s
t
n
e
d
i
s
e
r
 
r
o
f

 
r
a
e
y
 
r
e
p
0
0
0
6
€
n
r
a
e

,

 

 
s
n
o
i
s
s
i

m
e

 

 

O
C
g
n
i
c
u
d
e
r

 
,

 

0
3
0
2
y
b
 
t
n
e
c
 
r
e
p
0
4
y
b

 

 

 

y
t
i
c
 
;
s
l
e
v
e
l
 

2
9
9
1
m
o
r
f

 

 
f
o
 
t
i

m

i
l
 

d
e
e
p
s
 
d
e
t
p
o
d
a

 
r
u
o
h
 
r
e
p
 
s
e
r
t
e
m
o

 

l
i
k
0
3

2

 
;
s
i
x
a
 
c

ffi
a
r
t
 
n
a
m
n

i

 

i

 
:
s
l
e
n
a
p
 
r
a
l
o
s
 
,
s
l
l
i

m
d
n
w

i

 

 

e
l
b
a
w
e
n
e
r
 
0
5
4
e
h
t

 

 
r
a
l
o
s
 
d
n
a
y
g
r
e
n
e

 

 

 

,

l

y
o
p
m
e
 
s
e
n
a
p
m
o
c

0
0
0
0
1
n
a
h
t
 
e
r
o
m

i

i

 
l
a
n
o
g
e
r
 
e
h
t
 
;
e
l
p
o
e
p

 

 
s
r
e
ff
o
y
t
i
l
i
t
u
 
c
i
l

b
u
p

 
s
t
n
e
m

t
s
e
v
n

i
 
r
a
l
o
s
"

 
s
t
n
e
d
i
s
e
r
 
o
t
 
"
s
e
d
i
s
b
u
s

i

 
t
a
h
t
 
s
e
s
s
e
n
i
s
u
b
d
n
a

 
;
s
l
e
n
a
p
 
r
a
l
o
s
 
l
l
a
t
s
n

i

 

 

n

 

e
r
a
h
s
 
e
s
a
e
r
c
n

i
 

o
t
 
:
l
a
o
g

 

 

 

 

i
 
y
g
r
e
n
e
e
l
b
a
w
e
n
e
r
 
f
o

 
t
e
k
r
a
m
y
t
i
c
i
r
t
c
e
l
e
e
h
t

0
2
o
t
 
t
n
e
c
 
r
e
p
5
m
o
r
f

 

 

 

 

0
2
0
2
y
b
 
t
n
e
c
 
r
e
p

 

n
o
i
t
c
u
r
t
s
n
o
c
 
y
g
r
e
n
e
-
w
o
L

 
s
g
n
d

i

l
i

u
b
 
t
a
h
t
 
o
s
 
d
r
a
d
n
a
t
s

 

 

y
g
r
e
n
e
m
u
m
i
x
a
m
a
e
v
a
h

 

 

 
s
r
u
o
h
-
t
t
a
w
o

 

l
i
k
5
6
 
f
o
e
s
u

 

 

 
;
r
a
e
y
 
r
e
p
e
r
t
e
m
e
r
a
u
q
s
 
r
e
p

 

 

g
n
d

i

l
i

u
b

 

 
,
s
0
7
9
1
e
h
t
 
e
c
n
i
s

 

 

d
e
n
g
i
s
e
d
n
e
e
b
e
v
a
h
 
s
e
d
o
c

 

 

 

d
n
a
e
t
a
m

i
l
c
 
e
c
n
a
h
n
e
o
t

 

 
;

 

n
a
i
r
t
s
e
d
e
p
d
n
a
e
l
c
y
c
i
b

 

 
,
l
i
a
r

 

 
r
e
p
8
1
 
t
i
s
n
a
r
t
 
c
i
l

 

b
u
p
n
o
 
s
p
i
r
t

 
,

m
a
r
t
 
,
s
u
b

 
:

n
o
i
t
a
t
r
o
p
s
n
a
r
t

 

d
e
t
a
r
g
e
t
n

i
 
;
"
s
w
o
fl
r
i
a
 
l

o
o
c
"

 
s
u
p

l

 

 
;
t
n
e
c
 
r
e
p
3
2
g
n
i
k
l
a
w

 

 
;
t
n
e
c

 

 

-
e
l
c
y
c
i
b
 
f
o
 
s
e
r
t
e
m
o

n
o
(
 
t
n
e
c
 
r
e
p
7
2
g
n

 

 

i
l
c
y
c
i
b

 

l
i
k
0
2
4

y
t
i
c
 
r
e
n
n

i
 
;
)
s
h
t
a
p
y
l
d
n
e
i
r
f

 

 

 

 
,
e
l
b
a
l
i
a
v
a
 
s
y
a
b
g
n
i
k
r
a
p

e
l
c
y
c
i
b
0
0
0
5
 
r
e
v
o
 
s
a
h

,

 

 

i

i

n
a
r
t
 
n
a
m
e
h
t
 
n

 

i
 

0
0
0
1

,

 
t
n
e
c
 
r
e
p
2
7
 
r
e
v
o

 

 
;

n
o
i
t
a
t
s

 

e
h
t
 
e
s
u
 
s
r
e
t
u
m
m
o
c
 
l
l
a
 
f
o

 

 

 

e
h
t
 
f
o
y
t
i
r
o
j
a
m

 
;

m
e
t
s
y
s
 

m
a
r
t

a
 
f
l
a
h
n
h
t
i

i

 

w
 
s
i
 

n
o
i
t
a
l
u
p
o
p

n
o
i
t
a
t
s
 
f
o
e
r
t
e
m
o

 

l
i
k

l

 
l
a
t
n
e
m
n
o
r
i
v
n
e
 “
e
h
T

 
s
y
o
p
m
e
” 
y
m
o
n
o
c
e

 

0
0
5
1
n

,

 

i
 

e
l
p
o
e
p

 

,

0
0
0
0
1
y
l
r
a
e
n

 

 
,
s
e
s
s
e
n
i
s
u
b

 

 

0
0
5
€
g
n
i
t
a
r
e
n
e
g

 
;
r
a
e
y
 
r
e
p
n
o

 

i
l
l
i

m

 
s
t
fi
e
n
e
b
 
c
i

m
o
n
o
c
e

 
,

g
n
i
r
u
t
c
a
f
u
n
a
m

 

d
n
a
 
,

n
o
i
t
a
c
u
d
e

 

 

d
n
a
h
c
r
a
e
s
e
r

 

n

i

i
 
y
l
n
a
m
e
i
l

 

i

 
s
e
n
a
p
m
o
c
 
;

m

s
i
r
u
o
t

 

i

 
s
l
l
e
c
 
r
a
l
o
s
 
e
c
u
d
o
r
p

y
r
e
n
h
c
a
m
e
h
t
 
d
n
a

 

 

m
e
h
t
 
e
r
u
t
c
a
f
u
n
a
m

 

o
t
 
d
e
d
e
e
n

 

e
l
b
a
t
r
o
f
m
o
c
 
n
a
t
n
a
m

i

i

 

y
e
h
t
(
 
s
e
r
u
t
a
r
e
p
m
e
t

 

o
t
 

m
e
t
s
y
s
 
e
v
i
t
c
a
n
a

 

 

 

y
l
n
o
 
f
o
y
g
r
e
n
e
e
r
i
u
q
e
r

 

 

 

 
r
e
p
e
r
t
e
m
e
r
a
u
q
s
 
r
e
p

 
s
e
t
o
m
o
r
p
y
t
i
c
 
;
)
r
a
e
y

 

 

 

e
s
n
e
d
d
n
a
d
e
n
n
a
l
p

 

 
s
r
u
o
h
-
t
t
a
w
o

 

l
i
k
5
1

 
s
s
o

l
 
y
g
r
e
n
e
e
c
u
d
e
r

 

 

d
n
a
 
t
n
e
c
 
r
e
p
0
9
y
b

 

 

 
l
a
t
n
e
m
n
o
r
i
v
n
e

 
"
s
e
s
u
o
h
e
v
i
s
s
a
p
"

 

 

 
f
o
n
o
i
t
c
u
r
t
s
n
o
C

 
r
o
f
 
d
e
e
n
o
n
h
t
i

 

 

w

 

g
n
i
s
u
o
h

 
l
a
n
o
s
r
e
p
a
 
s
e
n

 

i
l
t
u
o

 

d
n
a
 
t
n
i
r
p
t
o
o
f
 

O
C

2

 

 

n
o
n
o
i
t
a
m
r
o
f
n

i

 
t
e
s
ff
o
o
t
 

 

w
o
h

 
s
n
o
i
s
s
i

m
e
 
l
a
n
o
s
r
e
p

.

g
r
u
b
e
r
f
.

i

w
w
w

(

 

 
f
o
 
s
e
r
t
n
e
c
 
;
)
O
C
 
/
e
d

 
c
i
l

 

b
u
p
d
n
a
e
t
a
v
i
r
p

 

2

 

e
t
a
g
i
t
s
e
v
n

i
 

h
c
r
a
e
s
e
r

 

y
g
r
e
n
e
e
l
b
a
w
e
n
e
r

 

2

O
C
e
n

 

i
l

 

n
o
e
h
T

 
r
o
t
a
l
u
c
l
a
c
 
t
e
D

i

 
r
a
l
o
S

 
;
s
e
c
r
u
o
s
e
r

 

 

e
r
t
n
e
C
g
n
n
a
r
T

 
s
n
a
i
c
i
n
h
c
e
t
 
r
o
f

i

i

 
;
s
r
e
l
l
a
t
s
n

i
 

d
n
a

 

 
f
o
n
o
i
t
c
e
t
o
r
p

 

 
r
e
t
a
w
g
n
i
k
n
i
r
d
e
f
a
s

 

 
r
o
f
 
r
e
t
a
w
d
n
u
o
r
g

 

h
g
u
o
r
h
t
 
y
l
p
p
u
s

 
l
a
n
o
i
t
a
c
u
d
e

 

 

n
a
c
 
n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

 
s
i
h
t
(
 
s
e
r
u
h
c
o
r
b

 

 
r
e
d
n
u
d
e
t
s
i
l
 
e
b

i

 
t
s
o
m

-
t
h
g
i
r
 
e
h
t

i

g
n
d
a
e
h
n
m
u
o
c

l

 

 

n
o
i
t
a
t
i
n
a
s
 
,
r
e
t
a
W

(

 

m
e
t
s
y
s
o
c
e
d
n
a

)
t
n
e
m
e
g
a
n
a
m

 

 

 

 

e
t
i
s
-
n
o
 
r
o
f
 
s
e
v
i
t
n
e
c
n

m
r
o
t
s
 
f
o
 
t
n
e
m
e
g
a
n
a
m

I

 

e
p
a
c
s
d
n
a
l
 

d
n
a
 
r
e
t
a
w

 

n
e
e
r
g
 
f
o
e
s
u

 

 
;

i

g
n
n
n
a
l
p

i

 
s
e
l
a
w
s
o
b
d
n
a
 
s
f
o
o
r

 

 

 

 
f
o
n
o
i
t
a
e
r
c
 
e
t
o
m
o
r
p
o
t

e
l
b
a
e
m
r
e
p
d
n
a
 
l
a
r
u
t
a
n

 

 

e
v
a
h
 
s
c
i
r
t
e
m

 
;
s
e
c
a
f
r
u
s

 
r
o
f
 
d
e
h
s
i
l

b
a
t
s
e
n
e
e
b

 

 

y
b
 
s
e
e
f
 
r
e
t
a
w
m
r
o
t
s

 

 

 

 

e
l
b
a
e
m
r
e
p
m

 

i
 
f
o
e
m
u
o
v

l

d
e
t
a
m

 

 

i
t
s
e
d
n
a
y
t
r
e
p
o
r
p

d
n
a
 
l
a
i
t
n
e
d
i
s
e
r
 
t
a
 
l
l
a
f
n
a
r

i

 
r
e
t
a
w

 
;
s
e
t
i
s
 
l
a
i
c
r
e
m
m
o
c

 
t
l
i

u
b
 
r
i
o
v
r
e
s
e
r
 
n
o
i
t
n
e
t
e
r

s
k
s
i
r
 
d
o
o
fl
e
c
u
d
e
r
 
o
t

 

 

 
r
e
t
a
w
e
c
u
d
e
r
 
o
t
 
:
l
a
o
G

 

 

 

0
4
1
o
t
 
n
o
i
t
p
m
u
s
n
o
c

 
r
e
p
n
o
s
r
e
p
 
r
e
p
 
s
e
r
t
i
l

 

n
w
o
d

 
,

 

0
3
0
2
y
b
y
a
d

 

 
f
o
 
t
n
e
c
 
r
e
p
0
3

 

 
;

8
0
0
2

 
s
i
 
s
d
e
e
n
 
r
e
t
a
w
 
s
'
y
t
i
c

 

n

i
 
s
e
r
t
i
l
 

 

6
5
1
m
o
r
f

 

 

d
e
t
a
e
r
t
 
y
b
d
e
r
e
v
o
c

 
l
a
o
g
(
 
r
e
t
a
w
e
t
s
a
w

 
r
e
p
0
5
h
c
a
e
r
 
o
t
 
s
i

 

 

 

 
:
l
a
o
g

 

 
;
)
0
6
0
2
y
b
 
t
n
e
c

 
s
e
r
a
t
c
e
h
8
0
g
n
d

.

i

 

 

l
i

u
b

s
t
n
e
d
i
s
e
r
 
0
0
0
1
y
r
e
v
e

,

 

 
r
o
f
 
e
c
a
p
s
 
n
e
e
r
g
 
f
o

)
d
’
t
n
o
c
(

 

 
f
o
e
t
a
r
 
g
n

i
l
c
y
c
e
r
 
:
l
a
o
G

 
;

 

0
3
0
2
y
b
 
t
n
e
c
 
r
e
p
0
7

 

 
t
n
e
c
 
r
e
p
6
5

 

 
,
y
l
t
n
e
r
r
u
c

d
e
l
c
y
c
e
r
 
s
i
 

e
t
s
a
w

 
f
o

 
t
n
e
c
 
r
e
p
5
3

 

 
:
l
a
o
G

 

n

i
 
t
n
e
m
e
v
o
r
p
m

i

 

y
c
n
e
i
c

 

ffi
e
y
g
r
e
n
e

 

m
o
r
f
 
,

0
3
0
2
y
b

 

 
s
l
e
v
e
l
 

5
0
0
2

 

 

 
r
e
p
0
3
y
b
 
s
n
o
i
s
s
i

m
e

 

O
C

 

e
c
u
d
e
r
 
o
t
 
:
l
a
o
g

 
;
r
a
l
o
S

2

 

 

e
l
c
i
h
e
V

 
;

 

0
3
0
2
y
b
 
t
n
e
c

 
:
y
c
i
l

 

o
p
m
e
t
s
y
S
a
t
o
u
Q

 

 

 

 
t
h
g
i
r
 
r
o
f
 
d
b
e
l
p
o
e
p

e
l
c
i
h
e
v
a
e
s
a
h
c
r
u
p
o
t

i

 

 

 
s
e
g
a
r
u
o
c
s
i
d
h
c
i
h
w

 

(

 

 

 

 

d
n
a
g
n
i
s
a
h
c
r
u
p
 
r
a
c

e
u
n
e
v
e
r
 
s
e
t
a
r
e
n
e
g

d
a
o
r
 
g
n
i
r
i
a
p
e
r
 
r
o
f

 
)
e
r
u
t
c
u
r
t
s
a
r
f
n

i

 
;

 

0
3
0
2
y
b
 
s
g
n
d

i

l
i

u
b
 
f
o
 
t
n
e
c

 

 

 
s
y
a
p
d
r
a
C
y
n
o
h
p
m
y
S
 
-
E

 
,
l
e
v
a
r
t
 
s
u
b

 
,
s
l
l

o
t
 
d
a
o
r
 
r
o
f

 

 

 
r
e
p
0
8
g
n
n
e
e
r
g

i

 
:
l
a
o
G

 

 

n
e
v
e
d
n
a
o
r
t
e
m

 

 
,
s
i
x
a
t

 
r
e
p
0
7

 

 
:
l
a
o
g

 

y
b
 
s
y
e
n
r
u
o

 
;

i

g
n
p
p
o
h
s

j
 
l
l
a
 
f
o
 
t
n
e
c

 

 

 

y
b
n
o
i
t
a
t
r
o
p
s
n
a
r
t
 
c
i
l

b
u
p

 
s
e
g
n
a
h
c
 

m
e
t
s
y
s
 
g
n
i
c
i
r
P

d
a
o
R
 
c
i
n
o
r
t
c
e
l
E
 
;

0
3
0
2

 

d
n
a
m
e
d

 

 
l
a
u
t
c
a
o
t
 
g
n
d
r
o
c
c
a

i

 

e
c
u
d
e
r
 
o
t
(
 
r
o
d
i
r
r
o
c
 
a
n

 

i

)
n
o
i
t
s
e
g
n
o
c

 
c
i

m
o
n
o
c
e
h
g
H

i

 

h
t
w
o
r
g

 

 

 
l
a
d
i
t
 
a
 
s
a
 
s
t
c
a
 
t
c
e
j
o
r
p

 

e
g
a
r
r
a
B
a
n
i
r
a
M
e
h
T

 

 

 

e
t
a
i
v
e
l
l
a
o
t
 
r
e
i
r
r
a
b

 

g
n
i
y
l
-
w
o

l
 

n

i
 

i

g
n
d
o
o
fl

s
a
e
r
a

 

n
o

i
t
a
l
u
p
o
P

)
s
d
n
a
s
u
o
h
t
(

0
2
2

0
0
6
4

,

 

g
r
u
b
e
r
F

i

y
t
i
C

y
t
i
c
(
 
e
r
o
p
a
g
n
S

i

)
e
t
a
t
S

World Economic and Social Survey 2013 

n
o

 

i
t
a
t
i
n
a
s
 
,
r
e
t
a
W

m
e
t
s
y
s
o
c
e
d
n
a

t
n
e
m
e
g
a
n
a
m

 

t
n
e
m
e
g
a
n
a
m

 

 

d
n
a
e
t
s
a
W

 

g
n

i
l
c
y
c
e
r

y
c
n
e
i
c

ffi
e

 

y
g
r
e
n
E

 

2
O
C
 
f
o
n
o

 

i
t
c
u
d
e
r
 
d
n
a

s
n
o
i
s
s
i

m
e

 

 

y
g
r
e
n
e
e
l
b
a
w
e
n
e
R

 

e
t
a
r
 
s
s
e
c
c
a
 
r
e
t
a
w
-
p
a
T

-
e
t
s
a
w

 
;
t
n
e
c
 
r
e
p
0
0
1

 

 
t
n
e
m
t
a
e
r
t
 
r
e
t
a
w

 

 
r
e
t
a
w
e
c
u
d
e
r
 
o
t
 
n
a
l
p

 
;
t
n
e
c
 
r
e
p
3
3
8

.

 

 
;
e
t
a
r

 
f
o
 
t
i
n
u
 
r
e
p
e
g
a
s
u

 

 

 
,

 

n
a
h
t
 
e
r
o
m
y
b
 
t
u
p
t
u
o

5
1
0
2
y
b
 
t
n
e
c
 
r
e
p
0
2

 

 

 
;

0
1
0
2
h
t
i

 

 

w
d
e
r
a
p
m
o
c

 

 

 

 

h
c
a
e
r
 
o
t
 
:
t
e
g
r
a
t
 
5
1
0
2

5
1
 
f
o
e
g
a
r
e
v
o
c
 
t
s
e
r
o
f

 

n
e
e
r
g
d
n
a
 
t
n
e
c
 
r
e
p

 

.

 
r
e
p
5
8
3
 
f
o
e
g
a
r
e
v
o
c

 

 
t
n
e
m
e
g
a
n
a
m

 
;
t
n
e
c

 

n
o
i
t
a
v
r
e
s
n
o
c
 
t
s
e
r
o
f

 

 
r
o
f
 
t
l
e
b
n
e
e
r
g
 
f
o

 
r
e
t
a
w
d
n
u
o
r
g
 
f
o

 

n
o
i
t
c
u
d
e
r
 
d
n
a

n
o
i
t
u

l
l

o
p

 

 
r
e
p
e
c
u
d
e
r
 
;
t
n
e
c
 
r
e
p

 

o
t
 
e
g
a
b
r
a
g
a
t
i
p
a
c

 

 

y
a
d
 
r
e
p
m
a
r
g
o

 

 

l
i
k
8
0

.

 
t
n
e
c
 
r
e
p
0
2

 

 
,

5
1
0
2
n

 

0
1
0
2
n

 

i
 

n
a
h
t
 
r
e
w
o

i

l

 

e
g
a
b
r
a
g
 
c
i
t
s
e
m
o
D

 

2
8

 
:
e
t
a
r
 
t
n
e
m
t
a
e
r
t

 

 
r
e
p
e
g
a
s
u
y
g
r
e
n
e

 

 

e
c
u
d
e
r
 
o
t
 
:
l
a
o
G

 

 

 

d
n
a
 
t
n
e
c
 
r
e
p
8
1

 

n
o
b
r
a
c
 
e
c
u
d
e
r

 

y
b
P
D
G

 
f
o
 
t
i
n
u

 
t
i
n
u
 
r
e
p
 
s
n
o
i
s
s
i

m
e

 

 

 
r
e
p
9
1
y
b
P
D
G

 

 
f
o

 
s
r
a
e
y
e
v
fi
n

 

 

i
 
t
n
e
c

)
5
1
0
2
-
0
1
0
2
(

s
e
m
m
a
r
g
o
r
p
y
t
i
l
a
u
q
 
r
i
A

 

 

e
r
u
t
c
u
r
t
s
a
r
f
n

i
 

n
e
e
r
G

 
c
i
l

b
u
p
 
,
s
g
n
d

i

l
i

u
b
(

)
n
o
i
t
a
t
r
o
p
s
n
a
r
t

 
t
n
e
m
e
g
a
n
a
M
D

 

I
 
c
i
n
o
r
t
c
e
l
E

 
s
u
b

 
,
s
d
r
a
c
 
t
r
a
m

s
 
t
r
o
p
s
n
a
r
t

s

m
e
t
s
y
s
 
n
o
i
t
a
m
r
o
f
n

i
 
t
r
a
m

s

 
c
i
l

b
u
p

 
;
)
s
d
r
a
c
 
g
a
t
 
e
c
n
e
c
i
l

 

d
n
a
D

 

I
 
t
r
a
m

s
(
 

m
e
t
s
y
S

 

d
n
a
l
d
o
o
w
d
n
a
 
s
e
e
r
T

 

 
l
a
c
o

 

l
 
;

d
e
t
c
e
t
o
r
p
e
r
a

 

e
r
a
 
s
e
i
t
i
r
o
h
t
u
a

 

 

i

p
o
l
e
v
e
d
o
t
 
d
e
r
i
u
q
e
r

 
s
e
g
e
t
a
r
t
s
 
e
e
r
t
 
l
a
c
o

l

 
l
a
c
o

l
 
r
i
e
h
t
 
o
t
 
d
e
k
n

i
l

i

s
e
g
e
t
a
r
t
s
 
e
c
a
p
s
 
n
e
p
o

 
l
l

 

o
r
e
z
 
f
o
 
t
e
g
r
a
T

fi
d
n
a
l
 

o
t
 
e
t
s
a
w

 

g
n
i
z
i

i

i

m
n
m
y
b

 

 
;

 

1
3
0
2
y
b
e
t
s
a
w

 

 

 

o
t
 
t
n
e
m
e
g
a
r
u
o
c
n
e

e
s
a
e
r
c
n

i
 

 

d
n
a
e
s
u
e
r

 

 
r
e
p
0
6
o
t
 
g
n

 

i
l
c
y
c
e
r

 

1
3
0
2
y
b
 
t
n
e
c

 

 
f
o
n
o
i
t
c
u
d
e
r
 
t
n
e
c

 

 
r
e
p
0
6
 
f
o
 
t
e
g
r
a
T

 

w
o
l
e
b

 
,

 
s
n
o
i
s
s
i

 

m
e
2
O
C

5
2
0
2
y
b

 

 
t
e
g
r
a
t
 
;
s
l
e
v
e
l
 

0
9
9
1

 

 
f
o
 
t
n
e
c
 
r
e
p
5
2
 
f
o

 
r
e
w
o
p
d
n
a
 
t
a
e
h

 

 
l
a
c
o

 

 

 

e
b
 
t
s
u
m
d
e
s
u

l
 
y
b
d
e
t
a
r
e
n
e
g

 

d
e
z
i
l
a
r
t
n
e
c
e
d

 
;

5
2
0
2
y
b
 
s

 

m
e
t
s
y
s

 
s
t
s
i
s
s
a
 
l

o
o
t
 
p
a
m

 

 
f
o
n
o
i
t
a
c
fi
i
t
n
e
d

i

 

y
g
r
e
n
e
 
,
s
n
o
i
s
s
i

m
e

 

2

 

O
C

y
g
r
e
n
e
 
r
o
j
a
m

 
,
s
r
e
m
u
s
n
o
c

 
,
s
t
n
a
l
p
y
l
p
p
u
s

 

 

y
t
i
n
u
m
m
o
c

 
,
s
k
r
o
w
t
e
n
g
n
i
t
a
e
h

 
;
y
t
i
s
n
e
d
 
t
a
e
h
d
n
a

 

 

 
s
e
i
t
i
r
o
h
t
u
a
 
l
a
c
o

l

 

i

g
n
p
o
l
e
v
e
d
e
r
a

 
r
e
t
s
a
m
y
g
r
e
n
e

 

 

s
n
a
l
p

83

)
d
’
t
n
o
c
(

 

 

d
e
z
i
d
i
s
b
u
s
 
t
r
o
p
s
n
a
r
t
 
c
i
l

b
u
P

 

y
t
i
r
o
h
t
u
a
 
l
a
r
t
n
e
c
 
a
 
r
e
d
n
u

 
,
)
n
o
d
n
o
L
 
r
o
f
 
t
r
o
p
s
n
a
r
T
(

 

d
e
s
i
h
c
n
a
r
f
 
e
r
a
 
s
e
c
i
v
r
e
s
 
t
u
b

 

y
b

 
l
e
v
a
r
t
 
e
c
u
d
e
r
 
;

g
n

i
l
c
y
c

 

 

i

e
v
e
h
c
a
o
t
 
:
t
e
g
r
a
t
 
;
r
a
c

 
l
a
i
t
n
e
d
i
s
e
r
 
n

i
 

n
o
b
r
a
c
-
o
r
e
z

 

 

d
n
a
6
1
0
2
y
b
 
s
g
n
d

i

 

l
i

u
b

 

y
b
 
s
g
n
d

i

 

n
o
n
n

 

l
i

u
b

 
l
a
i
t
n
e
d
i
s
e
r

i
 

n
o
b
r
a
c
-
o
r
e
z

 

d
e
v
o
r
p
m

i
 
,

g
n

i
l
l
e
v
a
r
t
 
s
u
b
o
t

 

 

 

n
e
v
i
g
y
t
i
r
o
i
r
p
h
g
h

i

 

 
;

9
1
0
2

 

 

n
e
e
w
t
e
b
e
g
n
a
h
c
r
e
t
n

i

ffi
e
 
;
t
r
o
p
s
n
a
r
t
 
f
o
 
s
e
d
o
m

 
;
t
h
g
e
r
f
 
f
o
n
o
i
t
u
b
i
r
t
s
i
d

 

i

 
s

 

 

m
r
fi
e
t
a
v
i
r
p
 
s
u
o
i
r
a
v
o
t

 
s
e
t
o
m
o
r
p
y
t
i
c
 
;
)
s
e
s
u
b
(

 

 
,

g
n
i
k
l
a
w

 
,
l
e
v
a
r
t
 
t
r
a
m

s

 

 
;
r
e
t
a
w
y
b
 
t
r
o
p
s
n
a
r
t
 
e
s
a
e
r
c
n

i

 
;

 

g
n
i
k
r
a
p
e
l
c
y
c
 
t
n
e
i
c

ffi
u
s

 
s
k
l
a
w
e
d
i
s
 
d
e
v
o
r
p
m

i

 
;
s
e
c
a
p
s
 
n
a
b
r
u

 
l
l
a
m

s
 
d
n
a

 

w
e
n
n

 

i
 

g
n
i
k
r
a
p
 
r
a
c
 
d
e
t
c
i
r
t
s
e
r

t
n
e
m
p
o
l
e
v
e
d

 

 

y
g
e
t
a
r
t
S
y
t
i
l
a
u
Q
 
r
i
A
e
h
T

 

 

d
a
o
r
 

m
o
r
f
 
s
n
o
i
s
s
i

m
e

 

 

w
e
n
d
n
a
 
t
r
o
p
s
n
a
r
t

 

 
s
t
l
u
s
e
r
 
;
t
n
e
m
p
o
l
e
v
e
d

n
o
i
t
s
e
g
n
o
c
 
n
a
b
r
u
 
f
o

 

g
n
i
c
u
d
e
r
 
t
a
 
s

m
a

i

 
,
c

 
r
e
p
1
2

 

 
:
)
3
0
0
2
(
 
s
e
g
r
a
h
c

 

 

ffi
a
r
t
 
f
o
n
o
i
t
c
u
d
e
r
 
t
n
e
c

n
o
i
t
c
u
d
e
r
 
t
n
e
c
 
r
e
p
0
3

 

 
r
e
p
3
4

 

 
,

n
o
i
t
s
e
g
n
o
c
 
f
o

 

g
n

i
l
c
y
c
 
n

i
 

e
s
a
e
r
c
n

i
 
t
n
e
c

 

5
2
1
£

 
;
r
a
e
y
 
t
s
r
fi
g
n
i
r
u
d

 

 
c
i
l

b
u
p
 
r
o
f
 
d
e
s
i
a
r
 
n
o

i
l
l
i

m

 
;
t
n
e
m
e
v
o
r
p
m

i
 
t
r
o
p
s
n
a
r
t

 
t
n
i
r
p
t
o
o
f
 
l
a
c
i
g
o
o
c
e

l

 
r
o
f
 
a
e
r
a
d
n
a
l
(

 

 

 
l
a
c
i
h
p
a
r
g
o
e
g
 
s
t
i
 
s
e
m

i
t

 

 

3
9
2
d
n
a
y
t
i
c
a
p
a
c
-
o
b

i

 

 

d
e
s
a
b
n
o
i
t
a
m

i
t
s
e
(
 
a
e
r
a

 
,

 

 
f
o
n
o
i
t
p
m
u
s
n
o
c
 
n
o

d
o
o
f
 
,
y
g
r
e
n
e
 
,
r
e
t
a
w

 
,
e
t
s
a
w

 

 
f
o
n
o
i
t
c
u
d
o
r
p

 

w
o
L
 
;
)
h
t
r
o
f
 
o
s
 
d
n
a

 

d
r
a
d
n
a
t
s
 
e
n
o
Z
n
o
i
s
s
i

 

m
E

 

 

 

 
f
o
e
s
u
d
e
c
r
o
f
n
e
 
)
8
0
0
2
(

e
t
a
l
p
e
c
n
e
c
i
l
 
c
i
t
a
m
o
t
u
a

 
s
t
i
 
s
e
m

i
t
 
2
4
 
s
i

n
o
i
t
i
n
g
o
c
e
r

 
)
s
e
i
t
i
v
i
t
c
a
 
l
l
a
g
n
n
a
t
s
u
s

i

i

 

 
t
n
e
i
c

 

n
e
e
r
g
 
,

 
c
i

m
o
n
o
c
E

h
t
w
o
r
g

 
,
s
b
o
j
 
,
y
m
o
n
o
c
e

i

 
/
g
n
n
i
a
r
t

i

g
n
n
i
a
r
t
e
r

g
n
i
s
u
o
H

 

d
n
a
 
,

h
c
r
a
e
s
e
r

 

n
o
i
t
a
m
r
o
f
n

s
e
m
m
a
r
g
o
r
p

i

 
,

n
o
i
t
a
c
u
d
E

i

 
,
g
n
n
i
a
r
t

 

k
s
i
r
 
r
e
t
s
a
s
i
D

 
 

n
o

i
t
c
u
d
e
r

 

 

 

e
l
b
a
d
r
o
ff
a
n
o

 

i
l
l
i

m

 

6
3
d

 

l
i

 

u
b
o
t
 
:
l
a
o
G

e
m
o
c
n

i
 

w
o

l
 
r
o
f
 
s
t
a
fl

 

 

d
n
a
1
1
0
2
n
e
e
w
t
e
b

 

 
s
e
i
t
i
c
 
n

i
 

e
l
p
o
e
p

 
l
l
a
r
e
v
O

 
i

a
h
g
n
a
h
S

 
r
o
f
 
e
m
m
a
r
g
o
r
P

 
s
s
e
n
d
e
r
a
p
e
r
P

 

e
h
t
 
d
e
z
i
c
i
l

b
u
p

 

y
t
i
c
 
,

6
0
0
2
n

 

I

5
1
0
2

s
e
i
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E
 
c
i
l

b
u
P

 

d
n
a
t
s
h
t
i

 

w
n
a
c
 
d
r
a
d
n
a
t
s

 

e
c
n
a
t
s
i
s
e
r
 
d
o
o
fl
 
s
’
y
t
i
C

 
s
r
a
e
y
-
0
0
2
-
n
i
-
e
c
n
o

 

e
p
o
c
 
d
n
a
 
l
e
v
e
l
 
e
d
i
t
-
h
g
h

i

 

 

3
3
1
o
t
 
p
u
 
f
o
 
s
e
l
a
g
h
t
i

 

w

 

 
r
e
v
i
R
u
p
g
n
a
u
H

 

 
f
o
e
e
v
e
l

 
l

o
r
t
n
o
c
 
d
o
o
fl
n
a
b
r
u
d
n
a

 

 

 
;
r
u
o
h
 
r
e
p
 
s
e
r
t
e
m
o

l
i
k

 

 
t
s
i
s
e
r
 
o
t
 
e
l
b
a
 
s
t
c
e
j
o
r
p

 
s
r
a
e
y
-
0
0
0
1
-
n
i
-
e
c
n
o

,

e
h
t
 
f
o

 
l
e
v
e
l
 
e
d
i
t
-
h
g
h

i

u
p
g
n
a
u
H

 

d
e
t
i
n
U

 
f
o
 
t
n
e
c
 
r
e
p

 

 

P
D
G
m
o
d
g
n
K

i

l

 
f
o
 
t
n
e
c
 
r
e
p
5
1
d
n
a

 
t
n
e
m
y
o
p
m
e
 
l
a
t
o
t

 

 

 

n

 
f
o
 
t
n
e
c
 
r
e
p
0
7
(

 

i
 
t
n
e
m
y
o
p
m
e

l

 

e
t
a
v
i
r
p
 
s
i
 

n
o
d
n
o
L

 

 

y
m
o
n
o
c
e
n
e
e
r
G

9
1
 
r
o
f
 
s
t
n
u
o
c
c
a

 

)
d
e
s
a
b
-
r
o
t
c
e
s

 

 

g
n
i
s
u
o
h
e
l
b
a
d
r
o
ff
a

 

 

d
n
a
e
l
b
a
n
a
t
s
u
S

i

 
;
e
m
m
a
r
g
o
r
p

 
l
a
t
n
e
m

i
r
e
p
x
e

 

 

g
n
i
s
u
o
h
n
o
b
r
a
c
-
w
o

l

 
,
)
2
0
0
2
(
 
)
D
E
Z
d
e
B
(

 
;
t
n
e
m
p
o
l
e
v
e
d
-
o
c
e

 
t
n
e
m
p
o
l
e
v
e
d

 

h
c
i
w
n
e
e
r
G

 

i

m
u
n
n
e
l
l
i

M

 

n
a
 
s
e
d
u
l
c
n

i
 
:
e
g
a
l
l
i

V

 

e
s
u

 
,
k
r
a
p

 
l
a
c
i
g
o
o
c
e

l

 

y
l
l
a
t
n
e
m
n
o
r
i
v
n
e
 
f
o

 

 
,
s
l
a
i
r
e
t
a
m
e
l
b
a
n
a
t
s
u
s

i

 

 
f
o
 
x
i
m
d
n
a
 
,
s
l
a
i
r
e
t
a
m

 

d
e
s
a
b
-
s
d
e
e
n

 
l
a
i
c
o
s

 

 

s
t
i
n
u
d
e
n
w
o
y
l
e
t
a
v
i
r
p

 

 

d
n
a
g
n
i
s
u
o
h
d
e
t
n
e
r

 

 
l
a
c
o

l
 

 

d
n
a
d
e
l
c
y
c
e
r

s
e
Y

 

 

 
s
e
m
a
h
T
e
h
t
 
y
b
d
e
l
l

 

o
r
t
n
o
c

 

 

 

a
e
S
h
t
r
o
N
e
h
t
 
f
o
e
c
n
a
v
d
a

 

ff
o
 
t
u
c
 
o
t
 
d
e
s
i
a
r
 
e
b
n
a
c

 

 

 

n
a
b
r
u
e
h
t
 
f
o
 
t
c
a
p
m

i
 

e
h
t

 

e
c
u
d
e
r
 
o
t
 
:
t
e
g
r
a
t
 
;
e
d
i
t

 

h
c
i
h
w

 
,
)
4
8
9
1
(
 
r
e
i
r
r
a
B

 

t
c
e
ff
e
d
n
a
l
s
i
 
t
a
e
h

 

e
r
a
 
s
e
v
a
w

 
l
a
d
T

i

 

n
o

i
t
a
l
u
p
o
P

)
s
d
n
a
s
u
o
h
t
(

0
0
0
1
2

,

i

a
h
g
n
a
h
S

y
t
i
C

0
0
4
7

,

n
o
d
n
o
L

Towards sustainable cities84

 

n
o

 

i
t
a
t
i
n
a
s
 
,
r
e
t
a
W

m
e
t
s
y
s
o
c
e
d
n
a

t
n
e
m
e
g
a
n
a
m

 

t
n
e
m
e
g
a
n
a
m

 

 

d
n
a
e
t
s
a
W

 

g
n

i
l
c
y
c
e
r

y
c
n
e
i
c

ffi
e

 

y
g
r
e
n
E

 

2
O
C
 
f
o
n
o

 

i
t
c
u
d
e
r
 
d
n
a

s
n
o

i
s
s
i

m
e

 

 

y
g
r
e
n
e
e
l
b
a
w
e
n
e
R

 

e
r
u
t
c
u
r
t
s
a
r
f
n

i
 

n
e
e
r
G

 
c
i
l

b
u
p
 
,
s
g
n
d

i

l
i

u
b
(

)
n
o
i
t
a
t
r
o
p
s
n
a
r
t

 

n
e
e
r
g
 
,

 
c
i

m
o
n
o
c
E

h
t
w
o
r
g

 
,
s
b
o
j
 
,
y
m
o
n
o
c
e

i

 
/
g
n
n
i
a
r
t

i

g
n
n
i
a
r
t
e
r

 

e
v
o
r
p
m

i
 

 

i

e
n
e
S
n

 

i
 
r
e
t
a
w

o
t
 
r
e
v
i
R

 

n
a
e
l
c
 
o
t
 
n
a
l
P

 

 
r
e
t
r
a
h
c
 
e
t
r
e
V
n
a
M

i

 

i

 
s
e
t
o
m
o
r
p
 
)
3
0
0
2
(

g
n
n
e
d
r
a
g
 
c
i
n
a
g
r
o

 

e
h
t
 
;
y
t
i
s
r
e
v
i
d
o
b

i

 

e
r
e
h
t
 
;
s
e
c
i
t
c
a
r
p

 

 

y
b
d
e
g
a
n
a
m

 
s
n
e
d
r
a
g

 

 
-
n
o
n
d
o
o
h
r
u
o
b
h
g
e
n

i

 

 
;
s
n
o
i
t
a
z
i
n
a
g
r
o
 
t
fi
o
r
p

 
f
o
n
o
i
t
c
u
d
e
r
 
c
i
t
s
a
r
d

 

y
t
i
n
u
m
m
o
c
 
0
5
e
r
a

 

 
s
r
e
z
i
l
i
t
r
e
f
 
l
a
c
i

m
e
h
c

 

n

i
 
s
e
d
i
c
i
t
s
e
p
d
n
a

 

 

 
;
s
r
a
e
y
5
1
 
t
s
a
l
 
e
h
t
 
n

 

 
s
n
e
d
r
a
g
d
n
a
 
s
k
r
a
p

i

 

d
n
a
 
s
f
o
o
r
 
n
e
e
r
g

 
s
e
v
i
h
e
e
b
0
0
4

 

 
;
s
l
l
a
w

y
t
i
c
 
e
h
t
 
t
u
o
h
g
u
o
r
h
t

 

d
e
s
r
e
p
s
i
d
e
r
a

 

 

 

n
o
i
t
p
m
u
s
n
o
c

 

 
t
n
e
c
 
r
e
p
5
2
 
f
o

y
b
y
g
r
e
n
e
 
s
s
e
l

 

 
;

4
0
0
2
 
r
e
v
o

 
,

0
2
0
2

 
s
e
s
u
n
o
b
y
t
i
s
n
e
d

 

 
t
n
e
m
p
o
l
e
v
e
d

 
t
n
e
i
c

ffi
e
-
y
g
r
e
n
e

 

e
c
n
i
s
 
;
s
g
n
d

i

l
i

u
b

 
s
r
e
ff
o
y
t
i
c
 
,

 

9
0
0
2

 

d
n
a
 
s
t
i
d
u
a
e
e
r
f

 

 
t
r
o
p
p
u
s
 
n
o
i
s
i
c
e
d

 
,

n
o
i
t
a
l
u
s
n

i
 

n
o

 
s
e
z
i
d
i
s
b
u
s
 
d
n
a

 
t
s
o
m
n

 

i

 

 
s
t
c
e
j
o
r
p
n
o
i
t
a
l
u
s
n

i

 

 

 

i

i

m
u
n
m
o
d
n
o
c
 
r
o
f

d
n
a
 
s
n
o
i
t
a
i
c
o
s
s
a

 

i

 
s
e
d
i
s
b
u
s
 
;
s
r
e
n
w
o

d
e
s
u
o
s
l
a
 
)
s
t
n
a
r
g
(

 
t
n
e
i
c

 

ffi
e
d
n
u
f
 
o
t

 
r
e
t
a
w

 
,

g
n
i
t
a
e
h

 
,
s

m
e
t
s
y
s
 
g
n
i
t
a
e
h

 

e
l
b
a
w
e
n
e
r
 
d
n
a

 
,

n
o
i
t
a
l
i
t
n
e
v

i

s
e
g
r
e
n
e

 
:
l
a
o
g
 
)
7
0
0
2
(
 
n
a
l
P

 

e
t
a
m

i
l

C
 
s
i
r
a
P

 

e
c
u
d
e
r
 
o
t
 
:
l
a
o
g
 
)
7
0
0
2
(

 

 

n
a
l
P
e
t
a
m

i
l

C
 
s
i
r
a
P

 

 

 
r
e
p
5
2
y
b
 
s
n
o
i
s
s
i

m
e

 

 

 

 
r
e
p
5
2
e
s
u
d
n
a
 
t
n
e
c

y
g
r
e
n
e
 
s
'
y
t
i
c
 
f
o
 
t
n
e
c

 

 

 
s
a
g
e
s
u
o
h
n
e
e
r
g

 
s
e
c
r
u
o
s
 
e
l
b
a
w
e
n
e
r
 

m
o
r
f

 

 
;

 

d
e
r
a
p
m
o
c
 
,

0
2
0
2
y
b

 

 

o
t
 
d
n
a
 
,

4
0
0
2
h
t
i

 

w

y
b
 
s
n
o
i
s
s
i

 

m
e
e
c
u
d
e
r

 

 

0
5
0
2
y
b
 
t
n
e
c
 
r
e
p
5
7

 

 

y
g
r
e
n
e
e
l
b
a
w
e
n
e
r

 

.

 
t
n
e
c
 
r
e
p
5
2
 
s
t
n
e
s
e
r
p
e
r

 

y
g
r
e
n
e
 
l
a
t
o
t
 
s
'
y
t
i
c
 
f
o

n
o
i
t
p
m
u
s
n
o
c

 
;
e
m
m
a
r
g
o
r
p
g
n
i
r
a
h
s
-
e
k
i
B

 

 

y
a
w
m
a
r
t
 
c
i
r
t
c
e
l
e
w
e
n

 

 

d
e
d
w
o
r
c
r
e
v
o
e
c
a
l
p
e
r
 
s
e
n

 

i
l

 

 

 
s
i
r
a
P
e
h
t
 
;
s
e
n

i
l
 
s
u
b

 

n
a
l
p
n
o
i
t
a
t
r
o
p
s
n
a
r
t

 

g
n
i
c
u
d
e
r
 
t
a
 
s

i

m
a
 
)
7
0
0
2
(

 

d
e
t
a
l
e
r
-
n
o
i
t
a
t
r
o
p
s
n
a
r
t

 
s
n
o
i
s
s
i

 

m
e
 
s
a
g
e
s
u
o
h
n
e
e
r
g

 

 

 

 

0
2
0
2
y
b
 
t
n
e
c
 
r
e
p
0
6
d
n
a

3
1
0
2
y
b
 
t
n
e
c
 
r
e
p
5
2
y
b

 

 

 

 

 
,

 

 

 

y
b
y
l
n
a
m

i

 

 
,
)
4
0
0
2
o
t
 
e
v
i
t
a
l
e
r
(

n
o
i
s
s
i

m
e
-
w
o

l
 
s
t
r
o
p
p
u
s
 
o
s
l
a

 

 

n
a
l
p
e
h
t
 
;
e
s
u
 
r
a
c
 
g
n
i
c
u
d
e
r

 

g
n
i
k
r
a
p
 
r
e
w
o

l
 

d
n
a
 
s
n
o
i
t
a
t
s

 

 
c
i
r
t
c
e
l
e
d
n
a
 
l
l
a
m

8
0
0
2
-
1
0
0
2
g
n
i
r
u
d

 

s
 
r
o
f
 
s
e
t
a
r

 
;
s
e
l
c
i
h
e
v

 

e
g
r
a
h
c
e
r
 
h
t
i

w
 
s
e
l
c
i
h
e
v

 

 

 

n

g
n
i
r
a
h
s
-
r
a
c
 
;
t
n
e
c
 
r
e
p
9
1

 

i
 

 

d
e
t
p
o
d
a
e
m
m
a
r
g
o
r
p

 

0
0
3
d
d
a
o
t
 
n
a
l
p

 

 
;

1
1
0
2

 

 

y
b
d
e
n

i
l
c
e
d
 
c

ffi
a
r
t
 
r
a
c

 

 
,
s
e
n

i
l
 
y
a
w
m
a
r
t
 
f
o
 
s
e
r
t
e
m
o

0
2
1

 
,
s
e
n

i
l
 
s
u
b
 
f
o
 
s
e
r
t
e
m
o

l
i
k

l
i
k

 

 
r
o
m
a
r
t
 
f
o
 
s
e
r
t
e
m
o

 
l
a
d
o
m

 

i
t
l
u
m
w
e
n
3
1

 

 

l
i
k
5
0
1

 
,

i

n
a
r
t

 
f
o
 
s
e
r
t
e
m
o

 

 

l
i
k
0
8
d
n
a
 
,
s
e
d
o
n

 

0
2
0
2
y
b
o
r
t
e
m

 

 

 

i

n
o
g
e
r
 
g
n
d
n
u
o
r
r
u
s

i

0
3
 
t
u
o
b
a
e
c
u
d
o
r
p

 

 
l
a
n
o
i
t
a
n
 
f
o
 
t
n
e
c
 
r
e
p

 
s
t
i
 

d
n
a
 
s
i
r
a
P

P
D
G

g
n
i
s
u
o
H

 

n
o
i
t
a
m
r
o
f
n

i
 
c
i
l

b
u
p

 
s
r
o
s
n
o
p
s
 
y
t
i
C

 

e
g
a
r
u
o
c
n
e
o
t

 

i

 
s
n
g
a
p
m
a
c

 

n
e
e
w
t
e
b
y
t
i
r
a
d

 

i
l

o
s

 

d
n
a
 
s
n
o
i
t
a
r
e
n
e
g

s
r
u
o
b
h
g
e
n

i

 

 
:
s
e
v
a
w
t
a
e
h
 
r
o
f
 
n
a
l
P

n
a
c
 
s
n
o
s
r
e
p
d
e
t
a
l
o
s
i

 

 
x
e
l
a
h
C
n

 

i
 
r
e
t
s
i
g
e
r

 

g
n
i
r
u
d

 
;
e
s
a
b
a
t
a
d

 
s
n
o
s
r
e
p

 
,
s
e
v
a
w
t
a
e
h

 

 

d
n
a
d
e
t
c
a
t
n
o
c
 
e
r
a

 
s
t
r
o
p
p
u
s
 
y
t
i
c
 
;

d
e
t
i
s
i
v

 
,
s
r
e
t
t
u
h
s
 
,

n
o
i
t
a
l
u
s
n

i

 

n
o
i
t
a
l
i
t
n
e
v
 
,

i

g
n
d
a
h
s
-
n
u
s

 

y
b
 
s

 

g
n

i
l

o
o
c
 
t
c
i
r
t
s
i
d
g
n
i
s
u

 

m
e
t
s
y
s
 
g
n

i
l

o
o
c
 
d
n
a

 
;
y
g
r
e
n
e
 
l
a
m
r
e
h
t
o
e
g
d
n
a

 

 

 
l
l
a
o
t
 
d
e
d
i
v
o
r
p
e
r
a
 
s
a
e
r
a

 

 

e
l
b
a
d
o
o
fl
 
f
o
 
s
p
a
m

s
r
e
y
u
b
e
m
o
h

 

n
o
i
t
a
l
u
p
o
p
(
 
1
1
2
2

,

 

0
0
2
5
2

,

 
:
y
t
i
s
n
e
d

)
 
e
r
t
e
m
o

 

l
i
k
e
r
a
u
q
s

 
r
e
p
 
s
t
n
e
d
i
s
e
r

 

d
n
a
 
,

h
c
r
a
e
s
e
r

 

n
o
i
t
a
m
r
o
f
n

s
e
m
m
a
r
g
o
r
p

i

 
,

n
o
i
t
a
c
u
d
E

i

 
,
g
n
n
i
a
r
t

 

k
s
i
r
 
r
e
t
s
a
s
i
D

 
 

n
o

i
t
c
u
d
e
r

 

n
o

i
t
a
l
u
p
o
P

)
s
d
n
a
s
u
o
h
t
(

y
t
i
C

s
i
r
a
P

 

 

a
n

i
 
s
e
v
i
t
a
i
t
i
n

i
 

y
c

i
l

o
p
 
t
a
h
t
 
e
t
a
c
d
n

i

i
 

y
a
m

 
s
l
l

e
c
 
k
n
a
B

l

 
.

d
e
t
s
i
l
 
s
e
i
t
i
c
e
h
t
 
n

 

i
 

d
e
t
n
e
m
e
p
m

l

i
 

d
n
a
 
r
o

f
 

d
e
n
n
a
p
 
s
e
c

l

i

i
l

 

o
p
y
t
i
l
i

i

b
a
n
a
t
s
u
s
 
e
h
t
 
f

o

 
l
l

a
 
f

i

 

 

 

 

o
n
o
i
t
p
i
r
c
s
e
d
e
v
i
t
s
u
a
h
x
e
n
a
e
d
v
o
r
p
 
t
o
n
 
s
e
o
d
 
x
e
n
n
a
 
t
n
e
s
e
r
p
e
h
T

 

 
:

e
t
o
N

.

s
e
c

i

i
l

l

 

 

o
p
d
n
a
 
s
n
a
p
n
a
b
r
u
n
o
n
o
i
t
a
m
r
o
n

f

 

 

i
 

 

d
n
a
a
t
a
d
 
t
n
a
v
e
e
r
 
l

l

i

l

 

 

a
n
o
i
t
i
d
d
a
e
d
v
o
r
p
d
u
o
c
h
c
r
a
e
s
e
r
 
r
e
h
t
r
u
F

 

 
.

d
e
t
i

m

i
l
 

 

 

e
r
a
a
e
r
a
n
a
b
r
u
c
fi
c
e
p
s

 

i

.

A
S
E
D
/
N
U

 
:

e
c
r
u
o
S

World Economic and Social Survey 2013Chapter IV
Ensuring food and  
nutrition security

Summary

 y

 y

 y

 y

 y

 y

The persistence of malnutrition reflects deep inequalities in the distribution of and 
access to food at national and global levels. Ensuring that everyone in the world has 
access to enough nutritious food should be at the forefront of the post-2015 develop-
ment discussions.
Increasing food production in parallel with population growth, urbanization and a 
change in consumption patterns will require an integrated approach that takes into 
consideration the nexus of food, water, energy, environment and climate, while reori-
enting food production, distribution and consumption.
Increasing agricultural productivity will be required, in particular in developing coun-
tries where the agriculture sector accounts for an important share of gross domestic 
product and where large productivity gaps still exist.
Access of poor households to food and of isolated producers and smallholders to 
markets will need to be improved, in particular given that hunger can exist even in 
countries where there is enough food produced.
Food  consumption  will  need  to  be  oriented  towards  diets  that  are  less  resource-
intensive and more nutritious, which will be crucial for the sustainability of the food 
system and for better health outcomes.
The  transformation  and  development  of  the  agricultural  sector  will  require  invest-
ments on a significant scale. The public sector should typically finance infrastructural 
needs as well as research and development, while introducing adequate incentives 
for private investments, such as risk protection and better access to credit markets. In 
addition, Governments need to design a regulatory framework that ensures inclusive 
and sustainable private investments.

Introduction

Ensuring that everyone in the world has access to enough nutritious food should be at 
the  forefront  of  the  post-2015  development  discussions,  as  recently  emphasized  by  the 
Secretary-General  through  the  launch  of  the  Zero  Hunger  Challenge.1  The  present 
chapter highlights the changes needed in the food system to ensure food and nutrition 
security by 2050 and the challenges involved, given that malnutrition is only partly an 
issue of food availability. The persistence of malnutrition reflects the deep inequalities in 

1 

Secretary-General  Ban  Ki-moon  launched  the  Zero  Hunger  Challenge  on  June  20,  2012,  at  the 
Rio+20  United  Nations  Conference  on  Sustainable  Development.  For  further  information  see 
http://www.un.org/en/zerohunger/challenge.shtml. 

86

the distribution and access to food, knowing that one third of the food produced is not 
eaten—a missed opportunity to feed the growing world population (Food and Agriculture 
Organization of the United Nations, 2012b).

Recent studies have found that the challenge of malnutrition is broader than the 
issue of hunger or undernourishment, as highlighted by the United Nations Millennium 
Declaration.2 Low quality and low diversity of food are other major sources of malnutri-
tion. Individuals may have an intake of enough calories for daily subsistence, and still suffer 
from “hidden hunger”, with low levels of micronutrients due to low diversification of diets. 
This is a problem in both developing and developed countries, affecting 30 per cent of the 
world’s population. The excess intake of calories is another major global public-health con-
cern, as overweight and obesity cause more than 2.8 million deaths per year among adults. 
In addition to the multiple burdens of malnutrition, other problems are on 
the horizon. On the demand side, population growth, rapid urbanization and consequent 
changes in consumption patterns will require additional food. The Food and Agriculture 
Organization of the United Nations (FAO) estimates that food production will have to 
increase  70  per  cent  globally  to  feed  an  additional  2.3  billion  people  by  2050.  At  the 
same time, food demand has been shifting towards more resource-intensive agricultural 
products, such as livestock and dairy products, thereby exerting additional pressure on 
land, water and biodiversity resources.

An increase in food production will also require integrating sustainable prac-
tices, particularly regarding the use of natural resources. Many of the current agricultural 
practices have relied on cheap energy and abundant water and land, and are a leading 
source of greenhouse gas emissions (The Hague Conference, 2010). These practices are 
now proving unsustainable for the environment and health, due to contamination of air, 
land and water sources. At the same time, they have led to substantial productivity losses, 
thereby posing risks to food security. 

Thus, increasing food production and improving distribution to respond to 
population growth, urbanization and a change in consumption patterns will require an 
integrated approach to addressing several challenges simultaneously along the entire food 
chain.  Such  an  integrated  approach  to  food  security  and  environmental  sustainability 
should also take into consideration the nexus of food, water, energy, environment and 
climate, while reorienting food production, distribution and consumption. 

The first challenge is to increase food production, while minimizing the en-
vironmental impact and increasing natural resource efficiency. This will require increas-
ing agricultural productivity, in particular in developing countries where the agricultural 
sector contributes an important share of gross domestic product (GDP) and where large 
productivity gaps still exist. The introduction of improved agronomical practices and ad-
vanced technologies will be central. Information and communications technologies (ICT), 
for instance, can be used to inform smallholders about new farming techniques and market 
prices (World Bank, 2008a), as well as to improve livestock traceability (Deloitte, 2012), 
maximizing output, while minimizing negative impacts on the environment. Additional 
investments in research and development (R&D) will be crucial in increasing productivity, 
but better dissemination and adaptation of existing technology in different agroecological 
regions will also need to be part of the solution. A broader rural development strategy 
is  also  required,  including  infrastructural  investments  to  better  connect  producers  and 
smallholders to output markets, including rural-urban linkages. 

2 

 See General Assembly resolution 55/2.

World Economic and Social Survey 201387

The second major challenge will be to improve the access to food and markets, 
as hunger often occurs in countries where there is enough food produced. Income poverty 
is a major factor preventing access to food. Therefore, increasing the income level of poor 
households will help them obtain food that is adequate in quantity and quality, thereby 
reducing the prevalence of undernourishment. However, high inequality in the rural sec-
tor, in particular in the distribution of assets—such as land, water, capital, education and 
health—is an obstacle that needs to be addressed in order to enhance food security. The 
underlying issue of discrimination in the rural sector, including against women, also calls 
for concrete action. In addition, social protection mechanisms, including safety nets, must 
also be part of a broader strategy to facilitate access of lower-income groups to food, in 
particular during economic shocks.  

The third challenge is to orient food consumption towards “sustainable diets”, 
that is, diets that are less resource-intensive and more nutritious, which will be crucial 
for the sustainability of the food system. Such changes would also improve health con-
ditions related to low diversification of diets, including obesity. Reducing food wastage 
will  also  contribute  significantly  to  the  sustainability  of  the  food  system.  Currently,  it 
is  estimated  that  32  per  cent  of  the  total  food  produced  globally  is  wasted  (Food  and 
Agriculture Organization, 2012b). In order to substantially reduce the quantity of food 
lost and wasted, changes have to occur at different points along the food chain: produc-
tion, storage, transportation and consumption. Strategies to reduce food waste will vary 
among countries according to their structural conditions.

Finally, in an increasingly interconnected world, improving agricultural pro-
ductivity and the allocation of food within and across countries requires well-coordinated 
actions at local, national and global levels. At the local and national levels, in particular in 
food-insecure countries, institutions should promote transparency and accountability, as 
well as the participation of all individuals in the decisions that affect them. At the global 
level, the international community can help developing countries in their efforts to design 
and  implement  policies  that  increase  resilience  to  food  price  volatility  and  to  climatic 
shocks, as well as provide safety nets, especially for smallholders. Wealthier countries will 
also be required to change their production and consumption patterns through actions 
that should include reviewing trade policies to ensure that they are pro-food and pro-
nutrition security, establishing regional and international strategic reserves, and address-
ing the issue of speculation in land, as well as enabling the adoption of sustainable diets.

Multiple dimensions of malnutrition: 
undernourishment, micronutrient deficiencies  
and over-nutrition

Malnutrition is a broad term encompassing conditions that hinder good health, includ-
ing both under-nutrition and over-nutrition. Under-nutrition can be the result of under-
nourishment  (energy  deficiency)  or  micronutrient  (vitamin  and  mineral)  deficiencies. 
Undernourishment continues to affect the world’s population (12.5 per cent), mainly in 
developing countries (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2012a), 
despite  remarkable  progress  in  reducing  hunger  during  the  last  decade,  while  stunting 
and  micronutrient  deficiencies  affect  a  significant  number  of  people.  Obesity,  on  the 
other hand, has been increasing rapidly in all countries, although its prevalence is still 

The health risks associated 
with undernourishment 
and inadequate diets in 
many developing countries 
are running parallel 
to a rapid rise in non-
communicable diseases 
in many developed and 
middle-income countries 
due to over-nutrition

Ensuring food and nutrition security88

considerably higher in developed countries. Thus, today, the world as a whole is facing 
multiple burdens of malnutrition. The health risks associated with undernourishment and 
inadequate diets in many developing countries are running parallel to a rapid rise of non-
communicable diseases in many developed and middle-income countries, owing to the 
rampant increase in over-nutrition. 

Under-nutrition

Food insecurity3 persists

Sub-Saharan Africa and 
Western Asia are facing the 
most serious challenges to 
reaching the Millennium 
Development Goal 1 
hunger target by 2015

According to recent estimations, in 2010-2012, about 868 million people were chroni-
cally undernourished (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2012b). 
Despite the fact that this figure is still particularly high and represents, as noted above, 
12.5 per cent of world population, it also indicates that there has clearly been progress in 
reducing hunger at the global level (figure IV.1). 

In  several  regions,  however,  the  food  and  financial  crisis  slowed  down  that 
progress, mainly owing to higher food prices, reflecting different levels of vulnerability to 
external shocks and different country capacities to increase food supply when needed. Sub-
Saharan Africa and Western Asia are facing the most serious challenges to reaching the 
Figure IV.1 Number of people undernourished and prevalence of undernourishment, 
1990 - 2012

Figure IV.1
Number of people undernourished and prevalence of undernourishment,  1990-2012
Millions of persons

1,050

1,000

950

900

850

800

Number of people (millions)
Prevalence (percentage)

)
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
p
(
 
e
c
n
e
a
v
e
r
P

l

20

18

16

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

Source: Food and Agriculture 
Organization of the United 
Nations (2012b).

2
9
9
1
-
0
9
9
1

3
9
9
1
-
1
9
9
1

4
9
9
1
-
2
9
9
1

5
9
9
1
-
3
9
9
1

6
9
9
1
-
4
9
9
1

7
9
9
1
-
5
9
9
1

8
9
9
1
-
6
9
9
1

9
9
9
1
-
7
9
9
1

0
0
0
2
-
8
9
9
1

1
0
0
2
-
9
9
9
1

2
0
0
2
-
0
0
0
2

3
0
0
2
-
1
0
0
2

4
0
0
2
-
2
0
0
2

5
0
0
2
-
3
0
0
2

6
0
0
2
-
4
0
0
2

7
0
0
2
-
5
0
0
2

8
0
0
2
-
6
0
0
2

9
0
0
2
-
7
0
0
2

0
1
0
2
-
8
0
0
2

1
1
0
2
-
9
0
0
2

2
1
0
2
-
0
1
0
2

Source: UN/DESA, based on FAO, The State of Food Insecurity in the World 2012: food security indicators. 
Available from http://www.fao.org/publications/soﬁ/food-security-indicators/en/.

3 

Food security has been defined as access by all people at all times to the food needed for a healthy 
life. 

World Economic and Social Survey 201389

Millennium Development Goal 1 hunger target by 2015.4 Western Asia, in particular, has 
experienced a significant increase in the number of people that are undernourished, from 8 
million in 1990-1992 to 21 million in 2010-2012 (Food and Agriculture Organization of the 
United Nations, 2012b), increasing the prevalence of undernourishment over that period. 

The distribution of undernourished people in the world has also been altered 
in line with different progression rates in hunger reduction during the past two decades  
(figure IV.2). In the past 20 years, the share of the world’s undernourished people decreased 
in East Asia and the Pacific, from 41 per cent in 1990-1992 to 28 per cent in 2010-2012, 
whereas the proportion increased significantly in sub-Saharan Africa, from 17 per cent in 
1990-1992 to 27 per cent in 2010-2012, as well as in Northern Africa and Western Asia, 
from 1 per cent in 1990-1992 to 3 per cent in 2010-2012. 

Periods of high food prices in the past few years have affected countries and re-
gions differently, according to their different levels of vulnerability to external shocks. For 
instance, many African countries, such as the Democratic Republic of the Congo, were 
fully exposed to price hikes and the global recession. Over the long run, the differences in 
hunger reduction across regions and countries are attributable to several factors. Inclusive 
economic growth, generating demand for the assets controlled by the extreme poor, has a 
much higher impact on hunger reduction. In addition, when poor households invest part 
of their increased income in health, sanitation and education, the impact of economic 
growth on hunger reduction is also stronger. In parallel, as seen in the case of Bangladesh, 
which is on track to reach the hunger target of Millennium Development Goal 1, higher 
public spending on health and education with targeted interventions increases nutritional 
success (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2012b). 

An individual may take 
in enough or even too 
many calories for daily 
subsistence, but cases 
where diet is not diversified 
enough may lead to low 
levels of micronutrients

Impacts of under-nutrition: undernourishment and 
micronutrient deficiencies

Undernourishment  is  the  result  of  food  intake  that  is  inadequate  as  regards  providing 
sufficient  calories  to  meet  people’s  physiological  requirements  on  a  continuing  basis. 
Micronutrient deficiencies are also a result of under-nutrition, but in this case they are 
related to insufficient intake of vitamins and minerals.5 An individual may take in enough 
or even too many calories for daily subsistence; however, if his or her diet is not diversified 
enough, the result may be low levels of micronutrients, a condition referred to as “hidden 
hunger”. This is an issue in both developing and developed countries, affecting 30 per cent 
of the world’s population (ibid.).

The relation between poor nutrition and poor health—including the existence 
of a vicious cycle of poor nutrition, poor health and low income—is well documented. 
For instance, iron deficiency anaemia impacts negatively on cognitive development and 

4 

5 

The  impact  of  the  food  price  and  economic  crises  during  the  period  2007-2010  in  under-
nourishment prevalence was less severe than previously estimated. According to FAO, there are 
two main reasons. First, the impact of economic shocks on developing economies was less severe 
than previously estimated. Many developing economies, in particular the largest ones, continued 
to  grow  at  a  relatively  fast  pace,  albeit  more  slowly  than  in  the  pre-crisis  period.  Second,  the 
methodology  used  by  FAO  estimates  chronic  undernourishment,  which  does  not  capture  the 
effects of short-term shocks, such as price spikes. Therefore, the undernourishment indicator does 
not fully reflect the impact of price spikes and other short-term shocks.

Vitamin  A,  iron  and  iodine  deficiencies  are  the  most  commonly  measured  micronutrient 
deficiencies  because  they  are  well  known  and  have  long  been  associated  with  specific  health 
consequences (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2013).

Ensuring food and nutrition security90

Figure IV.2   Distribution of undernourished people in the world, by region, 
Figure IV.2
1990-1992 and 2010-2012
Distribution of undernourished people in the world, by region,  1990-1992 and 2010-2012

1990-1992

2% 1%

6%

17%

Sub-Saharan Africa: 
170 million

South Asia: 327 million

East Asia and the Paciﬁc:
405 million

Latin America and the
Caribbean: 65 million

Developed countries:
21 million

Northern Africa and Western
Asia: 13 million

33%

2% 3%

6%

2010-2012

27%

41%

28%

Sub-Saharan Africa: 
234 million

South Asia: 304 million

East Asia and the Paciﬁc:
239 million

Latin America and the
Caribbean: 49 million

Developed countries: 
17 million

Northern Africa and Western
Asia: 25 million

34%

Source: Food and Agriculture 
Organization of the United 
Nations (2012b).

Source: UN/DESA, based on WHO (2012b).
Abbreviations: AFR, WHO African Region; AMR, WHO Region of the Americas; SEAR, WHO South-East Asia 
Region; EUR, WHO European Region; EMR, WHO Eastern Mediterranean Region; WPR, WHO Western Paciﬁc Region.

World Economic and Social Survey 201391

Overweight and obesity are 
often perceived as higher 
income economy issues, 
but in fact they have been 
on the rise, and at a fast 
pace, in low- and middle-
income countries

academic performance in school-age children (Food and Agriculture Organization of the 
United Nations, 2013). Short-term consequences in terms of learning disability, as well as 
long-term economic consequences, can be expected, since lower education levels lead to 
lower income opportunities. 

Vitamin A deficiency, for instance, is a leading cause of blindness and cor-
neal damage. In developing countries, 163 million children were estimated to be vitamin 
A-deficient, with a prevalence of more than 30 per cent in 2007, down from approximately 
36 per cent in 1990 (United Nations System Standing Committee on Nutrition, 2010).

From  a  longer-term  perspective,  there  is  also  the  risk  of  intergenerational 
transmission of poor nutritional status. Women who suffer from undernourishment are 
more likely to give birth to underweight babies, whose development will then be affected 
throughout their life. Undernourishment may also lead to irreversible consequences, such 
as  physical  stunting,  excluding  individuals  from  better-rewarded  tasks  which  demand 
greater physical strength. Ultimately, undernourishment affects individuals’ freedom and 
well-being (Drèze and Sen, 1991).

Not only does undernourishment have microlevel negative consequences, but 
it affects the whole economy, reducing its rate of growth. For instance in India, stunting 
and iron and iodine deficiencies result in productivity losses equivalent to 2.95 per cent of 
GDP annually (World Bank, 2006). Despite the evidence of negative outcomes from poor 
nutrition in the short and long terms, nutritional health has not received sufficient priority 
in  the  development  agenda  (United  Nations,  2012c).  In  particular,  a  good  nutritional 
status for the whole population would have a positive impact on economic development.6

Over-nutrition

Obesity on the rise

Malnutrition  has  been  traditionally  associated  with  undernourishment;  but  in  recent 
years, greater attention has been given to overweight (body mass index equal or superior 
to 25) and obesity (body mass index equal or superior to 30), as a major global public-
health concern and a cause of death of at least 2.8 million adults per year (World Health 
Organization,  2012b).  Overweight  and  obesity  are  often  perceived  as  higher  income 
economy issues, but in fact they have been on the rise, and at a fast pace, in low- and 
middle-income countries.

Globally,  in  2008,  the  number  of  overweight  adults  reached  more  than  
1.4 billion, surpassing the number of undernourished people worldwide.7 Almost 13 per 
cent of the world’s population are obese. 

The prevalence of overweight and obese individuals varies across the world. 
Breaking down by World Health Organization (WHO) regions, in the Americas, over-
weight and obesity affect 62 per cent and 26 per cent of the population, respectively. On 
the opposite side of the spectrum, in South-East Asia, only 14 per cent of the population 
are overweight. In Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) 

6 

7 

See FAO, “Incorporating nutrition considerations into development policies and programes: brief 
for policy-makers and programme planners in developing countries” (Rome, 2004). Available from 
http://www.fao.org/docrep/007/y5343e/y5343e04.htm.

WHO (2013). 

Ensuring food and nutrition security92

countries for which data exist, the prevalence of obesity varies from 4 per cent in Japan and 
the Republic of Korea, to 30 per cent or more in the United States of America and Mexico.
Worldwide obesity almost doubled between 1980 and 2008 (figure IV.3). In 
OECD countries, until 1980, obesity affected less than 10 per cent of the population. 
Since then, that rate has doubled or tripled in many countries. In 2012, in 19 countries out 
of 34 OECD countries, the majority of the population was overweight. OECD projections 
suggest that more than 2 people out of 3 will be overweight or obese in some OECD 
countries by 2020. 

Figure IV.3
Figure IV.3   Age-standardized prevalence of obesity among adults aged 
Age-standardized prevalence of obesitya among adults aged 20 years or over,  
20 years and over, by WHO region, 1980 and 2008
by WHO region, 1980 and 2008
Percentage

Source: UN/DESA, based on 
WHO (2012). 
a  Obesity is defined as 
a body mass index (BMI) 
greater than or equal to 
30, where BMI is equal to a 
person’s weight in kilograms 
(kg) divided by the square of 
his or her height in  
metres (m2).
Abbreviations: AFR, WHO 
African region; AMR, WHO 
Region of the Americas; 
SEAR, WHO South-East Asia 
Region; EUR, WHO European 
Region; EMR, WHO Eastern 
Mediterranean Region; WPR, 
WHO Western Pacific Region.

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

1980

2008

AFR

AMR

SEAR

EUR

EMR

WPR

Global

a Obesity is deﬁned as a body mass index (BMI) greater than or equal to 30, where BMI is equal to a person's 
weight in kilograms (kg) divided by the sqaure of his or her height in metres (m2).

Source: UN/DESA, based on WHO (2012b).
In low- and middle-income countries, the number of overweight children has 
Abbreviations: AFR, WHO African Region; AMR, WHO Region of the Americas; SEAR, WHO South-East Asia 
Region; EUR, WHO European Region; EMR, WHO Eastern Mediterranean Region; WPR, WHO Western Paciﬁc Region.
been increasing. Out of 40 million overweight children worldwide, close to 35 million 
were  living  in  developing  countries  in  2010  (Organization  for  Economic  Cooperation 
and Development, 2012a). Thus, it is not surprising to see health challenges associated 
with over-nutrition in countries that are still facing the issue of undernourishment. These 
two dimensions of malnutrition are sometimes experienced within the same household. 
This is the result of the greater susceptibility to obesity of adults that have suffered from 
undernourishment during their childhood (Hoffman and others, 2000).  

Impacts of over-nutrition

The health consequences of over-nutrition and obesity are quite different from those of 
hunger. There is an increase in non-communicable diseases instead of infectious and com-
municable diseases in those affected by over-nutrition and obesity. For instance, excessive 
consumption of meat (especially red meat), dairy products and eggs by older children and 
adults can have detrimental health effects and increase the risk of chronic non-communi-
cable diseases such as heart disease, cancer, diabetes and obesity. Excessive consumption 

World Economic and Social Survey 201393

According to the World 
Health Organization, 
overweight and obesity 
are the fifth leading risk 
factors for global deaths, 
posing a greater risk than 
underweight

of refined sugars and carbohydrates has also been found to be associated with health issues 
such as diabetes, overweight and obesity.

According  to  WHO,  overweight  and  obesity  are  the  fifth  leading  risk  fac-
tors for global deaths, posing a greater risk than underweight. At least 2.8 million adults 
die each year as a result of being overweight or obese. Compared with people of normal 
weight, severely obese people die 8-10 years sooner. Every 15 extra kilograms (kg) increase 
the risk of early death by approximately 30 per cent. In addition, 44 per cent of the dia-
betes burden, 23 per cent of the heart disease burden and 7-41 per cent of certain cancer 
burdens are attributable to overweight and obesity. 

Obesity also represents an important source of health expenditure at the in-
dividual and macro levels. For instance, in any given year, an obese person incurs 25 per 
cent higher health expenditures than a person of normal weight. At the macrolevel, obesity 
accounts for 5-10 per cent of total health expenditures in the United States of America. 
At the same time, obesity negatively affects personal income. Obese people earn 18 per 
cent less than people who are not obese (Organization for Economic Cooperation and 
Development, 2012a).

Increasing food availability 

In  developing  countries,  where  the  prevalence  of  undernourishment  is  higher  and  the 
population  is  growing  faster,  food  production  will  need  to  almost  double  (Food  and 
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2009c). Therefore, the first concern will 
be  increasing  agricultural  productivity,  in  particular  in  countries  where  the  prevalence 
of  hunger  is  higher  and  where  large  productivity  gaps  still  exist.  The  main  challenge, 
however, is to increase food production while minimizing the environmental impact and 
increasing  natural  resource  use  efficiency.  Finally,  food  production  requires  additional 
investments in rural infrastructure, including in harvest technologies designed to reduce 
wastage at the production level. 

In order to improve food 
availability, the first 
concern will be increasing 
agricultural productivity, 
in particular in countries 
where the prevalence of 
hunger is higher and where 
large productivity gaps  
still exist

Increasing agricultural productivity 

Low productivity and slow growth in the agricultural sector, including in small farms, 
raise specific concerns. Despite some improvements in total factor productivity in the ag-
ricultural sector (Fuglie, 2012), growth in yield, an indicator of land productivity, for most 
cereals has been declining since the 1980s (FAOSTAT). Today, important gaps between 
farmers’  yields  and  technical  potential  yields  still  exist  in  many  developing  countries. 
In 2005, such gaps varied from 11 per cent in countries of East Asia to 76 per cent in 
sub-Saharan Africa (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2011b). 
Reducing these gaps would increase agricultural output, and consequently, food security, 
as well as nutrition outcomes, in many developing countries. 

Extension services

The extensive menu of technologies and sustainable practices that are already available 
can, in part, reduce existing productivity gaps in agriculture. In sub-Saharan Africa for 
instance,  where  the  prevalence  of  undernourishment  is  high,  important  productivity 
gains—on the order of a two- to threefold increase in average yields—can be achieved 

The extensive menu 
of technologies and 
sustainable practices that 
are already available can, 
in part, reduce existing 
productivity gaps in 
agriculture

Ensuring food and nutrition security94

through better use of existing knowledge and technology (Foresight, 2011). Dissemination 
of information and technical assistance will be an effective strategy for improving access 
to knowledge and technology. Further, agricultural extension services are a useful tool 
for helping farmers increase their productivity, and collaborate with a broader network 
of farmers and researchers. In the current context, a large number of actors (civil society  
organizations, the private sector, farmers and multilateral organizations) need to contrib-
ute towards this end.

A survey conducted by the Global Conference on Agricultural Research for 
Development (GCARD) 2010 points to the importance of official agricultural extension 
workers.8 The general perception is that their number is inadequate, especially when meas-
ured against the needs of small-scale farm holders, who have limited access to the services 
they offer, services that represent an important vehicle for the transmission of knowledge, 
information and training (Lele and others, 2010). 

Thus, a longer-term commitment to training and a new approach to techni-
cal education are required. Training and education have to be more practical in nature 
and oriented towards problem-solving and decision-making. At the same time, they must 
involve farmers and civil society organizations in finding interdisciplinary and creative 
solutions to new problems.

Focusing more on building capacity among farmers, in particular smallhold-
ers,  is  a  better  strategy  than  prescribing  technological  practices.  The  former  approach, 
considered to embody the empowerment model, would help farmers to identify and take 
advantage of available opportunities (World Bank, 2008a). The exclusion of women from 
technical support also needs to be explicitly addressed. In Africa, women receive 7 per cent 
of agricultural extension services and less than 10 per cent of credit offered to small-scale 
farm holders. Gender analysis and targeted initiatives must be incorporated in agricultural 
education, research and extension services (Davis and others, 2007).

Increasing investment in R&D

In addition to existing technology and agricultural knowledge which already provide a 
range of alternatives for achieving better outcomes, continuous research and development 
in respect of new technologies are needed. In this regard, an important lesson from the 
previous green revolution is that the development of new technology requires long-term 
financial support for R&D, in parallel with wide and effective dissemination of informa-
tion and know-how (United Nations, 2011b).

However, public expenditure for agricultural R&D remains low in many de-
veloping regions (figure IV.4), the main reason being that since the 1980s, international 
support for agriculture research has decreased and many national agricultural research 
centres have scaled back their programmes for the production and distribution of seeds 
(Dubin and Brennan, 2009). Thus, national initiatives must be designed to address the 
lack of investment in R&D, including through partnerships with the private sector.

8 

While the main function of agricultural extension workers is to provide and transfer knowledge 
for increasing productivity, they are now increasingly being expected to fulfil a number of new 
functions,  such  as  linking  smallholder  farmers  to  high-value  and  export  markets,  promoting 
environmental  outcomes  (involving,  for  example,  watersheds,  forests  and  irrigation  water), 
supporting  microcredit  groups,  and  coping  with  the  effects  of  HIV/AIDS  and  other  health 
challenges (Lele and others, 2010).

World Economic and Social Survey 201395

Figure IV.4 
Figure IV.4   Public research expenditure on food and agriculture, 1981-2008
Public research expenditure on food and agriculture, 1981-2008
Millions of 2005 purchasing power parity United States dollars

Sub-Saharan Africa
East Asia and the Paciﬁc, minus China
China
Latin America and the Caribbean
South Asia, minus India
India

1
8
9
1

2
8
9
1

3
8
9
1

4
8
9
1

5
8
9
1

6
8
9
1

7
8
9
1

8
8
9
1

9
8
9
1

0
9
9
1

1
9
9
1

2
9
9
1

3
9
9
1

4
9
9
1

5
9
9
1

6
9
9
1

7
9
9
1

8
9
9
1

9
9
9
1

0
0
0
2

1
0
0
2

2
0
0
2

3
0
0
2

4
0
0
2

5
0
0
2

6
0
0
2

7
0
0
2

8
0
0
2

Source: Agricultural Science 
and Technology Indicators 
database (http://www.asti.
cgiar.org/data/).

4000

3500

3000

2500

2000

1500

1000

500

0

Source: Agricultural Science and Technology Indicators database (http://www.asti.cgiar.org/data/).

In developing countries, where agricultural R&D remains relatively weak, the 
main focus of the public research institutions should be the adaptation of technology to 
particular farming conditions and agroecological settings. However, the main challenge 
in developing countries is their national research institutions’ lack of adequate resources. 
For instance, the development of a new variety of wheat, rice or corn, requires 7-10 years 
of breeding (Pardey and Beintema, 2001). The resulting discontinuity in funding compro-
mises their independence and capacity to operate efficiently, while poor documentation of 
processes increases the risk of permanent loss of knowledge. 

In developing countries, 
where agricultural research 
and development remains 
relatively weak, the 
main focus of the public 
research institutions 
should be the adaptation 
of technology to particular 
farming conditions and 
agroecological settings

In  addition  to  securing  stable  financial  resources,  national  public  research 
centres have to change their organizational culture. They need to improve their respon-
siveness to the needs of farmers, including through joint experimentation and learning. 
This requires that research institutions work more closely with farmers and other actors 
such as non-governmental organizations, farmers organizations and innovation brokers, 
which can make farmers’ needs known to the research and government communities, us-
ing innovations made possible by ICT. In this field, participation of women, especially in 
sub-Saharan Africa where women constitute a large proportion of the agricultural labour 
force, will also be critical to enhancing their decision-making in agricultural research and 
extension services and to addressing their specific needs. 

Research  institutions  also  need  to  expand  their  traditional  disciplinary  ap-
proach to encompass an interdisciplinary focus in response to wide-ranging farmer de-
mands. For instance, transformation of diverse agroecological rural economies requires 
the  expertise  of  biologists,  agronomists,  water  engineers,  nutritionists,  economists  and 
social and political scientists (Lipton, 2010). 

The private sector has become a more active player in agricultural R&D, but its 
involvement has not been sufficient to compensate for the reduction in public expenditure. 
In developing countries, public funding remains the main source of finance for agricultural 

Ensuring food and nutrition securityresearch. Moreover, the private sector tends to invest mainly in profitable research, in-
cluding agricultural chemical inputs, machinery and biotechnology, targeting wealthier 
economies and larger farmers. The involvement of private research in managing natural 
resources and maintaining biodiversity also remains limited (Biodiversity International 
and others, 2012).

The private sector also can play an important role in promoting rapid techno-
logical innovation for achieving food security and tackling climate change. Biotechnology 
and innovative market access for smallholders constitute one of the areas where the private 
sector can play a major role in expanding research. Despite the fact that biotechnology 
remains a controversial issue, it nevertheless holds great potential for increasing agriculture 
productivity (United Nations, 2011b). 

96

Biotechnology could be 
an effective instrument 
for facilitating the 
transformation 
of agriculture in 
agroecological regions 
affected by harsher 
conditions

Today, one third of the rural population in developing countries lives in rain-
fed  regions,  characterized  by  frequent  moisture  stress,  which  limits  their  agricultural 
output. Biotechnology could be an effective instrument for facilitating the transforma-
tion of agriculture in these agroecological regions affected by harsher conditions. It has 
a  significant  potential  to  increase  yield  gains  by  making  crops  herbicide-resistant,  less 
dependent on chemical pesticides and more resilient to water stress, while conferring on 
them a greater nutritional value. 

So far, private research in biotechnology has concentrated on the development 
of products that can be easily protected by patents and has focused mainly on the demand 
from large-scale farmers. The cost of seeds and inputs may discourage use of this technol-
ogy by small farm holders, especially if the market continues to be dominated by a few 
large companies which exert influence over prices. The potential of genetically modified 
organisms to increase food production is limited not only by their excessive costs, but also 
by their unknown possible risks, including long-term environmental and health impacts. 
Independent assessments of the larger impacts of this technology are urgently needed.

Moving forward, the structure of incentives and the governance of innovation 
in this area require radical changes. New mechanisms for engaging the private sector need 
to be explored: results-based performance contracts granted on a competitive basis—for 
the development, for example, of improved seed or crop varieties with higher water-stress 
tolerance and greater responsiveness to fertilizers—may be one means of stimulating pri-
vate research. Patent buyouts and prizes may be other means of doing so (Elliot, 2010; 
Bhagwati, 2005). Use of more traditional subsidies, co-financing arrangements and joint 
ventures, within a framework of appropriate protocols for maintaining the public-good 
nature of research products, could also be explored (Pardey and Beintema, 2001).

Many countries face serious challenges to addressing these complex techno-
logical changes. Overcoming these challenges will require the cooperation of the public, 
private and civil society organization sectors within countries, as well as between countries, 
towards adapting know-how to specific agricultural conditions (Biodiversity International 
and others, 2012).  CGIAR (formerly the Consultative Group on International Agricultural 
Research)  has  a  positive  record  in  developing  technology  well  suited  for  smallholders, 
although  diffusion  of  these  technologies  has  been  a  challenge.  In  2008,  CGIAR  was  
reformed to refocus its research and develop partnerships with the capacity to increase the 
diffusion of results. 

Yet, given the need to adapt technologies to different agroecological systems,  
CGIAR and other international research institutions must work more closely with national 
agricultural research centres so that they can adapt internationally developed technologies 

World Economic and Social Survey 201397

to their various national contexts and “share back” their innovations with other countries. 
The growing capacity of large national agricultural systems in Brazil, China, India and 
South Africa, for instance, has generated South-South cooperation aimed at benefiting 
countries with limited resources, by allowing them to adopt or adapt the technologies of 
the countries with large agriculture systems, which are typically less capital-intensive and 
have less intellectual property rights protection.

Sustainable management of natural resources

An increase in food production will also require integrating sustainable practices, in par-
ticular in the use of natural resources. Many of the current agricultural practices have 
relied on cheap energy and abundant water and land, and are a leading source of green-
house gas emissions. These practices are now proving unsustainable for the environment 
and health. At the same time, they have led to substantial productivity losses, thereby 
posing risks to food security. Thus, agricultural productivity and an efficient use of natural 
resources, as well as climate-related adaptation and resilience-building, should be part of 
an integrated policy approach.  

Agricultural productivity 
and an efficient use of 
natural resources, as well as 
climate-related adaptation 
and resilience-building, 
should be part of an 
integrated policy approach

Current unsustainable practices

Available land for food 
cultivation has been 
shrinking, owing to 
land degradation and 
competition from  
other uses, such as  
urban development  
and production of  
non-food crops

Even if 90 per cent of the growth in crops will come from higher yields, land availability 
will continue to be crucial for agriculture. Arable land would need to expand by 12 per 
cent in developing countries by 2050 (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United 
Nations, 2009a). However, available land for food cultivation has been shrinking, owing 
to land degradation and competition from other uses, such as urban development and 
production of non-food crops, like biofuels. In many regions, available agrarian land is 
constrained,  especially  when  biodiversity  and  soil  degradation  are  taken  into  account. 
Every year, about 12 million hectares of agricultural land are lost owing to land degrada-
tion, adding to the billions of hectares that are already degraded (Beddington and others, 
2012). Soil degradation not only affects its fertility, reducing agricultural production op-
portunities, but also has negative effects on the hydrologic cycle, and climate, biodiversity, 
landscape and other ecosystem services. 

There are many factors leading to soil degradation which should be prevented. 
The excessive use of chemical fertilizers and pesticides is considered the major factor affect-
ing the resilience of land. For instance, in the past 50 years, global fertilizer use increased 
by 500 per cent, causing widespread pollution (Earth Security Initiative, 2012). Managing 
the use of fertilizers will be crucial for long-term land development; for example, in the 
United States, it has been demonstrated that in the long term, organic agricultural meth-
ods can outperform conventional chemical farming in terms of crop yield, sustainability 
and profit (ibid.). While large-scale farming is, in general, identified as the main source of 
excessive use of fertilizers and soil degradation, land fragmentation and limited farm size 
can also be a source of soil degradation. In the minifundias of the Andean highlands of 
Latin America for instance, poor small-scale farm holders over-exploit natural resources, 
owing to population pressure and scarcity of suitable land (United Nations, 2011b). 

The urbanization process is also increasing competition for arable land and 
wetlands. So far, urban areas occupy about 1 per cent of the total land surface (United 
Nations Environment Programme, 2012a), but urbanization is projected to continue at 

Ensuring food and nutrition security98

It is expected that  
the increasing and 
competing demands 
for water will aggravate 
the serious depletion of 
surface-water resources

Box IV.1

a  Oxfam (2012) recently 
reported an area of 
203 million hectares 
under consideration or 
negotiation in 2001-2010 
(Oxfam, 2012).
b  “Available land” in the 
World Bank estimates is 
defined as land that is 
uncultivated, unforested 
and productive (World 
Bank, 2011).

a fast pace in the next decades (see chap. III). Between 2012 and 2050, the world urban 
population is expected to increase by 69 per cent. At the same time, renewable energy strat-
egies, such as use of biofuels, are increasing demand for land resources. Hence, developing 
the  potential  to  create  more  sustainable  land  management  systems,  in  order  to  reverse 
current trends in food insecurity and unsustainable land degradation, is desirable—and 
possible (United Nations Environment Programme, 2012a). 

More recently, the purchase (or long-term lease) of large extensions of land is 
subjecting use of land for cultivation and local food consumption to pressure (box IV.1). 
These transactions have raised concern about their implications for rural communities and 
for the food security of countries already vulnerable to insecure food supplies.9 Improved 
national and international oversight mechanisms may be needed to prevent the unintended 
negative  impacts  of  leasing  arrangements  for  large  extensions  of  land  on  the  food  and 
nutrition security of poor communities.

Purchase of large extensions of land

The  demand  for  agricultural  land  intensified  at  the  peak  of  the  food  price  crisis  in  
2007-2008. Estimates about the extension of land involved in large-scale acquisitions vary wildly, from  
120 million acres, as reported by the World Bank in 2010, to 560 million acres, as reported by Oxfam 
in 2012.a There are many factors explaining the accelerated interest in foreign land. Reportedly, over  
60 per cent of foreign investment in land is for food exports and around two thirds of land deals in the 
last 10 years were made with a view to producing crops for biofuels (Oxfam, 2012, p. 6). In addition, 
land is also becoming an asset that offers portfolio diversification for international investors, such as 
large pension funds and financial institutions (Earth Security Initiative, 2012).

There  is  a  large  controversy  about  the  recent  interest  of  foreigners  in  purchasing  or 
leasing large landholdings: some see an opportunity to leverage foreign investment for agriculture 
and rural development, while others warn against the risk of displacing traditional rural communities 
and  pastoralists  from  their  land,  thereby  increasing  food  insecurity  in  countries  already  at  risk.  In 
countries like Ethiopia, Mali, Mozambique and the Sudan, this development has raised widespread 
concerns  over  forced  evictions,  social  vulnerability  and  dwindling  water  resources  (Earth  Security 
Initiative, 2012). Pearce (2012) found that in countries selling (or leasing) large extensions of land, in 
the largest majority of cases, local communities lose access to forests, pastures and water resources,  
with no major gains in employment, owing to the use of capital-intensive technology in large farms.
In  the  absence  of  policies  and  institutions  that  provide  secure  tenure  and  adequate 
safeguards to domestic smallholders and their communities, large-scale purchases of land may have 
unintended negative consequences for rural communities and small-scale farmers. Countries such as 
Argentina and Brazil have already erected legal barriers in relation to the amount of farmland that can 
be owned by foreigners (Earth Security Initiative, 2012). More recently, United Nations entities (such as 
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, the Food and Agriculture Organization 
of  the  United  Nations,  the  International  Fund  for  Agricultural  Development  and  the  World  Bank) 
adopted the Principles for Responsible Agricultural Investment with the intention of providing some 
form of protection to rural dwellers. Globally agreed safeguards to protect the rights of traditional 
communities, often lacking legal recognition of their rights to land, water and forests, are particularly 
relevant for countries in sub-Saharan Africa and Latin America where, according to the World Bank, 
most of the 450 million hectares of “available land”b are located.

9 

By some accounts, two thirds of land purchases occur in countries already facing hunger (Oxfam, 
2012).

World Economic and Social Survey 201399

Extreme weather events 
such as droughts and 
floods have been affecting 
food production, with 
dramatic consequences for 
various agroecosystems

Adaptation measures 
involving organic soil 
nutrient enhancement 
and other ecologically 
sound methods—an 
approach popularly 
known as climate-
smart agriculture—can 
contribute to reducing 
greenhouse gas emissions

Water is another essential natural resource for agriculture, whose limit of sus-
tainability may have already been reached in many regions. Global water withdrawals have 
tripled over the last 50 years and water withdrawals for irrigation are expected to increase 
by almost 11 per cent by 2050 (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 
2009d). Yet, today, 80 per cent of the world’s population lives in areas with high levels of 
threat to water security, particularly in developing countries (United Nations Environment 
Programme, 2012b). In addition, it is expected that the increasing and competing demands 
for water will aggravate the serious depletion of surface-water resources. Water scarcity rep-
resents an important challenge for agriculture, which uses 70 per cent of global freshwater.10  
There  are  several  causes  of  water  scarcity.  Intensive  agriculture,  including 
livestock  production,  has  become  a  major  factor  in  water  quality  degradation  (United 
Nations, 2011b). Excessive use of agrochemicals (pesticides and fertilizers) contaminates 
waterways. Energy production and climate change are also main causes of water scarcity. 
For instance, use of traditional sources for energy production results in increased green-
house gas emissions and climate change, increasing the frequency and intensity of extreme 
climatic events such as flood and droughts, sea-level rise, and the loss of glacial and polar 
sea ice, all of which contribute to water scarcity. Alternative solutions, such as utilization 
of energy sources with lower carbon footprints, can also have implications for the water 
environment. Hydropower production can contribute to fragmentation of river systems, 
while the construction of some solar-energy infrastructure consumes significant quantities 
of water (United Nations Environment Programme, 2012a).

Finally, climate has been changing, mainly owing to the levels of greenhouse 
gases in the atmosphere, presenting a serious threat to agriculture. Extreme weather events 
such as droughts and floods, have been affecting food production, with dramatic conse-
quences for various agroecosystems. In the coming decades, it is expected that climate 
change will continue to have adverse effects on agricultural production. Even a modest cli-
mate change of about 2º Celsius can change rainfall patterns, resulting in a shorter grow-
ing season and lower agricultural production, particularly in areas that are already hot and 
dry, for example, in Africa and South Asia (Beddington and others, 2012). Communities 
already plagued with high levels of food insecurity and environmental degradation are 
disproportionally affected. In particular, smallholders relying on rain-fed agriculture are 
more vulnerable to climate change. 

There  are  several  factors  contributing  to  the  problem  of  climate  change. 
Current agriculture practices, including land clearing for cultivation and inefficient use of 
fertilizers and organic residues, constitute one such factor, being responsible for 25-33 per 
cent of greenhouse gas emissions (Beddington and others, 2012). While agriculture is a 
major contributor to global greenhouse gas emissions, it can also be part of the solution to 
the problem of climate change. There is ample room for lowering emissions throughout the 
food system, through more efficient productive techniques and better demand manage-
ment. On the production side, climate change can be mitigated through carbon sequestra-
tion  in  both  vegetation  (forests,  for  example)  and  soil.  On  the  demand  side,  reducing 
wastage, for instance, will be important (see the sect., entitled “Diets and consumption 
patterns”, below), as well as increasing demand for organic and eco-certified products, 
which should encourage producers to pay more attention to sustainable practices. Despite 
international and national awareness of the risks related to climate change, there has so far 
been limited financial and political support for implementing more sustainable practices. 

10 

See Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (2009b).

Ensuring food and nutrition security100

Improving management of natural resources 

Improving agricultural outcomes will therefore require an integrated approach which pro-
motes the resource efficiency of the whole agriculture and food system, while mitigating 
its environmental impacts. In this regard, government policies can foster an agricultural 
innovation system approach to developing a comprehensive policy framework for innova-
tion, which can respond to the double challenge of increasing agricultural productivity 
and achieving environmental sustainability (United Nations, 2011b). 

The  Southern  Agricultural  Growth  Corridor  of  the  United  Republic  of 
Tanzania  (SAGCOT)  exemplifies  such  an  integrated  approach.  The  Growth  Corridor 
brings together the capabilities and resources of businesses, government and civil society 
within a common platform in order to overcome the country’s various ecosystems barriers 
to achieving the triple objective of agricultural productivity, food security and livelihoods 
creation in a sustainable manner. By encompassing the entire agricultural value chain, the 
SAGCOT approach attempts not just to raise agricultural productivity but to ensure the 
necessary infrastructure, policy environment and access to knowledge required to create 
an efficient, well-functioning agricultural value chain.

Traditional  practices  have  recently  also  gained  in  importance  within  the 
context  of  adaptation  to  climate  change.  For  instance,  local  farmers  and  communities 
have shown a great capacity to innovate in response to weather and other shocks. There 
are  thousands  of  successful  experiences  of  localized  enhanced  pest  and  weed  manage-
ment, water efficiency and biodiversity, including stories of highly successful innovation 
in the most challenging circumstances characterized by a poor natural resource base and 
widespread poverty.11 Traditional practices, such as low-tillage farming, crop rotation and 
interplanting, water harvesting and recycling, water-efficient cropping, and integrated pest 
management,  have  also  proved  their  relevance  to  increasing  productivity  and  ensuring 
environmental sustainability. 

Agricultural research should also consider the climatic, soil and water condi-
tions  of  the  relevant  agroecological  region.  Adaptation  measures  involving  organic  soil 
nutrient  enhancement  and  other  ecologically  sound  methods—an  approach  popularly 
known as climate-smart agriculture—can contribute to reducing greenhouse gas emis-
sions. As noted above, there is much interest in the climate change mitigation potential of 
carbon sequestration, in both vegetation (forests in particular) and soil (United Nations, 
2011b). The use of ICT and better access to information facilitate the transition to preci-
sion agriculture adapted to different agroecological regions. For instance, using satellite-
based remote monitoring and in-field sensing technologies is of great help in the global 
and regional monitoring of crop productivity and weather-related impacts. 

Investments in rural infrastructures 

Addressing the structural 
constraints on food 
production and distribution 
within a wider framework 
of sustainable natural 
resource management 
will require investments in 
infrastructure in rural areas

In respect of addressing the structural constraints on food production and distribution 
within a wider framework of sustainable natural resource management, investments in 
infrastructure in rural areas will also be determinant. In particular, small farm holders in 
developing countries face limited access to output markets, which affects the efficiency of 
their farming. As a result of the existence of such inefficiencies, an opportunity is missed 
to increase agricultural output. This is especially regrettable since most of the findings 

11 

See United Nations (2011b) for a more elaborate discussion of this topic.  

World Economic and Social Survey 2013101

In some countries, the focus 
should also be on crop 
harvesting technologies, as 
significant wastage occurs 
at the producer end and 
before reaching the market

presented in the literature dealing with agricultural development in low-income countries 
indicate that small farm units tend to show higher productivity than large-scale farms.12
In agriculture-based countries, in sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia in particu-
lar, the priority should be expansions of basic infrastructure such as roads, electricity supply 
and  potable  water.  In  many  African  countries,  for  instance,  transportation  can  account 
for 50-60 per cent of total marketing costs. Improving road connections is thus crucial for 
bringing marketing costs down and stimulating local economies (World Bank, 2008a). 

By addressing long-term structural constraints on food production, investments 
in physical infrastructure can be a catalyst of productivity growth. In poor agriculture-
based countries, public investment will also play an important role in leveraging private 
investment, which will otherwise not flow in sufficient amounts to meet needs, owing 
to the perception that agricultural production is high-risk. Larger public investment in 
infrastructure will provide greater incentives to increase private investment within a wider 
framework of sustainable natural resource management. 

The  case  of  Uganda  (box  IV.2)  not  only  provides  a  good  illustration  of  the 
potentially large impact that public infrastructure can have in increasing productivity, but 
also raises important questions about the larger macroeconomic impacts of increasing gov-
ernment expenditures and the need to take into account the trade-offs involved in this deci-
sion. Carefully crafted strategies for achieving food security will require national consensus 
and the political will to prioritize investments, as well as greater government capacities to 
stimulate large productivity gains through sustainable finance. Development cooperation 
would have an important role in at least two areas: (a) support for development of capacity, 
especially within least developed countries, to conduct policy assessments, and (b) provi-
sion of additional resources for infrastructure development. Enhancing the outreach and 
volume of resources in the Aid for Trade initiative for infrastructure development would 
make an outstanding contribution to achieving the objective of sustainable food security.  
In some countries, the focus should also be on crop harvesting technologies, 
as significant wastage occurs at the producer end and before reaching the market, owing 
to  inadequate  harvesting  techniques  (Institution  of  Mechanical  Engineers,  2013).  The 
amount of food wasted represents not only an economic cost but, more importantly, a 
waste of energy and natural resources. As mechanized harvested systems are implemented, 
food distribution and storage systems will need to be improved in parallel. Access to af-
fordable energy and cooling systems, for instance, could provide storage options and also 
facilitate their installation by smaller scale farmers, isolated from markets, which would 
ultimately increase food availability throughout the whole year.

Many developing countries, especially those with an agriculture-based econo-
my, will need external support to increase their investments in infrastructure. In 2010, the 
international community launched the Global Agriculture and Food Security Programme 
(GAFSP), which, among several activities, has been channelling long-term investments in 
food and nutrition security. However, this Programme is costly and has required a high 
level of funding that has not become available. Of the $1.2 billion pledged, $752 million 
have  already  been  received,  of  which  $658  million  have  been  allocated  to  country-led 
programmes in 18 countries. More funds should be provided, however, to help implement 
these strategies and support the development of new ones so as to reinforce the resilience 
of the food production system.  

12 

These  advantages  may  disappear  for  certain  crops  whose  cultivation  benefits  from  significant 
economies of scale and input-intensive technologies.

Ensuring food and nutrition security102

Box IV.2

a  The scenarios have 
been generated using a 
dynamic economy-wide 
modelling framework 
known as the Maquette 
for MDG Simulations 
(MAMS) (Lofgren, Cicowiez 
and Díaz-Bonilla, 2013), 
which involves, inter 
alia, a microeconomic 
analysis of determinants 
of productivity growth 
where the stock of public 
infrastructure is one of the 
key drivers at underlying 
country-specific elasticity 
values. Uganda’s baseline 
scenario was first generated 
for the period 2007-2015 
by national researchers and 
Government experts, with 
technical support from UN/
DESA and the World Bank 
(Matovu and others, 2013). 
UN/DESA extended this 
scenario up to 2030 for the 
analysis presented here.

Infrastructure’s potential to drive productivity and 
sustainable food production: the case of Uganda 

Uganda  is  a  low-income  country  with  severe  deficits  in  physical  infrastructure,  where  agriculture 
still generates about 23 per cent of GDP, which is relatively high compared with an average of 12 per 
cent  in  sub-Saharan  Africa.  Several  policy  scenarios  illustrate  the  potential  of  Government  invest-
ments in physical infrastructure to drive productivity growth and enhance food production capacity. 
These scenarios are compared with a baseline that delineates a continuation of currently expected 
economic growth and public spending interventions up to 2030.a

Public spending in agriculture infrastructure, mostly for irrigation projects, represents 
only  0.7  per  cent  of  Uganda’s  GDP  under  the  baseline.  The  first  scenario  assumes  an  increase  of 
public investment in agriculture by the Government equivalent to 2 percentage points of GDP over 
the period 2016-2030. As a result, factor productivity growth in agriculture—of about 2.4 per cent 
per year under the baseline—is pushed up by an additional 1.3 percentage points per year during 
the period 2016-2030. Consequently, agricultural output growth increases by about 1.5 percentage 
points per year. In a second round of effects, public spending spurs export growth and a higher level 
of household consumption, especially of agricultural goods, but the results are also favourable at the 
national level (see table). 

These results support the idea that public investment in agriculture infrastructure con-
tributes  to  productivity  gains.  While  investments  in  other  public  infrastructure,  mainly  roads  and 
electricity supply, also yield positive results, they are relatively less significant in magnitude, particu-
larly for agriculture, compared with the results under the first three scenarios.

The main concern for policymakers is how to finance the new investments in infrastruc-
ture. The financing requirements could create undesirable macroeconomic hardships and may be 
politically unattainable. In the case of Uganda, for example, the scenarios show that financing new 
infrastructures through higher direct-tax revenues spurs GDP growth and household consumption 
relatively less than does, for example, financing them through foreign resources. However, the use of 
foreign resources affects export growth negatively, owing to real exchange rate appreciation. In ad-
dition to these macroeconomic hardships, other factors, like debt sustainability, (declining) support 
from foreign donors and the issue of the real feasibility of raising tax burdens, need to be taken into 
consideration as well when defining a financing strategy. 

According to these simulations, the ideal scenario entails the creation of fiscal space by 
reducing other government expenditures, which avoids the said macroeconomic trade-offs. The fea-
sibility of this scenario will depend, however, on the political conditions for improving the efficiency 
of government spending and/or reallocating resources towards the agricultural sector.

Improving access to food

Investments in food 
production systems need 
to be complemented by 
programmes designed to 
increase the incomes of the 
poor, as well as by social 
protection and safety nets

Although crucial to improving nutrition outcomes, improving food availability is not suf-
ficient to ensure access to food. Food insecurity is more often the result of limited access 
to food. As explained by A. Sen (1981), “starvation is a matter of some people not having 
enough food to eat, and not a matter of there being not enough food to eat”. Thus, invest-
ments  in  food  production  systems  need  to  be  complemented  by  programmes  designed 
to increase the incomes of the poor, as well as social protection and safety nets. At the 
international level, measures also have to be taken to prevent excessive food price volatility 
and to ensure that a pro-food security trade system is in place. 

World Economic and Social Survey 2013103

Box IV.2 (cont’d)

 Uganda: selected real macro indicators under simulation scenarios, 2016-2030  
Annual average growth rate

Agriculture
GDP
Exports of agricultural goods
Household consumption of  
agricultural goods
National
GDP
Exports of goods and services
Household consumption

Direct-tax 
revenue

Foreign 
transfers

Allocative 
efficiency

Baseline

Irrigation systems

5.3
3.5

5.0

7.0
7.0
6.5

6.6
7.3

5.4

7.2
7.8
6.2

6.5
6.2

5.8

7.6
7.0
7.0

6.7
7.0

5.8

7.4
8.0
6.9

Roads and electricity supply

5.5
3.6

5.2

5.3
3.5

5.0

5.5
4.1

5.0

Agriculture
GDP
Exports of agricultural goods
Household consumption of  
agricultural goods
National
GDP
Exports of goods and services
Household consumption
Source: UN/DESA, based on an updated version of MAMS for Uganda, presented initially in Matovu and  
others (2013).
Note: In non-baseline scenarios, the Government generates the fiscal space needed to expand investments 
in infrastructure by 2 percentage points of GDP above the baseline in 2016-2030. The new investments are 
financed through higher direct-tax revenues, foreign transfers or allocative efficiency of government spending 
achieved by reducing “wasteful” spending or “overlapping” government functions.

7.0
7.0
6.5

7.4
6.9
6.8

7.1
7.3
6.2

5.6
3.7

5.2

7.2
7.6
6.7

Limited access to food 

Income poverty is obviously a main underlying factor preventing access to food. For in-
stance, when comparing the highest and the lowest income quintiles of the population in 
developing countries, the poorer children are almost 3 times more likely to be underweight 
than children in the wealthiest 20 per cent of households (United Nations, 2012c). Hence, 
increasing the income level of poor households will help ensure adequate food quantity 
and quality, and reduce the prevalence of undernourishment. However, in many regions 
and countries, economic growth has not been inclusive enough to provide employment 
and income-earning opportunities for the poor. 

Increasing the income level 
of poor households will 
help ensure adequate food 
quantity and quality, and 
reduce the prevalence of 
undernourishment

Ensuring food and nutrition security104

High inequality in the 
distribution of assets—
such as land, water, 
capital, education and 
healthcare—is a main 
obstacle which needs to  
be addressed so as to 
enhance food security

As many poor people live in rural areas, it is not surprising that it is in those 
areas that the prevalence of undernourishment is also higher. For instance, in developing 
regions, children living in rural areas are almost twice as likely to be underweight than 
children in urban households (ibid.). Therefore, economic growth should generate demand 
for the assets controlled by the poor (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United 
Nations, 2012b), in particular the rural poor. 

Among the rural poor, the situation of small farm holders is at the heart of the 
food security challenge. Small farmers face limited resources and assets, either for purchas-
ing or for producing the quantity of food that is adequate to their needs. Empirically, it has 
been observed that the majority of the extremely poor and about half of the undernourished 
people in the world, which includes 1.5 billion people in least developed countries, live on 
small farms of less than two hectares, representing 90 per cent of farms worldwide (United 
Nations, 2011b). Further, according to the most recent data, average farm sizes are still 
declining in many countries, for example, in Africa, and in India (World Bank, 2008a). 

Thus, addressing the issue of food availability and undernourishment in rural 
areas necessarily implies responding to the challenges faced by smallholders. In particular, 
high inequality in distribution of assets—such as land, water, capital, education and health 
care—is  a  main  obstacle  which  needs  to  be  addressed  so  as  to  enhance  food  security. 
This is particularly evident in countries where large farms have been controlling a larger 
proportion of the land, while exacerbating the asset squeeze on smallholders (ibid.). 

Discrimination against women in the rural sector also has a negative impact on 
the outcomes of efforts to secure access to food and nutrition. Women make up over 40 per 
cent of the agricultural workforce in Africa and East and South Asia, but they constitute 
only 5 per cent of landholders in Northern and West Africa, 15 per cent in sub-Saharan 
Africa and 25 per cent in several countries in Latin America. Women have restricted access 
not only to land but also to credit and technology, which increases their economic vulner-
ability and the instability of their situation with respect to nutrition. These restrictions 
imposed on women exacerbate gender discrepancies with regard to nutrition, with serious 
intergenerational effects, as nutrition in children under age 5 depends critically on the 
nutrition of their mothers during pregnancy and lactation (Horton, 2008; Copenhagen 
Consensus, 2008). 

Generating income in rural areas

The  ability  to  generate  income  for  the  rural  poor  will  be  a  main  determinant  of  food 
security. Generating an increase in agricultural productivity is an important strategy for 
increasing food availability, but it may not improve access to food of a large portion of the 
population, including vulnerable social groups.

Improving agricultural income

A successful strategy for 
increasing rural households’ 
income entails promoting 
the diversification of their 
farming activities

A successful strategy for increasing rural households’ income entails promoting the di-
versification  of  their  farming  activities.  When  comparing  households  relying  on  more 
diversified farming activities with those that remain engaged in more traditional farming, 
it is evident that the former are more successful in moving out of poverty. In Uganda, for 
instance, the combination of higher productivity of land and diversification of crops, in 
particular cash crops, has led to lower rural poverty (World Bank, 2008a). 

World Economic and Social Survey 2013105

Adult literacy and training 
should be a priority in 
any strategy aimed at 
strengthening farmers’ 
capacity for response to 
rapidly changing market 
conditions

In addition, a diversified farming system, integrating, for instance, horticul-
ture and livestock, can enhance nutritional outcomes, as it improves rural households’ 
access to foods from animal sources, fruits and vegetables. In Viet Nam, for example, the 
vegetation, aquaculture, and cages for animal Husbandry (VAC) system, which includes 
a diversified farming system at the household level, has contributed to improvements in 
both incomes and nutritional outcomes, in terms of consumption of foods from animal 
sources  and  fruits  and  vegetables  (Food  and  Agriculture  Organization  of  the  United 
Nations, 2013). This experience shows that integrated farming projects can be particularly 
successful in raising micronutrient intake, in addition to improving income stability. 

However, a main challenge is the unequal access to rural assets, which prevent 
many households from adopting market-oriented strategies and moving out of poverty. 
There are gaps in the institutional structure required for the operation of land markets, 
financial services, input markets and producer organizations. An appropriate institutional 
setting is also crucial for supporting small-scale farming, so as to increase agricultural in-
vestment and productivity, while preserving natural resources. Improving women’s access, 
for instance, to several assets, such as land, input markets and technology, could increase 
agricultural production by as much as 2.5-4.0 per cent, thereby reducing the number of 
undernourished people by 12-17 per cent, equivalent to freeing 100 million-150 million 
people from hunger (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2011b). 
Moreover, flexible land management and the capacity to innovate in produc-
tion, storage and marketing practices and techniques require the appropriate use of infor-
mation and technology, as part of a continuous learning process (Davis and others, 2007). 
Therefore, rapid expansion of quality education in rural areas, including adult literacy and 
training, should receive the highest priority in any strategy aimed at strengthening farm-
ers’ capacity for response to rapidly changing market conditions. Innovative mechanisms 
for the transmission of knowledge and training also need to be strengthened. The experi-
ence of the Farmer Field Schools—operating in 87 countries—shows that innovation and 
flexible natural resource management can be advanced through farmer-to-farmer learning, 
including participation in formal and informal research institutions. In-service and on-
the-job training and distance education have also proved effective and are increasingly 
complementing extension services (United Nations, 2011b).

Non-farm economy

As has been extensively documented, many rural households complement their own ag-
ricultural activity with non-farm sources of income. In agriculture-based economies, the 
share of rural income derived from non-agricultural sources may be only 20-30 per cent, 
but in urbanizing economies, it can be as high as 60-70 per cent (Food and Agriculture 
Organization of the United Nations, 2012b). That is to say, many rural households diver-
sify their source of income by dividing their time and labour units between farming and 
non-farm activities. 

Thus, in agriculture-based countries, growth in the agriculture sector can be 
complemented by non-farm activities, creating a virtuous cycle of rural growth and em-
ployment generation (ibid.). However, as noted above (see the previous sect. on increasing 
food availability), developing rural infrastructure and improving rural-urban linkages will 
also be important for promoting additional sources of revenue. For instance, stimulat-
ing rural-urban migration will help in diversifying the income sources of the household 
and reducing poverty, particularly in urbanizing economies. In China, for instance, the 

Ensuring food and nutrition security106

Rural development 
strategies should 
enhance opportunities for 
smallholders to diversify 
their agricultural as well as 
non-farm activities

In the short term, 
emergency food assistance 
and safety nets are effective 
tools for meeting urgent 
food needs and protecting 
the most vulnerable against 
price and climatic shocks

existence of areas of high population density combined with lower transport costs has 
stimulated labour-intensive manufacturing for export markets using the labour force from 
rural areas (ibid.). 

Moving forward, rural development strategies should enhance opportunities 
for smallholders to diversify their agricultural as well as non-farm activities. These strate-
gies can at the same time reduce rural poverty and under-nutrition. First, they can enable 
households to both diversify their sources of income, by incorporating more cash crops in 
their agricultural production, and secure higher-productivity jobs outside the agricultural 
sector.  Second,  they  can  lead  to  direct  improvement  of  nutritional  conditions  through 
enhanced access to a more diversified source of nutrients. 

However, access to assets, individuals’ skills and migration opportunities will 
all be determining factors in the process of moving out of rural poverty. Infrastructural 
as well as institutional changes will be necessary to ensure access to rural assets, such as 
land and water. Access to education will also be crucial to ensuring that the rural poor and 
specific social groups, such as women, can take advantage of new income opportunities. 

Social security and safety nets

As discussed above, one of the main obstacles to achieving food security is the lack of ac-
cess to food, in particular among lower-income groups which lack the necessary purchas-
ing power. The 2007-2008 food price crisis exacerbated the problem of food accessibility 
and nutrition outcomes, in particular for poor people, who spend 50-70 per cent of their 
income on food. A social protection system, including safety nets, can protect the most 
vulnerable  against  short-term  economic  and  food  price  shocks.  Several  large  countries 
were able to protect consumers by insulating their markets from international price shocks 
with additional safety net programmes. Social protection can also contribute to long-term 
resilience by facilitating access to food and by strengthening the ability of smallholders to 
manage risks and adopt new technologies with higher productivity (Food and Agriculture 
Organization of the United Nations, 2012a). The types of social protection instruments 
will vary depending on national social needs, development objectives and fiscal space. 

Safety nets in the short term

As regards short-term relevance, emergency food assistance and safety nets are effective 
tools  for  meeting  urgent  food  needs  and  protecting  the  poor  and  the  most  vulnerable 
against price or climatic shocks. Safety nets include community support systems, transfers 
(direct and indirect), subsidies, public works and microcredit. For instance, in the after-
math of the 2007-2008 food price crisis, 23 countries introduced or expanded cash trans-
fer programmes, 19 countries introduced food assistance programmes and 16 countries 
increased disposable income measures (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United 
Nations, 2009c). Multiple solutions are possible, but, in general, scaling up existing social 
protection interventions has proved to be the best strategy for facing urgent challenges. 

An adequate safety net can also ensure a basic level of consumption, which 
enables poorer farmers to assume the higher risks associated with higher-return strategies, 
which, potentially, could break the vicious circle of poverty and hunger. Public works (or 
cash for work) programmes, such as India’s National Employment Guarantee Scheme, 
represent  typical  employment-based  safety  nets  which  entitle  individuals  to  a  minimal 

World Economic and Social Survey 2013107

Long-term resilience and 
food security will require a 
more comprehensive social 
security system

amount of work and income, while they contribute to labour-intensive infrastructure de-
velopment projects (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2009c). 
These employment programmes can also incorporate training components, thereby en-
hancing human capital at the local level. 

Social security in the long term 

Long-term resilience and food security will require a more comprehensive social security 
system.  The  main  goal  should  be  to  establish  systematic  and  predictable  programmes, 
targeting specific social groups, including the poor and smallholders, which can enhance 
human  capital  and  stimulate  the  adoption  of  new  technologies.  For  instance,  nutrition 
intervention in early childhood, especially in the first thousand days, can lead to higher 
adult economic productivity. In Guatemala, a study showed that children who had received 
nutritional supplements before reaching the age of 3 earned hourly wages as adults that were 
46 per cent higher (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2012b). 

Much has been learned about how best to design social protection floors, how 
to  determine  which  combinations  of  plans  work  and  where,  and  how  to  target  them. 
The international community can provide assistance to developing countries in design-
ing such plans in a cost-effective time-bound manner so as to realize the right to food, 
as well as stimulate rural development, agricultural production and poverty alleviation. 
Support should also be offered to help integrate the social protection floor plan within the 
national agricultural strategies. The leaders of the G20, at their 2012 Summit, recognized 
the importance of establishing nationally determined social protection floors. They are 
being  endorsed  within  International  Labour  Organization  conference  processes,  which 
could support national efforts. The international community may also need to help the 
least developed countries finance their own social protection programmes.

A pro-food security international trade system

In  today’s  interdependent  world,  the  implementation  of  national  strategies  to  improve 
access to food also requires concrete actions at the global level. As observed during the 
2007-2008 food price crisis, higher food prices deeply affected nutrition and macroeco-
nomic conditions of net food importing countries, especially in sub-Saharan Africa (Food 
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2011d), in part owing to a shortage 
of the foreign currency required to increase food imports. Conditions promoting trade and 
food market transparency needed to reduce price distortions and volatility will be crucial 
to stimulating staple food production at the local level and ensuring access to food at the 
same time.

Conditions promoting 
trade and food market 
transparency needed to 
reduce price distortions 
and volatility will be crucial 
to stimulating staple food 
production at the local level 
and ensuring access to food 
at the same time

The trade system 

Agricultural trade is potentially a pathway for GDP growth, lower rural poverty and food 
security. However, global markets have been working in favour of major production com-
panies and some food exporting countries, often to the detriment of small landholders. 
The main challenge for the international trade system is to become more food security-ori-
ented, in particular as regards food importing countries. For instance, the export subsidies 
and import protection granted by developed countries continue to create price distortions 

Ensuring food and nutrition security108

in global food markets, with large negative consequences for developing countries. As a 
result, several countries have reduced investment in their agriculture sector. In this regard, 
as suggested in the specific proposals for the review of World Trade Organization rules, 
the trade system should be flexible in order to protect non-traded agricultural sectors that 
are vital to food security. 

In food exporting countries, export restrictions must be disciplined, as agreed 
at the G20 Cannes Summit in 2011 within the context of food crisis situations. Export 
restrictions provide a disincentive to farmers to invest in food production and undermine 
progress towards multilateral trade reforms and freer trade in the agriculture sector. At 
the same time, in food importing countries, import and domestic taxes on food must be 
temporarily reduced, especially when taxes constitute a significant proportion of the final 
price. For instance, tax reductions could be a better option than a subsidy programme, 
despite some of the negative effects on public revenue. 

In the longer run, a fairer international trading system, taking into account 
the food security, livelihood security and rural development needs of developing countries, 
will  be  crucial.  For  instance,  in  higher-income  countries,  agricultural  trade  distortions 
need to be eliminated, in particular subsidies and market restrictions, which have devastat-
ing consequences for farmers in lower-income countries. In this regard, the Doha Round 
of  World  Trade  Organization  negotiations  should  be  completed,  with  the  Marrakesh 
Ministerial Decision on Measures Concerning the Possible Negative Effects of the Reform 
Programme on Least Developed and Net Food-importing Developing Countries13 assist-
ing countries in the implementation process.  

Maintaining food stocks 
at the global and regional 
levels is an additional useful 
mechanism for improving 
emergency access to food 
and stabilizing food prices

There is need for better 
information, with the 
creation of a transparent 
and coordinated food 
market information system

Food security stocks and information transparency 

Maintaining food stocks at the global and regional levels is an additional useful mecha-
nism not only for improving emergency access to food, but also for stabilizing food prices. 
A certain level of world stock could be a sufficient condition for price stability (Committee 
on World Food Security, High-level Panel of Experts on Food Security and Nutrition, 
2011). Supporting and improving access to these stocks can enhance food security and 
prevent  humanitarian  crises  in  countries  under  emergency  conditions.  These  stocks 
should, however, target lower-income countries and be released strategically to support 
programmes that facilitate food access to the most vulnerable populations. In this regard, 
the High-level Panel of Experts on Food Security and Nutrition of the Committee on 
World Food Security made two important recommendations on how to maintain a mini-
mum level of world stocks and ultimately reduce food insecurity. 

Pursuant to those recommendations, first, there is need for better informa-
tion, with the creation of a transparent and coordinated food market information system. 
The elimination of most public stocks in OECD countries and the privatization of most 
State-trading enterprises have concentrated knowledge concerning agricultural commod-
ity availability in the hands of a small number of companies which maintain this informa-
tion as proprietary. One of the most important elements of the Action Plan on Food Price 
Volatility, agreed by the G20 Agriculture Ministers at their meeting held in Paris on 22 
and  23  June  2011,  was  the  launching  of  the  Agricultural  Market  Information  System 
(AMIS) to improve market information and transparency of data on current stocks, and 
promote  coordination  of  policy  responses  (see  Ministerial  declaration,  para.  26).  The 
High-level Panel of Experts at the same time recommended that given the importance of 

13 

See Legal Instruments Embodying the Results of the Uruguay Round of Multilateral Trade Negotiations, 
done at Marrakesh on 15 April 1994 (GATT secretariat publication, Sales No. GATT/1994-7).

World Economic and Social Survey 2013food insecurity, trading firms should be mandated to report on stocks instead of being 
allowed to do so voluntarily. AMIS market information should also be extended to in-
clude food crops other than the usual global cereals, including livestock and fish. Second, 
assuming the role traditionally played by the United States of America and China as stock 
holders, the international community should maintain a minimum level of world food 
stock. The objective would not be to defend a price band but rather to avert price spikes 
through the release of stock when prices started to boom.

In addition, increasing food reserves managed by the World Food Programme 
(WFP) could reduce delivery time and costs when a situation reaches crisis level. Since 
WFP usually relies on cash to purchase food for its work, upward price spikes limit the 
quantity of food it can purchase and its ability to respond to human needs. In order to 
fill these gaps, including delivery time, WFP initiated a regional stocking programme in 
2008—the Forward Purchase Facility—in Eastern and Southern Africa. This system of-
fered several advantages, such as more accurate provision due to reduced time lags between 
requests  and  provision,  and  could  be  expanded  to  other  regions.  However,  the  lack  of 
funding, and of available advance financing in particular, constitutes a major constraint 
on expanding this pilot project. 

Diets and consumption patterns

Nutrition outcomes are largely determined not only by food production and accessibility 
but  also  by  food  quality  and  diversity.  A  considerable  potential  for  increasing  the  nu-
tritional status of people and the efficiency of the whole food chain lies in encouraging 
changes in diet and consumption patterns, as well as designing pro-nutrition policies in 
other sectors, such as health and education. In addition, reducing food losses is a cost-
effective means of increasing the availability of safe and nutritious food for all. Preventing 
food wastage would also reduce the challenge of how to increase production in a world 
with limited natural resources. 

Sustainable diets

The challenge of feeding a rising and increasingly affluent population also requires be-
havioural changes in terms of consumption, including dietary patterns. In particular, the 
livestock  sector,  which  has  grown  rapidly  to  meet  the  increasing  demand  for  meat,  is 
a prime contribution to water scarcity, pollution, land degradation and greenhouse gas 
emissions. This has prompted calls for support of more sustainable diets with a more bal-
anced content of calories derived from animal food. While the caloric content of meat is, 
on average, not substantially higher than that of cereals, meat production is much more 
demanding in terms of natural resources. On average, grain-meat conversion ratios, i.e., 
the number of kilograms of cereals needed to produce one kilogram of poultry or beef 
ranges from 2 to 1 for poultry all the way up to 7 to 1 for beef (United Nations Convention 
to Combat Desertification, 2012).

Consumption by an increasingly affluent population in 2050 will exacerbate 
pressures on the use of land and water and increase greenhouse gas emissions from agri-
culture (see previous sect. on increasing food availability). A decrease in the consumption 
of meat through adoption of more sustainable diets can lead to a substantial reduction in 
the use of land and other natural resources, thus improving the prospects of sustainable 
development, as illustrated in box IV.3. 

109

A decrease in the 
consumption of meat 
can lead to a substantial 
reduction in the use of land 
and other natural resources, 
thus improving the 
prospects for sustainable 
development

Ensuring food and nutrition security110

Box IV.3

Source: UN/DESA, based 
on Millennium Institute, 
“Global food and nutrition 
scenarios”, background 
paper prepared for the 
World Economic and Social  
Survey 2013 (2013).
a  The T21 model is a 
dynamic simulation tool 
designed to support 
comprehensive, integrated 
long-term national 
development planning.
b  In addition to the 
simulation presented in 
this box, the Millennium 
Institute designed three 
more simulation scenarios 
with different assumptions 
on changes in consumption 
and waste patterns. For a 
full discussion of the results, 
see Millennium Institute, 
“Global food and nutrition 
scenarios”, background 
paper prepared for the 
World Economic and Social  
Survey 2013 (2013). 

Health and education policies to enhance nutrition security

There is a strong consensus that better nutrition will also require pro-nutrition policies in 
other, related sectors. Public policies and programmes designed to improve health, water and 
sanitation services will be particularly important. Increasing individuals’ awareness of the 
benefits of healthier diets, through information campaigns and educational programmes, 
is  also  relevant.  A  multifaceted  approach  to  improving  the  nutritional  status  of  people, 

Sustainable diets and reduced food waste 

The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) has estimated that meat con-
sumption in 2050 will amount approximately to 4.65 billion tons. Poultry meat consumption level 
is expected to be 2.3 times higher than in 2010, while consumption of other livestock products is 
expected to be between 1.4 and 1.8 times higher (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United 
Nations, 2009d). The world’s average daily calorie availability is projected to rise from an average of 
2,789 kilocalories per person in 2000 to 3,130 kilocalories per person in 2050, a 12 per cent increase. 
Further,  current  food  waste  is  around  30-50  per  cent  of  total  production  (Food  and  Agriculture 
Organization of the United Nations, 2011d; Institution of Mechanical Engineers, 2013).

Using the T21 model,a the Millennium Institute simulated the impact of reducing meat 
consumption and food waste on the demand for land.b The simulation assumes an overall reduc-
tion in the consumption of meat to provide 500 calories per capita per day in 2050 (down from the 
620 projected by FAO). In addition, food waste and loss are assumed to decrease slightly from the 
current 32 per cent of total production to 30 per cent. These two assumptions result in a substantial 
reduction in harvested area, from an estimated 1.31 billion hectares required in 2050 to 1.065 billion 
hectares, a savings of almost 20 per cent in respect of the demand for harvested land. 

While the changes projected do not seem ambitious, much larger changes will have 
to occur in each country, according to their starting point. For meat consumption, it is assumed that 
there is a global convergence towards the current world average of 500 calories per capita per day 
from animal food, which would require an increase in the consumption of animal food in low-income 
countries in Africa, the Caribbean and Asia and a reduction in the consumption of animal food in 
high-income countries in Europe, North America and Oceania of 30-35 per cent. 

Similarly, the projected decrease of food waste and loss, from the current 32 per cent 
to approximately 30 per cent by 2050 is based on the assumption of a global convergence towards 
a level of about 200 kilograms per capita per year. This allows for some slight increase in food waste 
and loss in low-income countries (mainly driven by an expected substantial increase in production), 
a gradual decrease of food waste and loss in middle-income countries, and a more drastic reduction 
in high-income countries.

While these results demonstrate that even a conservative change in global consump-
tion patterns will yield significant reductions in the demand for harvested land, with consequent 
lower pressure on the use of water, soil nutrients and energy, they also indicate that even small steps 
towards improving the use of available resources require major changes at country level, in the way 
that food is produced, transported and consumed.

The available policy options for inducing these changes are largely country-specific and 
require a large degree of coordination and consistency across multiple policy areas, with agriculture,  
health and education being the most obvious. Achieving an understanding of the policy instruments 
available to countries for inducing a change in diets within different contexts requires further research 
and policy experimentation. Policy instruments such as taxing meat products or refined sugars and 
carbohydrates to discourage unhealthy diets, educational programmes, mandating corporate social 
responsibility and labelling standards, production disincentives for meats and production incentives 
for whole grain cereals, vegetables and fruits, etc., need to be tested against the overall objective of 
promoting (and enabling) the adoption of sustainable diets. 

World Economic and Social Survey 2013including in preventing overconsumption and obesity, is essential. Hence, health and edu-
cational policies need to incorporate nutrition-related considerations in their programmes. 

Health

Nutrition and health are inextricable, as a good nutritional status can be achieved only 
within the context of overall conditions of good health. For instance, in developing coun-
tries, access to basic health services is often inadequate owing to an insufficient number of 
health centres and qualified personnel. The resulting poor health conditions and illnesses, 
such as measles and gastroenteritis, will then have a negative impact on nutritional status. 
Similarly, the lack of safe water and of adequate sanitation leads to many diseases and 
illnesses, while compromising the nutritional status of people. 

Thus, health policies should include preventive health and hygiene measures, 
which are essential for good nutrition, as well as ensure that nutrition components are part 
of their programme. In developing countries, access to health-care facilities and services 
for the poor, particularly women and children, has positive impacts on the nutritional 
status of individuals (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2004). 
In particular, as has been emphasized on many occasions, the first thousand days of life are 
crucial for children’s survival, as well as being a determinant for their nutrition and health 
status as adults. For instance, infants and small children should be breastfed exclusively up 
to the age of six months. After those first six months and for up to two years, breastfeeding 
should be complemented with safe and nutritious foods for infants (Food and Agriculture 
Organization of the United Nations, 2013). 

Considering the negative effects of both under- and over-nutrition on health 
throughout  life  stages  (see  previous  sect.  on  the  multiple  dimensions  of  malnutrition), 
health and nutrition must be part of a life-course approach, in particular for the prevention 
of chronic diseases. First, healthier diets and physical activity should be part of preventive 
measures to reduce negative health consequences in the long term. Second, national health 
policies need to strengthen health systems, enabling them to respond more effectively and 
equitably to health-care needs (World Health Organization, 2008). 

Information campaigns and educational programmes 

In the case of lower-income groups in developing countries, the income elasticity of de-
mand for dietary energy is positive and greater than for other income groups (Food and 
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2012a). However, as income increases, 
there is a tendency to purchase more expensive foods, based on taste preferences, which 
may not improve nutrition outcomes. In many cases, individuals are unaware of the health 
problems associated with consuming certain types of foods, as well as of the importance of 
certain micronutrients. In developed countries, people may be unaware of the health prob-
lems associated with a less diversified diet and consumption of specific foods. In countries 
where overweight and obesity have increased, diets have typically shifted towards higher 
intake of energy-dense foods which are high in fat, salt and sugars but low in vitamins, 
minerals and other micronutrients.

Thus, education programmes can improve the health and nutritional status 
of  the  population  in  general,  and  of  women  and  children  in  particular.  Women  with 
better education are more aware of the importance of adequate diets and can secure ac-
cess to better-paying jobs. Several studies have shown that women with higher income 

111

A multisectoral approach 
to improving the 
nutritional status of people, 
including in preventing 
overconsumption and 
obesity, is essential

Health systems need to be 
strengthened to respond 
more effectively and 
equitably to the health-
care needs of people 
throughout the life course 
and prevent negative 
health consequences

In developed countries, it 
has been observed that 
poorly educated women 
are 2-3 times more likely  
to be overweight than 
those with high levels  
of education

Ensuring food and nutrition security112

Dietary guidelines 
constitute one example  
of the public information 
tools used in many 
countries which should  
be encouraged

In developed countries, 
food wastage occurs  
more frequently at the 
retail and consumer 
end, owing, in part, to 
management practices  
and consumption habits

and greater bargaining power within the family exert a more positive influence on child 
nutrition,  health  and  education  outcomes  (Food  and  Agriculture  Organization  of  the 
United Nations, 2013). In developed countries, it has been observed that poorly educated 
women are 2-3 times more likely to be overweight than those with high levels of education 
(Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, 2012a). Although the link 
between education, knowledge and dietary intake is not clear, the impact of education and 
knowledge is most evident when those at highest risk are considered (Food and Agriculture 
Organization of the United Nations, 2013).

Inculcating  basic  knowledge  of  good  nutrition,  including  family  nutrition 
practices, in primary and secondary schools, can help individuals make informed dietary 
choices. Nutrition education could be included in the school curriculum and offered in 
community  centres  targeting  adults.  Recent  evaluations  of  various  school-based  nutri-
tion  education  programmes  in  Italy  and  Portugal  showed  that  those  programmes  had 
positive impacts in terms of both attitudes and consumption and health outcomes (ibid.). 
In particular, nutritional education for women has a positive impact in terms of dietary 
intake and malnutrition (ibid.). Yet, in many developing countries, gender discrimination 
preventing  school  enrolment  of  girls  is  still  a  challenge,  which  ultimately  has  negative 
impacts on nutrition outcomes.

In addition to education, information and nutrition advocacy can also have 
positive impacts on population conditions related to nutrition. Strategies aimed at influ-
encing consumer choice based on enhanced consumer awareness and knowledge should 
also be considered, as they may lead to a change in consumption habits. Dietary guidelines 
constitute  one  example  of  the  public  information  tools  used  in  many  countries  which 
should be encouraged. Information and communications measures are particularly rel-
evant to preventing obesity. However, nutrition-related messages must be appropriate in 
order  to  be  effective.  They  should  be  delivered  by  health  professionals,  among  others, 
through a variety of channels and over an extended period of time.

Consumption patterns: reducing waste

Globally, approximately one third of the total food produced for consumption, amounting 
to 1.3 billion tons per year, is lost or wasted (Food and Agriculture Organization of the 
United Nations, 2012c). Because of food waste, an opportunity is lost to reduce malnu-
trition and significant unnecessary pressure is imposed on natural resources, including 
through greenhouse gas emissions caused by production of food. There are several sources 
of food wastage throughout the supply chain, from initial agricultural production down to 
final household consumption (figure IV.5). This section examines food wastage occurring 
at the consumption end is examined, along with the underlying factors associated with 
different socioeconomic and agricultural development conditions.

The amount of food wasted in developed countries is higher than that in de-
veloping countries. Recent estimations show that the weight of food wasted per capita by 
consumers in Europe and North America amounts to 95-115 kg/year, compared with the 
figure for sub-Saharan Africa and South and South-East Asia, which is only 6-11 kg/year 
(Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2012c). 

In  developed  countries,  food  wastage  occurs  more  frequently  at  the  retail 
and consumer end, owing, in part, to management practices and consumption habits. In 
wealthier countries, sales agreements between producers and distributors may contribute 

World Economic and Social Survey 2013Figure IV.5 
Figure IV.5   Lost and wasted food, by type of product
Lost and wasted food, by type of product
Global food losses (percentage)

113

Consumption
Distribution
Processing
Post-harvest
Agriculture

Cereals

Roots 

and tubers

Oilseeds and

pulses

Fruit and
vegetables

Meat

Fish and
seafood

Dairy

products

Source: Food and Agriculture 
Organization of the United 
Nations (2012c).

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

Source: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (2012).

to the wastage of quantities of food due to the application of quality standards. As much 
as 30 per cent of total harvested food does not reach the marketplace as a result of qual-
ity  selection  and  cosmetic  considerations  (Institution  of  Mechanical  Engineers,  2013). 
Also, food production tends to exceed demand in developed countries as a precautionary 
measure, in order to ensure delivery of agreed quantities. This situation entails a financial 
loss for producers and additional pressure on natural resources. 

In industrialized countries, once food production reaches the market, perish-
able products are displayed for a minimum period of time in supermarkets, reducing in-
store wastage. However, of the 70 per cent of harvested food that reaches the marketplace,  
30-50  per  cent  is  wasted  at  home  by  the  final  consumer  (Institution  of  Mechanical 
Engineers,  2013).  Insufficient  purchase  planning  and  conservative  expiration  dates  on 
labelling, as well as significant discounts when food is purchased in higher quantities, are 
the main factors explaining the large degree of waste at the consumer level. 

In developing countries, the situation is relatively different, as waste may oc-
cur primarily at the producer level, owing to inadequate harvesting methods and at the 
marketplace, owing to inappropriate storage, rather than at home. At the producer level, 
premature harvesting of crops usually causes a loss in nutritional value and, as a result, 
a significant portion is wasted as it is not suitable for consumption. At the marketplace, 
waste also occurs when vendors keep food displayed in stalls for a long period of time, 
using unhealthy preservation methods. However, urban households keep wastage at mini-
mum levels by buying small portions each time they purchase food. 

In developed countries, retail and consumption patterns will require profound 
cultural changes, particularly regarding preferences and rejection of food based on cos-
metic characteristics. As surveys show, consumers are willing to buy such food as long 
as the taste is not affected (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 
2011e). Raising awareness in food industries, and among retailers and consumers, is a key 

In developing countries, 
the situation is relatively 
different, as waste may 
occur primarily at the 
producer level, owing to 
inadequate harvesting 
methods, and at the 
marketplace, owing to 
inappropriate storage

In developed countries, 
retail and consumption 
patterns will require 
profound cultural changes

Ensuring food and nutrition security114

In developing countries, 
investments in 
infrastructure will be  
crucial to reducing  
food wastage

element in ensuring that consumers are offered a broader range of quality products in re-
tail stores. Further, a significant proportion of the food that is currently discarded but still 
suitable for consumption could be sold or donated to commercial or charity organizations. 
Governments  may  have  to  implement  policies  designed  to  stimulate  differ-
ent marketing and food management practices which can modify retailer and consumer 
decisions, and ultimately reduce the amount of food wasted at the marketplace and at 
home. Such policies are particularly applicable to consumable fresh food products that 
do not reach the market owing to cosmetic considerations. Publicity, advocacy, education 
and even legislation can also be used to bring about ideological, cultural and behavioural 
changes so as to reduce high levels of retail and domestic food waste in the developed 
world. In addition, in wealthier countries, price incentives in retail spaces lead to over-
consumption, which ultimately increases food waste and health issues linked to excessive 
caloric intake. As long as food market prices remain relatively low, there will be no incen-
tives to alter behavioural practices.

In developing countries, as discussed previously (see sect. on increasing food 
availability), investments in infrastructure will be crucial to reducing food wastage. Public 
investments should focus on main infrastructures, such as roads and energy production. 
In parallel, private sector investments could concentrate efforts on storage and cooling 
systems. At the same time, it is important that food chain operators be trained to improve 
production, handling and storage methods, in line with food safety standards. 

Increasing financing for the agricultural sector

The transformation and development of the agricultural sector discussed in previous sec-
tions will require investments on a significant scale. There have been several studies on 
and estimations of the financing requirements for agricultural development. Considered 
within a long-term perspective, investment needs for primary agriculture and its down-
stream industries in developing countries were estimated at US$ 9.2 trillion (2009 dollars) 
over the 44-year period from 2005-2007 to 2050 (Food and Agriculture Organization of 
the United Nations, 2009a). This level of investments will have to be sourced from both 
the public and the private sector. Th  e public sector should typically finance infrastructural 
needs as well as research and development. These investments would improve productivity 
in the agricultural sector and attract private investment, which will benefit from positive 
externalities. Yet, the policy environment must provide the right incentives for private in-
vestments. Risk protection and better access to credit markets, for example, can stimulate 
private investments, from smallholders in particular. 

The importance of increasing public investment in agriculture

The public sector needs to 
take the lead in those areas 
that offer little incentive for 
private investments—such 
as rural infrastructure, and 
research and development, 
as well as extension 
services—to increase 
agricultural productivity

In  many  developing  countries,  the  share  of  agriculture  in  public  expenditure  has  to 
increase  in  order  to  improve  the  agricultural  system,  as  emphasized  by  the  Secretary-
General’s  High-level  Task  Force  on  the  Global  Food  Security  Crisis  (United  Nations, 
2008). The public sector needs to take the lead in those areas that offer little incentive 
for private investments—such as rural infrastructure, and research and development, as 
well as extension services—to increase agricultural productivity. Scaling up investment 
in these agricultural public goods and services has the potential not only to improve agri-
cultural productivity, but also to crowd in private investment. In addition, greater public 

World Economic and Social Survey 2013115

Contrary to the common 
perception, low economic 
growth and low aggregate 
wealth in a country are not 
necessarily an impediment 
to higher public spending 
on agriculture 

investment in community capacity development and social infrastructure has been consid-
ered indispensable to improving the management of natural resources and the livelihoods 
of small-scale farms (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2012a).

The main challenge, however, lies in the fact that public resources allocated to 
the agricultural sector have been falling short of the required levels, including in develop-
ing countries where food insecurity is higher and where smallholders need more support 
in order to engage with the market. Government spending on agriculture has decreased 
from the 1980s to the mid-2000s, representing only 6 per cent of total public expendi-
tures  (United  Nations,  Department  of  Economic  and  Social  Affairs,  2008).  In  Africa, 
for  instance,  despite  the  landmark  decision  of  Heads  of  State  and  Government  of  the 
African Union, at the second ordinary session of the Union Assembly, held in July 2003, 
to adopt the Maputo Declaration on Agriculture and Food Security,14 Governments have 
not increased their allocation of resources to the agricultural sector as expected. Heads of 
State and Government had committed to the allocation of at least 10 per cent of budget-
ary resources to agriculture and rural development within five years. The commitment 
to allocate the same percentage by 2015 to coincide with the deadline for reaching the 
Millennium Development Goal 1 target of halving hunger was renewed in 2009. However, 
in 2008, only 8 countries out of 45 allocated 10 per cent or more of their total budgetary 
resources to agriculture and rural development (figure IV.6). These countries were Burkina 
Faso, Ethiopia, Ghana, Guinea, Malawi, Mali, the Niger and Senegal (Omilola and oth-
ers, 2010). Six of these countries are least developed countries, and were at the same time 
the larger beneficiaries of official development assistance (ODA) and characterized by less 
favourable agriculture conditions (Benin and others, 2010).

Major  national  emergencies,  lack  of  peace  and  stability,  HIV/AIDS  and 
natural disasters were among the major challenges faced by Governments during the last 
decade, leading to fewer resources for agriculture. However, there are also several govern-
ance issues preventing more and better allocation of public resources to agriculture which 
need to be addressed. The lack of transparency and political will is an underlying factor 
leading to low levels of public spending in agriculture. Contrary to the common percep-
tion, low economic growth and low aggregate wealth in a country are not necessarily an 
impediment to allocating higher public spending to agriculture. For instance, in Africa, 
a small economy such as Malawi had already complied with the Maputo Declaration, 
allocating more than 13 per cent of the total public budget to agriculture (te Lintelo and  
others, 2013).  

Another major challenge is the inadequacy of agricultural sector policy strate-
gies,  including  diversion  of  public  spending  from  long-term  investment  to  agricultural 
subsidies. While subsidies, such as for energy, or fertilizer subsidies for agriculture, can 
help overcoming short-term market failures, they tend to remain in effect much beyond 
the original planned time frame, leading to inefficient use of resources. For instance, in 
Zambia more than half of the agriculture budget during fiscal year 2005 was spent on 
subsidies for fertilizers and crop marketing, while investment in infrastructure represented 
only 3 per cent of the budget. Moreover, only 29 per cent of farmers were buying fertiliz-
ers, namely, those who were wealthier and closer to roads (World Bank, 2008a).  

14 

See document A/58/626, annex I.

Ensuring food and nutrition security116

16

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

Figure IV.6 
Figure IV.6 Agricultural expenditures and the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture 
Agricultural expenditures and the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme (CAADP)  
Development Programme (CAADP) 10 per cent target, 2008 (unless otherwise noted)
10 per cent target, 2008 (unless otherwise noted)
Agriculture expenditures as a share of total expenditures (percentage)

Agriculture expenditures/total expenditures
CAADP 10 per cent target

*
*
i
t
u
o
b

i
j

D

s
e

l
l

e
h
c
y
e
S

*
*
*
o
g
n
o
C

*
*
u
a
s
s
i
B
-
a
e
n
u
G

i

*
*
*
e
n
o
e
L
a
r
r
e
S

i

 

a
d
n
a
g
U

*
*
*
t
p
y
g
E

*
*
*
a
d
n
a
w
R

*
*
a
n
a
w
s
t
o
B

*
*
o
h
t
o
s
e
L

s
u
i
t
i
r
u
a
M

l

*
*
a
o
g
n
A

*
*
d
n
a

l
i
z
a
w
S

i

*
*
e
u
q
b
m
a
z
o
M

i

*
*
a
b
m
a
Z

*
*
i
d
n
u
r
u
B

*
*
r
a
c
s
a
g
a
d
a
M

*
*
c
i
l

 

b
u
p
e
R
n
a
c
i
r
f
A

 
l

a
r
t
n
e
C

*
*
*
o
c
c
o
r
o
M

i

a
n
a
z
n
a
T
 
f
o
c
i
l

 

 

b
u
p
e
R
d
e
t
i
n
U

*
a

i
r
e
b
i
L

*
a
y
n
e
K

*
*
*
*
s
o
r
o
m
o
C

*
*
e
r
i
o
v
I
'

 

d
e
t
ô
C

*
*
o
g
n
o
C
e
h
t
 
f
o
c
i
l

 

 

 

b
u
p
e
R
c
i
t
a
r
c
o
m
e
D

a

i
r
e
g
N

i

*
*
*
n
o
o
r
e
m
a
C

*
*
n
a
d
u
S

*
*
*
a
i
s
i
n
u
T

i

*
*
a
b
m
a
N

i

o
g
o
T

*
*
*
a
n
a
h
G

r
e
g
N

i

i

*
a
p
o
h
t
E

i

i
l

a
M

i

n
n
e
B

*
*
d
a
h
C

i

*
*
a
b
m
a
G

i

*
*
*
a
n
a
t
i
r
u
a
M

*
*
e
w
b
a
b
m
Z

i

 

*
*
e
p
i
c
n
i
r
P
d
n
a
e
m
o
T
o
a
S

 

 

a
e
n
u
G

i

*
*
l

a
g
e
n
e
S

*
*
i
w
a

l

a
M

 

o
s
a
F
a
n
i
k
r
u
B

Sources: Based on Regional Strategic Analysis and Knowledge Support System (ReSAKSS) data collected from various national Government 
Sources: Based on Regional Strategic Analysis and Knowledge Support System (ReSAKSS) 
sources; and International Monetary Fund (2009).
data collected from various national Government sources; and International Monetary Fund (2009).
*  =  2009
 
* = 2009
  **  =  2007
** = 2007
  ***  =  2006
*** = 2006
 ****  =  2005
**** = 2005

Incentives for private investment

Creating the right 
incentives and regulations 
is a major influence 
in encouraging both 
large- and small-scale 
private investments, while 
improving smallholders’ 
livelihoods

Insufficient  public  investment  in  agriculture  is  an  important  barrier  to  improving  and 
ensuring food and nutrition security. At the same time, low private investment, including 
from smallholders in their own farming activities, constitutes another major constraint on 
improving food production. Creating the right incentives and regulations is a main deter-
minant for encouraging both large- and small-scale private investments, while improving 
smallholders’ livelihoods. 

There is scope for increasing production, food security and rural incomes with 
greater investments in small farms. In particular, if investment focuses on the produc-
tion of food staples, rather than high-value products or export-oriented crops, there will 
be  better  opportunities  to  increase  food  security  in  highly  food  insecure  countries.  In 
Africa, for instance, it is estimated that the value of domestic and regional markets can 
amount to more than 50 billion dollars annually, more than the value of total international 
agricultural  exports  from  the  region  (World  Bank,  2008a;  Sahan  and  Mikhail,  2012). 
Furthermore, diversifying small farms’ food production is the best strategy for improving 
rural households’ income and nutrition conditions.

World Economic and Social Survey 2013There are numerous obstacles preventing higher investment in small farms. The 
above-mentioned insufficiency of public goods and services limits potential returns to farm-
ers’ investments. The second issue is related to the lack of price incentives for small-scale 
producers, in particular when there are price controls on food products which reduce their 
potential net revenue. A third issue is the lack of access by smallholders to formal insurance 
protection against risks, which, typically, include natural disasters, pest infestations and 
price volatility, leading to lower investments in small farms, as a safeguarding measure. 

An  additional  obstacle—and,  arguably,  the  most  important—is  the  lack  of 
access  to  credit  markets.  In  many  developing  countries,  agricultural  financial  services 
remain underdeveloped, in particular the supply of seasonal credit for small farms, pre-
venting farm-level investments. In many cases, when credit is available, banks increase risk 
premiums and interest rates to prohibitive levels, as they perceive small-scale production 
as  particularly  risky.  Thus,  expanding  rural  financial  institutions  and  creating  specific 
financial  products  for  small-scale  farms  will  be  a  key  determinant  as  regards  boosting 
productivity  in  the  agricultural  sector.  The  public  sector  can  not  only  supply  specific 
insurance and financing products to farmers, but also stimulate the development of insur-
ance and credit markets for smallholders (Organization for Economic Cooperation and 
Development, 2010). Specific products could include leasing, matching grants, warehouse 
receipt  systems,  commodity-based  financial  products,  and  overdraft  facilities  for  input 
dealers (United Nations, 2008).

Private  investments  in  agriculture,  particularly  international  private  invest-
ments, are needed and can play an important role in boosting productivity and ensuring 
food security, when directed towards strategic needs (Hallam, 2009). However, in order 
to increase the positive impact of these investments, Governments need to design policies 
and  legislation  that  can  create  a  more  conducive  climate  for  inclusive  and  sustainable 
investments. Direct incentives, for instance, such as tax incentives, can encourage invest-
ments that directly support local smallholders. Contract farming can also lead to positive 
investment,  when  small-scale  farmers  are  assisted  in  contract  negotiation  and  dispute 
resolution (Sahan and Mikhail, 2012). 

117

Expanding rural financial 
institutions and creating 
specific financial products 
for small-scale farms will 
be a key determinant in 
boosting productivity in 
the agricultural sector

It is still essential that 
national Governments 
create regulations and 
incentives to ensure the 
positive impact of private 
investments, particularly 
international private 
investments

The onus of increasing the positive impact of private investment is on recipi-
ent countries, even if a regulatory framework is often missing in developing countries. 
While international standards and voluntary actions can partly bridge the gap, it is still 
essential that national Governments create regulations and incentives to ensure a positive 
impact. For instance, as observed above, large-scale land acquisitions from foreign private 
investors must be regulated in order to maximize benefits for local communities. In rela-
tion to land, several mechanisms can be used, such as legal protection of all land rights 
and the inclusion of local communities in political decision-making processes (Sahan and 
Mikhail, 2012). Similarly, sustainable farming investments can also be encouraged with 
adequate incentives and regulations for protecting the environment. 

International support for agriculture 

The support of the international community—bilateral and multilateral organizations, 
international non-governmental organizations and other development partners—will be 
crucial for the allocation of more resources to long-term investments in agriculture. In the 
last few decades, agriculture has been considerably neglected by donors and development 
partners. In the 1980s and 1990s, total ODA to agriculture exhibited a declining trend, 
as a consequence of structural adjustment programmes that favoured industrial sectors 

Developing countries 
will need additional 
financial support from the 
international community 
in order to increase the 
allocation of resources to 
long-term investments in 
agriculture

Ensuring food and nutrition security118

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

in developing countries. From the 1980s to 2008, aid to agriculture fell by 43 per cent  
(figure IV.7). In terms of total aid programmes, the share of aid to agriculture declined 
even more sharply, from 17 per cent in the 1980s to 6 per cent in 2008. 

Despite the long-term decline, bilateral aid to agriculture showed an upward 
trend  in  recent  years,  during  the  period  2003-2008.  This  recent  trend  coincided  with 
the  onset  of  the  new  millennium  and  commitments  made  by  the  donor  community, 
in  particular  to  Africa.  In  addition,  in  2007-2008,  the  total  annual  average  aid  com-
mitments  to  agriculture  amounted  to  US$  7.2  billion  (Organization  for  Economic 
Cooperation  and  Development,  2010),  which  represented  a  positive  step  towards 
increasing  financing  for  agriculture  in  developing  countries.  Still,  in  2008,  the  High-
level  Task  Force  on  the  Global  Food  Security  Crisis  urged  donor  countries  to  double 
ODA for food assistance, other types of nutritional support and safety net programmes, 
and  to  increase  the  proportion  of  ODA  to  be  invested  in  food  security  and  agricul-
tural  development  from  the  current  3  to  10  per  cent  within  five  years  (and  beyond  if 
needed)  so  as  to  reverse  the  historic  underinvestment  in  agriculture  (United  Nations, 
2008).  Further,  global  support  of  US$  20  billion  for  agriculture  over  a  three-year  pe-
riod  was  promised  at  the  Group  of  Eight  (G8)  Summit,  held  in  L’Aquila,  Italy,  from  
8  to  10  July  2009  (see  L’Aquila  joint  statement  on  global  food  security,  para.  12).  By 
the time of the 2012 Camp David G8 meeting, 48 per cent of the L’Aquila pledge had 
been  disbursed.  Some  countries  such  as  Canada,  Italy,  the  Netherlandas  and  the  UK 
had already fully disbursed their pledges (Organization for Economic Cooperation and 
Development, 2012b).

Figure IV.7 
Figure IV.7   Trends in aid to agriculture: commitments, 1973-2008 
(Five-year moving averages and annual (cid:31)gures, constant 2007 prices)
Trends in aid to agriculture: commitments, 1973-2008  
(Five-year moving averages and annual figures, constant 2007 prices)
Billions of United States dollars

Multilateral agencies
DAC countries

3
7
9
1

4
7
9
1

5
7
9
1

6
7
9
1

7
7
9
1

8
7
9
1

9
7
9
1

0
8
9
1

1
8
9
1

2
8
9
1

3
8
9
1

4
8
9
1

5
8
9
1

6
8
9
1

7
8
9
1

8
8
9
1

9
8
9
1

0
9
9
1

1
9
9
1

2
9
9
1

3
9
9
1

4
9
9
1

5
9
9
1

6
9
9
1

7
9
9
1

8
9
9
1

9
9
9
1

0
0
0
2

1
0
0
2

2
0
0
2

3
0
0
2

4
0
0
2

5
0
0
2

6
0
0
2

7
0
0
2

8
0
0
2

9
0
0
2

0
1
0
2

Source: Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (2012b). 
Source: Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (2012). 
Development Co-operation Report 2012: Lessons in Linking Sustainability and Development. Paris.

World Economic and Social Survey 2013119

New mechanisms in global 
governance of agriculture 
will also be important for 
better coordination across 
sectors and for ensuring 
continuous and appropriate 
funding

In order to maximize the positive impact of external aid on agriculture, coun-
tries that face food insecurity and small-scale farms should be prioritized. In line with this 
perspective, sub-Saharan Africa and South and Central Asia have received, respectively,  
31 per cent and 22 per cent of the total aid flows to agriculture in 2007-2008 (Organization 
for Economic Cooperation and Development, 2010). However, continuity and coherence 
of ODA for agriculture are also crucial for its effectiveness. 

In addition, new mechanisms in global governance of agriculture are needed to 
provide political support, coordinate across sectors and, in particular, ensure continuous 
and appropriate funding (World Bank, 2008a). Concerted action is needed by the interna-
tional community in addressing the issues of trade and global public goods (research and 
technology), as well as helping developing countries confront climate change challenges. 
In the case of climate change, for instance, it is accepted that wealthier countries bear the 
major responsibility for its emergence, while vulnerable farmers in developing countries 
suffer most of its consequences. Thus, within the context of the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change, several funds were created to finance adaptation in vul-
nerable developing countries. In 2010, aid for climate change mitigation was estimated 
at US$ 17.6 billion, and climate change adaptation at US$8.9 billion (Organization for 
Economic Cooperation and Development, 2012b). However, as observed earlier, the inter-
national community is underinvesting in global public goods for food and agriculture, as 
these have only long-term pay-offs. Nevertheless, greater and better allocation of financial 
resources is possible, once the international community acknowledges that investing in 
sustainable agriculture is a means of ensuring global equity and stability. 

Ensuring food and nutrition securityChapter V
The energy  
transformation challenge

Summary

 y

 y

 y

 y

 y

 y

The latest estimates confirm that trends in emissions are likely to lead to increases 
in world temperature which could have catastrophic consequences. Even after ac-
counting  for  recent  mitigation  policies—including  expanded  use  of  renewable 
energy sources and improvements in energy efficiency—the accumulated concen-
trations of emissions will be well above the safety mark of 450 parts per million of 
carbon dioxide equivalent by 2050. 
Pathways to an energy transformation for sustainable development are multiple: there 
is flexibility in the energy technologies that need to be available and in the sectors in 
which  energy  efficiency  should  improve,  and  there  are  options  with  respect  to  the 
economic, social and cultural envelopes that could contain the increase in emissions, 
while still  allowing for a rise in welfare.
Despite their variety, sustainable pathways share some common ground. First, the 
sooner policies scale up, the greater the technological flexibility will be and the less 
costly mitigation will become. Second, policies increasing efficiency in the delivery of 
energy services can go a long way. Indeed, if it chooses to, the world can avoid the 
use of controversial technologies with high risks and high costs, including nuclear 
power and carbon capture and storage.
This Survey finds a certain degree of technological over-optimism in the assessment 
of  sustainable  pathways. While  technology  per  se  might  not  be  the  main  limiting 
factor, its implementation faces challenges. In this regard, our analysis is less sanguine 
about the economic, social and cultural hurdles to be overcome in implementing 
the  decisive  and  coherent  national  policies  that  are  called  for,  as  well  as  in  secur-
ing the commensurate level of international cooperation. The world needs a public 
investment-led big push, capable of catalysing private sector investment and innova-
tion so as to sustainably transform the energy system.
The  sustainable  energy  transformation  is  consistent  with  economic  and  social  in-
clusion; moreover, policies promoting economic and social inclusion can, in some 
cases, also result in reduced emissions. Universal access to clean cooking fuels and 
electricity can be consistent with measures to contain the increase of emissions and, 
pertinently, this can be achieved at a comparatively modest investment cost:
The investment necessary to render the energy system sustainable is, in principle,  
affordable. However, the full costing of investment needs calls for resource allocations 
several times larger than the direct energy investments that are needed to keep the 
world on a sustainable pathway. Additional investments needed to achieve universal 
access to modern energy by 2030 are, in comparison quite affordable.

122

Introduction

The world economic system is in need of deep transformation as a means of re-establishing 
a balanced relationship with the Earth’s boundaries while accommodating the legitimate 
development aspirations of the billions of people who would like to have access to quality 
and nutritious food, decent clothing and shelter, health, good-quality education, water 
and sanitation, and modern amenities. At the heart of this transformation lies the revamp-
ing  of  the  world  “energy  system,”  as  it  is  energy  that  underpins  the  production  of  the 
goods and services that sustain human life. The energy system harnesses natural resources 
and transforms them into energy carriers, to be used by the appliances and machinery 
that provide energy services, such as heat, refrigeration and transport. Providing energy 
services to current and future generations requires energy systems that are sustainable, 
in terms of both the use of natural resources and the disposal and absorption of the pol-
lutants associated with the generation and use of energy. To the extent that an energy 
system is engaged in multiple interactions with the economy, society and the environment 
(including interrelations with other physical resource and commodity systems), the only 
way to build sustainability in the energy system is to introduce sustainable management 
of those economic, social and environmental interactions. 

The transformation of the energy system should be a core element in any agenda 
for sustainable development that aims at improving the living standards of people within 
a framework of equity and environmental sustainability. In the context of the Secretary-
General’s Sustainable Energy for All Initiative and at other occasions, explicit energy goals 
(or targets) are needed to eradicate dependence on traditional use of biomass as a source 
of thermal energy; to improve access to reliable and adequate quality electricity; and to 
ensure that unreliable or low-quality energy sources do not compromise the opportunities 
of those among the working poor who are self-employed or run household enterprises. 

Achieving  these  objectives  entails  confronting  the  challenge  of  formulating 
policies that adequately resolve the issue of potential trade-offs and take advantage of po-
tential synergies. Policies need to explore possible synergies with other development goals, 
by promoting, for example, health, education, training and employment creation through 
improvement of workers’ skills in the areas of design, deployment and maintenance of 
sustainable energy systems. 

The evidence for climate change and  
human-activity generated emissions

A large number of studies have examined current energy trends and found them to be 
outright unsustainable. They do, however, offer alternatives and have proposed a variety of 
paths that have the potential to re-establish a balance between human activity and Earth’s 
carrying capacity. Presented below are some of the major institutional exercises focused on 
energy trends and alternative sustainable pathways.1

1 

The release by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change of its Fifth Assessment Report (to 
be finalized in 2014) will further enrich our understanding of sustainable paths.

World Economic and Social Survey 2013123

The latest assessments of 
energy trends confirm the 
urgency of transformative 
action to prevent undue 
accumulation of CO2 
and risky increases in 
temperature

The room for effective action is shrinking

The growing body of analytical evidence provided by the scientific community unmistak-
ably  confirms  that  current  incremental  policies  will  not  suffice  to  keep  human  impact 
within the Earth’s boundaries. If current trends continue, the further infringement of those 
boundaries will lead to a dangerous increase in the risk of devastating consequences. If one 
looks at the rise in the use of renewable energy, the advances made in reducing pollution in 
many cities, the increase in the number of protected areas, the implementation of policies to 
improve sustainable use of natural resources, and the adoption of international agreements 
to improve environmental sustainability, the world is probably greener today than it would 
have been if no actions had been taken. Certainly, the world is, increasingly, using energy 
more efficiently and there has been a 25 per cent improvement over 1980 efficiency indica-
tors. Some countries, notably China, and some regions have achieved large improvements. 
However, even after taking into account all of these actions, the likely outlook does not 
meet desired emissions reduction targets. Simulations incorporating current economic and 
demographic trends, energy policies, emissions levels and current commitments indicate 
that present efforts do not suffice to maintain accumulated emissions within acceptable 
boundaries and safe temperature limits. Introducing policies and regulations that can ef-
fectively bring about a shift to a sustainable energy path is becoming evermore urgent.

World  Energy  Outlook  2012  (International  Energy  Agency,  2012)  considers 
two  baseline  scenarios  and  presents  estimates  extending  to  2035.  The  “current  policies 
scenario” includes the implementation only of policies that had been adopted by mid-
2012. The “new policies scenario” includes all policies in the current policies scenario plus 
a cautious implementation of recently announced policy commitments and the expected 
impact of adopting new technologies (ibid.). In a sense, then, the second baseline scenario 
takes an optimistic view of recent policies and technology development, mainly because 
it assumes that they will be fully implemented. A comparison of these baseline scenarios 
highlights two important points. First, new policy and technology developments are im-
portant steps in the right direction, for they imply a noticeable lessening in the increase 
in emissions between 2010 and 2035 (figure V.1). Second, even after optimistically ac-
counting for recent green developments, the world is still a long way from a sustainable 
pathway, as emissions will still be well above the sustainable prescribed level. While the 
current policies scenario implies a long-term average increase in global temperature of 5.3º 
C, the updated new policies baseline scenario softens the impact on world temperature by  
1.7° C, yet still leads to a risky increase of 3.6° C. Based on scientific assessments, it has 
been established that world temperature should not increase by more than 2º C. 

A comprehensive review by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
(2012c) of 16 global energy-economy and integrated assessment models found a remark-
able  increase  in  the  use  of  renewable  energy  in  many  baseline  scenarios.  Based  on  the 
increases in the use of renewable sources of energy foreseen by such baseline scenarios, 
by 2030 the level of use of renewables will have doubled. Under other scenarios, the use 
of renewable energy will be 3 or even 4 times the current level. Yet, again, these baseline 
scenarios result in emissions implying dangerous increases in world temperature.

The  baseline  scenario  presented  in  OECD  Outlook  2050  (Organization 
for  Economic  Cooperation  and  Development,  2012c)  implies  that  concentrations  of 

The post-2015 energy transformation challenge124

50

40

30

20

10

0

Source: International Energy 
Agency (2012), p. 52,  
Figure 2.2.
Note:  NPS = new policies 
scenario; CPS = current 
policies scenario;  
450 = 450 scenario.

Figure V.1 
Global energy-related CO2 emissions by scenario, OECD and non-OECD,  
Figure V.1   Global energy-related CO2 emissions by scenario
2010, 2020 and 2035
 CO2 emissions (gigatons/year)

OECD
Non-OECD

2010

CPS

NPS
2020

450

CPS

NPS
2035

450

Source: World Energy Outlook 2012, Figure 2.2, page 52.
Note: NPS = New Policies Scenario; CPS = Current Policies Scenario; 450 = 450 Scenario

greenhouse  gas  emissions  will  rise  to  685  parts  per  million  (ppm)  of  carbon  dioxide 
equivalent (ppm CO2e) by 2050 and to over 1,000 ppm of CO2e by 2100, well above the 
internationally agreed target of cumulative concentrations of required 450 ppm of CO2e 
by  2050  required  to  stabilize  world  temperature  (Intergovernmental  Panel  on  Climate 
Change,  2007b).  These  increases  in  greenhouse  gas  emissions  will  lead  to  temperature 
hikes ranging between 2.0º C and 2.8º C by 2050 and between 3.7º C and 5.6º C by 
2100.  The  predicted  business-as-usual  emissions  are  thus  likely  to  trigger  increases  in 
world temperature with potentially disastrous consequences for the environment and peo-
ple’s well-being: aggravated losses of biodiversity, increased pollution in cities, heightened 
competition for water and a doubling of the number of premature deaths. 

The  projections  and  reviews  of  scenarios  undertaken  by  the  United  Nations 
Environment Programme (UNEP) (2012b) also suggest that current policies and underlying 
trends fall short of what is required to prevent risky increases in world temperature. UNEP 
scenarios are presented in conformity with countries’ emissions reduction pledges under the 
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change,2 i.e., from the time commit-
ments were made to the year 2020. According to UNEP estimates, current commitments 
are insufficient and will likely lead to a rise in temperature of more than 4° C. To stay within 
the safe temperature range, the world needs to reduce emissions by another 14 gigatons (Gt) 
of CO2e (GtCO2e)/year by 2020, beyond current commitments to reductions in emissions. 

There are a large number 
of pathways towards 
transforming the energy 
system so that the world 
can achieve sustainable 
development

The many paths to a sustainable energy transformation 

There  has  been  progress  in  the  understanding  of  the  changes  that  will  be  required  to 
achieve a sustainable energy transformation that keeps the Earth within safe boundaries. 
One overriding message from the hundreds of scenarios that have been produced by scien-
tists is that the world can follow a large number of paths to achieving sustainability. 

2 

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1771. No. 30822.

World Economic and Social Survey 2013125

The IPCC special report on renewables (2012)

The IPCC special report on renewables (2012c) looks at 164 scenarios presenting the results 
of policies aimed at increasing the role of renewables in the energy system. Under more 
than half of these policy scenarios, there is a significant increase in the use of renewables 
with figures ranging from 64 exajoules (EJ)/year to more than 173 EJ/year and in some 
instances to 400 EJ/year over current levels (figure V.2). The share of renewables in the 
energy mix will increase in these scenarios from 13 per cent in 2008 to more than 17 per 
cent and 27 per cent in 2030 and 2050, respectively. The most ambitious scenarios project 
renewables sources accounting for about 43 per cent and 77 per cent of total energy in 
2030 and 2050, respectively. 

The IPCC review suggests that scenarios aimed at controlling emissions more 
strictly require an energy mix with a higher share of renewables. To what extent renewables 
can contribute to the control of emissions is still somewhat uncertain, however. For any single 
level of emissions, there is a wide range of renewable energy combinations that are compat-
ible with that level of emissions; such large variation reflects the difficulty in modelling the 
environmental impact of renewables, which in part stems from uncertainties surrounding 
the deployment of renewable technologies (see legend in figure V.2). While there is a need to 
increase our understanding of the interactions between renewable energy and emissions, the 
IPCC review suggests a large potential for increasing the use of renewables.3

United Nations Environment Programme  
emissions gap report

Noting the slow progress in international negotiations on reducing emissions, the UNEP 
report (2012b) looks at scenarios where some important actions to curb emissions occur only 
after 2020.4 Comparing these scenarios with scenarios under which most of the significant 
environmental policy actions occur before 2020 helps highlight important trade-offs. The 
first observation is that under scenarios assuming strong mitigation only after 2020, there 
is obviously more flexibility given to the type of changes in the energy system that need 
to take place in the short term. The trade-off is that under these scenarios, there is greater 
pressure to accelerate progress after 2020, with the world becoming more dependent on 
technological breakthroughs to be able to achieve the required reduction in emissions. For 
example, the UNEP report concludes that not a single later action scenario published up to 
2012 can meet the target of controlling the rise in world temperature without bio-carbon 
capture and storage (United Nations Environmental Programme, 2012b, p. 29). A similar 
trade-off applies to policy options and societal choices: the widening of options in the short 
term narrows the room for future policy action (because higher emissions increase the risk 
of rising temperature and climate changes). 

OECD Environmental Outlook to 2050

OECD Environmental Outlook to 2050 (2012c) analyses the costs and benefits of an array 
of policies aimed at transforming the energy system and avoiding high climate change 
risks. The OECD core scenario makes several assumptions: (a) that mitigation options are 

3 

4 

See also the discussion in IEA (2012b), chap. 7 entitled “Renewable energy outlook”.

There are only a handful of studies that have examine this type of scenarios, including Vuuren 
and others (2013), Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (2012c), and Rogelj, 
McCollum and Riahi (2013). 

The post-2015 energy transformation challenge126

400

300

200

100

0

Figure V.2    Global RE primary energy supply (direct equivalent) versus fossil 
Figure V.2 
and industrial CO2 emissions in 2030 and 2050
Global renewable primary energy supply (direct equivalent) versus fossil fuel and industrial CO2 emissions, 2030 and 2050
2030
Renewable primary energy supply (exajoules/year)

2050
Renewable primary energy supply (exajoules/year)

- Maximum

- 75th

- Median

- 25th

- Minimum

20

0
 CO2 emissions from fossil fuels and industrial processes 
(gigatons of CO2 per year)

40

60

400

300

200

100

0

20

0
 CO2 emissions from fossil fuels and industrial processes 
(gigatons of CO2 per year)

60

40

80

Category I (<400 ppm)

Category II (400-440 ppm)

Category III (440-485 ppm)

Category IV (485-600 ppm)

Baselines

Source: Intergovernmental 
Source: Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2011, page 21, ﬁgure SPM.9.
Panel on Climate Change, 
2012c, p. 21,  
figure SPM.9.

fully flexible, (b) that all the necessary cooperation exists to implement an all-encompass-
ing and harmonized global carbon market and (c) that least-cost mitigation options are 
adopted. The core scenario is set to achieve the target of keeping the CO2e concentration at 
450 ppm. To achieve the target, this scenario simulates a set of policies that could achieve 
such a target, including actions to establish a global carbon price, followed by immediate 
use of least-cost mitigation options in all sectors and regions, and gradual progress in the 
decarbonization of the energy sector—stimulated by higher carbon prices, extensive use 
of  low-cost  advanced  technologies,  including  biomass  energy  with  carbon  capture  and 
storage. While the cost to the economy of keeping emissions in check under these assump-
tions would not be large, it would vary significantly across regions. Costs would entail 
reductions of 2050 gross domestic product (GDP) ranging from -2.1 percent for OECD 
countries to -8 per cent for Brazil, India, Indochina and China eliminated, with other 
regions facing reductions of -4.4 per cent.5    

OECD explicitly probes the effects of policies designed to curb emissions and 
the impact that such policies would have on biodiversity, whose boundaries are among the 
Earth’s most severely infringed. Under the OECD baseline scenario, by 2050 the world 
will have lost 10 per cent of biodiversity, over and above the already reduced level for the 
year 2010. The set of policies and technologies that lead to limiting emissions to 450 ppm 
of  CO2e  in  the  OECD  core  scenario  are  unfortunately  incapable  of  addressing  the  loss 
Reductions  in  the  Russian  Federation  are  of  the  order  of  -6.5  per  cent  (see  Organization  for 
Economic Cooperation and Development (2012c), p. 115, figure 3.18, panel B).

5 

World Economic and Social Survey 2013127

in biodiversity. The OECD core scenario reduces the loss of biodiversity by 9.9 per cent 
relative to the biodiversity in baseline 2010, that is, there is a net gain of 0.1 percentage 
points over the baseline projection to year 2050. A more detailed look at the simulation 
helps reveal potential trade-offs. Most policies and positive climate change effects under this 
scenario reduce the loss of biodiversity by 1.5 percentage points with respect to the 2050 
baseline projection, but more intensive use of bioenergy under this scenario effectively adds 
1.4 percentage points to the loss of biodiversity. Combining these two figures yields the 
above-mentioned 0.1 percentage point net gain. Thus, the use of bio-energy to help reduce 
emissions involves a trade-off of increasing biodiversity loss. Simulations using technology 
combinations that rely less importantly on bio-energy result in larger net gains. On the other 
hand, complementary policies can be of great assistance. When the core 450 scenario is 
reinforced with increases in land productivity, ranging between 3 and 18 per cent depending 
on type of land and region, the net loss in biodiversity is reduced by 1.2 percentage points.

Global Energy Assessment 

The Global Energy Assessment (International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, 2012) 
builds 60 scenarios that include fundamental changes in energy and development policies, 
e.g., policies related to the energy sector, changes in the user-end point demand for energy, 
and changes in the transport sector, as well as policies broadening access to modern energy, 
enhancing  energy  security  and  keeping  emissions  within  safe  levels  (Riahi  and  others, 
2012). The 60 scenarios are organized around three sets of options. The first set of options 
includes different combinations of changes in the course of the evolution of the supply 
of and demand for energy. At one extreme, the world relies mainly on improvements in 
the supply of energy to meet the needs of a growing and increasingly more affluent world 
population: the supply path. At the other extreme, the world population is still growing 
and is becoming more affluent but in this case, measures are taken to improve efficiency 
in the use of energy: the efficiency path.  Between the two extremes, there is a mix of 
improvements in supply and demand: the mix path. Of particular relevance to an increas-
ingly urbanized world (see chap. III), each of these three configurations of demand- and 
supply-side changes can be deployed along with two different transport sectors systems: 
one that continues to rely on conventional technologies and fuels (liquid) and one that 
uses advanced technologies and fuels (hydrogen and electricity). 

The set of three supply and demand possibilities and the set of two transport 
options, as described, define six technological paths. For each of these six paths, the ex-
ercise considers 10 possible variations in the portfolio of technologies, e.g., one where all 
technologies are available, one comprising all but nuclear, one comprising all but carbon 
capture and storage (CCS), etc. In total, 60 alternative paths are considered. The results 
of running these 60 scenarios are measured with a checklist to determine whether or not 
they meet sustainability goals. Four sustainability goals are defined: (a) to attain almost 
universal  access  to  electricity  and  clean  cooking  fuels  by  2030;  (b)  to  ensure  that  the 
majority of the world’s population live in areas that meet the air quality guidelines of the 
World Health Organization (WHO); (c) to limit global average temperature increase to  
2° C (with a likelihood greater than 50 per cent); and (d) to limit energy trade and increase 
the diversity and resilience of the energy supply. Scenario results are subject to the test of 
meeting all four defined sustainability goals. A total of 41 out of the 60 scenarios success-
fully meet the test, underscoring the view that there are a variety of paths towards keeping 
emissions and the rise in temperature within safe limits.   

The post-2015 energy transformation challenge128

The most important insight provided by this ensemble of scenarios is that the 
world can go a long way towards controlling emissions if there are adequate investments 
in energy efficiency. The 60 scenarios can be divided into 20 scenarios within the supply 
path,  20  scenarios  within  the  efficiency  path  and  20  within  the  mix  path.  While  all  
20 scenarios that emphasize measures for efficiency in demand meet all four sustain-
ability goals, 13 out of the 20 scenarios that assume a mix of supply and demand changes 
meet the goals and only 8 of the scenarios emphasizing the supply side pass the sustain -
a bility test. 

The  explanation  for  these  results  is  that  the  increase  in  energy  efficiency 
provides enough room for all combinations of the two transportation paths and all five 
technology portfolios to meet the sustainability goals. If gains in efficiency are small, how-
ever, the world becomes more dependent on the capacity to increase the supply of clean 
energy, which depends in turn on the ability to innovate and adopt new technologies. If 
substantial efficiency improvements are ruled out, the number of scenarios that meet all 
four sustainability goals are reduced to only two, regardless of whether or not it is possible 
to migrate from conventional to modern transport systems. 

Another  important  insight  that  can  be  derived  from  this  exercise  is  that 
the  technologies  with  greater  technological,  economic  and  social  uncertainties— 
nuclear energy, carbon capture storage (CCS), and bio-energy with carbon capture storage 
(BECCS)—are not indispensable for achieving the four sustainability goals adopted in the 
Global Energy Assessment exercise. That is, even if the world phases out nuclear energy 
and/or discards the option of carbon capture storage and bio-energy with carbon capture 
storage, the four Global Energy Assessment sustainability goals can still be achieved as 
long as it keeps the demand for energy low and renewable technologies are implemented as 
assumed in scenarios. The main lesson is that if the world cannot control the demand for 
energy with efficiency measures, then nuclear, carbon capture storage and bio-energy with 
carbon capture storage technologies will have to be accepted.6 

Sustainable energy with economic and social inclusion

Since the IPCC Fourth  Assessment Report review (2007b), many energy and climate 
scenarios have included the assumption that countries’ GDP will converge towards the 
top. Take, for example, the Global Energy Assessment and OECD modelling. The Global 
Energy Assessment scenarios assume that the country or region with the lowest income 
will have a GDP per capita of 8,000 purchasing power parity (PPP) United States dollars 
by 2050 and US$ 26,000 in ppp prices by 2100. This means that regional income dispar-
ity, measured as the ratio of the top to the lowest income per capita, will drop from 17 
in 2010 to 6 in 2050 and to 3 in 2100. The OECD modelling assumes that by 2050, the 
lowest country or region GDP per capita will be US$ 13,000 ppp and the ratio of the top 
to the lowest income per capita will have decreased, in ppp terms, from 12 in 2010 to 6 
in 2050. The OECD modelling, explicitly builds changes in GDP based on the effects 
of a set of growth drivers, including the age structure of the population, the labour-force 
participation and unemployment rates, and education attainment, among others. The pro-
cedure explicitly discusses the role of important interactions determining growth, such as 
the slowing-down effect that ageing has on growth and the upward effect that education 

6 

Consistent with the known economic, social and cultural difficulties associated with the use of 
some of the proposed technologies substituting fossil fuels, the IEA (2012b) sustainable scenarios 
do not include nuclear energy and carbon capture and storage.

World Economic and Social Survey 2013129

Not only is economic and 
social inclusion, including 
upward convergence of 
GDP, consistent with the 
curbing of greenhouse gas 
emissions, but it can also 
be an active contributor in 
this regard

attainment has on labour productivity and thereby on growth. The assumption of GDP 
convergence is driven by the assumption of convergence in education.

The fact that these models include numerous scenarios where emissions meet 
the 450 ppm target and income convergence is still allowed for, implicitly demonstrates 
that environmental goals are consistent with inclusive economic growth. IPCC (2007b) 
found that models assuming GDP convergence tend to yield lower emissions mainly be-
cause the increase in income is allowed to occur in countries where emissions per capita 
(emissions/population) and the intensity of emissions (emissions/GDP) are lower because 
resources and technologies are allowed to flow to countries and regions where availability 
is more restricted.7 Hence, convergence of GDP per capita not only is consistent with, but 
might also actively contribute to, environmental sustainability.    

The relevance of GDP convergence to environmental sustainability goes be-
yond  the  reduction  of  between-country  inequalities.  Within  each  country,  appropriate 
and coherent policies promoting upward income convergence can result in great progress 
towards implementation of an inclusive development agenda. To the extent that social and 
economic inclusion indicators correlate with GDP per capita, reaching a GDP per capita 
floor of say 10,000 PPP dollars by 2050 might also mean that the incidence of one dollar-
per-day income poverty would be about  5 per cent (figure V.3; see also World Bank (2012b),  
p. 5, figure 0.2). Similar patterns would apply to other indicators such as child mortality, 
female literacy, education attainment, health outcomes and access to water and sanitation, 
among others. All of this suggests that economic and social inclusion, including upward 
convergence of GDP, is consistent with—and can even be a net contributor to—the curb-
ing of greenhouse gas emissions. Consistency, however, is not equivalent to sufficiency. 
Economic and social inclusion politices will have to be designed and implemented as the 
world transforms its energy system.

Income convergence allows for convergence in human development but does 
not  assure  it,  particularly  under  conditions  of  persistent  and,  at  times,  aggravating  in-
equalities (see chap. I). Climate change/energy/economy models have also looked at issues 
of energy and environment-related poverty. 

We begin by recalling that the Global Energy Assessment exercise specifically 
included elimination of energy poverty among its four goals and found that 41 of its 60 
scenarios fulfilled all four goals, i.e., universal access to electricity and clean cooking fuels 
by 2030; compliance of cities with WHO air quality guidelines; limiting the global aver-
age temperature increase to 2º C; and limiting energy trade and increasing the diversity 
and resilience of the energy supply.8 Although the 60 scenarios incorporate the economic 
and social inclusion dimensions of sustainable development and establish whether or not 
they are compatible with the 450 ppm target, the exercise does not indicate what specifi-
cally would be required to achieve economic and social inclusion in an environmentally 
sustainable path. To address this question, the Global Energy Assessment compared two 
scenarios, one including policies to achieve universal access to clean fuels and stoves for 
cooking and access to electricity with another incorporating none of these policies. The 

7 

8 

In  general,  scenarios  featuring  between-regions/between-countries  income  per  capita  conver-
gences  result  in  lower  emissions  because  slower  growth  rates  in  lower-income  countries  tend 
to be associated with slower adoption of low-emissions technologies (Intergovernmental Panel 
on  Climate  Change,  2007b,  chap.  3,  p.177).  Accordingly,  the  more  inclusive  the  income  paths 
underlying energy transformation scenarios are, the larger the gains in the stabilizing of emissions.

Rogelj,  McCollum  and  Riahi  (2013)  also  find  that  access  to  modern  energy,  as  reflected  in  the 
United  Nations  Sustainable  Energy  for  All  Initiative  (United  Nations,  2012d),  is  consistent  with 
environmental sustainability.

The post-2015 energy transformation challenge130

100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

200
180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0

analysis was carried out for three key regions—sub-Saharan Africa, South Asia and Pacific 
Asia—where access to modern energy is a critical issue. 

The results of the comparison indicate that with the absence of energy poverty 
policies, 2.4 billion people will still rely on solid fuels for cooking by 2030 (figure V.4), that 
is, 300 million more people than the 2.1 billion so reliant in 2005. The implementation of 
the most ambitious package providing clean energy fuel, which combines microfinancing 
and fuel subsidies to cover the upfront costs of enabling access to modern energy and the 
purchase of appliances (assuming a 50 per cent fuel subsidy in relation to market prices), 
has the potential to ensure access to modern energy services for 1.9 billion people who 

Figure V.3 
Figure V.3    Income per capita, and social and economic inclusion
Income per capita, and social and economic inclusion

Poverty
Population below $1 a day (percentage), 1990s and 2000s 

Education
Percentage

100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

0

10

20

0

10

20

30
GDP per capita, 2009

40

50

Primary school 
enrollment rate
Secondary school 
progression rate

60

70

80

40

30

50
GDP per capita, 2010

Child mortality 
Mortality rate (deaths of children under 5 per 1,000 live births), 2010

Sanitation
Improved facilities (percentage of population with access), 2010

100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

60

70

80

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

GDP per capita , 2010

0

10

20

30

40

50
GDP per capita, 2010

Sources: World Bank, “Global poverty and inequality: a review of the evidence,”  World Bank Policy Working paper, No. 4623 (2008); and World Bank, 
Sources: World Bank “Global poverty and inequality: a review of the evidence,” World Bank Policy Working paper, no. 4623 (2008); 
World Development Indicators.
and World Bank, World Development Indicators.

World Economic and Social Survey 2013131

Providing the world’s 
poor with access to clean 
cooking fuel and electricity 
is possible without 
significantly changing 
global emissions

would otherwise still rely on solid fuels for cooking.9 This set of policies, however, will still 
leave 500 million people without access to clean cooking fuels.

Separately, the Global Energy Assessment looks at access to grid-electricity in 
the rural areas of three regions: sub-Saharan Africa, Pacific Asia and South Asia.10 The 
baseline scenario indicates that in the absence of access to electricity policies, between 
70-85 per cent of the rural population of sub-Saharan Africa and 18-23 per cent of the 
rural population of Pacific and South Asia will still be deprived of electricity by 2030. 
Implementing policies aimed at providing universal access to clean cooking fuels and elec-
tricity in these three regions will have no visible impact on emissions. Actually, greenhouse 
gas emissions will be slightly lower than the emissions under the baseline scenario.

The International Energy Agency (IEA) World Energy Outlook 2012 provides 
an interesting perspective on access to modern energy and the climate change implications 
thereof. The IEA core new policies baseline scenario predicts that by 2030, 1 billion people 
will still be without electricity and 2.6 billion people will lack clean cooking facilities. The 
simulation of a scenario with granting universal access to clean cooking fuel and electricity 
indicates that these policies can be implemented without significantly increasing emissions.
OECD Environment Outlook to 2050 examines the benefits of combining en-
vironmental policies and policies aimed at reaching the Millennium Development Goal of 
access to water and sanitation. The report presents a scenario where the number of people 

Figure V.4 
Figure V.4   Impact of access policies on cleaner cooking in three developing regions
Impact of access policies on cleaner cooking in three developing regions
Populations (billions)

South Asia
Paciﬁc Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa

Solid fuel
Liquid fuel

4.2

3.6

3

2.4

1.8

1.2

0.6

0

Base 2005

No new policies 2030

Microﬁnance at 15 per cent 

and 50 per cent fuel 

subsidy 2030 

Source: Riahi and others 
(2012), p. 1,263, figure 17.31.

Source: Extracted from GEA 2012, ﬁgure 17.31, p. 1,263.

9 

The  Global  Energy  Assessment  acknowledges  that  fuel  subsidies  are  controversial  (see,  for 
example, International Monetary Fund (2013)), but subsidies in this simulation are used to make 
access  to  modern  fuels  affordable.  Other  policies  specifically  designed  to  address  poverty  and 
environmental sustainability, such as tailored cash transfers, might be more appropriate.

10 

Owing to lack of reliable data, the analysis leaves out the provision of off-grid electricity, which 
could be a more appropriate and lower-cost alternative. 

The post-2015 energy transformation challenge132

without access to improved water in 2005 will have been reduced to half by 2030, followed 
by universal access to an improved water source and basic sanitation by 2050. The benefits 
of such a scenario include prevention of premature deaths, better health conditions and 
economic rewards to such sectors as fisheries and tourism (Organization for Economic 
Cooperation and Development, 2012c, p. 247).11 

The brief and selective review of sustainable pathways towards transforming the 
energy system has yielded the following insights: (a) long-term trends are not sustainable 
even if the effects of recent mitigation policies are taken into account; (b) transformative 
changes can follow multiple paths; (c) transforming the energy system is consistent with 
increasing economic and social inclusion; (d) a closer look at available scenarios warrants 
the conclusion that not only is mitigation consistent with economic and social inclusion 
but, in some instances, it also benefits from economic and social inclusion; (e) all feasible 
paths require policies, resources and international cooperation well beyond current stand-
ards and trends. In sum, full sustainable development is possible, but it needs strong policy 
interventions at global and country levels. 

The challenge of transforming the energy system

Successful mitigation and sustainable development face multiple challenges. To begin with, 
there is the challenge of ensuring  that people and policymakers learn from scientific and 
factual evidence and modify their views and current consumption patterns accordingly. 
Yet, even if the world is fully convinced of the environmental risks of continuing current 
trends, the task is daunting. The task involves the timely transformation of the energy sys-
tem. The accomplishment of this task involves a complex and potentially lengthy process. 
The “energy system” harnesses natural resources and transforms them into energy carriers 
to be used by the appliances and machinery that provide energy services, such as heat, 
refrigeration and transport, among others (see box V.1 on the energy system). Providing 
energy services to current and future generations requires sustainable energy systems. To 
the extent that energy systems have multiple interactions with the economy, society and 
the environment (including interrelations with other physical resource and commodity 
systems), the only way to build sustainability in the energy system is to introduce sustain-
able management of those economic, social and environmental interactions. In the present 
section, we discuss issues regarding two challenges to the transformation of the energy 
system: the technological challenge and the economic, social and political challenge.

The technology challenge

Technology per se is not 
the limiting factor. The 
most difficult obstacles 
to the implementation of 
sustainable technologies lie 
in the economic, social and 
cultural domains

It is widely acknowledged that many of the technologies necessary for supporting sustain-
able development are already available. The challenge is how to improve these technolo-
gies, how to accelerate cost reductions and achieve meaningful changes, how to integrate 
them along coherent development paths that respond to specific local and sectoral needs, 
and  how  to  provide  incentives  and  mechanisms  for  rapid  innovation,  diffusions  and 
knowledge-sharing (United Nations, 2011b, p. ix). 

11 

It should be noted that if instead of access to improved water, the focus shifts to access to safe 
water, the reduction in mortality rates would be stronger (Organization for Economic Cooperation 
and Development, 2012c, p. 303). 

World Economic and Social Survey 2013133

Climate change-energy models, which look carefully at available and foresee-
able technologies, confirm the view that technology is not the main obstacle. For example, 
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Special Report on Renewables (2012c), 
looked  at  four  illustrative  scenarios  in  which  emissions  were  controlled  and  the  use  of 
renewables increased significantly, and noted that in these cases only 2.5 per cent of the 
globally available technological potential was used (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change, 2012c, p. 23 and 796). The UNEP 2012 emissions gap report estimates that the 
technological  potential  for  reducing  emissions  between  now  and  2020  to  be  anywhere 
between  14  and  20  GtCO2e,  which  is  enough  to  accomplish  the  emissions  reductions 
of 8-13 GtCO2e that still need to be achieved beyond current reduction commitments. 
These two examples confirm that current or foreseeable availability of technologies is not 
the obstacle to achieving environmental sustainability, but also suggest that a significant 
degree of uncertainty still pervades the assessment of technical possibilities. 

Climate change-energy models coincide in pointing out that implementing in 
the real world the modelled assumptions represents a daunting task. There are technical and 
engineering obstacles that need to be overcome in order to implement the new technologies 
(see United Nations, 2011b, pp. 54-58 and United Nations, 2012b). Still more challenging 
are the unavoidable economic, social and cultural obstacles that will need to be overcome in 
order to implement new technologies that are to replace the currently dominant fuel-based 
technology  envelope.  Obstacles  include  not  only  the  entrenched  interests  of  the  energy 
industry  but  also  challenges  associated  with  shifts  in  land  use  and  changes  in  the  eco-
nomic structure and its associated consumption patterns. Finally, one should not forget that 
implementation challenges are exacerbated by the fact that changes need to take place in a 
short period of time (United Nations, 2011b).

The kinds of economic, social and cultural changes that might be involved in 
switching energy sources are suggested by the following illustration. A technically feasible 
large-scale plan intended to supply energy from solar sources to 1 billion people in Europe 
and North Africa and half a billion in North America will require an expanse of solar 
farms in the Sahara desert and North America equivalent in size to the State of Arizona. 
The economic, social and political challenges associated with changing land-use patterns 
so that such large extensions of land can be allocated to the generation of solar energy at-
test to the magnitude of the obstacles that need to be overcome when scaling up renewable 
energy alternatives (United Nations, 2011b, pp. 55-56; MacKay, 2009). Another illustra-
tion  is  provided  by  the  seemingly  simple  substitution  of  fossil  fuel-driven  automobiles 
with electricity-propelled cars. Even if technically feasible and environmentally sound (see 
MacKay, 2009, pp. 126-132), such a change will not occur unless the retail network that 
supplies gasoline is altered and the auto repair sector revamped, changes that would require 
significant investments and might be strongly resisted by vested interests. However, such 
large investments might be made attractive if the full cost to the environment is properly 
internalized in the price of buying and using fossil fuel-driven cars. 

This simple example also helps to illustrate the role of cultural factors. It is of-
ten suggested that a shift to electric automobiles would be out of the question until electric 
cars could perform at par with fossil fuel-driven cars, as if cultural norms were static and 
unchangeable. This claim ignores the fact that preferences could (and probably should) 
change in favour of clean transportation and that it might be possible to change behav-
iours, tastes and social views if consumers were confronted with prices for fossil-fuelled 
cars  that  fully  reflected  emissions  and  other  environmental  costs.  If  this  was  the  case, 

The post-2015 energy transformation challenge134

Box V.1

The energy systema

The energy system constitutes the ensemble of production, conversion and use of energy and is 
thus closely linked to the Earth’s carrying capacity and to the economic, social and cultural organiza-
tion of human life (figures A and B). The energy system comprises primary energy resources (e.g., 
coal, oil and gas) which are converted to energy carriers (e.g., electricity, gasoline and liquefied gas). 
These carriers then serve in end-use applications for the provision of various energy forms (e.g., heat, 
transport and light), required to deliver final energy services (e.g., thermal comfort, transportation  
and illumination). 

Energy conversion technologies are the critical component defining the energy system: 
the energy systems can be characterized by the dominant set of technologies used to convert primary 
energy resources into useful energy (secondary energy). Energy systems can be further differentiated 
into the energy supply sector and the end-use energy sector. The energy supply sector encompasses 
the  extraction  of  energy  resources  (involving  so-called  upstream  activities),  their  conversion  into 
suitable forms of secondary energy and their delivery to the locus of demand (involving so-called 
downstream activities). The end-use energy sector, in turn, handles with the provision of services such 
as cooking, illumination, heating, refrigerated storage and transportation. The ultimate goal of the 
energy system is to meet the demand for energy services required to satisfy human needs.

Figure A
Global energy ﬂows of primary to useful energy, including conversion 
Global energy flows of primary to useful energy, including conversion 
losses (waste and rejected energy), in EJ for 2005
losses (waste and rejected energy), in exajoules (EJ) for 2005

    Energy

Examples

144 EJ

22 EJ

161 EJ

169 EJ

Primary

496 EJ

Crude oil

Coal

Conversion

Reﬁnery

Power Plant

Secondary

352 EJ

Gasoline

Electricity

Distribution

Final

End use

Useful

Services

330 EJ

Truck

Gasoline
Car

169 EJ

Kinetic

Grid

Electricity

Light Bulb

Radiant

Passenger-km Light

Source: Grübler and others 
(2012a), figure 1.2, p. 104.
a  This box draws heavily on 
Grübler and others (2012a).

496 EJ

Waste and rejected energy

Source: Global Energy Assessment: Toward a Sustainable Future (2012), International Institute 
for Applied Systems Analysis, ﬁgure 1.2, page 104.

World Economic and Social Survey 2013Figure B
Schematic diagram of the energy system: illustrative examples of the energy sector  
and energy end use and services
 

Environmental, economic and social impacts 

Energy system  

Energy sector  

 

 

 

 

Extraction and 

treatment

Gas well 

Coal mine 

Sun 

Uranium 

mine 

 

Uranium 

 

Solar 

radiation 

 

 

 

Coal 

 

Energy supply  
 
 

Oil well 

Farms and 

forests 

 

Oil 

 

 

Biomass 

 

Ethanol 
plants 

 

Power plant 

 

Photo-

voltaic cell 

 

Power plant 

Reﬁnery 

 

 

Electricity 

Electricity 

Electricity 

Kerosene 

Ethanol 

 

 

 

 

 

Electricity 

grid

 

Electricity 

 

Electricity 

grid 

Electricity 

grid 

Pipeline 

Truck 

 

 

 

Electricity 

 

Electricity 

 

Kerosene 

 

 

Ethanol 

 

Primary energy 

 

 

Conversion 
technologies

Secondary 
energy 

 

 

Natural 

gas 

 

 

 

Gas 

 

Distribution 
technologies 

Gas grid 

 

Final energy 

 

 

 
Gas 
 

135

Box V.1 (cont’d)

 

m
a
e
r
t
s
p
U

 

m
a
e
r
t
s
n
w
o
D

Energy 
resources 

Energy 
technologies

Energy 
carriers 

Energy end-use  

 

 

 

 

Energy demand 
 

 

End-use 

technologies

Furnace 

Computer 

Light bulb 

Air conditioner 

Aircraft 

Automobile 

 

 

Useful energy 

Heat 

Electricity 

 

Light 

 

Heat/cold 

 

Kinetic 
energy 

 

Kinetic 
energy 

Energy 
forms 

Energy services  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Energy services

Cooking 

Information 
processing 

Illumination 

Thermal 
comfort 

Mobility 
passenger

km 

Mobility 
ton-km  

Energy 
services 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Source: Grübler and others (2012a), figure 1.1, p. 104.

Satisfaction of human needs  

The post-2015 energy transformation challenge136

The initial investment 
needed to sustainably 
transform the energy 
system implies a significant 
increase in energy- 
related investments

many consumers might find the current performance of electric cars acceptable. In this 
regard, an example of a rapid change in preferences is reflected in the 2008 introduction 
of a policy combining bonuses and penalties in France. Reportedly, the introduction of 
the policy coincided with a sudden 5 per cent drop and subsequent reductions in new cars’ 
average CO2 emissions (Durremayer and others (2011), p. 8; World Bank 2012b, p. 56). 

The investment challenge

Despite the sixfold increase in global investments in renewable energy in the period 2004-
2011, investments leading to sustainable development still fall far short of what is needed. 
The range of estimates is large, reflecting uncertainties about costs that are still not well 
known;  but  the  large  range  also  reflects  differences  in  approaches  and  modelling  tech-
niques.12 Investments needed to transform the energy system are usually classified as rang-
ing between energy investments and additional other investments needed to transform this 
system. Estimates of each of these investments have to deal with a number of unknown or 
uncertain costs, which results in a large range of estimates, particularly on non-energy in-
vestments and investments in developing countries. Synthesizing the investment estimates 
of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), IEA, OECD, and 
UNEP, a report of the Green Growth Action Alliance (World Economic Forum, 2013) 
indicates that the additional investments needed to put the world on a sustainable path 
are at least US$ 0.7 trillion per year between 2010 and 2030 (World Economic Forum, 
2013).  This US$ 0.7 trillion figure refers to additional investments that will be needed on a 
sustainable path in six sectors with readily available estimates (power generation, transmis-
sion and development, buildings, industry, transport vehicles and forestry). Estimates of 
additional investments in other sectors, such as water and agriculture, are not well known 
or not yet available, e.g., for roads, rail, airports and ports. The US$ 0.7 trillion figure, on 
the  other  hand,  refers  only  to  additional  incremental  investments—it  does  not  include 
investment needed under the business-as-usual greening scenario. 

To obtain a rough idea of total additional investments in energy-related sectors, 
one can simply impute the proportional increase in known sectors to those we still do not 
know and give a range for variation. Total energy-related annual investments in sectors for 
which there is an estimate amount to US$ 2.1 trillion in a business-as-usual scenario. In 
addition to this, US$ 0.7 trillion annual investments are needed in these sectors, an increase 
of 33 per cent, to set the economy on a sustainable pathway. Now, total business-as-usual 
investments in sectors for which the report does not include an estimate of additional sus-
tainable investments add up to US$ 2.9 trillion. Applying the same proportional increase 
of known sectors gives an additional investment of US$ 1.6 trillion; and given the sector 
variability in additional investments, one can think of a range of from US$ 1.1 trillion to 
US$ 2.4 trillion (table V.1). 

It is worth noting that these estimates confirm the view that investing makes 
good economic sense. The Green Growth Action Alliance reports that, for some sectors, total 
investments under a sustainable scenario might actually be lower than business-as-usual in-
vestments. For example, the IEA estimates compiled by the Green Growth Action Alliance 
suggest that annual green investments in power and transmission are 8 per cent lower than 
the business-as-usual figure (World Economic Forum, 2013, table 1.1). Investments might 
also be lower in, for example, infrastructure for the transport of oil and gas.

12 

See, for example, the discussions of needed investments in United Nations (2011b), pp. 174-175.

World Economic and Social Survey 2013Table V.1
Additional investments for sustainable development, 2010-2050

 Billions of US dollars

Sector

Business-as-
usual scenario

Additional 

investments on 
a 2 oC scenario

Percentage 

change

Known additional energy investments for sustainability, 2010-2030

Power generation
Power transmission  
and development
Energy total
Buildings
Industry
Building and Industrial
Transport: vehicles
Forestry
Transport and Forestry total
Total known additional 
investment estimates

347

272
619
358
255
613
845
64
909

2141

160

-21
139
296
35
331
187
40
227

697

46.1

-7.7
22.5
82.7
13.7
54.0
22.1
62.5
25.0

32.6

Unknown additional energy investments for sustainability, 2010-2030

Road
Rail
Airports
Ports
Transport
Water
Agriculture
Telecommunications
Other sectors
Total unknown green 
investment estimates

Needed at least*
Needed lower
Needed mid
Needed higher

400
250
115
40
805
1320
125
600
2045

-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-

-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-

-

2850

-
Additional energy investments for sustainability, 2010-2030
14
23
33
47

697
1,148
1,625
2,361

4,991
4,991
4,991
4,991

137

Source

IEA

IEA
-
IEA
IEA
-
IEA
UNEP
-

-

OECD
OECD
OECD
OECD
-
OECD
FAO
OECD
-

-

-
-
-
-

Additional inclusion investments for sustainability goals, 2010-2050

2 oC

Percentage

Business as usual

Lower**
Clean cooking and electricity:
   Low a
   Low b
   High
Sanitation and water
Source: Data from World Economic Forum (2013), p. 13, table I.1, compiling data from IEA, OECD and UNEP; inclusion 
investment estimates are from International Institute of Applied Systems Analysis (2012), p. 1258, table 17.13; data 
on sanitation and water from the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (2012c), p. 248. 
  * Only known investment estimates.
  ** Lower is calculated as the percentage of the first quartile, and higher as the third quartile of the six sector  
       percentage changes.

IEA
GEA
GEA
OECD

125
-
-
-

15
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

34
36
41
5

The post-2015 energy transformation challenge138

Focusing on efficiency  
and investing sooner  
rather than later reduces 
the size of the total 
investment needed

The proportional size 
of sustainable energy 
investments is larger 
for developing than for 
developed countries

Green Growth Action Alliance estimates, like any others, are contingent on the 
policy and technology assumptions of simulated scenarios. The Global Energy Assessment 
exercise  provides  useful  insights  on  how  assumptions  about  policies  and  availability  of 
technologies can affect estimates of needed investments. The Global Energy Assessment 
estimates total energy supply-related investments at US$ 960 billion in 2010 (Riahi and 
others, 2012); a figure consistent with the Green Growth Action Alliance compilations. 
The annual average total energy investments in the baseline scenario is equal to US$ 1.8 
trillion,  while  the  mean  of  the  annual  total  energy  investments  needed  in  sustainable 
pathways is US$ 2.4 trillion. This means the mean additional annual investment in the 41 
scenarios is US$ 0.6 trillion (very close to the Green Growth Action Alliance at-least figure 
of US$ 0.7 trillion). Now, additional sustainable investments vary significantly depending 
on the assumptions about efficiency demand, mode of transport and portfolio of technolo-
gies: the range of additional annual investments in the 41 scenarios starts at the low figure 
of US$ 0.14 trillion but rises up to US$ 1.16 trillion. 

The main driver determining the magnitude of additional investments in the 
41 scenarios is efficiency. Pathways stressing energy supply policies have investment tags 
ranging from US$ 0.72 trillion to US$ 1.16 trillion (figure V.5a). In contrast, pathways 
emphasizing  efficiency  tend  to  necessitate  lower  additional  investments,  ranging  from 
US$ 0.14 trillion to US$ 0.65 trillion. Varying technology portfolios reveals interesting 
investment patterns. Confirming the importance of maintaining flexibility in technology 
choices,  full  portfolio  pathways  tend  to  have  low  additional  investments  (figure  V.5b). 
Portfolios that discard carbon capture and storage technologies tend to have low additional 
investments, as these are expensive options. Running in the opposite direction, technology 
portfolios featuring restrictions in the capacity to use renewables or bio-energy raise the 
range of needed investments. The sharpest upward shift in the range of needed investment 
is associated with portfolios excluding carbon sink technologies. More restricted portfolios 
tend to result in some of the highest investment tags, particularly portfolios with no bio-
energy, no sink or limited bio-energy. One extreme case illustrates well the importance 
of maintaining flexibility in technology portfolios. A high-efficiency technology pathway 
featuring  technology  restrictions,  no  bio-carbon  storage,  no  carbon  sink  technologies  
and  restricted  use  of  bio-energy,  turns  out  to  carry  an  additional  investment  ticket  of  
US$ 1.08 trillion, way above the US$ 0.32 trillion median investment of efficiency pathways  
(figure V.5a).13    

Energy investments differ, of course, by region (figure V.5c). To explore regional 
investments needs, we should focus on proportional changes, for both baseline and additional 
sustainable investments might vary significant across regions. While total energy invest-
ment in 2010 represents about 2 per cent of global GDP, energy investments in developing 
countries represent about 3.5 per cent of GDP, but only 1.3 per cent of GDP in developed 
countries (Riahi and others, 2012, p. 1253). In the Western European Union region, for 
example, rates are below 1 per cent of GDP, but in the sub-Saharan African region rates are 
above 3.5 per cent; oil producing regions are characterized by high investment rates, above 
5 per cent of GDP (own estimates based on the Global Energy Assessment online database). 
Additional investments needed to achieve sustainability, relative to the baseline, across the 

13 

The  largest  investment  tickets  in  Global  Energy  Assessment  scenarios  correspond  to  efficiency  
(US$  0.29  trillion-US$  0.80  trillion),  renewables  (US$  0.26  trillion-US$  1.01  trillion),  and 
infrastructure (US$ 0.31 trillion-US$  0.50 trillion) (Riahi and others, 2012, Table 17.13, p. 1258). 
Nuclear energy and carbon capture and storage imply investments ranging from no investment 
to US$ 0.21 trillion.

World Economic and Social Survey 2013Figure V.5a   Additional investments in sustainable pathways, by supply, mix and 
Figure V.5a 
e(cid:31)ciency policies
Additional investments in sustainable pathways, by supply, mix and  efficiency policies
Billions of US dollars

1200

1000
800

600

400

200

0

Outlier

- Maximum

- 75th
- Median
- 25th
- Minimum

GEA-supply 
(high demand)

GEA-mix 

(intermediate demand)

Pathways

GEA-e(cid:31)ciency 
(low demand)

Figure V.5b 
Figure V.5b  Additional investments in sustainable pathways, by technology portfolio
Source:  based on GEA 2012 online database http://www.iiasa.ac.at/web-apps/ene/geadb/dsd?
Additional investments in sustainable pathways, by technology portfolio
Action=htmlpage&page=about
Billions of US dollars
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0

- 75th
- Median
- 25th
- Minimum

- Maximum

No 

carbon 
(dioxide)
capture
and 
storage

No nuclear
and no
carbon
(dioxide)
capture
and 
storage

Full 

portfolio

(all 

Limited
biomass

and

options)

renewables

No 

Limited

nuclear

renewables

Limited
biomass

Types of technology

No 
sinks

No 

bio-energy
carbon 
capture

and storage

Limited

biomass, no
bio-energy

carbon

capture and
storage, 
no sinks

Figure V.5c 
Source:  based on GEA 2012 online database http://www.iiasa.ac.at/web-apps/ene/geadb/dsd?
Figure V.5c    Additional investments in sustainable pathways, by region
Action=htmlpage&page=about
Additional investments in sustainable pathways, by region
Billions of US dollars
180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
-20

Latin
America

Common-
wealth

North
America

Western
Europe

Paci(cid:31)c
OECD

Middle
East and
Northern
Africa

of

Independent

states

Regions

Other
Paci(cid:31)c
Asia

Centrally
planned
Asia and
China

South
Asia

Sub-
Saharan
Africa

Central
and
Eastern
Europe

- Maximum

- 75th
- Median
- 25th
- Minimum

Source:  based on GEA 2012 online database http://www.iiasa.ac.at/web-apps/ene/geadb/dsd?
Action=htmlpage&page=about

139

Source: See Global Energy 
Assessment 2012 online 
database http://www.
iiasa.ac.at/web-apps/
ene/geadb/dsd?Action= 
htmlpage&page=about.

Source: See Global Energy 
Assessment 2012 online 
database http://www.
iiasa.ac.at/web-apps/
ene/geadb/dsd?Action= 
htmlpage&page=about.

Source: See Global Energy 
Assessment 2012 online 
database http://www.
iiasa.ac.at/web-apps/
ene/geadb/dsd?Action= 
htmlpage&page=about.

The post-2015 energy transformation challenge140

A thorough accounting of 
energy-related investments 
and energy services-related 
investments might multiply 
by 10 the size of initial 
needed investments 

11 regions and 41 scenarios vary between -18 and 156 per cent.14 Additional investments 
cluster in three regional groups: the first group, showing high relative investments, com-
prises sub-Saharan Africa, Central and Eastern Europe and South Asia; the second group 
showing medium relative investments, includes economies of centrally planned Asia and 
China, Pacific OECD, other Pacific Asia, Western Europe and North America, and; the 
third group showing low relative investments, includes the Commonwealth of Independent 
States, Latin America and the Middle East and Northern Africa. Minimum and maximum 
investments by region also tend to cluster in these three groups, albeit imperfectly (figure 
V.6a). Caution should be exercised when interpreting these estimates. For example, negative 
regional investments tend to be associated with regions that currently engage heavily in the 
production and export of fossil fuels, which suggests that the global shift to non-fossil fuel 
sources of energy implies disinvestment in current production capacity. More generally, cau-
tion should also be exercised when interpreting the investment tags for developing regions, 
as there is a tendency to underestimate required investments in energy infrastructure and 
shelter in developing countries (O’Connor, 2009). 

The size of additional investments also varies with other factors, among which, 
timing is  crucial. According to UNEP, the total cost of mitigation policies that begin only 
after 2020 is 10-15 per cent higher than the cost of policies that start mitigation promptly 
in 2013 (United Nations Environment Programme, 2012b, p. 28).15 

Investments  needed  to  transform  the  energy  system  include  investments 
beyond  sectors,  namely,  investments  in  rendering  sustainable  the  demand  for  energy. 
Investments needed to change the demand for energy are likely to be significantly higher 
than investments in the supply of energy, but the size of the needed investments is also 
more difficult to estimate. The Global Energy Assessment report estimates that there are 
additional needed investments in the demand side of energy ranging from US$ 0.1 trillion 
to US$ 0.7 trillion (Riahi and others, 2012, p. 1254). These investments include those 
related to services on engines in cars, boilers in building heating systems, and compres-
sors, fans and heating appliances in households, among others. Accounting for the full 
cost of demand-side energy technologies increases the investment figure by one order of 
magnitude, to a range between US$ 1 trillion and US$ 3.5 trillion (ibid.). These include 
investments in innovation, market formation and diffusion (Grübler and others  2012b, 
pp. 1691-1695 and 1713-1724).

In contrast, the cost of targeted investments to achieve economic and social 
inclusion is small. The Global Energy Assessment estimates that policies aimed at provid-
ing universal access to clean fuel cooking and electricity will require annual investments 
ranging between US$ 0.036 trillion and US$ 0.041 trillion (see table V.1 and the above 
discussion on inclusion). Similarly, IEA estimates at US$ 0.34 trillion the additional in-
vestments needed to achieve universal access to clean cooking fuel and electricity.16 The 
OECD scenarios simulating policies designed to achieve universal access to an improved 
water source and sanitation by 2050 find that those policies will require additional annual 

14 

15 

16 

The range of additional needed global investments across the 41 scenarios varies between 8 and 
64 per cent, with a mean increase of 33 per cent.

See also OECD (2012c) estimates of significant negative competitiveness and income impacts of 
delayed action (table 3.8, p. 127, and p. 129, figure 3.24). 

Energy access is defined here as reliable and affordable access by a household to clean cooking 
facilities  and  a  first  electricity  supply  connection,  with  a  minimum  level  of  consumption  (250 
kilowatt-hours (kWh) per year for a rural household and 500 kWh per year  for an urban household), 
which increases over time to reach the regional average.

World Economic and Social Survey 2013141

investments of about US$ 0.005 trillion. One main message stemming from the reviewed 
scenarios simulating policies designed to achieve energy inclusion is that the investment 
needed to implement them is well within reach at the global scale.

Implementing sustainable development

There  is  an  emerging  consensus  that  the  world  needs  to  urgently  undertake  to  achieve 
transformative changes so as to avert increases in greenhouse gas emissions which have 
potentially catastrophic consequences. Climate change-energy models have made invalu-
able contributions to our understanding of the range of possible means of transforming the 
energy system. Less is known about how to proceed in countries and how best to organize 
international cooperation so as to effectively transform energy systems in developed and 
developing countries. Based on analytical contributions, a good number of policy propos-
als addressing the challenges of sustainable development were put forward in anticipation 
of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development. In the present section, 
we selectively look at three of those proposals and revisit the proposals broached in World 
Economic and Social Survey, 2009 (United Nations, 2009) and World Economic and Social 
Survey, 2011 (United Nations, 2011b). The three proposals selected encompass the green 
energy  strategies  of  Organization  for  Economic  Cooperation  and  Development  (2011a; 
2011b), United Nations Environment Programme (2011) and World Bank (2012c). These 
strategies, which are comprehensive in their coverage of issues, aim at rationalizing the 
transition from the current state to an alternative path on which the environment is taken 
fully into account. These exercises offer insights on alternative means of moving towards 
sustainable  development  strategies.  The  emphasis  is  on  the  short  term:  “green  growth 
should focus on what needs to be done in the next 5 to 10 years.” (World Bank, 2012b, 
p.  1).  The  World  Economic  and  Social  Survey  (2009  and  2011)  takes  a  more  ambitious 
approach. It argues that the world needs a big-push investment-driven transformation of 
the energy system. We briefly highlight some of the arguments underlying these proposals.  

Sustainable development pathways

OECD  proposes  to  tackle  the  challenges  with  “an  operational  policy  agenda  that  can 
help achieve concrete, measurable progress at the interface between the economy and the 
environment”;  a  green  growth  agenda  (OECD,  2011b,  p.  11).  Policymakers  seeking  to 
harmonize the economic and the environmental goals in a green policy agenda face three 
obstacles, namely, (a) low returns to green investment, which leads to (b) lack of investment 
and (c) slow innovation. To overcome these obstacles, OECD proposes that use be made 
of a green growth diagnostic tool which classifies the main obstacles to green growth into 
those causing low economic returns and those causing low capacity to appropriate gener-
ated returns, or low appropriability of returns (figure V.6). The first obstacle (low returns) 
is further categorized as a problem related to: (a) inertia, as reflected in, e.g., low returns 
to research and development and the presence of barriers to competition; or (b) low social 
returns, as reflected in, e.g., infrastructure deficiencies and low human capital. The second 
obstacle, low appropriability of returns, is further specified as: (a) government failure, as 
reflected in, e.g., policy unpredictability and perverse subsidies; or (b) market failure, as 
reflected in, e.g., the existence of negative externalities and informational imperfections. 

The post-2015 energy transformation challenge142

Figure V.6 
Figure V.7   Green growth diagnostic
Green growth diagnostic

Low returns to “green” activities, 

innovation and investment 

Low economic 

returns

Low appropriability 

of returns

Inertia

 Low social 

returns

Government 

failure

Market failure

Low returns to 

R&D

Inadequate 
infrastructure

Once the main obstacles have been identified, OECD proposes that effective institutional 
arrangements and policy packages be built for the transition towards green growth. 

This  policy  package  generates  useful  guidelines  for  building  green-growth 
strategies  for  countries  at  different  levels  of  development  (table  V.2).  For  example,  de-
veloped  countries  may  consider  enhancing  the  link  between  R&D  and  technological 
innovation,  investing  in  low-carbon  infrastructures  and  using  market-based  pricing  of 
externalities. Developing countries, for their part, could focus on policies designed to en-
able a shift away from carbon-intensive infrastructure, the promotion of energy efficiency, 
strengthening government capacities and providing incentives for the development, dif-
fusion and transfer of technology. Least developed countries might consider discouraging 
open-access to natural resources, increasing productivity in the use of natural resources, 
designing adaptation strategies and investing in infrastructure to support market access 
(OECD, 2011a, pp. 1-15;  see also OECD, 2011b). 

Networks 

eﬀects

Barriers to 
competition

Norms and 

habits

 

Source: OECD (2012b)  
p. 128, figure 5.1.

Low human 

capital

Low social capital 

and poor institutional 

quality

Incomplete property 

rights, perverse 

subsidies, preferences 

to incumbents

Policy 

unpredictability 
and regulatory 
uncertainty

Information 
externalities 

and split 
incentives

Negative 
externalities

 

World Economic and Social Survey 2013143

The World Bank sees green growth as “the pathway to sustainable develop-
ment” and “a vital tool for achieving sustainable development” (World Bank, 2012b, p. xi). 
It proposes a green growth strategy that rests on three pillars: 

(a)  Maximizing local and immediate economic or social benefits and avoidance 
of the lock-in of economies in fossil fuel technologies for several decades (this 
pillar  seeks  to  prevent  irreversibility  in  the  adoption  of  energy  systems  and 
reduce inertia); 

(b)  Providing  incentives  to  engage  in  smart  decision-making.  Examples  of  the 
measures  covered  in  this  pillar  are  green  accounting  (see  box  II.2),  getting 
prices  right  so  as  to  overcome  behavioural  biases,  providing  incentives  and 
regulations to engage firms in green growth, and using regulations, innovation 
strategies and industrial policies; 

(c)  Addressing the problem of financing green growth through the adoption of 
innovative  financing  tools  designed  to  tackle  high  upfront  financing  needs. 
The overall strategy allocates different priorities to developed and developing 
countries (World Bank, 2012b, pp.15-22; see also World Bank, 2012c). 
One  example  of  the  priority-setting  that  could  emerge  from  this  policy 
framework, mainly under the second pillar, would entail a focus by developing countries, 
particularly  low–income  ones,  on  two  actions:  actions  that  create  synergies  across  the 
environmental, social and economic dimensions of development; and actions that have 
high welfare benefits or do not carry large costs (table V.2). This policy framework would 
recommend  developing  countries  to  focus  on,  for  example,  measures  to  reduce  local 

Table V.2 
Some guiding principles for establishing green growth strategies

Local and immediate benefits

LOWER

Trade-offs exist between 

short-and-long-term or local 

and global benefits

•	 Lower-carbon, higher-

cost energy supply

•	 Carbon pricing
•	 Stricter wastewater 

regulation

•	 Reduced deforestation
•	 Coastal zone and natural 

area protectiion
•	 Fisheries catch 

management

HIGHER

Policies provide local and 

immediate benefits
•	 Drinking water and 

sanitation, solid waste 
management

•	 Lower-carbon, lower-cost 

energy supply

•	 Loss reduction in 
electricity supply
•	 Energy demand  

management

•	 Small-scale multipurpose 

water reservoirs

•	 Land use planning
•	 Public urban transport
•	 Family planning
•	 Sustainable intensification 

in agriculture

•	 Large-scale multipurpose 

water reservoirs

LOWER  
(action is less urgent)

HIGHER  
(action is urgent)

y
t
i
l
i

b
i
s
r
e
v
e
r
r
i
 

 

d
n
a
n
i
-
k
c
o

l
 
f

o
 
k
s
i
r
 
r
o
/
d
n
a
a
i
t
r
e
n

 

I

Source: World Bank (2012b), table O.1, page 17.

The post-2015 energy transformation challenge144

Transformative changes 
can be initiated through a 
public investment-led big 
push and decisive public 
interventions to promote 
technological innovation 
and implementation

pollution, which could provide significant welfare benefits to poor families, by leading 
to improved health and hence improved labour productivity. As regards developed coun-
tries, the strategy suggests a concentration on policies that could exert a long-term impact  
on emissions.

UNEP closely associates green growth with a process “that results in improved 
human  well-being  and  social  equity,  while  significantly  reducing  environmental  risks 
and  ecological  scarcities”  (United  Nations  Environment  Programme,  2010b  as  quoted 
in  United  Nations  Environment  Programme,  2011,  p.  102)  and  characterizes  sustain-
able development as “improving the quality of human life within the carrying capacity 
of  supporting  ecosystems”  (IUCN/UNEP/WWF  (1991),  as  quoted  in  United  Nations 
Environment Programme, 2011). UNEP further identifies a series of enabling conditions 
for a green economy, including reducing subsidies that are harmful to the environment, 
targeting public investments to green sectors, implementing government policies to en-
courage  innovation  and  growth  and  establishing  aggressive  environmental  regulation, 
among others (United Nations Environment Programme, 2011, pp. 22-23).

World  Economic  and  Social  Survey  2009  and  2011  emphasize  that  prompt, 
integrated and decisive policies are needed to achieve sustainable development (see the 
discussion in United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, 2012). World 
Economic and Social Survey 2011 specifically views the green economy approach as be-
ing fully compatible with sustainable development. Consistent with the magnitude of the 
investments needed, their urgency, and the broad implications for the rest of the economy 
and society, the view is that only a strong jump-start can effectively and in a timely man-
ner extract the economy away from the inertia of business as usual and move it towards the 
transformation of the energy system. Transformative changes would be initiated through a 
public investment-led big push and decisive public interventions to promote technological 
innovation and implementation. This approach is not intended to substitute markets—on 
the contrary, it rests on the assumption that only clearly defined sustainable development 
policies can unleash the power of markets to bring about the needed energy transforma-
tion on time. As the World Economic and Social Survey acknowledges that a realistic and 
desirable path towards sustainable development must allow for rapid economic growth in 
the developing world, it argues that the transformation of the energy system must include 
policies crafted to allow developing countries to simultaneously build low-carbon energy 
systems and accelerate economic growth. It further argues that a carefully crafted public 
investment-led  approach  will  not  disrupt  economic  balances  and  could  actually  crowd 
in private investment. World Economic and Social Survey macroeconomic simulations of 
the big-push approach confirm the assumption implicit in climate-energy models that a 
low-carbon and converging sustainable development pathway is feasible (United Nations, 
2009, particularly box IV.4).

The big-push approach is a realistic, well-grounded proposal which incorpo-
rates,  inter  alia,  the  historical  lessons  of  the  New  Deal  initiative  (see  United  Nations, 
2011b and United Nations, 2012b). The challenge, however, is much bigger now. When 
compared with that of the mid-twentieth century, the world economy is currently not 
only larger, but also more affluent, interconnected and natural-resource thirsty (see chap. 
I of this publication). Public-led investment has proved capable of accomplishing large 
socioeconomic transformations which would not have been feasible through implementa-
tion of incremental policies. A high degree of realism will be needed to properly gauge the 
dimension and complexity of the obstacles that the world needs to overcome. 

World Economic and Social Survey 2013145

The enabling conditions for the transformation  
of the energy system

Making low-carbon inclusive growth a reality requires putting in place the set of condi-
tions needed to create an “enabling environment”. Schematically, these enablers can be 
organized  into  four  groups:  policy  space  and  coherence;  international  financing;  inter-
national cooperation; and enabling international institutions: rules and norms. First, the 
transformation of the energy system will require a policy-setting framework within which 
developing countries can design and implement industrial policies to accelerate growth, 
foster green sectors and diversify the industrial and service sectors. Industrial policies have 
been  and  continue  to  be  used  across  a  wide  range  of  countries,  but  many  developing 
countries are constrained by international regulations and practices, notably in the trade 
and  property  rights  domains.  Second,  there  is  a  need  to  make  adequate  international 
financing  available  to  developing—and,  particularly  least  developed—countries;  while 
domestic sources should be tapped to the extent possible, the size of investments required 
to  promote  sustainable  development  makes  international  finance  indispensable.  Third, 
designing  national  sustainable  strategies  demands  the  integration  of  complex  processes 
across the macroeconomy, the energy sector, the deployment of technology, labour-market 
regulations, policies for social and economic inclusion, and the environment. Building 
national capacities and international cooperation in these areas will be important catalysts 
for the formulation of coherent sustainable national development strategies. Fourth, of 
particular importance is strengthening international cooperation to ensure that techno-
logical innovation and its adaptation occur where they are most needed and at the lowest 
possible cost. An important enabler will be a fluid process of technological innovation and 
adaptation facilitated by efficient technology transfer and cooperation at the regional and 
international levels. 

The magnitude of the endeavour is such that neither Governments nor markets 
alone can tackle the desired energy transformation with success. While Governments and 
markets have been successful in increasing the world’s aggregate affluence, they now need 
to ensure that the entire world population enjoys equitable well-being while re-establishing 
a balance with respect to the Earth’s boundaries. This change in priorities will require a 
new institutional set-up to enable markets to carry out the required sustainable energy 
transformation. As the global trade system is an  important component of the institutional 
framework within which markets operate, the world trade system should adopt sustain-
ability as one of its fundamental guiding principles. Meeting the challenge of building 
policy coherent rules and interventions at global, regional and national levels will be criti-
cal to accelerating the required transformation of energy systems. 

Coherent national policies for sustainable development 

While global models have contributed significantly to the debate by laying out a number 
of recommendations on policies and measures for a sustainable energy transformation, 
there is a need to gain a better understanding of the design and implementation of energy 
transformation strategies at country level and how to best forge and harness international 
cooperation. A number of country experiences can shed light on policy alternatives. In 
the present section, we review some concrete experiences that illustrate the complexity of 
policy challenges and provide further guidelines for policy design. 

The post-2015 energy transformation challenge146

There are opportunities  
to coherently combine  
low-carbon growth  
policies with strategies  
for economic and  
social inclusion

The experience in using carbon taxes to pursue green-economy objectives has 
by now a record spanning more than two decades, mainly involving developed countries. 
More recently, a number of studies on carbon taxes in developing countries also started 
to emerge, most of them sponsored by Governments, international organizations and aca-
demia. China and South Africa, for example, have been considering the implementation of 
carbon taxes, but concerns about negative social and economic impacts in different areas 
have delayed their introduction (see, for example, “Mitigating circumstances”, 2013; and 
Birdsall and MacDonald, 2013). Studies suggest that, while taxing carbon can contribute 
to curbing emissions, this seems to work better in combination with well-defined regula-
tory measures and complementary policies designed to offset (or compensate) the often 
regressive income distribution effects of carbon taxes.

Furthermore,  carbon  or  carbon-related  taxes  might  represent  an  important 
source  of  revenue,  which  raises  the  issue  of  how  to  make  best  use  of  them.  A  simula-
tion  exercise  probing  the  effects  of  raising  the  price  of  oil  through  a  tax  on  domestic 
consumption  in  Bolivia  (Plurinational  State  of)  (a  gas  exporting  country),  Costa  Rica 
(a country where 90 per cent of electricity is hydro-generated) and Uganda (a country 
dependent on oil imports to satisfy its energy demand) demonstrates the possibility of us-
ing carbon-related public revenues to finance economic and social inclusion programmes  
(see box V.2 entitled Taxing oil to invest in education). Under the simulation, taxes are 
increased up to the point where countries collect 2 additional percentage points of GDP 
in tax revenue. Simulations show that the introduction of this tax reduces oil consumption 
in productive sectors and among households, which has the effect of reducing emissions, 
but at the cost of decreasing GDP. Allocating additional revenues to investment helps to 
slow down the fall in GDP and, in some instances, even results in a net increase in GDP  
(figure V.7). Most importantly, the use of additional revenues to finance investments in 
education significantly improves education outcomes. Even though these simulations do 
not include the impact of higher education on labour productivity, it should be expected 

Figure V.7 
Figure V.8   Impact on GDP growth of a tax oil and investment in education
Impact on real GDP growth of a tax on oil and investment in education
Real GDP growth, percentage points from baseline GDP

0.2

0.1

0

-0.1

-0.2

-0.3

-0.4

-0.5

-0.6

Source: Box. V.2, table.

Bolivia (Plurinational State of)

Costa Rica

Uganda

Tax-oil

Tax-oil-infrastructure

Tax-oil-education

Source:  Based on table V.<num> of Box. V.<num>.

World Economic and Social Survey 2013Tax oil to invest in education 

Coherent policies to curb carbon emissions, promote economic  
growth and pursue human development: examples for  
oil-importing developing countries

The experience in using carbon taxes to pursue green-economy objectives has an interesting record 
spanning more than two decades of experience, mainly in developed countries. More recently, a 
number of studies on carbon taxes in developing countries have also started to emerge, most of them 
sponsored by Governments, international organizations and academia.a China and South Africa, for 
example,  have  been  considering  the  implementation  of  carbon  taxes,  but  concerns  about  nega-
tive social and economic impacts in different areas have delayed their introduction (see “Mitigating 
circumstances”, 2013).

Fiscal  policy  can  be  instrumental  for  enabling  developing  countries  to  curb  carbon 
emissions while such markets develop. Not only could fiscal policy contribute to reducing carbon 
emissions but it could also, if combined with a set of coherent policies, promote human develop-
ment, and offset some of its potential economic costs. Three policy scenarios are simulated to illus-
trate that this may be the case, using an economy-wide modelling framework applied with data sets 
for three oil-importing developing countries (Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Costa Rica and Uganda).b 
These scenarios are compared with a baseline which delineates a continuation of currently expected 
economic growth and public spending interventions up to 2030.

In the first scenario (Tax-oil), the domestic price of fuel oil is increased by steadily raising 
(baseline) tax rates on domestic consumption and imports of oil in order to generate new revenue 
averaging 2.0 per cent of GDP per year during 2016-2030.c The new revenue is used to reduce the 
budget deficit. The second scenario is identical to the first except that new revenue, instead of financ-
ing the budget deficit, is used for financing investments in public infrastructure such as roads, bridges 
and electricity networks (Tax-oil-infrastructure). The third scenario is identical to the second except 
that the revenue is used to increase spending in education (Tax-oil-education). Public infrastructure 
and  a  larger  pool  of  better-educated  workers  are  drivers  of  productivity  growth  in  the  scenarios. 
Moreover, new public infrastructure—which facilitates access to and functioning of education cen-
tres—and increased service delivery in education favourably impact attendance and promotion in all  
school cycles.

The results show that, keeping all other things equal, unilateral fiscal policy restrictions 
on the domestic price of fuel oil would depress intermediate and especially final consumption of 
fuel oil in the three countries (figure A). Carbon emissions would consequently likely be curbed—by 
a margin not estimated here—but, on the other hand, industries that supply oil-intensive goods for 
the domestic market and exports would be penalized. In fact, GDP growth is 0.54 percentage points 
per year less in Uganda, and it also slows down in the other two countries, though by much less, as 
they also produce and rely on alternative sources of energy, i.e., fuel gas in the Plurinational State of 
Bolivia and hydroelectric power in Costa Rica (table).

The  simulated  price  shock  has  been  smoothed  by  spreading  it  out  over  a  period  of 
15  years  to  make  it  more  realistic.  It  is  conservative  in  comparison  with  shocks  that  oil  importing 
countries  have  endured  owing  to  world  oil  price  hikes.  Using  a  similar  economy-wide  modelling 
framework, Sánchez (2011) shows that the negative impact on real GDP of the most recent oil price 
boom  (2002-2008)  has  been  substantial  in  six  oil-importing  developing  countries,  and  as  high  as  
2.0 to 3.0 per cent of GDP per year in some cases. In the first policy scenario presented here, however, 
real GDP is only 0.3-0.4 per cent per year below the baseline levels. The simulated fiscal policy will also 
be feasible should it not be used for protectionist purposes.

147

Box V.2

a  See, for example, 
Alton and others (2012); 
Devarajan and others 
(2011); Gonzalez (2012); 
Jaafar Al-Amin and Siwar 
(2008); van der Ploeg and 
Withagen (2011), Resnick, 
Tarp and Thurlow (2012); 
Sumner, Bird and Smith 
(2009); and Yusuf and 
Ramayandi (2008).
b  A dynamic economy-
wide modelling framework 
called Maquette for MDG 
Simulations (MAMS) is used 
to generate the scenarios 
(Lofgren, Cicowiez and 
Díaz-Bonilla, 2013). Its 
application involves, inter 
alia, detailed (country-
specific) microeconomic 
analyses of determinants 
of a set of human 
development indicators 
and productivity growth 
drivers such as the stocks 
of public infrastructure and 
highly educated workers. 
The application of this 
modelling framework with 
data for the three countries 
and extensions made to it 
are described in Sánchez 
and Cicowiez (2013).
c  The domestic price shift 
directly affects domestic 
consumption of refined 
oil in all three countries, 
imports of refined oil 
in Bolivia (Plurinational 
State of ) and Uganda and 
imports of crude oil in  
Costa Rica.

The post-2015 energy transformation challenge148

Box V.2 (cont’d)

Box 1   Real consumption of fuel oil in simulated scenarios, 2016 - 2030, 
Bolivia, Costa Rica, Uganda

Figure A 
Real consumption of fuel oil in simulated scenarios, 2016-2030
Annual average growth rate, per cent
Annual average growth rate, percentage

8.00

7.00

6.00

5.00

4.00

3.00

2.00

1.00

0.00

Intermediate
Final

e
n

i
l

e
s
a
B

l
i

o
-
x
a
T

-
l
i

o
-
x
a
T

e
r
u
t
c
u
r
t
s
a
r
f
n

i

e
n

i
l

e
s
a
B

l
i

o
-
x
a
T

n
o
i
t
a
c
u
d
e
-
l
i

o
-
x
a
T

-
l
i

o
-
x
a
T

e
r
u
t
c
u
r
t
s
a
r
f
n

i

Source: Box V.2, table.

Bolivia (Plurinational State of) 

     Costa Rica 

n
o
i
t
a
c
u
d
e
-
l
i

o
-
x
a
T

 

e
n

i
l

e
s
a
B

l
i

o
-
x
a
T

-
l
i

o
-
x
a
T

e
r
u
t
c
u
r
t
s
a
r
f
n

i

             Uganda

n
o
i
t
a
c
u
d
e
-
l
i

o
-
x
a
T

Source:  Based on MAMS application for Bolivia, Costa Rica and Uganda.

If, alternatively, the new revenue were allocated to investing in public infrastructure, on 
one hand, or to expanding service delivery in education, on the other, instead of using it to finance 
the  budget  deficit,  the  output  loss  would  be  offset  partially  or  fully.  This  is  mainly  because  such 
investments would spur productivity growth, but industries would also start employing more capital 
(table). Oil-intensive industries would also be favourably impacted by increased availability of public 
infrastructure  or  better-educated  workers.  Interestingly,  consumption  of  fuel  oil  would  continue 
to be unambiguously lower compared with the baseline (figure A). Increased public infrastructure 
or  service  delivery  in  education  would  also  trigger  a  positive  synergy  with  human  development. 
Promotion in all cycles of education, for example, would increase remarkably owing mainly to more 
service delivery, but also to a lesser extent inasmuch as new roads facilitate access to and functioning 
of education centres (see figure B, for primary education).d Without these coherent policy interven-
tions, taxing fuel oil consumption alone would actually reduce promotion rates in primary education, 
as household demand for education shrinks in tandem with the contraction of economic activity, as 
seen under the first simulated scenario. 

The new revenue from taxing consumption of fuel oil more could alternatively have 
been invested in other social sectors (health, water and sanitation, and so on) or used to enhance 
sectoral production capacity. For example, a scenario analysis similar to that presented here shows 
that investing 2 additional percentage points of GDP in Uganda’s agriculture infrastructure would 
bring about productivity gains that contributed to agricultural output without expanding land use, 
while enhancing food security and even spurring export capacity (see box IV.2).

d  There are additional 
gains—not shown 
here—in terms of human 
development when 
investments in public 
infrastructure are stepped 
up. Child and maternal 
mortality rates, for example, 
exhibit a reduction, as 
the increased stock of 
public roads, bridges 
and electricity networks 
facilitates access to and 
functioning of health 
centres and hospitals. The 
reduction in child mortality, 
a proxy for the health status 
of the student population, 
in turn, triggers a positive 
synergy for promotion 
rates and other educational 
attainment indicators.

World Economic and Social Survey 2013149

Box V.2 (cont’d)

Figure V.B    Promotion rates in primary education in simulated scenarios, 2016-2030 
Figure B
Promotion rates in primary education in simulated scenarios, 2016-2030 

Bolivia (Plurinational State of)
Percentage of relevant age cohort

Uganda
Per cent of relevant age cohort
Percentage of relevant age cohort

100.00
99.50
99.00
98.50
98.00
97.50
97.00
96.50
96.00
95.50
95.00

6
1
0
2

7
1
0
2

8
1
0
2

9
1
0
2

0
2
0
2

1
2
0
2

2
2
0
2

3
2
0
2

4
2
0
2

5
2
0
2

6
2
0
2

7
2
0
2

8
2
0
2

9
2
0
2

0
3
0
2

100.00

99.00

98.00
97.00

96.00

95.00

94.00
93.00

92.00

91.00

baseline
tax-oil
tax-oil-infrastructure
tax-oil-education

6
1
0
2

7
1
0
2

8
1
0
2

9
1
0
2

0
2
0
2

1
2
0
2

2
2
0
2

3
2
0
2

4
2
0
2

5
2
0
2

6
2
0
2

7
2
0
2

8
2
0
2

9
2
0
2

0
3
0
2

Source: UN/DESA, based on application of MAMS for Bolivia (Plurinational State of ), Costa Rica and Uganda.

Real GDP growth and its supply driving factors in simulated scenarios, 2016-2030 
Period annual averages, per cent

Source: UN-DESA, based on application of MAMS with data for Bolivia and Uganda.

 

baseline

tax-oil

tax-oil-infrastructure tax-oil-education

GDP at factor cost
Total factor productivity
Total factor employment

GDP at factor cost
Total factor productivity
Total factor employment

Bolivia (Plurinational State of)
5.00
2.61
2.39

4.25
2.22
2.03

4.92
2.61
2.31
Costa Rica
4.11
2.18
1.93
Uganda
6.46
3.42
3.05

5.13
2.78
2.36

4.25
2.29
1.96

4.95
2.63
2.32

4.36
2.25
2.11

6.79
3.67
3.12

7.11
GDP at factor cost
3.74
Total factor productivity
Total factor employment
3.38
Source: UN/DESA, based on application of MAMS for Bolivia (Plurinational State of ), Costa Rica and Uganda.

7.00
3.71
3.29

In the long run, the feasibility of the simulated policies will depend on countries’ ability 
to shift towards alternative sources of energy. In a country like the Plurinational State of Bolivia, for 
example, taxing fuel oil more may eventually lead to an increase in the demand for gas, another 
fossil fuel. Thus, the shift to be pursued should be towards more environmentally friendly sources of 
energy. The case of Costa Rica is interesting in this respect, as over the years, nearly 90 per cent of this 
country’s growing demand for electricity has been met through hydropower plants, the construc-
tion of which has taken into consideration their environmental and social implications. Thus, taxing 
fuel oil in this country may eventually incentivize further developments of environmentally friendly 
hydropower generation and energy efficiency.

The post-2015 energy transformation challenge150

that better education would result in higher incomes for higher-skilled workers over the 
medium  and  long  terms.  This  exercise  clearly  illustrates  the  possibilities  of  combining 
low-carbon growth policies with strategies for economic and social inclusion.

The reallocation of resources to investments with a long-term return, such as 
for infrastructure and education, should also include policies to enhance labour produc-
tivity. In addition to investments in formal education, investments in training and the 
adoption of the skills necessary to design, deploy and maintain sustainable energy systems 
are key components of a big-push approach to sustainable development. 

Further insights centring on the challenge of pursuing sustainable develop-
ment strategies can be derived from a series of studies that examined the economy-wide 
implications of accelerating the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals for 
education, health and sanitation under various financing strategies. These studies suggest 
that while important synergies arise from the simultaneous pursuit of these three goals, 
there are also noticeable trade-offs in relation to growth and macroeconomic balances. 
Simulation results indicate that the additional investment necessary to reach these goals 
are significant, in the order of 1-4 per cent of GDP (figure V.8).17 In these studies, nega-
tive macroeconomic effects can be neutralized or even made positive, if countries finance 
additional investments with foreign grants.

In  the  World  Economic  and  Social  Survey  2011  presentation,  the  big-push 
public  investment-led  strategy  does  not  substitute  for  private  investment  and  market 

Figure V.8
Growth impact of policies aimed towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals, 
Figure V.9  The growth impact of policies to achieve the MDGs
selected countries
Percentage points from baseline GDP

1.5

1.0

0.5

0

-0.5

-1.0

-1.5

-2.0

-2.5

n
e
m
e
Y

Source: Based on MAMS 
simulation results reported 
in Sanchez and others (2010) 
and Sanchez and Vos (2013).

c
i
l

 

b
u
p
e
R
n
a
c
i
n
m
o
D

i

n
a
t
s
i
k
e
b
z
U

a
n
i
t
n
e
g
r
A

 

a
c
i
R
a
t
s
o
C

a
l
a
m
e
t
a
u
G

s
a
r
u
d
n
o
H

u
r
e
P

a
c
i
a
m
a
J

a
u
g
a
r
a
c
i
N

e
l
i

h
C

a
i
s
i
n
u
T

r
o
d
a
u
c
E

y
a
u
g
u
r
U

a
i
b
m
o
o
C

l

t
p
y
g
E

y
a
u
g
a
r
a
P

Foreign grants
Foreign debt
Domestic debt
Direct taxation

a
b
u
C

a
d
n
a
g
U

l
i
z
a
r
B

r
o
d
a
v
l
a
S
 
l
E

o
c
i
x
e
M

n
a
t
s
z
y
g
r
y
K

l
a
g
e
n
e
S

s
e
n
p
p

i

i
l
i

h
P

 

a
c
i
r
f
A
h
t
u
o
S

 

)
f
o
e
t
a
t
S
 
l
a
n
o
i
t
a
n
i
r
u
P
(
 
a
i
v
i
l

l

o
B

17 

We  leave  aside  extreme  cases  where  expenditures  relative  to  GDP  are  about  0.2  per  cent  and  
8 per cent of GDP and above.

World Economic and Social Survey 2013Figure V.10  Energy and the post-2015 vision

Figure V.9
Energy and the post-2015 vision

Energy enablers

151

 

Energy enablers  
Non-dependence 

 

on traditional 
biomass energy
Access to reliable, 
adequate and good- 

 

quality electricity 

 

 

 

 
Convergence to best 

energy services 

per capita 

 

Access to modern 
energy services for 
the working poor 

 

Integrating energy systems 
within the Earth’s boundaries

 

Reducing emissions of 
 

greenhouse gases

 

 

 

 

Environmental 
sustainability 

Protecting biodiversity 

Stable climate 
Resilience to 
natural hazards

 

Inclusive   

 

economic development  
Eradicating income 
poverty and hunger 
Reducing inequalities 
Ensuring decent work 

 

 

 

 

and productive 
employment 

Human rights  

 

Equality  

 

Sustainability  

 
Peace and security

 

 

Freedom from violence,

 

conﬂict and abuse

 

Conﬂict-free access 
to natural resources 

 

 

Energy enablers

 

 

Conﬂict-free design and 
management of energy 

sources

 

 
Reducing dependence on 

 

energy imports

Diversifying energy sources

 

 

Inclusive 

 

social development  
Adequate nutrition for all 
Quality education for all 

 

 

 

Reduced mortality 

and morbidity
Gender equality 
Universal access to 
clean water and 

 

 
sanitation 

 

Energy enablers 
Increasing energy 

 

 

without compromising 
 

food access 

Education and training 
 

for sustainable 
energy systems 

 

Non-dependence on 

 
traditional biomass energy 

 

Integrating water to 
 

the design of 
energy systems 

Source: UN/DESA, Development 
Policy and Analysis Division, 
construction derived from 
United Nations System Task 
Team on the Post-2015 UN 
Development Agenda (2012),  
p. 24, figure1.

Source:  UN/DESA, DPAD construction from Realizing The Future We Want For All, UN System Task Team on the Post-2015 
UN Development Agenda, ﬁgure 1, page 24.

The post-2015 energy transformation challenge152

contributions. Public investments are used to trigger the private investment and market 
forces that have so far lain dormant and hence are unable to generate the type of changes 
needed if world demand is to remain within the Earth’s carrying capacity. However, poli-
cymaking also needs to deal with a host of market and public sector failures and to be 
able to elaborate well-crafted interventions, as proposed in the OECD, World Bank and 
UNEP green economy strategies. To illustrate the unexpected ways in which public sector 
interventions  can  spur  market  forces,  it  is  useful  to  look  at  how  a  nationally  oriented 
environmental policy in Sweden later developed into a market-mediated regional trash 
recycling activity (see box V.3 on policies and markets).

The potential relevance of the big-push approach and its emphasis on compre-
hensive coherent policies and strong international cooperation is illustrated by the case 
of  Bangladesh  which  has  rightly  identified  adaptation  as  the  issue  of  utmost  concern 
when dealing with climate change. Without losing sight of adaptation, the country has 
also been active in the area of mitigation, with such policies as the promotion of solar 
renewable sources (United Nations, 2011b). Furthermore, Bangladesh is considering an 
energy strategy aimed at guaranteeing the energy supply needed by the country to con-
tinue growing and improving energy security by reducing dependency on imports. One 
possible approach under consideration for achieving these goals entails basing the energy 
system on enhanced coal technologies. Use of enhanced coal technologies leads to a re-
duction in emissions relative to traditional coal technologies, but to an increase relative to 
pathways associated with renewable sources; and a more extensive use of renewables would 
reduce the locking in of the country to fossil fuel sources. In the absence of adequate 
financing  and  international  support,  however,  Bangladesh  should  probably  choose  the 
enhanced coal energy pathway. Choosing a sustainable pathway might be realistic only 
under the conditions of a big-push strategy properly financed and assisted (see box V.4  
on Bangladesh). 

Policies designed to transform energy systems and deploy them in developing 
countries work best when they are comprehensive, strategic and systematic. Policymaking 
in these areas needs to overcome the tendency to oversimplify the planning framework 

Box V.3

Source: Ringstrom (2012).

Policies and markets may provide unintended welcoming 
effects: Sweden is importing garbage to generate electricity

With a strong tradition of recycling and incinerating, Sweden now has too many waste-to-energy 
incinerators and not enough rubbish to meet demand. While Germany, Belgium and the Netherlands 
are  also  importing  trash  from  other  countries,  with  Germany  importing  the  most,  Sweden  is  the 
leading importer in terms of the share of rubbish burned. 

To date, Sweden has imported mainly from Norway. However, as the European Union 
seeks to reduce the dumping of 150 million tons of rubbish in huge landfills each year, Sweden sees 
a chance to import more waste from other States of the European Union too.

According to Weine Wiqvist, head of the trade association Swedish Waste Management: 
“It sounds almost foul to be importing waste, but the import to Sweden is not a problem. The dump-
ing in landfills abroad is a huge problem.” 

World Economic and Social Survey 2013Box V.4

153

Bangladesh: between a coal-based energy system at hand 
and a promising but distant sustainable energy system

Bangladesh is likely to experience severe negative impacts from climate change and it is preparing 
for them.a The Government has already formulated its National Adaptation Programme of Action 
and has taken measures to reduce climate change hazards, including community-led coastal affor-
estation, construction of dual-use flood shelters and programmes to reduce salinity, among others. 
Bangladesh is also taking important steps towards mitigation. Notably, it has formulated an energy 
strategy up to 2030, the Power System Master Plan 2010. The Plan, which identifies this strategy as 
based on a “fuel diversification” scenario considers that it addresses the three main concerns, related 
to  the  economy,  the  environment,  and  energy  security.  On  the  economic  front,  the  Plan  aims  to 
eliminate power shortages and to renovate the power infrastructure created during the first phase. 
In terms of the environment, while the use of coal is central to the Plan, Bangladesh expects to lower 
carbon emissions by improving the thermal efficiency of coal plants using Japan’s clean coal techno-
logy. The plan seeks energy security by lowering its current reliance on imported oil. 

The power strategy relies on energy generation from coal. Currently, gas is the main 
source of energy (60-70 per cent) and oil is second in importance (15-30 per cent). The Plan anticipates 
changing this composition dramatically. The share of coal in power generation will increase from 
less than 5 per cent in 2012 to about 50 per cent in 2030. Gas will account for 25 per cent and oil for  
5 per cent. Nuclear and hydroelectric—domestic and imported, including wind and solar renew-
ables—will account for 20 per cent. The main reason behind the choice of coal as the main source 
of energy is its comparatively low and stable price and the discovery of high-quality coal deposits in 
the northern part of the country.

Mondal,  Mathur  and  Denich  (2011)  argue  that  a  policy  package  of  carbon  taxes  and 
regulations  placing  caps  on  emissions  could  have  positive  sustainability  effects.  Using  a  MARKAL 
model for energy the authors run simulations showing that a policy package of mandated reductions 
in CO2 emission and carbon taxes directly decreases the use of high-carbon fossil-based technolo-
gies in favour of clean renewable energy technologies. A cumulative CO2 emissions reduction target 
of 10 and 20 per cent reduces cumulative net energy imports by 39-65 per cent, while a carbon tax 
of 2,500 taka/ton reduces imports by 37 per cent by 2035. The simulated emissions reduction targets 
and the carbon tax results suggest that the country can decrease its total primary energy use by  
5-22 per cent, relative to the baseline, and do so while satisfying the energy needs of an economy 
growing at 6.8 per cent per year. Thus, the adoption of low-carbon policies could allow the country to 
reduce emissions, guarantee energy security, increase efficiency and expand the use of renewables, 
with the added well-known health benefits.  

This quick review invites the following question, which might be relevant not only for 
Bangladesh but also for many other developing countries: Why not adopt ambitious low-carbon 
policies? The nature of the answer is, in large part, of course, related to the difficulties of implement-
ing, in the real world, the assumptions made in the modelling realm. Implementation problems need 
to  be  overcome  in  the  area  of  financing  of  investments  in  energy  generation  and  infrastructure 
and, of technology development and adaptation; and political economy-related obstacles need to 
be overcome in order to implement carbon taxes and regulations on capping emissions, which is 
known to require complementary policies designed to neutralize or compensate for negative im-
pacts on vulnerable population groups. The adoption of sustainable development paths by devel-
oping countries initially depends on effective internaitonal (sp) cooperation, including financial and 
technical assistance.  

Source: UN/DESA, 
Development Policy and 
Analysis Division.
a See, for example, World 
Bank (2010b); and Thurlow, 
Dorosh and Yu (2011). 

The post-2015 energy transformation challenge154

Box V.5

in terms of its scope, to focus on a narrow set of energy options, and to ignore trends in 
other economic and social sectors. Policies will have to specify goals, establish standards 
for performance, exploit niche markets and adopt a portfolio approach rather than pick 
a few winning projects or technologies. Policies should be geared towards end users, with 
specific goals for energy services, markets and the portfolio of technologies to be consid-
ered. Given multiple interrelations, the policy focus should be on clusters and should be 
based on integrated assessments. Examples of integrated approaches to energy policies are 
the water-energy-food nexus (NEXUS) and the climate-land-energy-water (CLEW) inter-
linkage. A best-practice energy policy feeding into the national biofuel policy of Mauritius 
turns out to be inconsistent with respect to future water availability, the cost of extraction 
and  the  energy  security  goals  of  the  country.  These  inconsistencies  were  revealed  only 

Mauritius: coping with climate and land-use,  
energy and water resources 

Land,  energy  and  water  are  among  our  most  precious  resources,  but  the  manner  and  extent  to 
which they are exploited contributes to climate change. Meanwhile, the systems that provide these 
resources are themselves highly vulnerable to changes in climate. Efficient resource management is 
therefore of great importance, for both mitigation and adaptation purposes. 

The lack of integration in resource assessments and policymaking leads to inconsistent 

strategies and inefficient resource utilization, especially at the national level. 

In Mauritius, a national biofuel policy that made sense from a best-practice energy, land 
and water planning point of view was shown to be strongly inconsistent. This was discovered only 
when the Government and international analysts modelled these systems in an integrated manner. 
An integrated modelling approach of climate, land-use, energy and water resource systems (CLEW) 
was particularly useful for assessing the response to climate change-induced reductions in precipita-
tion. The change in rainfall patterns led to increases in water withdrawals, which in turn led to higher 
demand for the energy needed to drive pumps bringing water from its source to the fields and to 
power water-desalination plants. The existence of a positive feedback loop means that this will lead 
to increased demand for cooling of thermal power plants and thus to additional withdrawal of water 
(unless they are cooled by seawater). If the increase in electricity demand is met with coal-fired power 
generation, as planned, then the greenhouse gas benefits of the ethanol policy are eroded by in-
creased emissions from the power sector. Higher coal imports also have a negative impact on energy 
security. The benefits of this policy—aimed at reducing energy import costs and emissions—are thus 
clearly vulnerable to the impacts of climate change; and the long-term viability of this strategy would 
be at risk if rainfall were to decrease further and droughts were to continue. In this case, producers 
would have either to scale back production or resort to expensive water desalination. Both of these 
options negatively impact the expected climate and energy security benefits of the policy and both 
would be detrimental to the sugar and ethanol industry.

The  water-constrained  scenario  does,  however,  also  lead  to  better  prospects  for  re-
newable electricity generation. Wind and photovoltaic electricity generation is typically much less 
water-intensive than fossil fuel generation. Furthermore, if power consumption for water desalination 
facilities were to make up a significant share of total system load, intermittent resources such as wind 
could be integrated more easily. Since water is cheap and easy to store, it is not important that it be 
produced at a specific time. It could therefore be treated as an interruptible load and shut down in 
the event that wind generation was unavailable during times of high system load. 

In response to these factors, the Government of Mauritius has appointed a high-level 

CLEW panel to ensure consistency among its climate, land, energy and water strategies.

World Economic and Social Survey 2013155

by an integrated assessment of the biofuel policy which included the potential effects of 
climate-change on water precipitation (box V.5). Increasing the production of biofuels is 
a natural candidate for the role of addressing energy insecurity and rising greenhouse gas 
emissions. Burkina Faso, like many other developing countries, would do well to consider 
expanding the production of biofuels to address energy security concerns and cope with 
greenhouse  gas  emissions,  even  at  the  cost  of  accelerating  the  rapid  deforestation  that 
affects  the  country.  However,  an  integrated  assessment  recommended  the  implementa-
tion of policies that intensify the use of land for agriculture production (see discussion in  
chap. III). Even if there are inevitable trade-offs, increasing the intensity of land use leads 
to  net  reductions  in  emissions,  contained  deforestation  and  improved  energy  security  
(box V.6). 

Box 3 Predicted impact of climate change on water availability in Mauritius, 
Predicted impact of climate change on water availability in Mauritius, 
water related energy consumption and greenhouse gas emissions, predictions 
water-related energy consumption and greenhouse gas emissions, for the year 2030
for 2030

Storage volume level of reservoirs in Mauritius under three climate change scenaries
Millions of cubic metres

Box V.5 (cont’d)

45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
2010 

70,000

60,000

50,000

40,000

30,000

20,000

10,000

0

Reference
scenario

Average case
reduced 
rainfall 
“Worst-case” 
reduced 
 
rainfall

 

 

 

 

2015

2020 

2025 

2030  

Additional electricity demand for water, 2030*
Megawatt hours

Desalination

Irrigation

Other

Source: Howells et al., forthcoming.

300,000
250,000
200,000
150,000
100,000
50,000
0
-50,000
-100,000
-150,000
-200,000
-250,000

Additional greenhouse gas emissions, 2030*
 Tonnes of CO2 equivalent

Coal production

Electricity generation

Transportation

Petroleum reﬁning

Source: Howells and others 
(forthcoming).
* Compared with the 
scenario without climate 
change impacts, under the 
worst-case scenario.

The post-2015 energy transformation challenge156

Integrated energy 
assessment and planning 
constitute a critical tool for 
the design of sustainable 
strategies, particularly in 
developing countries

Box V.6

Integrated energy assessment and planning constitute a critical tool for the 
design of sustainable strategies, particularly in developing countries—and even more so 
in  those  countries  that  are  likely  to  be  affected  by  climate  variability.  However,  these 
countries rarely have the capacities needed to undertake such analysis. Widespread access 
to integrated energy assessment and planning tools should be part of the international co-
operation framework for sustainable development. It is important to harness the expertise 
on energy systems acquired by a number of research institutions throughout the world to 
assist developing countries in the task of building sustainable energy systems. It will thus 
be important to establish a network of independent centres for energy systems analysis 
with a mandate to assist the design and implementation of sustainable energy plans in 
developing and least developed countries.

Burkina Faso adds energy in order to reduce emissions

Policies  to  reduce  emissions  have  to  take  into  consideration  the  fact  that  the  economic- 
environment system is complex, specific and interlinked. In Burkina Faso, a country with rapid de-
forestation, growing energy insecurity and greenhouse gas emissions, an integrated approach finds 
that a measure with damaging direct effects on each of these factors has disproportionately positive 
knock-on effects. This phenomenon is uncovered by an integrated modeling of the system, allowing 
for appropriate national development actions. 

Box 2   Changes in the energy balance 
Changes in the energy balance  
in Burkina Faso, 2030
in Burkina Faso, 2030
Terajoules

Fertilizer
production
Mechanization 
of agriculture
“Annual 
Harvestable” 
energy
content 

Source: Hermann et al, 2012.  

40,000

20,000

0

-20,000

-40,000

-60,000

-80,000

-100,000

-120,000

-140,000

-160,000

Source: Hermann  
and others, 2012.  

In  summary,  agriculture  is  ex-
panding  rapidly,  eating  into  forest,  a  natural 
“carbon sink”. Forest supplies vital fuel wood 
used for cooking and heating. As forest is dis-
placed, people are forced, for energy needs, 
to use oil, which is imported and expensive. 
Emissions are increasing as the carbon sink is 
disappearing and oil use is increasing. Energy 
security  is  reduced  as  more  oil  is  imported, 
and energy poverty is increased as the price 
of  the  new  energy  source  (oil)  is  relatively 
expensive. 

However,  agriculture  in  Burkina 
Faso is not intensive. The land requirements 
for  similar  outputs  can  be  significantly  re-
duced by changing practices. Those changes 
would include higher application of fertilizer 
and mechanization. To fully grasp these link-
ages  it  is  useful  to  recall  that  conventional 
production and application are highly green-
house gas-intensive and increased mechani-
zation  requires  higher  volumes  of  oil  use  in 
tractors and other equipment.

World Economic and Social Survey 2013157

More  broadly,  significant  investments  will  be  needed  in  technological  in-
novation and adaptation, supported by efficient technology transfers and cooperation at 
the regional and international levels (United Nations, 2011b). The design of sustainable 
energy systems as part of national development strategies calls for capacities and skills 
that are not abundant in many countries of the world. Building such capacities will enable 
countries to undertake transformative energy plans that would otherwise be considered 
completely out of reach. 

It will be important to 
establish a network of 
independent centres for 
energy systems analysis 
to assist in the design 
and implementation of 
sustainable energy plans 
in developing and least 
developed countries

Sustainable energy systems in a  
global development agenda

The transformation of the energy system should be a core element in a post-2015 develop-
ment agenda. The four dimensions integrated in the UN-System view of the post-2015 
development  agenda  provide  a  useful  reference  for  framing  the  transformation  of  the 
energy system (United Nations System Task Team on the Post-2015 UN Development 
Agenda, 2012). Each of the four dimensions can be mapped to further detail for relevant 
energy transformative policies. For example, the environmental sustainability dimension 
can be directly linked to the promotion of renewables and energy efficiency, as well as 
linked with integrated energy policies (figure V.9). The inclusive economic development 
dimension can relate to policies for reducing dependence on traditional biomass energy 
and policies aimed at providing universal access to electricity, among others. The inclusive 
social development dimension can be mapped to integrated policies for ensuring access 
to modern energy and food security, and to strategies for integrating access to water and 
provisioning  energy,  for  example.  The  dimension  of  peace  and  security  can  be  related 
to policies designed to lessen dependence on energy imports or policies for diversifying 
sources of energy. Member States currently working to define the main threads of the 
post-2015 development agenda might wish to take note of the importance of explicitly 
incorporating energy goals.  

Member States currently 
working on defining the 
main threads of the post-
2015 development agenda 
might take note of the 
importance of explicitly 
incorporating energy goals

The post-2015 energy transformation challengeBibliography

Abdallah,  S.  S.,  and  others  (2009). The (un)Happy PlanetIndex 2.0.: Why Good Lives 

don’t Have to Cost the Earth. London: new economics foundation.

Abel, Jaison, and Richard Deitz (2012). Job polarization and rising inequality in the nation 
and the New York-northern New Jersey region. Current Issues in Economics and 
Finance, vol. 18, No. 7, pp. 1-7.

Africare, Oxfam America and WWF-ICRISAT Project (2010). More rice for people, more 

water for the planet. Hyderabad, India.

Agrawala, Shardul, and Samuel Fankhauser, eds. (2008). Economic Aspects of Adaptation 
to Climate Change: Costs, Benefits and Policy Instruments. Paris: Organization 
for Economic Cooperation and Development.

AIV (2011). The post-2015 development agenda: the Millennium Development Goals in 
perspective, No. 74 (April). The Hague: Advisory Council on International 
Affairs.

Alire, Rod (2011). The reality behind biodegradable plastic packaging material: the science 
of  biodegradable  plastics.  Fremont,  California:  FP  International.  Available 
from  http://www.fpintl.com/resources/wp_biodegradable_plastics.htm  (ac-
cessed 3 March 2013).

Altieri, Miguel A. (2008). Small farms as a planetary ecological asset: five key reasons 
why we should support the revitalization of small farms in the global South. 
Oakland, California: Food First/Institute for Food and Development Policy. 
15 April. Available from http://www.foodfirst.org/en/node/2115.

Alton,  Theresa,  and  others  (2012).  The  Economic  Implications  of  Introducing  Carbon 
Taxes in South Africa. UNU-WIDER Working Paper, No. 2012/46. Helsinki: 
United  Nations  University-World  Institute  for  Development  Economics 
Research.

Anseeuw, Ward, and others (2012). Land Rights and the Rush for Land: Findings of the 
Global  Commercial  Pressures  on  Land  Research  Project.  Rome:  International 
Land Coalition.

Aryeetey, Ernest, and others (2012). Getting to zero: finishing the job the MDGs started. 
Paper prepared by members of the Global Agenda Council on Bench-making 
progress convened by the World Economic Forum.

Asheim, Geir B., and Martin L. Weitzman (2001). Does NNP growth indicate welfare 

improvement? Economics Letters, 73, No. 2 (November), pp. 233-239.

Audretsch, David B., Albert N. Link and John T. Scott (2002). Public/private technology 
partnerships:  evaluating  SBIR-supported  research.  Research  Policy,  vol.  31, 
No. 1 (January), pp. 145-158.

Ayres, Robert (2007). On the practical limits to substitution. Ecological Economics, vol. 61, 

No. 1, pp. 115-128. 

Baker, Judy L., ed. (2012). Climate Change, Disaster Risk, and the Urban Poor: Cities Building 
Resilience  for  a  Changing  World.  Urban  Development  Series.  Washington, 
D.C.: World Bank.

160

Bangladesh (2010). Power system master plan 2010. Available from http://www.powerdi-

vision.gov.bd/pdf/SUMMARYPSMP2010.pdf.

Barnosky,  Anthony,  and  others  (2012).  Approaching  a  state  shift  in  Earth’s  biosphere. 

Nature, vol. 486, No. 7401 (7 June), pp. 52-58.

Baumert,  Kevin  A.,  Timothy  Herzog  and  Jonathan  Pershing  (2005).  Navigating 
the  Numbers:  Greenhouse  Gas  Data  and  International  Climate  Policy. 
Washington, D.C.: World Resources Institute.

Beall,  Jo,  Basudeb  Guha-Khasnobis  and  Ravi  Kanbur,  eds.  (2012).  Urbanization  and 
Development  in  Asia.  Multidimensional  Perspectives.  New  York:  Oxford 
University Press.

Beatley, Timothy, ed. (2012). Green Cities of Europe: Global Lessons on Green Urbanism. 

Washington, D.C.: Island Press.

Beddington, J., and others (2012). Achieving food security in the face of climate change. 
Final report from the Commission on Sustainable Agriculture and Climate 
Change.  Copenhagen:  CGIAR  Research  Program  on  Climate  Change, 
Agriculture and Food Security. 

Beintema,  Nienke,  and  Howard  Elliott  (2009).  Setting  meaningful  investment  targets 
in agricultural research and development: challenges, opportunities and fiscal 
realities. Paper prepared for the Expert meeting on “How to Feed the World 
in 2050”, organized by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United 
Nations, Rome, 24-26 June 2009.

Bellard, Celine, and others (2012). Impacts of climate change on the future of biodiver-

sity. Ecology Letters, vol. 15, No. 4 (April), pp. 365-377. 

Benin, S., and others (2010). Monitoring African agricultural development processes and 
performance: a comparative analysis. ReSAKSS Annual Trends and Outlook 
Report 2010. Washington, D.C.: International Food Policy Research Institute.
Berg,  Andrew,  and  Jonathan  Ostry  (2011).  Inequality  and  unsustainable  growth:  two 
sides of the same coin? IMF Staff Discussion Note. SDN/11/08. Washington, 
D.C.: International Monetary Fund. 8 April.

Besley, Timothy, and Louise J. Cord, eds. (2007). Delivering on the Promise of Pro-Poor 
Growth: Insights and Lessons from Country Experiences. Washington, D.C.: 
World Bank; Basingstoke, United Kingdom: Palgrave Macmillan.

Bhagwati, Jagdish (2005). Development aid: getting it right. OECD Observer, No. 249 

(May).

Biodiversity International and others (2012). Sustainable agricultural productivity growth 
and bridging the gap for small-family farms: interagency report to the Mexican 
G20 Presidency. 12 June.

Birdsal, Nancy, and Lawrence McDonald (2013). Could China and its fellow Brics na-
tions lead the way on climate change? Guardian, 28 January. Available from 
http://go.nature.com/wqdizO.

Birkmann, Jörn, and Korinna von Teichman (2010). Integrating disaster risk reduction 
and climate change adaptation: key challenges - scales, knowledge, and norms. 
Sustainability Science, vol. 5, No. 2, pp. 171-184.

Boon,  Ronald  G.J.,  Anastasia  Alexaki  and  Ernesto  Herrera  Becerra  (2001).  The  Ilo 
Clean  Air  Project:  a  local  response  to  industrial  pollution  control  in  Peru. 
Environment and Urbanization, vol. 13, No. 2 (October), pp. 215-232. 

World Economic and Social Survey 2013161

Bowen, Alex (2012). “Green” growth: what does it mean? Environmental Scientist, pp. 7-11. 
London: Grantham Research Institute on Climate Change and the Environment.
Braun, Arnoud, and Deborah Duveskog (2008). The Farmer Field School approach: his-
tory, global assessment and success stories. Background paper commissioned 
by the International Fund for Agricultural Development for the IFAD Rural 
Poverty Report 2009 (October).

Brookes, L. (1990). The Greenhouse effect: the fallacies in the energy efficient solution. 

Energy Policy, vol. 18, No. 2 (March), pp. 199-201.

Brooks, S., and M. Loevinsohn (2011). Shaping agricultural innovation systems responsive 
to food insecurity and climate change. Background paper prepared for World 
Economic and Social Survey 2011.

Brown, Judy, and Michael Fraser (2006). Approaches and perspectives in social and en-
vironmental accounting: an overview of the conceptual landscape. Business 
Strategy and the Environment, vol. 15, No 2, pp. 103-117.

Brysse, Keynyn, and others (2012). Climate change predictions: erring on the side of least 
drama? Global Environmental Change, vol. 23, No. 1 (February 2013), pp. 
327-337. Available from  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2012.10.008. 

Burritt, Roger L., Tobias Hahn and Stefan Schaltegger (2002). Towards a comprehensive 
framework for environmental management accounting: links between busi-
ness  actors  and  environmental  management  accounting  tools.  Australian 
Accounting Review, vol. 12, No. 27 (July), pp. 39-50.

Campbell-Lendrum, D. (2009). Saving lives while saving the planet: protecting health 
from climate change. Background paper prepared for World Economic and 
Social Survey 2009. 

Cannady, Cynthia. (2009). Access to climate change technology by developing countries: a 
practical strategy. ICTSD Intellectual Property and Sustainable Development 
Series  Issue  Paper,  No.  25.  Geneva:  International  Centre  for  Trade  and 
Sustainable Development. September.

Castaldi, Carolina, and others (2009). Technological learning, policy regimes, and growth: 
the  long-term  patterns  and  some  specificities  of  a  “Globalized”  economy. 
In  Industrial  Policy  and  Development:  The  Political  Economy  of  Capabilities 
Accumulation, Mario Cimoli, Giovanni Dosi and Joseph Stiglitz, eds. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press. 

Cattaneo,  Olivier,  Gary  Gereffi  and  Cornelia  Staritz  (2010).  Global  value  chains  in  a 
postcrisis world: resilience, consolidation, and shifting end markets. In Global 
Value Chains in a Postcrisis World, Olivier Cattaneo, Gary Gereffi and Cornelia 
Staritz, eds. Washington, D.C.: World Bank.

Chant, Lindsay, Scott McDonald and Arjan Verschoor (2008). Some consequences of the 
1994-1995 coffee boom for growth and poverty reduction in Uganda. Journal 
of Agricultural Economics, vol. 59, No. 1 (February), pp. 93-113.

Chen, Shaohua, and Martin Ravallion (2010). The developing world is poorer than we 
thought, but no less successful in the fight against poverty. Quarterly Journal 
of Economics, vol. 25, No. 4, pp. 1577-1625.

Cohen, Barney (2006). Urbanization in developing countries: current trends, future pro-
jections, and key challenges for sustainability. Technology in Society, vol. 28, 
Nos. 1-2 (January-April), pp. 63-80. 

Bibliography162

Cohen,  Joel  (2010).  Beyond  population:  everyone  counts  in  development.  Center  for 
Global  Development  Working  Paper  220.  Washington,  D.C.:  Center  for 
Global Development. July.

Committee on World Food Security, High-level Panel of Experts on Food Security and 
Nutrition  (2011).  Price  volatility  and  food  security.  HLPE  report  1.  Rome. 
July.

Daly, Herman (1991). Steady State Economics, Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
________ (1996). Beyond Growth: The Economics of Sustainable Development. Boston, 

Massachusetts: Beacon Press.

Dasgupta,  Partha  (1994).  Optimal  development  and  the  idea  of  net  national  product. 
In Sustainable Economic Development: Domestic and International Policy, 
I.  Goldin  and  A.  Winter,  eds.  Cambridge,  United  Kingdom:  Cambridge 
University Press. Pp. 111-142.

________, B. Kristrom and K. G. Maler (1997). The environment and the net national 
product. In The Environment and Emerging Development Issues, P. Dasgupta 
and K. G. Maler, eds. Oxford: Clarendon Press. Pp. 129-139.

Davis, Kristin, and others (2007). Strengthening agricultural education and training in 
sub-Saharan  Africa  from  an  innovation  systems  perspective:  case  studies  of 
Ethiopia and Mozambique. IFPRI discussion Paper, No. 00736 (December). 
Washington, D.C.: International Food Policy Research Institute.

Deininger, Klaus, and others (2010). Rising Global Interest in Farmland: Can It Yield 

Sustainable and Equitable Benefits? Washington, D.C.: World Bank.

Deloitte (2012). eTransform Africa: agriculture sector study: sector assessment and op-

portunities for ICT. 4 February. 

Derviş,  Kemal  (2012).  Convergence,  interdependence,  and  divergence.  Finance  and 

Development, vol. 49, No. 3, pp. 10-14. 

Devarajan, Shantayanan, and others (2011). Tax policy to reduce carbon emissions in a 
distorted economy: illustrations from a South Africa CGE model. B.E. Journal 
of Economic Analysis and Policy, vol. 11, No. 1. Available from http://www.
bepress.com/bejeap/vol11/iss1/art13.

Dobbs,  Richard,  and  others  (2011a).  Resource  Revolution:  Meeting  the  World’s  Energy, 

Materials, Food, and Water needs. McKinsey Global Institute. November.

Dobbs, Richard, and others (2011b). Urban world: mapping the economic power of cities. 

McKinsey Global Institute. March.

Dobbs,  Richard,  and  others  (2011c).  Resource  revolution:  meeting  the  world’s  energy, 
materials,  food  and  water  needs.  McKinsey  Global  Institute,  McKinsey 
Sustainability and Resource Productivity Practice. November.

Dong, Fengxia and Frank H. Fuller (2007). Changing diets in china’s cities: empirical 
fact  or  urban  legend?  Working  Paper  06-WP  437.  Ames,  Iowa:  Center  for 
Agricultural and Rural Development, Iowa State University. September.

Dregne, H. E. (1990). Erosion and soil productivity in Africa. Journal of Soil and Water 

Conservation, vol. 45, No. 4 (July/August), pp. 431-436.

Drèze, J. and A. Sen, eds. (1991). The Political Economy of Hunger: vol. 1, Entitlement 
and Well-being; vol. 2, Famine Prevention; vol. 3, Endemic Hunger. WIDER 
Studies in Economics. New York: Oxford University Press.

World Economic and Social Survey 2013163

Dubin, H. J., and John P. Brennan (2009). Fighting a “shifty enemy”: the international 
collaboration  to  contain  wheat  rusts.  In  Millions  Fed:  Proven  Success  in 
Agricultural Development, David J. Spielman and Rajul Pandya-Lorch, eds. 
Washington, D.C.: International Food Policy Research Institute. Pp. 19-24.

Durrmeyer, Isis, Philippe Février and Xavier D’Haultfoeuille (2011). The Willingness to 
pay for global warming reduction: lessons from the French automobile mar-
ket. Paper prepared for the Eighteenth Annual Conference of the European 
Association  of  Environmental  and  Resource  Economists,  Rome,  29  June- 
2 July 2011. 

Earth Security Initiative (2012). The Land Security Agenda: how investor risks in farm-

land create opportunities for sustainability. London. March. 

Echeverria, Ruben G., and Nienke M. Beintema (2009). Mobilizing financial resources for 
agricultural research in developing countries: trends and mechanisms. Rome: 
Global Forum on Agricultural Research (GFAR).

Elliot, Kimberley Ann (2010). Pulling agricultural innovation and the market together. 
Working  paper  No.  215  (June).  Washington,  D.C.:  Centre  for  Global 
Development.

Epstein,  Gerald  (2005).  Introduction:  financialization  and  the  world  economy.  In 
Financialization  and  the  World  Economy,  Gerald  Epstein,  ed.  Cheltenham, 
United Kingdom: Edward Elgar.

Erten, Bilge, and Jose Antonio Ocampo (2012). Super-cycles of commodity prices since 
the mid-nineteenth century. DESA Working Paper No. 110. ST/ESA/2012/
DWP/110. February. Available from http://www.un.org/esa/desa/papers/2012/
wp110_2012.pdf.

Ervin, David E., Leland L. Glenna and Raymond A. Jussaume, Jr. (2010). Are biotechno-
logy and sustainable agriculture compatible? Renewable Agriculture and Food 
Systems, vol. 1, No. 1 (18 February), pp. 1-15.

Evans,  Alex  (2010).  Globalization  and  scarcity:  Multilateralism  for  a  world  with  lim-
its.  New  York:  Center  on  International  Cooperation,  New  York  University. 
November.

________ (2011). Resource scarcity, fair shares and development. WWF/Oxfam discus-
sion  paper.  Available  from  http://www.oxfam.org/sites/www.oxfam.org/files/
rr-resource-scarcity-fair-shares-200711-en.pdf.

Fan,  Shenggen,  and  Mark  W.  Rosegrant  (2008).  Investing  in  agriculture  to  overcome 
the world food crisis and reduce poverty and hunger. IFPRI Policy Brief, No. 
3.  Washington,  D.C.:  International  Food  Policy  Research  Institute.  June. 
Available from http://www.ifpri.org/sites/default/files/publications/bp003.pdf.
Falconer, Gordon, and Shane Mitchell (2012). Smart City Framework: a systematic pro-
cess  for  enabling  Smart+Connected  Communities.  Cisco  Internet  Business 
Solutions Group (IBSG). September.

Foley, Jonathan, and others (2005). Global consequences of land use. Science, vol. 309, 

No. 5734 (22 July), pp. 570-574. 

Food  and  Agriculture  Organization  of  the  United  Nations  (2003).  World  agriculture: 
towards 2015/2030 prospects for food nutrition, agriculture and major com-
modity groups - interim report. Rome.

Bibliography164

________ (2004). Incorporating nutrition considerations into development policies and 
programmes. Brief for policy-makers and programme planners in developing 
countries. Rome.

________ (2008). Crop prospects and food situation, No. 2: Benin. Rome.
________ (2009a). How to Feed the World in 2050: Proceedings of the Expert Meeting on 
How to Feed the World in 2050. Rome. 24-26 June 2009, FAO Headquarters, 
Rome.

________ (2009b). Investing in food security. Rome. November.
________ (2009c). The State of Food Insecurity in the World 2009: Economic Crises - 

Impacts and Lessons Learned. Rome.

________ (2009d). Expert papers from the High-Level Expert Forum on How to Feed 
the World, Rome, 12 and 13 October 2009. Available from http://www.fao.
org/wsfs/forum2050/wsfs-background-documents/wsfs-expert-papers/en/.

________  (2009e). The State of Food and Agriculture 2009: Livestock in the Balance. Rome.
________  (2010).  The  State  of  Food  Insecurity  in  the  World  2010:  Addressing  Food 

Insecurity in Protracted Crises. Rome.

________  (2011a).  The  State  of  the  World’s  Land  and  Water  Resources  for  Food  and 

Agriculture: Managing Systems at Risk—Summary Report. Rome. 

________  (2011b). The State of Food and Agriculture 2010/2011: Women in Agriculture- 

Closing the Gender Gap for Development. Rome.

________  (2011c). The State of the World’s Land and Water Resources for Food and 
Agriculture:  Managing  Systems  at  Risk.  Abingdon,  United  Kingdom: 
Earthscan.

________  (2011d).  The  State  of  Food  Insecurity  in  the  World  2011:  How  Does 
International Price Volatility Affect Domestic Economies and Food Security. 
Rome.

________ (2011e).  Global  food  losses  and  food  waste:  extent,  causes  and  prevention. 
Study conducted for the International Congress Save Food! at Interpack2011, 
Düsseldorf, Germany. Rome.

________ (2012a). Towards the future we want: end hunger and make the transition to 

sustainable agricultural and food systems. Rome.

________  (2012b). The State of Food Insecurity in the World 2012. Rome.
________ (2012c). Food wastage footprints. Factsheet. Available from http://www.fao.
org/fileadmin/templates/nr/sustainability_pathways/docs/Factsheet_FOOD-
WASTAGE.pdf.

________  (2013).  The  State  of  Food  and  Agriculture  2013:  Food  Systems  for  Food 

Security and Better Nutrition. Rome.

________, International Fund for Agricultural Development and International Labour 
Organization  (2010).  Gender  Dimensions  of  Agricultural  and  Rural 
Employment: Differentiated Pathways out of Poverty. Rome.

Foresight (2011). The future of food and farming: challenges and choices for global sus-

tainability. London: Government Office for Science.

World Economic and Social Survey 2013165

Fuglie, K. O. (2012). Productivity growth and technology capital in the global agricul-
tural  economy.  In  Productivity  Growth  in  Agriculture:  An  International 
Perspective, K. O. Fuglie, S. L. Wang and V. E. Ball, eds. Wallingford, United 
Kingdom: CABI.

Galbraith, James K. (2012). Inequality and Instability: The Study of the World Economy 

Just before the Great Crisis. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Galloway,  James,  and  others  (2003).  The  nitrogen  cascade.  BioScience,  vol.  53,  No.  4,  

pp. 341-356. 

Georgescu-Roegen, N. (1971). The Entropy Law and the Economic Process. Cambridge, 

Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.

Gereffi, Gary (2005). The global economy: organization, governance, and development. In 
The Handbook of Economic Sociology, Neil Smelser and Richard Swedberg, eds. 
Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press. 

Gilbert,  Christopher  L.  (2008).  How  to  understand  high  food  prices.  Discussion  pa-
per, No. 23. Trento, Italy: Department of Economics, University of Trento. 
Available from http://www.unitn.it/files/23_08_gilbert.pdf.

Global  Footprint  Network  (2010).  Ecological  footprint  and  biocapacity,  2007:  results 
from  Natural  Footprint  Accounts  2010  edition.  Oakland,  California. 
Available  from  http://www.footprintnetwork.org/en/index.php/GFN/page/
footprint_for_nations.

Godfray, H. Charles J., and others (2010). Food security: the challenge of feeding 9 billion 

people. Science, vol. 327, No. 5967 (12 February), pp. 812-818. 

Gollier, Christian, and Martin L. Weitzman (2010). How should the distant future be 
discounted  when  discount  rates  are  uncertain?  Economic  Letters,  vol.  107,  
No. 3 (June), pp. 350-353.

Gonzalez, Fidel (2012). Distributional effects of carbon taxes: the case of Mexico. Energy 

Economics, vol. 34, No. 6, pp. 2102-2115. doi: 10.1016/j.eneco.2012.03.007.

Group  of  Eight  (2008).  Leaders’  statement  on  global  food  security,  Hokkaido,  Japan,  
8 July. Available from http://www.mofa.go.jp/policy/economy/summit/2008/
doc/doc080709_04_en.html.

Grübler, Arnulf, and others (2012a). Energy primer. In International Institute for Applied 
Systems Analysis, Global Energy Assessment: Toward a Sustainable Future. New 
York: Cambridge University Press; Laxenburg, Austria: IIASA. Chap. 1, pp. 
99-150. 

Grübler, Arnulf, and others (2012b). Policies for the Energy Technology Innovation System 
(ETIS). In International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, Global Energy 
Assessment:  Toward  a  Sustainable  Future.  New  York:  Cambridge  University 
Press; Laxenburg, Austria: IIASA. Chap. 24, pp. 1665-1744. 

Grübler, Arnulf, and Thomas Buettner (2013). Urbanization past and future. In Energizing 
Sustainable Cities: Assessing Urban Energy, Arnulf Grubler and David Fisk, eds. 
Abingdon, United Kingdom: Routledge.

Grübler, Arnulf, and David Fisk, eds. (2013). Energizing Sustainable Cities: Assessing Urban 

Energy. Abingdon, United Kingdom: Routledge.

Bibliography166

Hall, Andy, Jeroen Dijkman and Rasheed Sulaiman V (2010). Research into use: investi-
gating the relationship between agricultural research and innovation. UNU-
MERIT Working Paper Series, No. 2010-44 (July). Maastricht, Netherlands: 
United  Nations  University  – Maastricht  Economic  and  Social  Research  and 
Training Centre on Innovation and Technology.

Hallam, David (2009). International Investment in agricultural production. Paper pre-
sented at the Expert Meeting on How to Feed the World in 2050, held at FAO 
Headquarters, Rome, from 24 to 26 June 2009.

Hartwick, J. (1990). National resources, national accounting, and economic depreciation. 

Journal of Public Economics, vol. 43, pp. 291-304.

Hazell, Peter B.R., and others (2010). The future of small farms: trajectories and policy 

priorities. World Development, vol. 38, No. 10 (October), pp. 1453-1526. 

Headey,  Derek,  Sangeetha  Malaiyandi  and  Shenggen  Fan  (2010).  Navigating  the  per-
fect storm: reflections on the food, energy, and financial crises. Agricultural 
Economics, vol. 41, No. S1, pp. 217-228. 

Henley,  David  (2012).  The  agrarian  roots  of  industrial  growth:  rural  development  in 
South-East Asia and sub-Saharan Africa. Development Policy Review, vol. 30, 
Supplement s1 (February), pp. 25-47.

Hermann, S., and others (2012). Climate, land, energy and water (CLEW) interlinkages 
in Burkina Faso: an analysis of agricultural intensification and bioenergy pro-
duction. Natural Resources Forum, vol. 36, No. 4 (November), pp. 245-262.
Hoekstra,  Arjen,  and  Merfin  Mekonnen  (2012).  The  water  footprint  of  humanity. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, vol. 109, No. 9, pp. 3232-3237.
Hoffman, D.J., and others (2000). Why are nutritionally stunted children at increased 
risk of obesity? studies of metabolic rate and fat oxidation in shantytown chil-
dren from São Paulo, Brazil. American Journal of Clininical Nutrition, vol. 72,  
No. 3 (September), pp. 702-707.

Holian, Matthew J., and Matthew E. Kahn (2013). The rise of the low carbon consumer 
city. NBER Working Paper, No. 18735 (January). Cambridge, Massachusetts: 
Natural Bureau of Economic Research.

Howells, M., and others (forthcoming). Integrated analysis of climate change, land-use, 

energy and water strategies. Nature Climate Change.

Huesemann, M. (2003). The limits of technological solutions to sustainable development. 

Clean Technologies and Environmental Policy, vol. 5, pp. 21-34.

________ (2004).  The  failure  of  eco-efficiency  to  guarantee  sustainability:  future  
challenges  for  industrial  ecology.  Environmental  Progress,  vol.  3,  No.  4,  
pp. 264-270.

Hoff, Karla, and Priyanka Pandey (2004). Belief systems and durable inequalities: an ex-
perimental investigation of Indian caste. World Bank Policy Research Working 
Paper 3351. Washington, D.C: World Bank. June.

Horton, Sue, and others (2008). The challenges of hunger and malnutrition. Washington, 

D.C.: Copenhagen Consensus Center. May. 

Institute  of  Development  Studies  (2010).  Special  issue:  the  MDGs  and  beyond.  IDS 

Bulletin, vol. 41, No. 1 (January). Brighton, United Kingdom.

World Economic and Social Survey 2013167

Institution of Mechanical Engineers (2013). Global food: waste not, want not. London. 

January. 

Intergovernmental  Panel  on  Climate  Change  (2007a).  Climate  Change  2007:  Synthesis 

Report. Geneva. 

________ (2007b). Climate Change 2007: Mitigation. Contribution of Working Group 
III  to  the  Fourth  Assessment  Report  of  the  Intergovernmental  Panel  on 
Climate Change, Bert Metz and others, eds. Cambridge, United Kingdom: 
Cambridge University Press.

________ (2012a). Summary for policymakers. In Managing the Risks of Extreme Events 
and  Disasters  to  Advance  Climate  Change  Adaptation.  A  Special  Report  of 
Working Groups I and II of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 
C.  B.  Field  and  others,  eds.  Cambridge,  United  Kingdom:  Cambridge 
University Press. 

________  (2012b). Managing the Risks of Extreme Events and Disasters to Advance Climate 
Change Adaptation. Special report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change. New York: Cambridge University Press. 

________  (2012c). Renewable Energy Sources and Climate Change Mitigation. Special 
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Ottmar Edenhofer 
and others, eds. New York: Cambridge University Press.

International  Assessment  of  Agricultural  Knowledge,  Science  and  Technology  for 
Development (2009). Agriculture at a Crossroads: Global Report, Beverly D. 
McIntyre and others, eds. Washington, D.C.: Island Press.

International Energy Agency (2012). World Energy Outlook 2012. Paris: OECD/IEA.
International Food Policy Research Institute (2002). Green revolution, curse or blessing? 

Washington, D.C.

________ (2005). The future of small farms. Proceedings of a research workshop, Wye, 
United Kingdom, 26-29 June 2005, jointly organized by International Food 
Policy Research Institute (IFPRI)/2020 Vision Initiative, Overseas Development 
Institute (ODI) and Imperial College, London. Washington, D.C.

International Fund for Agricultural Development (2011). Rural Poverty Report 2011: New 
Realities, New Challenges — New Opportunities for Tomorrow’s Generation. 
Rome.

International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (2012). Global Energy Assessment: 
Toward  a  Sustainable  Future.  New  York:  Cambridge  University  Press; 
Laxenburg, Austria: IIASA.

International Monetary Fund (2012). The liberalization and management of capital flows: 

an institutional view. Staff paper. Washington, D.C. 14 November.

________ (2013).  Energy  subsidy  reform:  lessons  and  implications. Washington, D.C. 

28 January.

Islam,  Nazrul  (2012).  Towards  a  sustainable  social  model:  implications  for  the  post-2015 
agenda. Background paper prepared for World Economic and Social Survey 2013. 
IUCN-The World Conservation Union, UNEP-United Nations Environment Programme 
and  WWF-World  Wide  Fund  for  Nature  (1991).  Caring  for  the  Earth:  A 
Strategy for Sustainable Living. Gland, Switzerland. October.

Bibliography168

Jackson,  Tim  (2009).  Prosperity  without  Growth:  Economics  for  a  Finite  planet. 

Abingdon, United Kingdom: Earthscan. 

________ (2010). Philosophical and social transformations necessary for the green econ-
omy. Background paper prepared for World Economic and Social Survey 2011.
Jaafar, Abdul Hamid, Abul Al-Amin and Chamhuri Siwar (2008). A CGE analysis of the 
economic  impact  of  output-specific  carbon  tax  on  the  Malaysian  economy. 
MPRA Paper, 10210. Munich Personal RePEc Archive. Available from http://
mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de/10210/.

Jovanovic, Boyan, and Peter Rousseau (2005). General purpose technologies. In Handbook 
of Economic Growth, Philippe Aghion and Steven Durlauf, eds. Amsterdam: 
Elsevier. Pp. 1181-1224. 

Kaeb, Harald (2011). European bioplastics: introduction. Available from www.european-

bioplastics.org (accessed 23 February 2011).

Kaplinsky,  Raphael  (2006).  Revisiting  the  revisited  terms  of  trade:  will  China  make  a 

difference? World Development, vol. 34, No. 6, pp. 981-995. 

________, and Masuma Farooki (2010). Global value chains, the crisis, and the shift of 
markets from North to South. In Global Value Chains in a Postcrisis World, 
Olivier Cattaneo, Gary Gereffi and Cornelia Staritz, eds. Washington, D.C.: 
World Bank.

Kapur, Devesh, and John McHale (2005). Give Us Your Best and Brightest: The Global 
Hunt for Talent and Its Impact on the Developing World. Washington, D.C.: 
Center for Global Development.

Kates, Robert, Thomas M. Parris and Anthony A. Leiserowitz (2005). What is sustainable 
development?  goals,  indicators,  values,  and  practice.  Environment:  Science 
and Policy for Sustainable Development, vol. 47, No. 3, pp. 8-21.

Keane, Jodie-Ann (2012). The governance of global value chains and the effects of the 
global financial crisis transmitted to producers in Africa and Asia. Journal of 
Development Studies, vol. 48, No. 6, pp. 783-797. 

Kees van Donge, Jan, David Henley and Peter Lewis (2012). Tracking development in 
South-East Asia and sub-Saharan Africa: the primacy of policy. Development 
Policy Review, vol. 30, Supplement s1 (February), pp. s5-s24.

Kenny, Charles, and Andy Sumner (2011). More money or more development: what have 
the  MDGs  achieved?  Center  for  Global  Development  Working  Paper,  No. 
278. Washington, D.C.: Center for Global Development. December.

Kindleberger, Charles, and Robert Aliber (2011). Maniacs, Panics and Crashes: A History of 
Financial Crises, 6th ed. Basingstoke, United Kingdom: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Krausmann, Fridolin, and others (2009). The global socio-metabolic transition: past and 
present  metabolic  profiles  and  their  future  trajectories.  Journal  of  Industrial 
Ecology, vol. 12, No. 5-6, pp. 637-656. 

Laeven, Luc, and Fabian Valencia (2012). Systemic banking crises database: an update. 
IMF Working Paper WP/12/163. Washington, D.C.: International Monetary 
Fund.

World Economic and Social Survey 2013169

Layard, R. (2005). The national income: a sorry tale. In Growth Triumphant: The 21st 
Century  in  Historical  Perspective,  R.  Easterlin,  ed.  Ann  Arbor,  Michigan: 
University of Michigan Press.

Lee,  Bernice,  and  others  (2012).  Resources  Futures.  Chatham  House  Report.  London: 

Royal Institute of International Affairs. December.

Leeuwis, Cees, and Andy Hall (2010). Facing the challenges of climate change and food 
security: the role of research, extension and communication institutions - final 
report.  Rome:  Food  and  Agriculture  Organization  of  the  United  Nations, 
Wageningen University and UNU-MERIT. October.

Lele, Uma, and others (2010). Transforming agricultural research for development. Paper 
commissioned by the Global Conference on Agricultural Research (GCARD) 
for  the  Global  Conference  on  Agricultural  Research  in  Development, 
Montpellier, France, 28-31 March 2010.

Lenton,  Timothy,  and  Juan-Carlos  Ciscar  (2012).  Integrating  tipping  points  into  cli-
mate impact assessments Climate Change (29 August), pp. 1-13. doi:10.1007/
s10584-012-0572-8.

Li, Y., and C. Hewitt (2008). The effect of trade between China and the UK on national 
and  global  carbon  dioxide  emissions.  Energy Policy,  vol.  36,  No.  6  (June),  
pp. 1907-1914.

Lim, William S.W. (2012). Incomplete Urbanism: A Critical Urban Strategy for Emerging 

Economies. Singapore: World Scientific Publishing Company.

Lobell, David, Wolfram Schlenker and Justin Costa-Roberts (2011). Climate trends and 
global  crop  production  since  1980.  Science,  vol.  333,  No.  6042  (29  July),  
pp. 616-620.

Lofgren, Hans, Martin Cicowiez and Carolina Díaz-Bonilla (2013). MAMS: a comput-
able  general  equilibrium  model  for  developing  country  strategy  analysis. In 
Handbook of Computable General Equilibrium Modeling, vol. 1A, Peter B. 
Dixon and Dale W. Jorgenson, eds. Amsterdam: North Holland. 

Lund, Susan, and others (2013). Financial globalization: retreat or reset?—global capital 

markets 2013. McKinsey Global Institute. 

Lutz, Wolfgang, Warren Sanderson and Sergei Scherbov (2008). The coming acceleration 

of global population ageing. Nature, vol. 451, No. 7179, pp. 716-719. 

Lyubormirsky, S., K. Sheldon and D. Schkade (2005). Pursuing happiness: the architec-
ture of sustainable change. Review of General Psychology, vol. 9, pp. 111-131.
Lipton, Michael (2010). From policy aims and small-farm characteristics to farm science 

needs. World Development, vol. 38, No. 10 (October), pp. 1399-1412.

MacKay,  David  J.C.  (2009).  Sustainable  Energy—Without  the  Hot  Air.  Cambridge, 

United Kingdom: UIT Cambridge.

Mathews, M.R. (1997). Twenty-five years of social and environmental accounting research: 
is there a silver jubilee to celebrate? Accounting, Auditing & Accountability 
Journal, vol. 10, No. 4, pp. 481-531.

Bibliography170

Matovu,  John  Mary,  and  others  (2013).  Uganda.  In  Financing  Human  Development 
in Africa, Asia and the Middle East, Marco V. Sánchez and Rob Vos, eds. 
United  Nations  Series  on  Development.  London:  Bloomsburg  Academic. 
McGranahan,  Gordon,  and  David  Satterthwaite  (2003).  Urban  centers:  an 
assessment  of  sustainability.  Annual  Review  of  Environment  and  Resources,  
vol. 28, pp. 243-274.

Meadows,  Donella  H.,  and  others  (1972).  The Limits to Growth.  New  York:  Universe 

Books.

Meadows, Donella H., Jorgen Randers and Dennis Meadows (2002). Limits to Growth: 
The 30-Year Update. White River Junction, Vermont: Chelsa Green Publishing 
Company.

Mehra, Rekha, and Mary Hill Rojas (2008). A significant shift: women, food security and 
agriculture in a global marketplace. Washington, D.C.: International Center 
for Research on Women (ICRW).

Milanovic, Branko (1999). True world income distribution, 1988 and 1993: first calcula-
tions based on household surveys alone. World Bank Policy Research Working 
Paper, No. 2244. Washington, D.C.: World Bank. November. WPS2244.

________ (2011a).  Global  inequality:  from  class  to  location,  from  proletarians  to  mi-
grants.  World  Bank  Policy  Research  Working  Paper,  No.  5820.  WPS5820. 
Washington, D.C.: World Bank. September.  

________  (2011b). The Haves and the Have-Nots: A Brief and Idiosyncratic History of 

Global Inequality. New York: Basic Books.

________ (2012). Global income inequality by the numbers: in history and now: an over-
view.  World Bank Policy Research Working Paper,  No.  6259.  Washington, 
D.C.: World Bank. November. WPS6259.

Melamud,  Claire  (2012).  After  2015:  contexts,  politics  and  processes  for  a  post-2015 
global agreement on development. London: Overseas Development Institute. 
4 January.

Milberg, William, and Deborah Winkler (2010). Trade, crisis, and recovery: restructur-
ing global value chains. In Global Value Chains in a Postcrisis World, Olivier 
Cattaneo, Gary Gereffi and Cornelia Staritz, eds. Washington, D.C.: World 
Bank. 

Millennium  Ecosystem  Assessment  (2005).  Ecosystems  and  Human  Well-Being:  
Synthesis Report. Millennium Ecosystem Assessment Series. Washington, D.C.:  
Island Press.

Mitchell,  Donald  (2008).  A  note  on  rising  food  prices.  World  Bank  Policy  Research 

Working Paper, No. 4682. Washington, D.C. 

“Mitigating circumstances: there are many barriers that must be overcome if South Africa 
is to control its greenhouse-gas emissions” (2013).  Nature Climate Change, 
vol. 3, No. 4 (April) Editorial. 

Mitlin, Diana, and David Satterthwaite (2012). Urban Poverty in the Global South: Scale 

and Nature. Abingdon, United Kingdom: Routledge.

World Economic and Social Survey 2013171

Mondal, Alam Hossain, Jyotirmay Mathur and Manfred Denich (2011). Impacts of CO2 
emission constraints on technology selection and energy resources for power 
generation in Bangladesh, Energy Policy, vol. 39, No. 4, pp. 2043-2050.

Montgomery, R. Mark, and others, eds. (2004). Cities Transformed: Demographic Change 

and its Implications in the Developing World. London: Earthscan.

Mowlds, Sinead, William, Nicol and Ernán ó Cléirigh (2012). Aid for food and nutrition 
security.  Paris:  Organization  for  Economic  Cooperation  and  Development, 
Development  Co-operation  Directorate.  Available  from  http://www.oecd.
org/dac/povertyreduction/Brochure%20on%20Food%20Security%20
FINAL%2013%20July%202012.pdf.

MS Swaminathan Research Foundation and World Food Programme (2008). Report on 

the state of food insecurity in rural India. Rome: WFP.

Mutizwa-Mangiza,  Naison  (2012).  Sustainable  urbanization  in  the  post-2015  UN  de-
velopment agenda. Power Point presentation prepared for the Experts Group 
Meeting on the Post-2015 UN Development Agenda, New York, 27-29 Febru-
ary  2012.  Available  from  http://www.un.org/en/development/desa/policy/
untaskteam_undf/pres_sustainable_habitat_mutizwa-mangiza.pdf.

Nelson, Gerald C., and others (2009). Climate Change: Impact on Agriculture and Costs 
of Adaptation. IFPRI Food Policy Report. Washington, D.C.: International 
Food Policy Research Institute. October.

Nordhaus, William D., and Edward C. Kokkelenberg, eds. (1999). Nature’s Numbers: 
Expanding  the  National  Economic  Accounts  to  Include  the  Environment. 
Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press.

Nordhaus, Ted, Michael Shellenberger and Linus Blomqvist (2012). The planetary bound-
aries hypothesis: a review of the evidence. Oakland, California: Breakthrough 
Institute. June.

Nussbaum, Martha C. (2011). Creating Capabilities: The Human Development Approach. 

Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.

O’Connor, David (2009). Clarifying climate change financing estimates. Informal note. 
New York: Division for Sustainable Development, Department of Economic 
and Social Affairs of the United Nations Secretariat.

O’Rourke, Kevin, and Jeffrey Williamson (2004). Once more: when did globalisation be-
gin? European Review of Economic History, vol. 8, No. 01 (April), pp. 109-117.
Ocampo, Jose Antonio (2009). The macroeconomics of the green economy. Paper con-
tained in the report of a Panel of Experts entitled “The transition to a green 
economy: benefits, challenges and risks from a sustainable development per-
spective”, presented at the Secondary Preparatory Committee Meeting for the 
United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development.

________, Shari  Spiegel  and  Joseph  Stiglitz  (2006).  Capital  market  liberalization  and 
development. In Capital Market Liberalization and Development, Jose Antonio 
Ocampo and Joseph Stiglitz, eds. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Olivier,  Jos,  Greet  Janssens-Maenhout  and  Jeroen  Peters  (2012).  Trends  in  Global  CO2 
Emissions:  2012  Report.  Background  Studies.  The  Hague:  PBL  Netherlands 
Environmental Assessment Agency.

Bibliography172

Omilola, Babatunde, and others (2010). Monitoring and assessing targets of the Com-
prehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme (CAADP) and the first 
Millennium Development Goal (MDG) in Africa. ReSAKSS Working Paper, 
No. 31. Washington, D.C.: International Food Policy Research Institute. July. 
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (2010). Measuring aid to agri-

culture. April. 

________ (2011a). Tools for delivering on green growth. Prepared for the OECD Meeting 

of the Council at Ministerial Level, 25-26 May 2011, Paris.

________  (2011b). Towards Green Growth. Paris.
________ (2012a). Obesity update 2012. Available from www.oecd.org/health/49716427.

pdf.

________  (2012b).  Development  Co-operation  Report  2012:  Lessons  in  Linking 
from  http://dx.doi.

Sustainability  and  Development.  Paris.  Available 
org/10.1787/dcr-2012-en.

________  (2012c).  OECD  Environmental  Outlook  to  2050:  The  Consequences  of 

Inaction. Paris. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264122246-en.

________ and Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (2010). OECD-

FAO Agricultural Outlook 2010-2019. Paris and Rome.

Orrenius, Pia M., and Madeline Zavodny (2009). Do immigrants work in riskier jobs? 

Demography, vol. 46, No. 3 (August), pp. 535-551.

Owen, David (2008). Chronicles of wasted time: a personal reflection on the current state 
of,  and  future  prospects  for,  social  and  environmental  accounting  research. 
Accounting, Auditing & Accountability Journal, vol. 21, No. 2, pp. 240-267.
Oxfam (2012). “Our Land, Our Lives”: Time Out on the Global Rush. Oxfam briefing 

note. Oxford, United Kingdom. October.

Palley, Thomas (2007). Financialization: what it is and why it matters. Levy Economics 
Institute  of  Bard  College  Working  Paper  No.  525.  Annandale-on-Hudson, 
New York. December. 

Palma, Gabriel (2011). Homogeneous middles vs. heterogeneous tails, and the end of the 
“inverted-U”:  it’s  all  about  the  share  of  the  rich.  Development  and  Change,  
vol. 42, No. 1, pp. 87-153.

Pardey, Philip G., and Nienke M. Beintema (2001). Slow Magic: Agricultural R & D a 
Century after Mendel. Washington, D.C.: International Food Policy Research 
Institute. 26 October.

Passel, Jeffrey S. (2006). The size and characteristics of the unauthorized migrant popu-
lation in the U.S.: estimates based on the March 2005 Current Population 
Survey. Research report. Washington, D.C.: Pew Hispanic Center. 7 March.

Patel, Raj (2010). The Value of Nothing. New York: Picador.
Pearce,  David,  Anil  Markandya  and  Edward  Barbier  (1989).  Blueprint  for  a  Green 

Economy. London: Earthscan. 

Pearce,  Fred  (2012).  The  Land  Grabbers:  The  New  Fight  over  Who  Owns  the  Earth. 

Massachusetts: Beacon Press.

Pemberton, H., and D. Ulph (2000). Measuring income and measuring sustainability. 

Scandinavian Journal of Economics, vol. 103, No. 1 (March), pp. 25-40.

World Economic and Social Survey 2013173

Peters, Glen P., and E. Hertwich (2008). CO2 embodied in international trade with impli-
cations for global climate policy. Environmental Science and Technology, vol. 
42, No. 5 (1 March), pp. 1401-1407.

Peters, Glen P., and others (2012). Rapid growth in CO2 emissions after the 2008-2009 

global financial crisis. Nature Climate Change, vol. 2 (January), pp. 2-4. 

Pickett,  Kate,  and  others  (2005).  Wider  income  gaps,  wider  waistbands?  an  ecological 
study of obesity and income inequality. Journal of Epidemiology Community 
Health, vol. 59, No. 8 (August), pp. 670-674. 

Pickett,  Kate,  and  Richard  Wilkinson  (2009).  The  Spirit  Level:  Why  Greater  Equality 

Makes Societies Stronger. New York: Bloomsbury Press.

Piketty, Thomas, and Emmanuel Saez (2003). Income inequality in the United States, 
1913-1998. Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 118, No. 1 (February), pp. 1-39.  
Polèse,  Mario  (2009).  The  Wealth  and  Poverty  of  Regions:  Why  Cities  Matter.  Chicago, 

Illinois: University of Chicago Press. 

Polyani, Karl (1944). The Great Transformation: The Political and Economic Origins of 

Our Times. Boston, Massachusetts: Beacon Press.

Potts,  Deborah  (2006).  Urban  growth  and  urban  economies  in  Eastern  and  Southern 
Africa: trends and prospects. In African Urban Economies: Viability, Vitality 
or Vitiation?, Deborah Fahy Bryceson and Deborah Potts, eds. Basingstoke, 
United Kingdom:  Palgrave Macmillan. Pp. 67-98.

Prasad, Eswar, Raghuram Rajan and Arvind Subramanian (2007). Foreign capital and eco-
nomic growth. NBER Working Paper, No. 13619. Cambridge, Massachusetts: 
Natural Bureau of Economic Research. November.

Pretty, J. N., and others (2006). Resource-conserving agriculture increases yields in de-
veloping countries. Environmental Science and Technology, vol. 40, No. 4,  
pp. 1114-1119.

PricewaterhouseCoopers (2012). Cities of the future: global competition, local leadership–

connected thinking.

Rahman, Anisur Md. (2011). Social and Environmental Thinking of Rabindranath Tagore 

in the Light of Post-Tagorian World Development. Dhaka: Bangla Academy.

Rahman,  Fazlur  Md.  (2012).  Sustainable  banking  is  the  way  forward.  Daily  Star,  
22  October.  Available  from  http://www.thedailystar.net/newDesign/news-
details.php?nid=254912. 

Rajan,  Raghuram  (2010).  Fault  Lines:  How  Hidden  Fractures  Still  Threaten  the  World 

Economy. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press.

Raupach, Michael R., and others (2007). Global and regional drivers of accelerating CO2 
emissions. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States 
of America, vol. 104, No. 24, pp. 10288-10293. Available from http://ateson.
com/ws/r/www.pnas.org/content/104/24/10288.full (accessed 28 March 2013).
Ravallion, Martin (2012). Benchmarking global poverty reduction. World Bank Policy 
Research  Working  Paper,  No.  6205.  Washington,  D.C.:  World  Bank. 
September. WPS6205.

Resnick,  Danielle,  Finn  Tarp  and  James  Thurlow  (2012).  The  Political  Economy  of 
Green-Growth: Illustrations from Southern Africa. UNU-WIDER Working 
Paper, No. 2012/11. Helsinki: United Nations University-World Institute for 
Development Economics Research.

Bibliography174

Rayner, Geof, and Timothey Lang (2012). Waste lands? In Revaluing Food, N. Doron, ed. 

Fabian policy report. London: Fabian Society. 

Rees, William E. (1992). Ecological footprints and appropriated carrying capacity: what 
urban  economics  leaves  out. Environment and Urbanisation,  vol.  4,  No.  2  
(2 October), pp. 121-130. doi:10.1177/095624789200400212. 

Riahi,  Keywan,  and  others  (2012).  Energy  pathways  for  sustainable  development.  In 
International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, Global Energy Assessment: 
Toward  a  Sustainable  Future.  New  York:  Cambridge  University  Press; 
Laxenburg, Austria: IIASA. Chap. 17, pp. 1203-1306.

Ringstrom, Anna (2012). Sweden turns trash into cash as EU seeks to curb dumping. Reuters.  
26  November.  Available  from  http://www.reuters.com/article/2012/11/26/ 
us-sweden-environment-garbage-idUSBRE8AP0MI20121126.

Rockstroem, Johan, and others (2009). A safe operating space for humanity. Nature, vol. 

461, No. 24, pp. 472-475.

Rodrik, Dani (2011). The Globalization Paradox. Democracy and the Future of the World 

Economy. New York: W.W. Norton and Company. 

________ (2012).  Unconditional  convergence  in  manufacturing.  Quarterly  Journal  of 

Economics (18 November). doi:10.1093/qje/qjs047.

Rogelj,  Joeri,  David  L.  McCollum  and  Keywan  Riahi  (2013).  The  UN’s  “Sustainable 
Energy for All” initiative is compatible with a warming limit of 2° C. Nature. 
Published online 24 February. doi: 10.1038/NCLIMATE1806. 

Rothman,  Dale  (1998).  Environmental  Kuznets  curves:  real  progress  or  passing  the 
buck?—a case for consumption-based approaches. Ecological Economics, vol. 
25, No. 2 (May), pp. 177-194. 

Saez, Emmanuel (2013). Striking it richer: the evolution of top incomes in the United 
States (updated with 2011 estimates). 23 January. Available from http://elsa.
berkeley.edu/~saez/saez-UStopincomes-2011.pdf. 

Sahan, Erinch, and Monique Mikhail (2012). Private Investment in Agriculture: Why 
It’s Essential, and What’s Needed. Oxfam Discussion Paper. Oxford, United 
Kingdom: Oxfam GB. 25 September. 

Sánchez, Marco V. (2011). Welfare effects of rising oil prices in oil-importing developing 
countries. The Developing Economies, vol. 49, No. 3 (September), pp. 321-346. 
________, and Martín Cicowiez (2013). Inter-temporal macroeconomic trade-offs and 
payoffs of human development strategies: an economy-wide modelling analy-
sis. Background paper prepared for World Economic and Social Survey 2013. 
Sánchez, Marco V., and Rob Vos (2010). Impact of the global crisis on the achievement of 
the MDGs in Latin America. DESA Working Paper, No. 74. June 2009 (re-
vised May 2010). ST/ESA/2009/DWP/74. Available from http://www.un.org/
esa/desa/papers/2009/wp74_2009.pdf. 

________, eds. (2013). Financing Human Development in Africa, Asia and the Middle 

East. United Nations Series on Development. London: Bloomsbury. 

Sánchez,  Marco  V.,  and  others,  eds.  (2010).  Public  Policies  for  Human  Development: 
Achieving the Millennium Development Goals in Latin America. Basingstoke, 
United Kingdom: Palgrave Macmillan. 

World Economic and Social Survey 2013Sanchez, Pedro A. (2002). Soil fertility and hunger in Africa. Science, vol. 295, No. 5562 

(15 March), pp. 2019-2020.

Sarris, Alexander (2009). Evolving structure of world agricultural trade and requirements 
for  new  world  trade  rules.  Paper  presented  at  the  FAO  Expert  Meeting  on 
“How to feed the world in 2050”, Rome, 24-26 June 2009.

175

Satterthwaite,  David  (1992).  Sustainable  cities: 

introduction.  Environment  and 

Urbanization, vol. 4, No. 2 (October), pp. 3-8.

________ (2007). The Transition to a Predominantly Urban World and its Underpinnings. 
Human  Settlements  Discussion  Paper:  theme  -  urban  change-4.  London: 
International Institute for Environment and Development (IIED).

________ (2009). The implications of population growth and urbanization for climate 
change. In Population Dynamics and Climate Change, José Miguel Guzmán 
and others, eds. United Nations publication, Sales No. E.09.III.H4.

________  (2010). Urban Myths and the Mis-use of Data that Underpin Them. UNU-WIDER 
Working  Paper,  No.  2010/28.  Helsinki:  World  Institute  for  Development 
Economics Research. March.

________, and Alice Sverdlik (2013). Energy access and housing for low-income groups 
in urban areas. In Energizing Sustainable Cities: Assessing Urban Energy, Arnulf 
Grubler and David Fisk, eds. Abingdon, United Kingdom: Routledge.

Schaltegger, S., and R. Burritt (2000). Contemporary Environmental Accounting: Issues, 

Concepts and Practice. Sheffield, United Kingdom: Greenleaf Publishing

Sen,  Amartya  K.  (1981).  Ingredients  of  famine  analysis:  availability  and  entitlements. 

Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 96, No. 3 (August), pp. 433-464.

________ (1999). Commodities and Capabilities. New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
________ (2000). Development as Freedom. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Simms, Andrew, Victoria Johnson and Peter Chowla (2010). Growth Isn’t Possible: Why 

We Need a New Economic Direction. London: new economics foundation. 

Spratt, Steven, and others (2010). The Great Transition: A Tale of How It Turned Out 

Right. London: new economics foundation. 

Spielman, David J, and Rajul Pandya-Lorch (2009). Fifty years of progress. In Millions 
Fed:  Proven  Successes  in  Agricultural  Development,  David  J.  Spielman 
and Rajul Pandya-Lorch, eds. Washington, D.C.: International Food Policy 
Research Institute. Pp. 1-18.

Steffen, Will, and others (2011). The anthropocene: from global change to planetary stew-

ardship. Ambio, vol. 40, No. 7, pp. 739-761. 

Stern, Nicholas (2007). The Economics of Climate Change: The Stern Review. Cambridge, 

United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press.

Stiglitz,  Joseph  E.  (2004).  Capital-market  liberalization,  globalization,  and  the  IMF. 

Oxford Review of Economic Policy, vol. 20, No. 1, pp. 57-71. 

________  (2012). The  Price  of  Inequality:  How  Today’s  Divided  Society  Endangers  Our 

Future. New York: W.W. Norton and Company.

________, Amartya K. Sen and Jean-Paul Fitoussi (2010). Mismeasuring Our Lives: Why 
GDP Doesn’t Add Up.  Report  by  the  Commission  on  the  Measurement  of 
Economic Performance and Social Progress. New York: New Press.

Bibliography176

Sturgeon, Timothy, and Richard Florida (2000). Globalization and jobs in the automo-
tive  industry.  Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology  Working  Paper.  MIT-
IPC-00-012. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Industrial Performance Center. 
November. Available from http://web.mit.edu/ipc/publications/pdf/00-012.pdf. 
Sumner, Jenny, Lori Bird and Hillary Smith (2009). Carbon taxes: a review of experience 
and  policy  design  considerations.  Technical  report  NREL/TP-6A2-47312. 
December.

te  Lintelo,  Dolf,  and  others  (2013).  The  Hunger  and  Nutrition  Commitment  Index: 
measuring the political commitment to reduce hunger and undernutrition in 
developing countries. Brighton, United Kingdom: Institute of Development 
Studies. April.

The Hague Conference on Agriculture, Food Security and Climate Change (2010). Chair’s 

summary.

Thurlow, James, Paul Dorosh and Winston Yu (2011). A Stochastic Simulation Approach 
to Estimating the Economic Impacts of Climate Change in Bangladesh. UNU-
WIDER Working Paper, No. 2011/86. Helsinki: United Nations University-
World Institute for Development Economics Research. December.

Toye, John (2012). Human development in an environmentally constrained world in the 
post-2015  era.  Background  paper  prepared  for  World Economic and Social 
Survey 2013.

Turner, G. (2008). A comparison of The Limits to Growth with 30 years of reality. Global 

Environmental Change, vol. 18, pp. 397-411.

United  Kingdom,  Department  for  Environment,  Food  and  Rural  Affairs  (2010).  The 
2007/2008 agricultural price spikes: causes and policy implications. London.
United Nations (1993). Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and 
Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3-14 June 1992, vol. I, Resolutions Adopted by 
the Conference. Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum. Resolution I, annex I 
(Rio Declaration on Environment and Development). Resolution I, annex II 
(Agenda 21).

________ (1997). Report of the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II), 
Istanbul, 3-14 June 1996. Sales No. E.97.IV.6. Chap. I resolution 1, annex II 
(Habitat Agenda).

________ (2007). The United Nations Development Agenda: Development for All. Sales 

No. E.07.I.17.  

________ (2008). Comprehensive framework for action. Prepared by the High-level Task 

Force on the Global Food Crisis. 15 July.

________ (2009). World Economic and Social Survey 2009: Promoting Development, 

Saving the Planet. Sales No. E.09.II.C.1.

________  (2010a). World Economic and Social Survey 2010: Retooling Global Development. 

Sales No. E.10.II.C.1.

________ (2010b). Shanghai manual: a guide for sustainable urban development of the 
21st  century.  Outcome  of  the  World  Expo  2010.  Available  from  http://sus-
tainabledevelopment.un.org/content/documents/shanghaimanual.pdf. 

________  (2011a). The Millennium Development Goals Report 2011. Sales No. E.11.I.10.

World Economic and Social Survey 2013177

________  (2011b). World Economic and Social Survey 2011: The Great Green Technological 

Transformation. Sales No. E.11.II.C.1.

________  (2012a). World Economic Situation and Prospects 2012. Sales No. E.12.II.C.2.
________  (2012b). Back to Our Common Future. Sustainable Development in the 21st 
Century (SD21) Project: Summary for policymakers. New York: Department 
of Economic and Social Affairs, Division for Sustainable Development. 

________  (2012c). The Millennium Development Goals Report 2012. Sales No. E.12.I.4.
________ (2012d).  Sustainable  energy  for  all.  New  York.  Available  from  http://www.

un.org/en/events/sustainableenergyforall/background.shtml.

________  (2013). World Economic Situation and Prospects 2013. Sales No. E.13.II.C.2.
________, Department  of  Economic  and  Social  Affairs  (2008).  Don’t  forget  the  food 

crisis: new policy directions needed. UN/DESA Policy Brief, No.8. October.
________  (2012). Back to Our Common Future: Sustainable Development in the 21st 

century (SD21) Project: Summary for Policymakers. May.

________, Population Division (2011). World Population Prospects: The 2010 Revision, 
vol.  I,  Comprehensive  Tables,  and  vol.  II,  Demographic  Profiles.  ST/ESA/
SER.A/313 and ST/ESA/SER.A/317. 

________ (2012). World Urbanization Prospects: The 2011 Revision - Methodology. April.
United  Nations,  Economic  Commission  for  Latin  America  and  the  Caribbean  (2012). 
Population, territory and sustainable development. LC/L.3474(CEP.2/3). June.
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (2010). Technology and Innovation 
Report 2010: Enhancing Food Security in Africa through Science, Technology 
and Innovation. Sales No. E.09.II.D.22.

________  (2012a). Trade and Development Report 2012: Policies for Inclusive and Balanced 

Growth. Sales No. E.12.II.D.6.

________  (2012b). World Investment Report 2012. Sales No. E.12.II.D.3.
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (2012). Worsening factors. Bonn: 
UNCCD  Secretariat.  Available  from  http://www.unccd.int/en/programmes/
Thematic-Priorities/Food-Sec/Pages/Wors-Fact.aspx.

United  Nations  Development  Programme  (2010).  Human  Development  Report,  2010: 
The Real Wealth of Nations - Pathways to Human Development, 20th anniver-
sary ed. Basingstoke, United Kingdom: Palgrave Macmillan.

________  (2013). Human  Development  Report  2013:  The  Rise  of  the  South:  Human 

Progress in a Diverse World. New York.

United  Nations  Environment  Programme  (2010a).  Green  economy  report:  a  preview. 

Châtelaine, Switzerland.

________ (2010b).  Driving  a  green  economy  through  public  finance  and  fiscal  policy 

reform. Working paper v. 1.0. Geneva.

________  (2011). Towards a Green Economy: Pathways to Sustainable Development and 

Poverty Eradication. Nairobi. Available from www.unep.org/greeneconomy.

________  (2012a). GEO5: Global Environment Outlook - Environment for the Future 
We  Want.  Nairobi.  Available  from  http://www.unep.org/geo/pdfs/geo5/
GEO5_report_full_en.pdf.

Bibliography178

________ (2012b). The Emissions Gap Report 2012: A UNEP Synthesis Report. Nairobi. 

November.

United  Nations  Human  Settlements  Programme  (UN-Habitat)  (2002).  Sustainable 
Urbanisation: Achieving Agenda 21. Nairobi: UN-Habitat; London: Department 
for International Development.

________  (2010).  State  of  the  World’s  Cities  2010/2011:  Bridging  the  Urban  Divide. 

Abingdon, United Kingdom: Earthscan.

________ (2012). Sustainable cities and human settlements in the post-2015 UN devel-
opment agenda. Concept note. Available from http://www/worldwewant2015.
org/node/302328. Accessed 8 April 2012.

United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction (2012). Making Cities Resilient Report 
2012: My City is Getting Ready! — A Global Snapshot of How Local Governments 
Reduce Disaster Risk. Available from http://www.unisdr.org/files/28240_rcre-
port.pdf. Geneva.

________ (2013). Resilient cities. Unpublished notes prepared as substantive input for 

World Economic and Social Survey 2013.

United  Nations  Population  Fund  (2011).  Population  Dynamics  in  the  Least  Developed 
Countries: Challenges and Opportunities for Development and Poverty Reduction. 
New York. 

United Nations Standing Committee on Nutrition (2010). Progress in nutrition. Sixth 

report on the world nutrition situation. Geneva: UNSCN Secretariat.

United Nations System Task Team on the Post-2015 UN Development Agenda (2012). 
Realizing the future we want for all: report to the Secretary-General. Available 
from http://www.un.org/millenniumgoals/pdf/Post_2015_UNTTreport.pdf. 
United States of America, Congress of the United States, Congressional Budget Office 
(2011).  Trends  in  the  distribution  of  household  income  between  1979  and 
2007. Publication No. 4031. Washington, D. C. October. 

van der Ploeg, Frederick, and Cees Withagen (2011). Optimal carbon tax with a dirty 
backstop:  oil,  coal,  or  renewables?  CESifo  Working  Paper,  No.  3334.  
12 January. Munich, Germany: CESifo Group.

Vandemoortele, Jan (2010). Taking the MDGs beyond 2015: hasten slowly. IDS Bulletin, 

vol. 41, No. 1, pp. 60-69.

________ (2011).  If  not  the  Millenium  Development  Goals,  then  what?  Third World 

Quarterly, vol. 31, No. 1, pp. 9-25.

________ (2012). Advancing the UN development agenda post-2015: some practical sug-
gestions.  Report  submitted  to  the  UN  Task  Force  regarding  the  post-2015 
framework for development. Bruges, Belgium. January.

Vieira, Sergio (2012). Inequalities on the rise. Background paper prepared for the World 

Economic and Social Survey 2012.

von Braun, Joachim (2009). Overcoming the world food and agriculture crisis through 
policy  change  and  science.  Prepared  for  the  Trust  for  Advancement  of 
Agricultural  Sciences  (TAAS),  Fourth  Foundation  Day  Lecture,  organized 
by International Food Policy Research Institute, New Delhi, 6 March 2009. 
Available from http://www.ifpri.org/publication/overcoming-world-food-and-
agriculture-crisis-through-policy-change-and-science.

World Economic and Social Survey 2013179

Vuuren,  Detlef  P.,  and  others  (2013).  The  role  of  negative  CO2  emissions  for  reach-
ing  2°  C—insights  from  integrated  assessment  modeling.  Climate  Change.  
6 February. doi: 10.1007/slos84-012-0680-5.

Wackernagel, M. (1994). Ecological footprint and appropriated carrying capacity: a tool 
for  planning  toward  sustainability.  PhD  thesis.  School  of  Community  and 
Regional Planning of the University of British Columbia. OCLC 41839429. 
Available  from  https://circle.ubc.ca/bitstream/handle/2429/7132/ubc_1994-
954027.pdf?sequence=1.

Waggoner, Paul, and Jesse Ausubel (2002). A framework for sustainability science: reno-
vated IPAT identity. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, vol. 99, 
No. 12, pp. 7860-7865. 

Weitzman, Martin L. (1976). On the welfare significance of national product in a dynamic 
economy. Quarter Journal of Economics, vol. 90, No. 1 (February), pp. 55-68.
________  (1984).  The  Share  Economy:  Conquering  Stagflation.  Cambridge, 

Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.

________ (1985). Profit sharing as macroeconomic policy. American Economic Review, 

vol. 75, No. 2 (May), pp. 41-45.

________ (1997).  Sustainability  and  technical  progress.  Scandinavian  Journal  of 

Economics, vol. 99, No. 1, pp. 1-13.

________ (2000).  The  linearized  Hamiltonian  as  comprehensive  NDP.  Environment 

and Development Economics, vol. 5, No. 1 (February) pp. 55-68.

________ (2003).  Income,  Wealth,  and  the  Maximum  Principle.  Cambridge, 

Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.

Wilkinson,  R.  (2005).  Impact  of  Inequality:  How  to  Make  Sick  Societies  Healthier. 

London: Routledge.

________, and K. Pickett (2008). The Spirit Level: Why Equal Societies Almost Always 

Do Better. London: Allen Lane. 

Woodward, David (2013). Global growth, inequality and the prospects for poverty eradi-
cation in a carbon-constrained world. Background paper prepared for World 
Economic and Social Survey 2013.

________, and  Andrew  Simms  (2006).  Growth  Isn’t  Working:  The  Unbalanced 
Distribution  of  Benefits  and  Costs  from  Growth.  London:  new  economics 
foundation. 

World Bank (2005). World Development Report: Equity and Development. Washington, D.C.
World Bank (2006). Repositioning Nutrition as Central to Development: A Strategy for 

Large-Scale Action.

World  Bank  (2008a).  World Development Report 2008: Agriculture for Development. 

Washington, D.C.

________ (2008b). Food price crisis imperils 100 million in poor countries. News and 
Broadcast.  Available  from  http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/
NEWS/0,,contentMDK:21729143~pagePK:64257043~piPK:437376~theSite
PK:4607,00.html.

________ (2009).  World  Development  Report  2009:  Reshaping  Economic  Geography. 

Washington, D.C.

Bibliography180

________  (2010a). World Development Report 2010: Development and Climate Change. 

Washington, D.C.

________ (2010b). Economics of adaptation to climate change: Bangladesh. Washington, 
D.  C.  Available  from  http://climatechange.worldbank.org/sites/default/files/
documents/EACC_Bangladesh.pdf.

________  (2011). Rising Global Interest in Farmland. Washington, D.C.
________ (2012a). Turn down the heat: why a 4ºC warmer world must be avoided. Report 
for the World Bank by the Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research and 
Climate Analytics. Washington, D.C. November. 

________  (2012b) Inclusive Green Growth: The Pathway to Sustainable Development. 

Washington, D.C.

________ (2012c).  Toward  a  green,  clean,  and  resilient  world  for  all:  A  World  Bank 

Group environment strategy 2012-2022.

________  (2013). Planning, Connecting and Financing Cities–Now: Priorities for City 

Leaders. Washington, D.C.

World  Commission  on  Environment  and  Development  (1987).  Our  Common  Future. 

Oxford: Oxford University Press.

World Economic Forum (2013). The Green Investment Report: The Ways and Means to 
Unlock Private Finance for Green Growth—A Report of the Green Growth 
Action Alliance. Geneva.

World Health Organization (2008). 2008-2013 Action Plan for the Global Strategy for the 

Prevention and Control of Noncommunicable Diseases. Geneva.

________ (2012a).  Millenium  Development  Goals  (MDGs).  Fact  sheet  No.  290. 
November. Available from http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs290/
en/index.html. 

________  (2012b). World Health Statistics 2012. Geneva. 
________ (2013).  Fact  Sheet  No.  311.  March.  Available  from  http://www.who.int/

mediacentre/factsheets/fs311/en/.

World  Vision  (2011).  Reaching  the  MDGs  2.0:  Rethinking  the  Politics.  World  Vision 
International  policy  briefing.  Uxbridge,  United  Kingdom:  World  Vision 
International. September. 

Wright, Brian, and Tiffany Shih (2010). Agricultural innovation. NBER Working Paper, 
No. 15793 (March). Cambridge, Massachusetts: National Bureau of Economic 
Research. 

Wu,  Jing,  and  others  (2013).  Incentives  and  outcomes:  China’s  environmental  policy. 
NBER  Working  Paper,  No.  18754.  Cambridge,  Massachusetts:  National 
Bureau of Economic Research. February.

WWF  (2012).  Living  Planet  Report  2012:  Biodiversity,Biocapacity  and  Better  Choices. 

Gland, Switzerland: WWF International. 

Yunus, Muhammad (2007). Creating a World without Poverty: Social Business and the 

Future of Capitalism. New York: PublicAffairs.

________  (2010). Building Social Business:  The Kind of New Capitalism That Serves 

Humanity’s Most Pressing Needs. New York: PublicAffairs.

World Economic and Social Survey 2013181

Yusuf, Arief Anshory, and Arief Ramayandi (2008). Reducing fuel subsidy or taxing car-
bon: comparing the two instruments from the economy, environment, and eq-
uity perspective for Indonesia. Working Paper in Economics and Development 
Studies, Padjadjaran University, Bandung, Indonesia. 

Xiao, Y. L., and F. Y. Nie (2009). A Report on the Status of China’s Food Security. Beijing: 

China Agricultural Science and Technology Press.

BibliographyUnited Nations publication 
Sales No. E.13.II.C.1 
ISBN 978-92-1-109167-0 
eISBN 978-92-1-056082-5 

Copyright © United Nations, 2013
All rights reserved
Printed at the United Nations, New York
13-29677

