2010

world development report
Development and  
Climate Change

2010

world development report
Development and  
Climate Change

© 2010 The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H Street NW
Washington DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000
Internet: www.worldbank.org
E-mail: feedback@worldbank.org

All rights reserved

1 2 3 4  13 12 11 10 

This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and 
Development / The World Bank. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed 
in this volume do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors of The World 
Bank or the governments they represent.

The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The 
boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work 
do not imply any judgement on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of 
any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

Rights and Permissions
The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or 
all of this work without permission may be a violation of applicable law. The International 
Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank encourages dissemination of 
its work and will normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the work promptly.

For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request 
with complete information to the Copyright Clearance Center Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, 
Danvers, MA 01923, USA; telephone: 978-750-8400; fax: 978-750-4470; Internet: www.
copyright.com.

All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed 
to the Office of the Publisher, The World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, 
USA; fax: 202-522-2422; e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org.

Softcover
ISBN: 978-0-8213-7987-5
ISSN: 0163-5085
eISBN: 978-0-8213-7988-2
DOI: 10.1596/978-0-8213-7987-5

Hardcover
ISSN: 0163-5085
ISBN: 978-0-8213-7989-5
DOI: 10.1596/978-0-8213-7989-5

Cover design: Rock Creek Strategic Marketing
Cover globe images: Norman Kuring, Ocean Biology Processing Group, National Aeronau-
tics and Space Administration (http://oceancolor.gsfc.nasa.gov)
Interior design: Naylor Design, Inc.
Typesetting: Precision Graphics 

Photo credits: Gary Braasch: Overview, chapters 3, 4, 5, 7; Corbis: chapters 1, 2, 6, 8

For more information about the World Development Report 2010, please visit  
http://www.worldbank.org/wdr.

Contents

Foreword 
  xiii
Acknowledgments 
Abbreviations and Data Notes 
Main Messages 

  xx

  xv

  xvii

Overview: Changing the Climate for Development 

  1

  4

The case for action 
A climate- smart world is within reach if we act now, act together,  
and act differently 
Making it happen: New pressures, new instruments, and new resources 

  10

  18

1  Understanding the Links between Climate Change  

  37

and Development 
Unmitigated climate change is incompatible with sustainable development 
Evaluating the tradeoffs 
The costs of delaying the global mitigation effort 
Seizing the moment: Immediate stimulus and long- term transformations  

  55

  48

  39

  58

Focus A: The Science of Climate Change 

  70

Part One  

2  Reducing Human Vulnerability: Helping People  

  87

Help Themselves 
Adaptive management: Living with change 
Managing physical risks: Avoiding the avoidable 
Managing financial risks: Flexible instruments for contingencies 
Managing social risks: Empower communities to protect themselves 
Looking ahead to 2050: Which world? 

  111

  89

  90

  101

  105

Focus B: Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services in a Changing 
Climate 

  124

v

vi 

C O N T E N T S

3  Managing Land and Water to Feed Nine Billion People  

  133

and Protect Natural Systems 
Put in place the fundamentals for natural resource management 
Produce more from water and protect it better 
Producing more in agriculture while protecting the environment 
Produce more and protect better in fisheries and aquaculture 
Building flexible international agreements 
Reliable information is fundamental for good natural resource 
management 
Pricing carbon, food, and energy could be the springboard 

  137

  158

  162

  166

  134

  145

  156

4  Energizing Development without Compromising  

  191

  195

  189

the Climate 
Balancing competing objectives 
Where the world needs to go: Transformation to a sustainable energy 
future 
  209
Realizing the savings from energy efficiency 
Scaling up existing low- carbon technologies 
  217
Accelerating innovation and advanced technologies 
Policies have to be integrated 

  222

  220

Part Two  

5 

  233

Integrating Development into the Global Climate 
Regime 
Building the climate regime: Transcending the tensions between climate  
and development 
Options for integrating developing-country actions into the global 
architecture 
Support for developing-country mitigation efforts 
Promoting international efforts to integrate adaptation into climate-smart 
development 

  240

  246

  233

  245

Focus C: Trade and Climate Change 

  251

6  Generating the Funding Needed for Mitigation  

  259

  257

and Adaptation 
The financing gap 
Inefficiencies in existing climate- finance instruments  
Increasing the scale of climate- change finance 
  267
Ensuring the transparent, efficient, and equitable use of funds 
Matching financing needs and sources of funds 

  278

  263

  276

 

Contents 

vii

7  Accelerating Innovation and Technology Diffusion 
The right tools, technologies, and institutions can put a climate- smart  
world well within our reach 
International collaboration and cost sharing can leverage domestic efforts  
to promote innovation 
Public programs, policies, and institutions power innovation and accelerate  
its diffusion 

  293

  303

  289

  287

8  Overcoming Behavioral and Institutional Inertia 

  321

Harnessing individuals’ behavioral change 
Bringing the state back in 
Thinking politically about climate policy 
Climate- smart development starts at home 

  330

  322

  335

  341

Bibliographical Note 

  349

Glossary 

  353

Selected Indicators 

  361

  362

  364

  363

Table A1  Energy-related emissions and carbon intensity 
Table A2  Land-based emissions 
Table A3  Total primary energy supply 
Table A4  Natural disasters 
Table A5  Land, water, and agriculture 
Table A6  Wealth of nations 
Table A7 
Definitions and notes 
Symbols and aggregates 

Innovation, research, and development 

  367

  368

  366

  370

  374

  369

Selected World Development Indicators 

  375

376

376

375

375

Data sources and methodology 
Classification of economies and summary measures 
Terminology and country coverage 
Technical notes 
Symbols 
376
Classification of economies by region and income, FY2010 
Table 1  Key indicators of development 
Table 2  Poverty 
Table 3 

  378

  380

  377

 Millennium Development Goals: eradicating poverty and improving 
lives 

  382

Table 4  Economic activity 

  384

viii 

C O N T E N T S

  386

Table 5  Trade, aid, and finance 
Table 6  Key indicators for other economies  
Technical notes 
Statistical methods 
  396
World Bank Atlas method 

  390

  396

  388

Index 

  399

Boxes

1  All developing regions are vulnerable to the impacts of 

 2.10  The Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility: Insurance 

climate change—for different reasons 

  6

against service interruption after disasters 

  105

2  Economic growth: Necessary, but not sufficient 
3  The cost of “climate insurance” 
4  Safety nets: From supporting incomes to reducing 

  8

  7

vulnerability to climate change 

  13

5  Promising approaches that are good for farmers and good 

for the environment 

  17

 2.11  Workfare in India under the Indian National Rural 

Employment Guarantee Act 

  109

  110

 2.12  Migration today 
 FB.1  What is biodiversity? What are ecosystem services? 
 FB.2  Payment for ecosystem and mitigation services 
  128
 FB.3  Excerpts from the Declaration of Indigenous Peoples on 

  124

6  Ingenuity needed: Adaptation requires new tools and new 

Climate Change 

  128

knowledge 

  19

7  Cities reducing their carbon footprints 
8  The role of land use, agriculture, and forestry in managing 

  21

climate change 

  25

  1.1  Empowered women improve adaptation and mitigation 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 
 

  3.1  Robust decision making: Changing how water managers  

do business 

  140

  3.2  The dangers of establishing a market for water rights  
  142
  3.3  Managing water resources within the margin of error: 

before the institutional structures are in place 

outcomes 

  43

Tunisia 

  143

  1.2  The basics of discounting the costs and benefits of climate 

  3.4  Palm oil, emission reductions, and avoided 

change mitigation 

  49

deforestation 

  148

  1.3  Positive feedbacks, tipping points, thresholds, and 

  3.5  Product and market diversification: An economic 

nonlinearities in natural and socioeconomic systems 

  50

  53

  1.4  Ethics and climate change 
 FA.1  The carbon cycle 
 FA.2  Ocean health: Coral reefs and ocean acidification 
  2.1  Characteristics of adaptive management 
  90
  2.2  Planning for greener and safer cities: The case  

  71

  78

of Curitiba 

  93

  2.3  Adapting to climate change: Alexandria, Casablanca,  

and Tunis 

  93

  2.4  Fostering synergies between mitigation and 

adaptation 

  95

  2.5  Preparing for heat waves 
  2.6  Beating the odds and getting ahead of impacts: Managing 
  99

risk of extreme events before they become disasters 

  96

  2.7  Satellite data and geo-information are instrumental in 

managing risk—and inexpensive 
  2.8  Creating jobs to reduce flood risk 
  2.9  Public-private partnerships for sharing climate risks: 

  100
  101

Mongolia livestock insurance 

  102

and ecological alternative for marginal farmers in the 
tropics 

  152

  3.6  Biotech crops could help farmers adapt to climate 

change 

  155

  3.7  Biochar could sequester carbon and increase yields  

on a vast scale 

  156

  3.8  Policy makers in Morocco face stark tradeoffs on cereal 

imports  

  160

  3.9  Pilot projects for agricultural carbon finance  

in Kenya 

  172

  4.1  The financial crisis offers an opportunity for efficient and 

clean energy 

  190

  4.2  Efficient and clean energy can be good for 

development 

  192

  4.3  A 450 ppm CO2e (2°C warmer) world requires a 
fundamental change in the global energy system 

  200

  4.4  Regional energy mix for 450 ppm CO2e (to limit warming 

to 2°C) 

  202

  4.5  Renewable energy technologies have huge potential but face 

constraints 

  205

 

Contents 

ix

  4.6  Advanced technologies 
  4.7  The role for urban policy in achieving mitigation and 

  209

development co- benefits 

  210

  4.8  Energy efficiency faces many market and nonmarket 

barriers and failures 

  212

  4.9  Carbon pricing alone is not enough  
 4.10  California’s energy- efficiency and renewable energy 

  213

programs 

  215

 4.11  World Bank Group experience with financing energy 

efficiency  

  216

 4.12  Difficulties in comparing energy technology costs: A matter 

of assumptions 

  217

 4.13  Denmark sustains economic growth while cutting 

emissions 

  218

 4.14  Feed- in laws, concessions, tax credits, and renewable 

portfolio standards in Germany, China, and the United 
States 

  219

 4.15  Concentrated solar power in Middle East and  

North Africa 

  221

  5.1  The climate regime today 
  5.2  Some proposals for burden sharing 
  5.3  Multitrack approaches score well on effectiveness  

  238

  234

and equity 

  242

 FC.1  Taxing virtual carbon 
  6.1  Costing adaptation to climate change in developing 

  252

countries 

  261

  6.2  Assessing the co- benefits of the CDM 
  6.3  Carbon taxes versus cap- and- trade 
  6.4  Indonesian Ministry of Finance engagement on climate 

  268

  266

change issues 

  269

  274

  6.5  Conserving agricultural soil carbon 
  6.6  Allocating concessional development finance 
  6.7  Climate vulnerability versus social capacity 
  6.8  Climate vulnerability versus capacity to adapt 
  7.1  Geoengineering the world out of climate change 

  277

  279

  280

  290

  7.2  Innovation is a messy process and can be promoted 

only by policies that address multiple parts of a complex 
system 

  295

  7.3  Innovative monitoring: Creating a global climate service 

and a “system of systems” 

  296

  7.4  ITER: A protracted start for energy R&D cost sharing 
  7.5  Technologies on the scale of carbon capture and storage 

  298

require international efforts 

  299

  7.6  The Super-Efficient Refrigerator: A pioneer advanced 

market commitment program? 

  300

  7.7  A promising innovation for coastal adaptation 
  7.8  Universities need to be innovative: The case  

  302

of Africa 

  305

  7.9  CGIAR: A model for climate change? 
 7.10  Improved cook stoves designs can reduce soot, 

  306

producing important benefits for human health and for 
mitigation  

  312

  8.1  Miscommunicating the need for climate action 
  8.2  Misunderstandings about the dynamics of climate change 

  323

encourage complacency 

  325

  8.3  How risk perceptions can sink policies: Flood risk 

management 

  325

  8.4  End- to- end community engagement for landslide risk 

reduction in the Caribbean 

  327

  8.5  Communicating climate change 
  8.6  Inserting climate education in school curricula 
  8.7  China’s and India’s path to institutional reform for climate 

  328

  329

action  

  333

  8.8  National adaptation programs of action 
  8.9  Enhancing government accountability for climate change in 

  334

the United Kingdom  

  335

 8.10  Green federalism and climate change policy  
 8.11  Garnering support for cap- and- trade 
  339
 8.12  The private sector is changing practices even without 

  336

national legislation 

  341

Figures
 

1  Unequal footprints: Emissions per capita in low- , middle- , 

and high- income countries, 2005 

  2

2  Rebalancing act: Switching from SUVs to fuel- efficient 
passenger cars in the U.S. alone would nearly offset the 
emissions generated in providing electricity to 1.6 billion 
more people 

  3

3  High- income countries have historically contributed 
a disproportionate share of global emissions and still 
do 

  3

4  Off the charts with CO2  

  4

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

5  What does the way forward look like? Two options among 

many: Business as usual or aggressive mitigation 

  10

6  Climate impacts are long- lived: Rising temperatures and sea 
  11

levels associated with higher concentrations of CO2  

7  Global CO2e emissions by sector: Energy, but also 
  14

agriculture and forestry, are major sources 

8  The full portfolio of existing measures and advanced 

technologies, not a silver bullet, will be needed to get the 
world onto a 2°C path 

  15

x 

 

C O N T E N T S

9  High expected demand drove cost reductions in solar 
photovoltaics by allowing for larger- scale production 

  16

  10  The gap is large: Estimated annual incremental climate 

costs required for a 2°C trajectory compared with current 
resources 

  23

  1.1  Individuals’ emissions in high- income countries overwhelm 

those in developing countries 

  39

  1.2  Corn- based biofuels in the United States increase CO2 

emissions and health costs relative to gasoline 

  47

  1.3  Assessing deadweight losses from partial participation in a 

climate deal 

  57

  1.4  Global green stimulus spending is rising 
  59
 FA.1  Global emissions of greenhouse gases have been 

increasing 

  72

 FA.2  Major factors affecting the climate since the Industrial 

Revolution 

  73

 FA.3  Global annual average temperature and CO2 concentration 

continue to climb, 1880–2007 
 FA.4  Greenland’s melting ice sheet 
 FA.5  Embers burning hotter: Assessment of risks and damages 

  73
  74

has increased from 2001 to 2007  

  76

 FA.6  Projected impacts of climate change by region  
 FA.7  Ways to limit warming to 2°C above preindustrial 

  77

levels 

  80

  2.1  The number of people affected by climate-related disasters 

is increasing 

  98

  2.2  Floods are increasing, even in drought-prone Africa 
  2.3  Insurance is limited in the developing world 
  103
  2.4  Turning back the desert with indigenous knowledge, farmer 

  100

action, and social learning 

  106

  3.1  Climate change in a typical river basin will be felt across the 

hydrological cycle 

  136

  3.2  Freshwater in rivers makes up a very small share of the 

water available on the planet—and agriculture dominates 
water use  

  139

  3.3  Meat is much more water intensive than major 

crops 

  149

  3.4  Intensive beef production is a heavy producer of 

greenhouse gas emissions 

  149

  3.5   Agricultural productivity will have to increase even more 

rapidly because of climate change 

  150

  3.6  Ecosystems have already been extensively converted for 

agriculture  

  151

  3.7  Computer simulation of integrated land use in 

Colombia 

  153

  3.8  Demand for fish from aquaculture will increase, particularly 

in Asia and Africa 

  158

  3.9  Remote- sensing techniques are used in the vineyards 

of Worcester (West Cape, South Africa) to gauge water 
productivity 

  164

 3.10  In Andhra Pradesh, India, farmers generate their own 

hydrological data, using very simple devices and tools, to 
regulate withdrawals from aquifers 

  165

 3.11  An ideal climate- smart agricultural landscape of the 

future would enable farmers to use new technologies and 
techniques to maximize yields and allow land managers to 
protect natural systems, with natural habitats integrated 
into agriculturally productive landscapes  

  166

 3.12  An ideal climate- smart landscape of the future would use 

flexible technology to buffer against climate shocks through 
natural infrastructure, built infrastructure, and market 
mechanisms 

  167

 3.13  Global cereal prices are expected to increase 50 to 100 

percent by 2050 

  168

 3.14  A carbon tax applied to emissions from agriculture and 
land- use change would encourage protection of natural 
resources 

  170

  4.1  The story behind doubling emissions: improvements in 

energy and carbon intensity have not been enough to offset 
rising energy demand boosted by rising incomes 

  193

  4.2  Primary energy mix 1850–2006. From 1850 to 1950 energy 
consumption grew 1.5 percent a year, driven mainly by coal. 
From 1950 to 2006 it grew 2.7 percent a year, driven mainly 
by oil and natural gas 

  193

  4.3  Despite low energy consumption and emissions per 

capita, developing countries will dominate much of the 
future growth in total energy consumption and CO2 
emissions 

  194

  4.4  Greenhouse gas emissions by sector: world and high- , 

middle- , and low- income countries 

  195

  4.5  Car ownership increases with income, but pricing, public 
transport, urban planning, and urban density can contain 
car use 

  196

  4.6  Where the world needs to go: Energy- related CO2 emissions 

per capita 

  197

  4.7  Only half the energy models find it possible to achieve the 

emission reductions necessary to stay close to 450 ppm 
CO2e (2°C)  

  197

  4.8  Estimates of global mitigation costs and carbon prices for 

450 and 550 ppm CO2e (2°C and 3°C) in 2030 from five 
models 

  199

  4.9  Global actions are essential to limit warming to 2°C 

(450 ppm) or 3°C (550 ppm). Developed countries alone 
could not put the world onto a 2°C or 3°C trajectory, even if 
they were to reduce emissions to zero by 2050 

  204

 4.10  The emissions gap between where the world is headed and 
where it needs to go is huge, but a portfolio of clean energy 
technologies can help the world stay at 450 ppm CO2e 
(2°C) 

  206

 4.11  The goal is to push low- carbon technologies from unproven 

concept to widespread deployment and to higher emission 
reductions 

  207

 

Contents 

xi

 4.12  Solar photovoltaic power is getting cheaper over time, 

  7.8  E- bikes are now among the cheapest and cleanest travel 

thanks to R&D and higher expected demand from larger 
scale of production  

  220

 FC.1  Import-export ratio of energy-intensive products in 
high-income countries and low- and middle-income 
countries 

  253

mode options in China 

  307

  7.9  Middle- income countries are attracting investments from 

the top five wind equipment firms, but weak intellectual 
property rights constrain technology transfers and R&D 
capacity 

  309

  6.1  Annual mitigation costs rise with the stringency and 

  8.1  The direct actions of U.S. consumers produce up to one-

certainty of the temperature target 

  259

 third of total U.S. CO2 emissions 

  322

  6.2  The gap is large: Estimated annual climate funding 

required for a 2°C trajectory compared with current 
resources  

  263

  7.1  Global cumulative installed wind capacity has soared in the 

past decade 

  287

  7.2  Government budgets for energy RD&D are near their lows, 

and nuclear dominates 

  292

  7.3  Annual spending for energy and climate change R&D pales 

against subsidies 

  293

  7.4  The pace of invention is uneven across low- carbon 

technologies 

  293

  7.5  Policy affects every link of the innovation chain 
  7.6  The “valley of death” between research and the 

  295

market 

  300

  7.7  Enrollment in engineering remains low in many developing 

countries 

  304

  8.2  Small local adjustments for big global benefits: Switching 
from SUVs to fuel- efficient passenger cars in the United 
States alone would nearly offset the emissions generated by 
providing energy to 1.6 billion more people 

  323

  8.3  Individuals’ willingness to respond to climate change differs 
across countries and does not always translate into concrete 
actions 

  324

  8.4  Climate change is not a priority yet 
  8.5  Concern about climate change decreases as wealth goes 

  326

up 

  327

  8.6  Effective governance goes hand in hand with good 

environmental performance 

  332

  8.7  Democracies do better in climate policy outputs than policy 

outcomes 

  338

Maps
 

1  Climate change will depress agricultural yields in most 

countries in 2050, given current agricultural practices and 
crop varieties 

  5

  2.2  A complex challenge: managing urban growth and 

flood risk in a changing climate in South and Southeast 
Asia 

  94

  1.1  More than a billion people depend on water from 

  2.3  Northern cities need to prepare for Mediterranean 

diminishing Himalayan glaciers 

  38

climate—now 

  96

  1.2  Rich countries are also affected by anomalous climate: 
The 2003 heat wave killed more than 70,000 people in 
Europe 

  41

  2.4  Climate change accelerates the comeback of dengue in the 

Americas 

  97

  2.5  Small and poor countries are financially vulnerable to 

  1.3  Climate change is likely to increase poverty in most of 

extreme weather events 

  104

Brazil, especially its poorest regions 

  42

  2.6  Senegalese migrants settle in flood-prone areas around 

  1.4  The January 2008 storm in China severely disrupted 

urban Dakar 

  111

mobility, a pillar of its economic growth 

  45

  1.5  Africa has enormous untapped hydropower potential, 

compared to lower potential but more exploitation of hydro 
resources in the United States 

  46

 FB.1  While many of the projected ecosystem changes are 

in boreal or desert areas that are not biodiversity 
hotspots, there are still substantial areas of overlap and 
concern 

  126

 FA.1  Regional variation in global climate trends over the last 

 FB.2  Unprotected areas at high risk of deforestation and with 

30 years 

  75

 FA.2  Potential tipping elements in the climate system: Global 

distribution  

  79

  2.1  At risk: Population and megacities concentrate in low-
elevation coastal zones threatened by sea level rise and 
storm surges 

  91

high carbon stocks should be priority areas to benefit from 
a REDD mechanism 

  129

  3.1  Water availability is projected to change dramatically 
by the middle of the 21st century in many parts of the 
world 

  137

  3.2  The world will experience both longer dry spells and more 

intense rainfall events  

  138

xii 

C O N T E N T S

  3.3  Climate change will depress agricultural yields in most 

  3.6  Developed countries have more data collection points and 

countries by 2050 given current agricultural practices and 
crop varieties 

  145

  3.4  Intensive agriculture in the developed world has 

contributed to the proliferation of dead zones 

  150

  3.5  World grain trade depends on exports from a few 

countries 

  161

longer time series of water monitoring data  

  163

  7.1  Advances in wind mapping open up new 

opportunities 

  288

Tables
 

1  Incremental mitigation costs and associated financing 

requirements for a 2°C  trajectory: What will be needed in 
developing countries by 2030? 

  9

 

2  In the long term, what will it cost? Present value of 

mitigation costs to 2100 

  9

 FA.1  Potential tipping elements in the climate system:  

Triggers, time- scale, and impacts 

  80

 FB.1  Assessment of the current trend in the global state  

of major services provided by ecosystems 

  125
  4.1  What it would take to achieve the 450 ppm CO2e 

concentration needed to keep warming close  
to 2°C—an illustrative scenario 

  198

  4.2  Investment needs to limit warming to 2°C (450 ppm CO2e) 

in 2030 

  199

  4.3  Different country circumstances require tailored 

approaches  

  204

  4.4  Policy instruments tailored to the maturity of 

technologies 

  207

  4.5  Policy interventions for energy efficiency, renewable energy, 

and transport 

  214

  6.1  Existing instruments of climate finance  
  6.2  Estimated annual climate funding needed in developing 

  258

countries 

  260

  6.3  Potential regional CDM delivery and carbon revenues  

(by 2012) 

  262

  6.4  New bilateral and multilateral climate funds 
  263
  6.5  The tax incidence of an adaptation levy on the Clean 

Development Mechanism (2020) 

  267

  6.6  Potential sources of mitigation and adaptation 

finance 

  271

  6.7  National and multilateral initiatives to reduce deforestation 

and degradation 

  273

  7.1  International technology- oriented agreements specific to 

climate change 

  294

  7.2  Key national policy priorities for innovation 

  303

Foreword

Climate change is one of the most complex challenges of our young century. No country 
is immune. No country alone can take on the interconnected challenges posed by climate 
change, including controversial political decisions, daunting technological change, and far-
reaching global consequences.

As the planet warms, rainfall patterns shift and extreme events such as droughts, floods, 
and forest fires become more frequent. Millions in densely populated coastal areas and 
in island nations will lose their homes as the sea level rises. Poor people in Africa, Asia, 
and elsewhere face prospects of tragic crop failures; reduced agricultural productivity; and 
increased hunger, malnutrition, and disease. 

As a multilateral institution whose mission is inclusive and sustainable development, the 
World Bank Group has a responsibility to try to explain some of those interconnections 
across disciplines—development economics, science, energy, ecology, technology, finance, 
and effective international regimes and governance. With 186 members, the World Bank 
Group faces the challenge, every day, of building cooperation among vastly different states, 
the private sector, and civil society to achieve common goods. This 32nd World Develop-
ment Report seeks to apply that experience, combined with research, to advance knowledge 
about Development and Climate Change. 

Developing countries will bear the brunt of the effects of climate change, even as they 
strive to overcome poverty and advance economic growth. For these countries, climate 
change threatens to deepen vulnerabilities, erode hard-won gains, and seriously undermine 
prospects for development. It becomes even harder to attain the Millennium Development 
Goals—and ensure a safe and sustainable future beyond 2015. At the same time, many 
developing countries fear limits on their critical call to develop energy or new rules that 
might stifle their many needs—from infrastructure to entrepreneurism. 

Tackling  the  immense  and  multidimensional  challenge  of  climate  change  demands 
extraordinary  ingenuity  and  cooperation.  A  “climate-smart”  world  is  possible  in  our 
time—yet, as this Report argues, effecting such a transformation requires us to act now, 
act together, and act differently.

We must act now, because what we do today determines both the climate of tomorrow 
and the choices that shape our future. Today, we are emitting greenhouse gases that trap 
heat in the atmosphere for decades or even centuries. We are building power plants, res-
ervoirs, houses, transport systems, and cities that are likely to last 50 years or more. The 
innovative technologies and crop varieties that we pilot today can shape energy and food 
sources to meet the needs of 3 billion more people by 2050. 

We must act together, because climate change is a crisis of the commons. Climate change 
cannot be solved without countries cooperating on a global scale to improve energy effi-
ciencies, develop and deploy clean technologies, and expand natural “sinks” to grow green 
by absorbing gases. We need to protect human life and ecological resources. We must act 
together in a differentiated and equitable way. Developed countries have produced most of 
the emissions of the past and have high per capita emissions. These countries should lead 
the way by significantly reducing their carbon footprints and stimulating research into 

xiii

xiv 

F O R E WO R D

green alternatives. Yet most of the world’s future emissions will be generated in the devel-
oping world. These countries will need adequate funds and technology transfer so they can 
pursue lower carbon paths—without jeopardizing their development prospects. And they 
need assistance to adapt to inevitable changes in climate.

We must act differently, because we cannot plan for the future based on the climate of 
the past. Tomorrow’s climate needs will require us to build infrastructure that can with-
stand new conditions and support greater numbers of people; use limited land and water 
resources to supply sufficient food and biomass for fuel while preserving ecosystems; and 
reconfigure the world’s energy systems. This will require adaptation measures that are 
based on new information about changing patterns of temperature, precipitation, and spe-
cies. Changes of this magnitude will require substantial additional finance for adaptation 
and mitigation, and for strategically intensified research to scale up promising approaches 
and explore bold new ideas. 

We need a new momentum. It is crucial that countries reach a climate agreement in 

December in Copen hagen that integrates development needs with climate actions. 

The World Bank Group has developed several financing initiatives to help countries 
cope with climate change, as outlined in our Strategic Framework for Development and 
Climate Change. These include our carbon funds and facilities, which continue to grow as 
financing for energy efficiency and new renewable energy increases substantially. We are 
trying to develop practical experience about how developing countries can benefit from 
and support a climate change regime—ranging from workable mechanisms to provide 
incentives for avoided deforestation, to lower carbon growth models and initiatives that 
combine adaptation and mitigation. In these ways, we can support the UNFCCC process 
and the countries devising new international incentives and disincentives. 

Much more is needed. Looking forward, the Bank Group is reshaping our energy and envi-
ronment strategies for the future, and helping countries to strengthen their risk management 
practices and expand their safety nets to cope with risks that cannot be fully mitigated. 

The 2010 World Development Report calls for action on climate issues: If we act now, act 
together, and act differently, there are real opportunities to shape our climate future for an 
inclusive and sustainable globalization.

 
 
 

Robert B. Zoellick
President
The World Bank Group

Acknowledgments

This Report has been prepared by a core team led by Rosina Bierbaum and Marianne Fay 
and comprising Julia Bucknall, Samuel Fankhauser, Ricardo Fuentes-Nieva, Kirk Hamilton, 
Andreas Kopp, Andrea Liverani, Alexander Lotsch, Ian Noble, Jean-Louis Racine, Mark Roseg-
rant, Xiaodong Wang, Xueman Wang, and Michael Ian Westphal. Major contributions were 
made by Arun Agrawal, Philippe Ambrosi, Elliot Diringer, Calestous Juma, Jean-Charles Hour-
cade, Kseniya Lvovsky, Muthukumara Mani, Alan Miller, and Michael Toman. Helpful advice 
and data were provided by Leon Clarke, Jens Dinkel, Jae Edmonds, Per-Anders Enkvist, Brigitte 
Knopf, and Volker Krey. The team was assisted by Rachel Block, Doina Cebotari, Nicola Cenac-
chi, Sandy Chang, Nate Engle, Hilary Gopnik, and Hrishikesh Patel. Additional contributions 
were made by Lidvard Gronnevet and Jon Strand. 

Bruce Ross-Larson was the principal editor. The World Bank’s Map Design Unit created the 
maps under the direction of Jeff Lecksell. The Office of the Publisher provided editorial, design, 
composition, and printing services under the supervision of Mary Fisk and Andres Meneses; 
Stephen McGroarty served as acquisitions editor.

The World Development Report 2010 was co-sponsored by Development Economics (DEC) 
and the Sustainable Development Network (SDN). The work was conducted under the general 
guidance of Justin Yifu Lin in DEC and Katherine Sierra in SDN. Warren Evans and Alan H. 
Gelb also provided valuable guidance. A Panel of Advisers comprised of Neil Adger, Zhou Dadi, 
Rashid Hassan, Geoffrey Heal, John Holdren (until December 2008), Jean-Charles Hourcade, 
Saleemul Huq, Calestous Juma, Nebojša Nakic´enovic´, Carlos Nobre, John Schellnhuber, Robert 
Watson, and John Weyant provided extensive and excellent advice at all stages of the Report.

World Bank President Robert B. Zoellick provided comments and guidance. 
Many others inside and outside the World Bank contributed with comments and inputs. The 
Development Data Group contributed to the data appendix and was responsible for the Selected 
World Development Indicators.

The team benefited greatly from a wide range of consultations. Meetings and regional work-
shops were held locally or through videoconferencing (using the World Bank’s Global Develop-
ment Learning Network) in: Argentina, Bangladesh, Belgium, Benin, Botswana, Burkina Faso, 
China, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ethiopia, Finland, France, 
Germany, Ghana, India, Indonesia, Kenya, Kuwait, Mexico, Mozambique, the Netherlands, 
Nicaragua, Norway, Peru, the Philippines, Poland, Senegal, South Africa, Sweden, Tanzania, 
Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, the United Arab Emirates, and the United Kingdom. The 
team wishes to thank participants in these workshops and videoconferences, which included 
academics, policy researchers, government officials, and staff of nongovernmental, civil society, 
and private sector organizations.

Finally, the team would like to acknowledge the generous support of the Government of 
Norway, the UK Department for International Development, the Government of Denmark, 
the Government of Germany through Deutsche Gesellschaft für technische Zusammenarbeit, 
the Swedish Government through Biodiversity Centre/Swedish International Biodiversity Pro-
gramme (SwedBio), the Trust Fund for Environmentally & Socially Sustainable Development 

xv

xvi 

AC K N OW L E D G M E N T S

(TFESSD), the multi-donor programmatic trust fund, and the Knowledge for Change Pro-
gram (KCP).

Rebecca Sugui served as senior executive assistant to the team—her 17th year with the 
WDR—Sonia Joseph and Jason Victor as program assistants, and Bertha Medina as team 
assistant. Evangeline Santo Domingo served as resource management assistant.

Abbreviations and Data Notes

Abbreviations
AAU 
ARPP 
BRIICS 
Bt 
CCS 
CDM 
CER 
CGIAR 
CIPAV 

CH4 
CO2 
CO2e 
CPIA 
CTF 
EE 
EIT 
ENSO 
ESCO 
ETF–IW 
EU 
FCPF 
FDI 
FIP 
GCCA 
GCS 
GDP 
GEO 
GEOSS 
GEEREF 
GEF 
GFDRR 
GHG 
GM 
Gt 
GWP 
IAASTD 

IATAL 

assigned amount unit
Annual Report on Portfolio Performance
Brazil, the Russian Federation, India, Indonesia, China, and South Africa
Bacillus thuringiensis
carbon capture and storage
Clean Development Mechanism
certified emission reduction
Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research
Centro para Investigación en Sistemas Sostenibles de Producción 
Agropecuaria
methane
carbon dioxide 
carbon dioxide equivalent
Country Policy and Institutional Assessment
Clean Technology Fund
energy efficiency
economies in transition
El Niño–Southern Oscillation
energy service company
Environmental Transformation Fund–International Window
European Union
Forest Carbon Partnership Facility
foreign direct investment
Forest Investment Program
Global Climate Change Alliance
global climate services enterprise
gross domestic product
Group on Earth Observation
Global Earth Observation System of Systems
Global Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Fund
Global Environment Facility
Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery
greenhouse gas
genetically modified
gigaton
global warming potential
International Assessment of Agricultural Science and Technology for 
Development
international air travel adaptation levy

xvii

xviii 

AB B R E V I AT I O N S  A N D  D ATA  NO T E S

International Development Association
International Energy Agency
International Finance Corporation
International Forest Carbon Initiative
International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis
International Maritime Emission Reduction Scheme
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
intellectual property rights
kilowatt-hour
Joint Implementation
Least Developed Country Fund
low-elevation coastal zones
liquefied petroleum gas
multilateral environmental agreement

IDA 
IEA 
IFC 
IFCI 
IIASA 
IMERS 
IPCC 
IPR 
kWh 
JI 
LDCF 
LECZ 
LPG 
MEA 
MRGRA  Midwestern Regional GHG Reduction Accord
MRV 
NAPA 
N2O 
NGO 
O3 
O&M 
OECD 
PaCIS 
ppb 
PPCR 
ppm 
PPP 
R&D 
RD&D 
RDD&D 
REDD 
RGGI 
SCCF 
SDII 
SD-PAMs 
SO2 
SUV 
toe 
TRIPS 
Tt 
UN 
UNFCCC  United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
UN-REDD  United Nations Collaborative Program on Reduced Emissions from 

measurable, reportable, and verifiable
National Adaptation Program of Action
nitrous oxide
nongovernmental organization
ozone
operation and maintenance
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
Pacific Climate Information System
parts per billion
Pilot Program for Climate Resistance
parts per million
purchasing power parity
research and development
research, development, and deployment
research, development, demonstration, and deployment
reduced emissions from deforestation and forest degradation
Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative
Strategic Climate Change Fund
simple daily intensity index
sustainable development policies and measures
sulfur dioxide
sports utility vehicle
tons of oil equivalent
Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights
trillion tons
United Nations

WCI 
WGI 
WMO 
WTO 

Deforestation and forest Degradation 
Western Climate Initiative
World Governance Indicator
World Meteorological Organization
World Trade Organization

 

Abbreviations and Data Notes 

xix

Data notes
The countries included in regional and income groupings in this Report are listed in the 
Classification of Economies table at the end of the Selected World Development Indicators. 
Income classifications are based on gross national product (GNP) per capita; thresholds for 
income classifications in this edition may be found in the Introduction to Selected World 
Development Indicators. Figures, maps, and tables (including selected indicators) show-
ing income groupings are based on the World Bank’s income classification in 2009. The 
data shown in the Selected World Development Indicators are based on the classification 
in 2010. Group averages reported in the figures and tables are unweighted averages of the 
countries in the group, unless noted to the contrary.

The use of the word countries to refer to economies implies no judgment by the World 
Bank about the legal or other status of a territory. The term developing countries includes 
low- and middle-income economies and thus may include economies in transition from 
central planning, as a matter of convenience. The terms industrialized countries or devel-
oped countries may be used as a matter of convenience to denote high-income economies. 
Dollar figures are current U.S. dollars, unless otherwise specified. Billion means 1,000 

million; trillion means 1,000 billion.

Main Messages of the 
World Development Report 2010

Poverty reduction and sustainable development remain core global priorities. 
A quarter of the population of developing countries still lives on less than $1.25 
a day. One billion people lack clean drinking water; 1.6 billion, electricity; and 3 
billion, adequate sanitation. A quarter of all developing-country children are mal-
nourished. Addressing these needs must remain the priorities both of developing 
countries and of development aid—recognizing that development will get harder, 
not easier, with climate change.

Yet climate change must urgently be addressed. Climate change threatens all 
countries, with developing countries the most vulnerable. Estimates are that they 
would bear some 75 to 80 percent of the costs of damages caused by the changing 
climate. Even 2°C warming above preindustrial temperatures—the minimum the 
world is likely to experience—could result in permanent reductions in GDP of 4 
to 5 percent for Africa and South Asia. Most developing countries lack sufficient 
financial and technical capacities to manage increasing climate risk. They also 
depend more directly on climate-sensitive natural resources for income and well-
being. And most are in tropical and subtropical regions already subject to highly 
variable climate. 

Economic growth alone is unlikely to be fast or equitable enough to counter 
threats from climate change, particularly if it remains carbon intensive and accel-
erates global warming. So climate policy cannot be framed as a choice between 
growth and climate change. In fact, climate-smart policies are those that enhance 
development, reduce vulnerability, and finance the transition to low-carbon growth 
paths.

A climate-smart world is within our reach if we act now, act together, and act 

differently than we have in the past:

•	 Acting now is essential, or else options disappear and costs increase as the world 
commits itself to high-carbon pathways and largely irreversible warming trajec-
tories. Climate change is already compromising efforts to improve standards of 
living and to achieve the Millennium Development Goals. Staying close to 2°C 
above preindustrial levels—likely the best that can be done—requires a verita-
ble energy revolution with the immediate deployment of energy efficiency and 
available low-carbon technologies, accompanied by massive investments in the 
next generation of technologies without which low-carbon growth cannot be 
achieved. Immediate actions are also needed to cope with the changing climate 
and to minimize the costs to people, infrastructure and ecosystems today as well 
as to prepare for the greater changes in store. 

xx

 
 

Main Messages: World Development Report 2010 
Chapter Title Goes Here 

xxi
xxi

•	 Acting together is key to keeping the costs down and effectively tackling both adap-
tation and mitigation. It has to start with high-income countries taking aggressive 
action to reduce their own emissions. That would free some “pollution space” for 
developing countries, but more importantly, it would stimulate innovation and the 
demand for new technologies so they can be rapidly scaled up. It would also help 
create a sufficiently large and stable carbon market. Both these effects are critical 
to enable developing countries to move to a lower carbon trajectory while rapidly 
gaining access to the energy services needed for development, although they will 
need to be supplemented with financial support. But acting together is also critical 
to advance development in a harsher environment—increasing climate risks will 
exceed communities’ capacity to adapt. National and international support will 
be essential to protect the most vulnerable through social assistance programs, to 
develop international risk-sharing arrangements, and to promote the exchange of 
knowledge, technology, and information.

•	 Acting differently is required to enable a sustainable future in a changing world. In 
the next few decades, the world’s energy systems must be transformed so that global 
emissions drop 50 to 80 percent. Infrastructure must be built to withstand new 
extremes. To feed 3 billion more people without further threatening already stressed 
ecosystems, agricultural productivity and efficiency of water use must improve. 
Only long-term, large-scale integrated management and flexible planning can sat-
isfy increased demands on natural resources for food, bioenergy, hydropower, and 
ecosystem services while conserving biodiversity and maintaining carbon stocks in 
land and forests. Robust economic and social strategies will be those that take into 
account increased uncertainty and that enhance adaptation to a variety of climate 
futures—not just “optimally” cope with the climate of the past. Effective policy 
will entail jointly evaluating development, adaptation, and mitigation actions, all 
of which draw on the same finite resources (human, financial, and natural).

An equitable and effective global climate deal is needed. Such a deal would 
recognize the varying needs and constraints of developing countries, assist them 
with the finance and technology to meet the increased challenges to development, 
ensure they are not locked into a permanently low share of the global commons, 
and establish mechanisms that decouple where mitigation happens from who pays 
for it. Most emissions growth will occur in developing nations, whose current car-
bon footprint is disproportionately low and whose economies must grow rapidly to 
reduce poverty. High-income countries must provide financial and technical assis-
tance for both adaptation and low-carbon growth in developing countries. Cur-
rent financing for adaptation and mitigation is less than 5 percent of what may be 
needed annually by 2030, but the shortfalls can be met through innovative financ-
ing mechanisms. 

Success hinges on changing behavior and shifting public opinion. Individuals, 
as citizens and consumers, will determine the planet’s future. Although an increas-
ing number of people know about climate change and believe action is needed, too 
few make it a priority, and too many fail to act when they have the opportunity. 
So the greatest challenge lies with changing behaviors and institutions, particu-
larly in high-income countries. Public policy changes—local, regional, national, 
and international—are necessary to make private and civic action easier and more 
attractive.

Overview
Changing the Climate  
for Development

Thirty years ago, half the developing 

world lived in extreme poverty—
today,  a  quarter.1  Now,  a  much 
smaller share of children are mal-
nourished  and  at  risk  of  early  death. And 
access  to  modern  infrastructure  is  much 
more widespread. Critical to the progress: 
rapid economic growth driven by techno-
logical innovation and institutional reform, 
particularly in today’s middle- income coun-
tries, where per capita incomes have dou-
bled. Yet the needs remain enormous, with 
the number of hungry people having passed 
the billion mark this year for the first time 
in  history.2  With  so  many  still  in  poverty 
and hunger, growth and poverty alleviation 
remain the overarching priority for develop-
ing countries. 

Climate change only makes the challenge 
more complicated. First, the impacts of a 
changing climate are already being felt, with 
more droughts, more floods, more strong 
storms, and more heat waves—taxing indi-
viduals, firms, and governments, drawing 
resources away from development. Second, 
continuing climate change, at current rates, 
will pose increasingly severe challenges to 
development. By century’s end, it could lead 
to warming of 5°C or more compared with 
preindustrial times and to a vastly differ-
ent world from today, with more extreme 
weather  events,  most  ecosystems  stressed 
and  changing,  many  species  doomed  to 
extinction, and whole island nations threat-
ened by inundation. Even our best efforts 
are  unlikely  to  stabilize  temperatures  at 
anything less than 2°C above preindustrial 

temperatures,  warming  that  will  require 
substantial adaptation.

High- income  countries  can  and  must 
reduce their carbon footprints. They cannot 
continue to fill up an unfair and unsustain-
able share of the atmospheric commons. But 
developing  countries—whose  average  per 
capita emissions are a third those of high-
 income countries (figure 1)—need massive 
expansions in energy, transport, urban sys-
tems, and agricultural production. If pursued 
using traditional technologies and carbon 
intensities, these much- needed expansions 
will  produce  more  greenhouse  gases  and, 
hence, more climate change. The question, 
then, is not just how to make development 
more resilient to climate change. It is how to 
pursue growth and prosperity without caus-
ing “dangerous” climate change.3

Climate  change  policy  is  not  a  simple 
choice between a high- growth, high- carbon 
world  and  a  low- growth,  low-  carbon 
world—a  simple  question  of  whether  to 
grow  or  to  preserve  the  planet.  Plenty  of 
inefficiencies  drive  today’s  high-  carbon 
intensity.4 For example, existing technolo-
gies and best practices could reduce energy 
consumption  in  industry  and  the  power 
sector by 20–30 percent, shrinking carbon 
footprints  without  sacrificing  growth.5 
Many  mitigation  actions—meaning 
changes to reduce emissions of greenhouse 
gases—have significant co-  benefits in pub-
lic health, energy security, environmental 
sustainability,  and  financial  savings.  In 
Africa, for example, mitigation opportuni-
ties are linked to more sustainable land and 

2 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 0

Figure 1     Unequal footprints: Emissions per capita in low- , middle- , and high- income 
countries, 2005

CO2e per capita (tons)
16

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

Emissions from
land-use change
All other
emissions

Developing-country averages:

with land-use change
without land-use change

High-income

countries

Middle-income

countries

Low-income
countries

Sources: World Bank 2008c; WRI 2008 augmented with land- use change emissions from Houghton 2009.
Note: Greenhouse gas emissions include carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O), and high-
 global- warming- potential gases (F- gases). All are expressed in terms of CO2 equivalent (CO2e)—the quantity 
of CO2 that would cause the same amount of warming. In 2005 emissions from land- use change in high income 
countries were negligible.

forest management, to cleaner energy (such 
as geothermal or hydro power), and to the 
creation  of  sustainable  urban  transport 
systems. So the mitigation agenda in Africa 
is likely to be compatible with furthering 
development.6 This is also the case for Latin 
America.7 

Nor  do  greater  wealth  and  prosperity 
inherently produce more greenhouse gases, 
even  if  they  have  gone  hand  in  hand  in 
the past. Particular patterns of consump-
tion and production do. Even excluding oil 
producers,  per  capita  emissions  in  high-
  income countries vary by a factor of four, 
from 7 tons of carbon dioxide equivalent 
(CO2e)8 per capita in Switzerland to 27 in 
Australia and Luxembourg.9 

And dependence on fossil fuel can hardly 
be  considered  unavoidable  given  the  inad-
equacy  of  the  efforts  to  find  alternatives. 
While global subsidies to petroleum products 
amount to some $150 billion annually, public 
spending on energy research, development, 
and deployment (RD&D) has hovered around 
$10 billion for decades, apart from a brief spike 
following the oil crisis (see chapter 7). That 
represents 4 percent of overall public RD&D. 
Private  spending  on  energy  RD&D,  at  
$40 billion to $60 billion a year, amounts to 
0.5 percent of private revenues—a fraction of 
what innovative industries such as telecom-

munications (8 percent) or pharmaceuticals 
(15 percent) invest in RD&D.10

A switch to a low-  carbon world through 
technological innovation and complemen-
tary institutional reforms has to start with 
immediate and aggressive action by high-
 income  countries  to  shrink  their  unsus-
tainable  carbon  footprints.  That  would 
free  some  space  in  the  atmospheric  com-
mons (figure 2). More important, a credible 
commitment by high- income countries to 
drastically  reduce  their  emissions  would 
stimulate the needed RD&D of new tech-
nologies and processes in energy, transport, 
industry,  and  agriculture.  And  large  and 
predictable  demand  for  alternative  tech-
nologies  will  reduce  their  price  and  help 
make  them  competitive  with  fossil  fuels. 
Only  with  new  technologies  at  competi-
tive prices can climate change be curtailed 
without sacrificing growth. 

There is scope for developing countries 
to shift to lower- carbon trajectories without 
compromising development, but this var-
ies across countries and will depend on the 
extent of financial and technical assistance 
from  high- income  countries.  Such  assis-
tance would be equitable (and in line with 
the 1992 United Nations Framework Con-
vention on Climate Change, or UNFCCC): 
high- income countries, with one- sixth of 
the world’s population, are responsible for 
nearly two- thirds of the greenhouse gases 
in  the  atmosphere  (figure  3).  It  would 
also be efficient: the savings from helping 
to  finance  early  mitigation  in  developing 
countries—for  example,  through  infra-
structure  and  housing  construction  over 
the  next  decades—are  so  large  that  they 
produce  clear  economic  benefits  for  all.11 
But designing, let alone implementing, an 
international agreement that involves sub-
stantial,  stable,  and  predictable  resource 
transfers is no trivial matter. 

Developing  countries,  particularly  the 
poorest and most exposed, will also need 
assistance in adapting to the changing cli-
mate.  They  already  suffer  the  most  from 
extreme weather events (see chapter 2). And 
even  relatively  modest  additional  warm-
ing will require big adjustments to the way 
development policy is designed and imple-
mented, to the way people live and make a 

 

Overview: Changing the Climate for Development 

3

living, and to the dangers and the opportu-
nities they face. 

The current financial crisis cannot be an 
excuse to put climate on the back burner. 
On average, a financial crisis lasts less than 
two years and results in a 3 percent loss in 
gross domestic product (GDP) that is later 
offset by more than 20 percent growth over 
eight years of recovery and prosperity.12 So 
for all the harm they cause, financial crises 
come and go. Not so with the growing threat 
imposed by a changing climate. Why? 

Because  time  is  not  on  our  side.  The 
impacts of greenhouse gases released into 
the atmosphere will be felt for decades, even 
millennia,13 making the return to a “safe” 
level very difficult. This inertia in the cli-
mate system severely limits the possibility 
of making up for modest efforts today with 
accelerated mitigation in the future.14 Delays 
also  increase  the  costs  because  impacts 
worsen and cheap mitigation options disap-
pear as economies become locked into high-
 carbon infrastructure and lifestyles—more 
inertia.

Immediate  action  is  needed  to  keep 
warming as close as possible to 2°C. That 
amount of warming is not desirable, but it 
is likely to be the best we can do. There isn’t 
a consensus in the economic profession that 
this  is  the  economic  optimum.  There  is, 
however, a growing consensus in policy and 
scientific circles that aiming for 2°C warm-
ing  is  the  responsible  thing  to  do.15  This 
Report endorses such a position. From the 
perspective of development, warming much 
above 2°C is simply unacceptable. But sta-
bilizing at 2°C will require major shifts in 
lifestyle, a veritable energy revolution, and a 
transformation in how we manage land and 
forests. And substantial adaptation would 
still be needed. Coping with climate change 
will require all the innovation and ingenu-
ity that the human race is capable of. 

Inertia,  equity,  and  ingenuity  are  three 
themes  that  permeate  this  Report.  Inertia 
is the defining characteristic of the climate 
challenge—the reason we need to act now. 
Equity is the key to an effective global deal, 
to the trust needed to find an efficient reso-
lution to this tragedy of the commons—the 
reason we need to act together. And ingenuity 
is the only possible answer to a problem that 

Figure 2      Rebalancing act: Switching from SUVs to fuel- efficient passenger cars in the U.S. alone 
would nearly offset the emissions generated in providing electricity to 1.6 billion more people
Emissions (million tons of CO2)
350

300

250

200

150

100

50

0

Emission reductions by switching
fleet of American SUVs to cars with

EU fuel economy standards.

Emission increase by providing

basic electricity to 1.6 billion people

without access to electricity.

Source: WDR team calculations based on BTS 2008.
Note: Estimates are based on 40 million SUVs (sports utility vehicles) in the United States traveling a total of 
480 billion miles (assuming 12,000 miles a car) a year. With average fuel efficiency of 18 miles a gallon, the 
SUV fleet consumes 27 billion gallons of gasoline annually with emissions of 2,421 grams of carbon a gallon. 
Switching to fuel- efficient cars with the average fuel efficiency of new passenger cars sold in the European 
Union (45 miles a gallon; see ICCT 2007) results in a reduction of 142 million tons of CO2 (39 million tons of car-
bon) annually. Electricity consumption of poor households in developing countries is estimated at 170 kilowatt-
 hours a person- year and electricity is assumed to be provided at the current world average carbon intensity of 
160 grams of carbon a kilowatt- hour, equivalent to 160 million tons of CO2 (44 million tons of carbon). The size 
of the electricity symbol in the global map corresponds to the number of people without access to electricity.

Figure 3     High- income countries have historically contributed a disproportionate share of 
global emissions and still do

Share of global emissions, historic and 2005

Cumulative CO2 emissions

since 1850: Energy

2%

CO2 emissions
in 2005: Energy

3%

Greenhouse gas emissions
in 2005: All sectors, including

land-use change

6%

34%

47%

38%

50%

64%

56%

Low-income countries (1.2 billion people)
High-income countries (1 billion people)

Middle-income countries (4.2 billion people)
Overuse relative to population share

Sources: DOE 2009; World Bank 2008c; WRI 2008 augmented with land- use change emissions from Houghton 2009. 
Note: The data cover over 200 countries for more recent years. Data are not available for all countries in 
the 19th century, but all major emitters of the era are included. Carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions from energy 
include all fossil- fuel burning, gas flaring, and cement production. Greenhouse gas emissions include CO2, 
methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O), and high- global- warming- potential gases (F- gases). Sectors include 
energy and industrial processes, agriculture, land- use change (from Houghton 2009), and waste. Overuse of 
the atmospheric commons relative to population share is based on deviations from equal per capita emissions; 
in 2005 high- income countries constituted 16 percent of global population; since 1850, on average, today’s 
high- income countries constituted about 20 percent of global population.

4 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 0

is politically and scientifically complex—the 
quality  that  could  enable  us  to  act  differ-
ently than we have in the past. Act now, act 
together, act differently—those are the steps 
that can put a climate- smart world within 
our reach. But first it requires believing there 
is a case for action.

The case for action
The  average  temperature  on  Earth  has 
already  warmed  by  close  to  1°C  since  the 
beginning  of  the  industrial  period.  In  the 
words of the Fourth Assessment Report of 
the  Intergovernmental  Panel  on  Climate 
Change  (IPCC),  a  consensus  document 
produced by over 2,000 scientists represent-
ing  every  country  in  the  United  Nations: 
“Warming of the climate system is unequiv-
ocal.”16 Global atmospheric concentrations 
of  CO2,  the  most  important  greenhouse 
gas, ranged between 200 and 300 parts per 

Higher emissions scenario for 2100

Lower emissions scenario for 2100

Observed in 2007

Figure 4      Off the charts with CO2 

Carbon dioxide concentration (ppm)
1,000

800

600

400

200

0
800,000

700,000

600,000

500,000

400,000

300,000

200,000

100,000

0

Number of years ago

Source: Lüthi and others 2008.
Note: Analysis of air bubbles trapped in an Antarctic ice core extending back 800,000 years documents the 
Earth’s changing CO2 concentration. Over this long period, natural factors have caused the atmospheric CO2 
concentration to vary within a range of about 170 to 300 parts per million (ppm). Temperature- related data 
make clear that these variations have played a central role in determining the global climate. As a result of 
human activities, the present CO2 concentration of about 387 ppm is about 30 percent above its highest level 
over at least the last 800,000 years. In the absence of strong control measures, emissions projected for this 
century would result in a CO2 concentration roughly two to three times the highest level experienced in the 
past 800,000 or more years, as depicted in the two projected emissions scenarios for 2100. 

million  (ppm)  for  800,000  years,  but  shot 
up to about 387 ppm over the past 150 years 
(figure 4), mainly because of the burning of 
fossil fuels and, to a lesser extent, agriculture 
and changing land use. A decade after the 
Kyoto  Protocol  set  limits  on  international 
carbon  emissions,  as  developed  countries 
enter the first period of rigorous accounting 
of their emissions, greenhouse gases in the 
atmosphere are still increasing. Worse, they 
are increasing at an accelerating rate.17

The effects of climate change are already 
visible in higher average air and ocean tem-
peratures, widespread melting of snow and 
ice,  and  rising  sea  levels.  Cold  days,  cold 
nights,  and  frosts  have  become  less  fre-
quent while heat waves are more common. 
Globally, precipitation has increased even 
as Australia, Central Asia, the Mediterra-
nean basin, the Sahel, the western United 
States, and many other regions have seen 
more frequent and more intense droughts. 
Heavy  rainfall  and  floods  have  become 
more  common,  and  the  damage  from—
and probably the intensity of—storms and 
tropical cyclones have increased.

Climate change threatens all, but 
particularly developing countries
The more than 5°C warming that unmiti-
gated climate change could cause this cen-
tury18 amounts to the difference between 
today’s climate and the last ice age, when gla-
ciers reached central Europe and the north-
ern  United  States.  That  change  occurred 
over  millennia;  human- induced  climate 
change is occurring on a one- century time 
scale giving societies and ecosystems little 
time  to  adapt  to  the  rapid  pace.  Such  a 
drastic temperature shift would cause large 
dislocations in ecosystems fundamental to 
human societies and economies—such as 
the  possible  dieback  of  the  Amazon  rain 
forest, complete loss of glaciers in the Andes 
and the Himalayas, and rapid ocean acidifi-
cation leading to disruption of marine eco-
systems and death of coral reefs. The speed 
and magnitude of change could condemn 
more than 50 percent of species to extinc-
tion. Sea levels could rise by one meter this 
century,19  threatening  more  than  60 mil -
lion  people  and  $200  billion  in  assets  in 
developing countries alone.20 Agricultural 

 

Overview: Changing the Climate for Development 

5

productivity would likely decline through-
out the world, particularly in the tropics, 
even  with  changes  in  farming  practices. 
And over 3 million additional people could 
die from malnutrition each year.21

Even  2°C  warming  above  preindus-
trial  temperatures  would  result  in  new 
weather patterns with global consequences. 
Increased  weather  variability,  more  fre-
quent  and  intense  extreme  events,  and 
greater  exposure  to  coastal  storm  surges 
would lead to a much higher risk of cata-
strophic and irreversible impacts. Between 
100 million and 400 million more people 
could be at risk of hunger.22 And 1 billion 
to 2 billion more people may no longer have 
enough water to meet their needs.23

Developing countries are more exposed and 
less  resilient  to  climate  hazards.      These 
consequences  will  fall  disproportionately 

on developing countries. Warming of 2°C 
could result in a 4 to 5 percent permanent 
reduction in annual income per capita in 
Africa  and  South  Asia,24  as  opposed  to 
minimal  losses  in  high- income  countries 
and  a  global  average  GDP  loss  of  about 
1 percent.25 These losses would be driven by 
impacts in agriculture, a sector important 
to the economies of both Africa and South 
Asia (map 1). 

It  is  estimated  that  developing  coun-
tries  will  bear  most  of  the  costs  of  the 
damages—some  75–80  percent.26  Several 
factors  explain  this  (box  1).  Developing 
countries are particularly reliant on ecosys-
tem services and natural capital for produc-
tion in climate- sensitive sectors. Much of 
their population lives in physically exposed 
locations  and  economically  precarious 
conditions. And their financial and institu-
tional capacity to adapt is limited. Already 

IBRD 37150
September 2009

Map 1      Climate change will depress agricultural yields in most countries in 2050, given current agricultural practices and crop varieties

CANADA AND

THE UNITED STATES

1%

LATIN AMERICA

AND THE

CARIBBEAN

6%

EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA

7%

WESTERN
EUROPE

2%

MIDDLE EAST AND

NORTH AFRICA

11%

SUB-SAHARAN

AFRICA

15%

SOUTH
ASIA
18%

EAST ASIA
AND PACIFIC

12%

AUSTRALIA AND
NEW ZEALAND

2.7%

Percentage change in yields between present and 2050

-50

-20

0

20

50

100

No data

Sources: Müller and others 2009; World Bank 2008c.
Note: The coloring in the figure shows the projected percentage change in yields of 11 major crops (wheat, rice, maize, millet, field pea, sugar beet, sweet potato, soybean, 
groundnut, sunflower, and rapeseed) from 2046 to 2055, compared with 1996–2005. The yield-change values are the mean of three emission scenarios across five global climate 
models, assuming no CO2 fertilization (a possible boost to plant growth and water- use efficiency from higher ambient CO2 concentrations). The numbers indicate the share of GDP 
derived from agriculture in each region. (The share for Sub-Saharan Africa is 23 percent if South Africa is excluded.) Large negative yield impacts are projected in many areas 
that are highly dependent on agriculture.

6 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 0

Box 1      All developing regions are vulnerable to the impacts of climate change—for different reasons

The problems common to developing 
countries—limited human and financial 
resources, weak institutions—drive their 
vulnerability. But other factors, attribut-
able to their geography and history, are 
also significant.

Sub- Saharan Africa suffers from 
natural fragility (two- thirds of its sur-
face area is desert or dry land) and high 
exposure to droughts and floods, which 
are forecast to increase with further 
climate change. The region’s econo-
mies are highly dependent on natural 
resources. Biomass provides 80 percent 
of the domestic primary energy supply. 
Rainfed agriculture contributes some 
23 percent of GDP (excluding South 
Africa) and employs about 70 percent of 
the population. Inadequate infrastructure 
could hamper adaptation efforts, with 
limited water storage despite abundant 
resources. Malaria, already the biggest 
killer in the region, is spreading to higher, 
previously safe, altitudes.

In East Asia and the Pacific one major 

well- managed coral reefs is $13 billion in 
Southeast Asia alone—which are already 
stressed by industrial pollution, coastal 
development, overfishing, and runoff of 
agricultural pesticides and nutrients.

Vulnerability to climate change in East-
ern Europe and Central Asia is driven by 
a lingering Soviet legacy of environmen-
tal mismanagement and the poor state 
of much of the region’s infrastructure. 
An example: rising temperatures and 
reduced precipitation in Central Asia will 
exacerbate the environmental catastro-
phe of the disappearing Southern Aral 
Sea (caused by the diversion of water to 
grow cotton in a desert climate) while 
sand and salt from the dried- up seabed 
are blowing onto Central Asia’s glaciers, 
accelerating the melting caused by higher 
temperature. Poorly constructed, badly 
maintained, and aging infrastructure and 
housing—a legacy of both the Soviet era 
and the transition years—are ill suited to 
withstand storms, heat waves, or floods. 

Latin America and the Caribbean’s 

driver of vulnerability is the large num-
ber of people living along the coast and 
on low- lying islands—over 130 million 
people in China, and roughly 40 million, 
or more than half the entire population, in 
Vietnam. A second driver is the continued 
reliance, particularly among the poorer 
countries, on agriculture for income and 
employment. As pressures on land, water, 
and forest resources increase—as a result 
of population growth, urbanization, and 
environmental degradation caused by 
rapid industrialization—greater vari-
ability and extremes will complicate their 
management. In the Mekong River basin, 
the rainy season will see more intense pre-
cipitation, while the dry season lengthens 
by two months. A third driver is that the 
region’s economies are highly depen-
dent on marine resources—the value of 

most critical ecosystems are under threat. 
First, the tropical glaciers of the Andes 
are expected to disappear, changing the 
timing and intensity of water available to 
several countries, resulting in water stress 
for at least 77 million people as early as 
2020 and threatening hydropower, the 
source of more than half the electricity in 
many South American countries. Second, 
warming and acidifying oceans will result 
in more frequent bleaching and possible 
diebacks of coral reefs in the Caribbean, 
which host nurseries for an estimated 
65 percent of all fish species in the basin, 
provide a natural protection against 
storm surge, and are a critical tourism 
asset. Third, damage to the Gulf of Mex-
ico’s wetlands will make the coast more 
vulnerable to more intense and more 
frequent hurricanes. Fourth, the most 

disastrous impact could be a dramatic 
dieback of the Amazon rain forest and 
a conversion of large areas to savannah, 
with severe consequences for the region’s 
climate—and possibly the world’s.

Water is the major vulnerability in 

the Middle East and North Africa, the 
world’s driest region, where per capita 
water availability is predicted to halve by 
2050 even without the effects of climate 
change. The region has few attractive 
options for increasing water storage, 
since close to 90 percent of its fresh-
water resources are already stored in 
reservoirs. The increased water scarcity 
combined with greater variability will 
threaten agriculture, which accounts for 
some 85 percent of the region’s water 
use. Vulnerability is compounded by a 
heavy concentration of population and 
economic activity in flood- prone coastal 
zones and by social and political tensions 
that resource scarcity could heighten. 
South Asia suffers from an already 
stressed and largely degraded natural 
resource base resulting from geography 
coupled with high levels of poverty and 
population density. Water resources are 
likely to be affected by climate change 
through its effect on the monsoon, which 
provides 70 percent of annual precipita-
tion in a four- month period, and on the 
melting of Himalayan glaciers. Rising sea 
levels are a dire concern in the region, 
which has long and densely populated 
coastlines, agricultural plains threatened 
by saltwater intrusion, and many low-
 lying islands. In more severe climate-
 change scenarios, rising seas would 
submerge much of the Maldives and 
inundate 18 percent of Bangladesh’s land. 
Sources: de la Torre, Fajnzylber, and Nash 
2008; Fay, Block, and Ebinger 2010; World 
Bank 2007a; World Bank 2007c; World Bank 
2008b; World Bank 2009b.

policy makers in some developing countries 
note that more of their development bud-
get is diverted to cope with weather- related 
emergencies.27 

High- income  countries  will  also  be 
affected  even  by  moderate  warming. 
Indeed,  damages  per  capita  are  likely  to 
be higher in wealthier countries since they 

account  for  16  percent  of  world  popula-
tion but would bear 20–25 percent of the 
global impact costs. But their much greater 
wealth makes them better able to cope with 
such  impacts.  Climate  change  will  wreak 
havoc everywhere—but it will increase the 
gulf  between  developed  and  developing 
countries. 

 

Overview: Changing the Climate for Development 

7

Growth is necessary for greater resilience, 
but  is  not  sufficient.      Economic  growth 
is necessary to reduce poverty and is at the 
heart  of  increasing  resilience  to  climate 
change in poor countries. But growth alone 
is  not  the  answer  to  a  changing  climate. 
Growth is unlikely to be fast enough to help 
the  poorer  countries,  and  it  can  increase 
vulnerability  to  climate  hazards  (box  2). 
Nor  is  growth  usually  equitable  enough 
to  ensure  protection  for  the  poorest  and 
most vulnerable. It does not guarantee that 
key institutions will function well. And if 
it is carbon intensive, it will cause further 
warming.

But  there  is  no  reason  to  think  that  a 
low- carbon  path  must  necessarily  slow 
economic  growth:  many  environmental 
regulations were preceded by warnings of 
massive job losses and industry collapse, few 
of which materialized.28 Clearly, however, 
the transition costs are substantial, notably 
in developing low- carbon technologies and 
infrastructure for energy, transport, hous-
ing, urbanization, and rural development. 
Two arguments often heard are that these 
transition  costs  are  unacceptable  given 
the  urgent  need  for  other  more  immedi-
ate investments in poor countries, and that 
care  should  be  taken  not  to  sacrifice  the 
welfare  of  poor  individuals  today  for  the 
sake of future, possibly richer, generations. 
There is validity to these concerns. But the 
point remains that a strong economic argu-
ment can be made for ambitious action on 
climate change. 

The economics of climate change: 
Reducing climate risk is affordable
Climate  change  is  costly,  whatever  the 
policy  chosen.  Spending  less  on  mitiga-
tion will mean spending more on adapta-
tion  and  accepting  greater  damages:  the 
cost of action must be compared with the 
cost of inaction. But, as discussed in chap-
ter 1, the comparison is complex because 
of the considerable uncertainty about the 
technologies  that  will  be  available  in  the 
future (and their cost), the ability of soci-
eties and ecosystems to adapt (and at what 
price),  the  extent  of  damages  that  higher 
greenhouse gas concentrations will cause, 
and the temperatures that might constitute 

Box 2      Economic growth: Necessary, but not sufficient

Richer countries have more resources 
to cope with climate impacts, and 
better educated and healthier popu-
lations are inherently more resilient. 
But the process of growth may 
exacerbate vulnerability to climate 
change, as in the ever- increasing 
extraction of water for farming, 
industry, and consumption in the 
drought- prone provinces around Bei-
jing, and as in Indonesia, Madagascar, 
Thailand, and U.S. Gulf Coast, where 
protective mangroves have been 
cleared for tourism and shrimp farms. 

Growth is not likely to be fast 

enough for low- income countries 
to afford the kind of protection that 
the rich can afford. Bangladesh and 
the Netherlands are among the 
countries most exposed to rising sea 
levels. Bangladesh is already doing a 
lot to reduce the vulnerability of its 
population, with a highly effective 

community- based early warning sys-
tem for cyclones and a flood forecast-
ing and response program drawing 
on local and international expertise. 
But the scope of possible adaptation 
is limited by resources—its annual 
per capita income is $450. Mean-
while, the Netherlands government 
is planning investments amounting 
to $100 for every Dutch citizen every 
year for the next century. And even 
the Netherlands, with a per capita 
income 100 times that of Bangladesh, 
has begun a program of selective 
relocation away from low- lying areas 
because continuing protection every-
where is unaffordable.

Sources: Barbier and Sathirathai 2004; 
Deltacommissie 2008; FAO 2007; Gov-
ernment of Bangladesh 2008; Guan 
and Hubacek 2008; Karim and Mimura 
2008; Shalizi 2006; and Xia and others 
2007.

thresholds or tipping points beyond which 
catastrophic  impacts  occur  (see  Science 
focus). The comparison is also complicated 
by distributional issues across time (mitiga-
tion incurred by one generation produces 
benefits  for  many  generations  to  come) 
and space (some areas are more vulnerable 
than others, hence more likely to support 
aggressive global mitigation efforts). And 
it is further complicated by the question of 
how to value the loss of life, livelihoods, and 
nonmarket services such as biodiversity and 
ecosystem services. 

Economists have typically tried to iden-
tify the optimal climate policy using cost-
 benefit  analysis.  But  as  box  3  illustrates, 
the  results  are  sensitive  to  the  particular 
assumptions  about  the  remaining  uncer-
tainties, and to the normative choices made 
regarding distributional and measurement 
issues. (A technology optimist, who expects 
the impact of climate change to be relatively 
modest and occurring gradually over time, 
and  who  heavily  discounts  what  happens 
in the future, will favor modest action now. 
And vice versa for a technology pessimist.) 
So economists continue to disagree on the 
economically  or  socially  optimal  carbon 

8 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 0

trajectory.  But  there  are  some  emerging 
agreements. In the major models, the bene-
fits of stabilization exceed the costs at 2.5°C 
warming (though not necessarily at 2°C).29 
And  all  conclude  that  business  as  usual 
(meaning no mitigation efforts whatsoever) 
would be disastrous. 

Advocates of a more gradual reduction 
in emissions conclude that the optimal tar-
get—the one that will produce the lowest 
total cost (meaning the sum of impact and 
mitigation  costs)—could  be  well  above 

3°C.30 But they do note that the incremen-
tal  cost  of  keeping  warming  around  2°C 
would be modest, less than half a percent of 
GDP (see box 3). In other words, the total 
costs of the 2°C option is not much more 
than the total cost of the much less ambi-
tious  economic  optimum.  Why?  Partly 
because  the  savings  from  less  mitigation 
are largely offset by the additional costs of 
more severe impacts or higher adaptation 
spending.31  And  partly  because  the  real 
difference between ambitious and modest 

Box 3      The cost of “climate insurance”

Hof, den Elzen, and van Vuuren examine 
the sensitivity of the optimal climate 
target to assumptions about the time 
horizon, climate sensitivity (the amount 
of warming associated with a doubling 
of carbon dioxide concentrations from 
preindustrial levels), mitigation costs, 
likely damages, and discount rates. To do 
so, they run their integrated assessment 
model (FAIR), varying the model’s settings 
along the range of assumptions found in 
the literature, notably those associated 
with two well- known economists: Nicho-
las Stern, who advocates early and ambi-
tious action; and William Nordhaus, who 
supports a gradual approach to climate 
mitigation.

Not surprisingly, their model results 
in completely different optimal targets 
depending on which assumptions are 
used. (The optimal target is defined as 
the concentration that would result in the 
lowest reduction in the present value of 
global consumption.) The “Stern assump-
tions” (which include relatively high 
climate sensitivity and climate damages, 
and a long time horizon combined with 
low discount rates and mitigation costs) 
produce an optimum peak CO2e concen-
tration of 540 parts per million (ppm). The 
“Nordhaus assumptions” (which assume 
lower climate sensitivity and damages, 
a shorter time horizon, and a higher 
discount rate) produce an optimum of 
750 ppm. In both cases, adaptation costs 
are included implicitly in the climate dam-
age function.

The figure plots the least cost of stabi-
lizing atmospheric concentrations in the 
range of 500 to 800 ppm for the Stern and 
Nordhaus assumptions (reported as the 
difference between the modeled present 

value of consumption and the present 
value of consumption that the world 
would enjoy with no climate change). 
A key point evident in the figure is the 
relative flatness of the consumption loss 
curves over wide ranges of peak CO2e 
concentrations. As a consequence, mov-
ing from 750 ppm to 550 ppm results in 
a relatively small loss in consumption 
(0.3 percent) with the Nordhaus assump-
tions. The results therefore suggest that 
the cost of precautionary mitigation to 
550 ppm is small. With the Stern assump-
tions, a 550 ppm target results in a gain 
in present value of consumption of about 
0.5 percent relative to the 750 ppm 
target. 

A strong motivation for choosing a 
lower peak concentration target is to 
reduce the risk of catastrophic outcomes 
linked to global warming. From this per-
spective, the cost of moving from a high 
target for peak CO2e concentrations to a 
lower target can be viewed as the cost of 
climate insurance—the amount of wel-
fare the world would sacrifice to reduce 
the risk of catastrophe. The analysis of 
Hof, den Elzen, and van Vuuren suggests 
that the cost of climate insurance is mod-
est under a very wide range of assump-
tions about the climate system and the 
cost of mitigating climate change.

Source: Hof, den Elzen, and van Vuuren 2008.

Looking at tradeoffs: The loss in consumption relative to a world without warming for different 
peak CO2e concentrations
Reduction in net present value of consumption (%)
4

3

2

1

0

Stern assumptions
Nordhaus assumptions
Optimum for given assumptions

500

550

600
700
CO2e concentration peak level (ppm)

650

750

800

Source: Adapted from Hof, den Elzen, and van Vuuren 2008, figure 10.
Note: The curves show the percentage loss in the present value of consumption, relative to what it would be 
with a constant climate, as a function of the target for peak CO2e concentrations. The “Stern assumptions” and 
“Nordhaus assumptions” refer to choices about the value of key parameters of the model as explained in the 
text. The dot shows the optimum for each set of assumptions, where the optimum is defined as the greenhouse 
gas concentration that would minimize the global consumption loss resulting from the sum of mitigation costs 
and impact damages.

 

Overview: Changing the Climate for Development 

9

climate  action  lies  with  costs  that  occur 
in  the  future,  which  gradualists  heavily 
discount. 

The large uncertainties about the poten-
tial losses associated with climate change 
and  the  possibility  of  catastrophic  risks 
may well justify earlier and more aggressive 
action than a simple cost- benefit analysis 
would  suggest.  This  incremental  amount 
could be thought of as the insurance pre-
mium to keep climate change within what 
scientists consider a safer band.32 Spending 
less than half a percent of GDP as “climate 
insurance” could well be a socially accept-
able proposition: the world spends 3 percent 
of global GDP on insurance today.33

But  beyond  the  question  of  “climate 
insurance”  is  the  question  of  what  might 
be the resulting mitigation costs—and the 
associated financing needs. In the medium 
term, estimates of mitigation costs in devel-
oping countries range between $140 billion 
and  $175  billion  annually  by  2030.  This 
represents the incremental costs relative to 
a  business-as- usual scenario (table 1). 

Financing needs would be higher, how-
ever, as many of the savings from the lower 
operating  costs  associated  with  renewable 
energy  and  energy  efficiency  gains  only 
materialize over time.  McKinsey, for exam-
ple, estimates that while the incremental cost 
in 2030 would be $175 billion, the upfront 
investments  required  would  amount  to 
$563 billion over and above  business-as- usual 
investment needs.  McKinsey does point out 
that  this  amounts  to  a  roughly  3  percent 
increase in global  business-as- usual invest-
ments, and as such is likely to be within the 
capacity of global financial markets.34 How-
ever, financing has historically been a con-
straint in developing countries, resulting in 
underinvestment  in  infrastructure  as  well 
as a bias toward energy choices with lower 
upfront capital costs, even when such choices 
eventually result in higher overall costs. The 
search  for  suitable  financing  mechanisms 
must therefore be a priority.

What about the longer term? Mitigation 
costs will increase over time to cope with 
growing  population  and  energy  needs—
but so will income. As a result, the present 
value of global mitigation costs to 2100 is 
expected  to  remain  well  below  1  percent 
of  global  GDP,  with  estimates  ranging 

between 0.3 percent and 0.7 percent (table 
2). Developing countries’ mitigation costs 
would represent a higher share of their own 
GDP,  however,  ranging  between  0.5  and 
1.2 percent. 

There are far fewer estimates of needed 
adaptation investments, and those that exist 
are not readily comparable. Some look only 
at the cost of climate- proofing foreign aid 
projects. Others include only certain sec-
tors. Very few try to look at overall country 
needs (see chapter 6). A recent World Bank 
study  that  attempts  to  tackle  these  issues 
suggests that the investments needed could 
be  between  $75  billion  and  $100  billion 
annually in developing countries alone.35

Table 1    Incremental mitigation costs and associated financing requirements for a 2°C 
 trajectory: What will be needed in developing countries by 2030?
Constant 2005$

175

384

139

565
563
264

Mitigation cost

Financing requirement

Model
IEA ETP
McKinsey
MESSAGE
MiniCAM
REMIND
Sources: IEA ETP: IEA 2008c; McKinsey: McKinsey & Company 2009 and additional data provided by McKinsey 
(J. Dinkel) for 2030, using a dollar-to-euro exchange rate of $1.25 to €1; MESSAGE: IIASA 2009 and additional 
data provided by V. Krey; MiniCAM: Edmonds and others 2008 and additional data provided by J. Edmonds and 
L. Clarke; REMIND: Knopf and others, forthcoming and additional data provided by B. Knopf. 
Note: Both mitigation costs and associated financing requirements are incremental relative to a business-as-
usual baseline. Estimates are for the stabilization of greenhouse gases at 450 ppm CO2e, which would provide a 
40–50 percent chance of staying below 2°C warming by 2100 (Schaeffer and others 2008; Hare and Meinshausen 
2006). IEA ETP is the model developed by the International Energy Agency, and McKinsey is the proprietary 
methodology developed by McKinsey & Company; MESSAGE, MiniCAM, and REMIND are the peer-reviewed 
models of the International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, the Pacific Northwest Laboratory, and the 
Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research, respectively. McKinsey includes all sectors; other models 
only include mitigation efforts in the energy sector. MiniCAM reports $168 billion in mitigation costs in 2035, in 
constant 2000 dollars; this figure has been interpolated to 2030 and converted to 2005 dollars. 

Table 2    In the long term, what will it cost? Present value of mitigation costs to 2100

Present value of mitigation costs to 2100 for 450 ppm CO2e 

(% of GDP)

World

Developing countries

0.7
0.6
0.3
0.7
0.4
0.4

Models
DICE
FAIR
MESSAGE
MiniCAM 
PAGE
REMIND
Sources: DICE: Nordhaus 2008 (estimated from table 5.3 and figure 5.3); FAIR: Hof, den Elzen, and van Vuuren 
2008; MESSAGE: IIASA 2009; MiniCAM: Edmonds and others 2008 and personal communications; PAGE: Hope 
2009 and personal communications; REMIND: Knopf and others, forthcoming. 
Note: DICE, FAIR, MESSAGE, MiniCAM, PAGE, and REMIND are peer-reviewed models. Estimates are for the 
stabilization of greenhouse gases at 450 ppm CO2e, which would provide a 40–50 percent chance of staying 
below 2°C warming by 2100 (Schaeffer and others 2008; Hare and Meinshausen 2006). The FAIR model result 
reports abatement costs using the low settings (see table 3 in Hof, den Elzen, and van Vuuren 2008).

0.5
1.2
0.9

10 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 0

A climate- smart world is within 
reach if we act now, act together, 
and act differently
Even  if  the  incremental  cost  of  reducing 
climate risk is modest and the investment 
needs  far  from  prohibitive,  stabilizing 
warming  around  2°C  above  preindustrial 
temperatures  is  extremely  ambitious.  By 
2050 emissions would need to be 50 percent 
below 1990 levels and be zero or negative by 
2100 (figure 5). This would require imme-
diate and Herculean efforts: within the next 
20  years  global  emissions  would  have  to 
fall, compared to a business- as- usual path, 
by an amount equivalent to total emissions 
from high- income countries today. In addi-
tion, even 2°C warming would also require 
costly adaptation—changing the kinds of 
risks  people  prepare  for;  where  they  live; 
what  they  eat;  and  the  way  they  design, 
develop,  and  manage  agroecological  and 
urban systems.36

So  both  the  mitigation  and  the  adap-
tation  challenges  are  substantial.  But  the 

Figure 5      What does the way forward look like? Two options among many: Business as usual 
or aggressive mitigation

Projected annual total global emissions (GtCO2e)
160

140

120

100

80

60

40

20

0

–20

–40

Business as
usual (~5°C)
2°C trajectory

2000

2010

2020

2030

2040

2060

2070

2080

2090

2100

2050
Year

Source: Clarke and others, forthcoming.
Note: The top band shows the range of estimates across models (GTEM, IMAGE, MESSAGE, MiniCAM) for emis-
sions under a business- as- usual scenario. The lower band shows a trajectory that could yield a concentration 
of 450 ppm of CO2e (with a 50 percent chance of limiting warming to less than 2°C). Greenhouse gas emissions 
include CO2, CH4, and N2O. Negative emissions (eventually required by the 2°C path) imply that the annual rate of 
emissions is lower than the rate of uptake and storage of carbon through natural processes (for example, plant 
growth) and engineered processes (for example, growing biofuels and when burning them, sequestering the CO2 
underground). GTEM, IMAGE, MESSAGE, and MiniCAM are the integrated assessment models of the Australian 
Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics, the Netherlands Environmental Assessment Agency, Interna-
tional Institute of Applied Systems Analysis, and Pacific Northwest National Laboratory.

hypothesis of this Report is that they can be 
tackled through climate- smart policies that 
entail acting now, acting together (or glob-
ally),  and  acting  differently.  Acting  now, 
because of the tremendous inertia in both 
climate and socioeconomic systems. Acting 
together,  to  keep  costs  down  and  protect 
the most vulnerable. And acting differently, 
because  a  climate- smart  world  requires  a 
transformation of our energy, food produc-
tion, and risk management systems. 

Act now: Inertia means that  
today’s actions will determine 
tomorrow’s options
The climate system exhibits substantial iner-
tia (figure 6). Concentrations lag emission 
reductions: CO2 remains in the atmosphere 
for decades to centuries, so a decline in emis-
sions  takes  time  to  affect  concentrations. 
Temperatures lag concentrations: tempera-
tures will continue increasing for a few cen-
turies after concentrations have stabilized. 
And sea levels lag temperature reductions: 
the thermal expansion of the ocean from an 
increase in temperature will last 1,000 years 
or more while the sea- level rise from melting 
ice could last several millennia.37

The  dynamics  of  the  climate  system 
therefore  limit  how  much  future  mitiga-
tion can be substituted for efforts today. For 
example,  stabilizing  the  climate  near  2°C 
(around 450 ppm of CO2e) would require 
global emissions to begin declining immedi-
ately by about 1.5 percent a year. A five- year 
delay would have to be offset by faster emis-
sion declines. And even longer delays simply 
could not be offset: a ten- year delay in miti-
gation would most likely make it impossible 
to keep warming from exceeding 2°C.38

Inertia is also present in the built envi-
ronment,  limiting  flexibility  in  reducing 
greenhouse  gases  or  designing  adaptation 
responses.  Infrastructure  investments  are 
lumpy,  concentrated  in  time  rather  than 
evenly  distributed.39  They  are  also  long-
 lived: 15–40 years for factories and power 
plants, 40–75 years for road, rail, and power 
distribution networks. Decisions on land use 
and urban form—the structure and density 
of cities—have impacts lasting more than a 
century. And long- lived infrastructure trig-
gers investments in associated capital (cars 

 

Overview: Changing the Climate for Development 

11

for  low- density  cities;  gas- fired  heat  and 
power generation capacity in response to gas 
pipelines), locking economies into lifestyles 
and energy consumption patterns.

The inertia in physical capital is nowhere 
close  to  that  in  the  climate  system  and  is 
more likely to affect the cost rather than the 
feasibility of achieving a particular emission 
goal—but it is substantial. The opportuni-
ties to shift from high- carbon to low- carbon 
capital stocks are not evenly distributed in 
time.40 China is expected to double its build-
ing stock between 2000 and 2015. And the 
coal- fired power plants proposed around the 
world over the next 25 years are so numer-
ous that their lifetime CO2 emissions would 
equal  those  of  all  coal- burning  activities 
since the beginning of the industrial era.41 
Only those facilities located close enough to 
the storage sites could be retrofitted for car-
bon capture and storage (if and when that 
technology becomes commercially available: 
see chapters 4 and 7). Retiring these plants 
before the end of their useful life—if changes 
in the climate force such action—would be 
extremely costly. 

Inertia  is  also  a  factor  in  research  and 
development (R&D) and in the deployment 
of  new  technologies.  New  energy  sources 
have  historically  taken  about  50  years  to 
reach  half  their  potential.42  Substantial 
investments  in  R&D  are  needed  now  to 
ensure that new technologies are available 
and  rapidly  penetrating  the  marketplace 
in  the  near  future.  This  could  require  an 
additional  $100  billion  to  $700  billion 
annually.43  Innovation  is  also  needed  in 
transport,  building,  water  management, 
urban  design,  and  many  other  sectors 
that affect climate change and are in turn 
affected by climate change—so innovation 
is a critical issue for adaptation as well. 

Inertia  is  also  present  in  the  behavior 
of  individuals  and  organizations.  Despite 
greater public concern, behaviors have not 
changed  much.  Available  energy- efficient 
technologies that are effective and pay for 
themselves are not adopted. R&D in renew-
ables is underfunded. Farmers face incen-
tives to over- irrigate their crops, which in 
turn affects energy use, because energy is 
a major input in water provision and treat-
ment. Building continues in hazard- prone 

Figure 6      Climate impacts are long- lived: Rising temperatures and sea levels associated with 
higher concentrations of CO2 

Annual CO2 emissions

CO2 concentration

Temperature

Sea-level rise

Time to reach
equilibrium

CO2 emissions peak:
0 to 100 years

CO2 stabilization:
100 to 300 years

Temperature
stabilization:
a few centuries

Sea-level rise due
to ice melting:
several millennia

Sea-level rise due
to thermal expansion:
centuries to millennia

Today

100
years

1,000
years

Source: WDR team based on IPCC 2001.
Note: Stylized figures; the magnitudes in each panel are intended for illustrative purposes.

areas,  and  infrastructure  continues  to 
be  designed  for  the  climate  of  the  past.44 
Changing  behaviors  and  organizational 
goals  and  standards  is  difficult  and  usu-
ally slow, but it has been done before (see 
chapter 8).

Act together: For equity and efficiency
Collective  action  is  needed  to  effectively 
tackle  climate  change  and  reduce  the 
costs of mitigation.45 It is also essential to 

12 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 0

facilitate adaptation, notably through bet-
ter risk management and safety nets to pro-
tect the most vulnerable. 

To keep costs down and fairly distributed.    
Affordability  hinges  on  mitigation  being 
done cost effectively. When estimating the 
mitigation costs discussed earlier, model-
ers  assume  that  greenhouse  gas  emission 
reductions  occur  wherever  and  whenever 
they  are  cheapest.  Wherever  means  pur-
suing  greater  energy  efficiency  and  other 
low- cost  options  to  mitigate  in  whatever 
country  or  sector  the  opportunity  arises. 
Whenever  entails  timing  investments  in 
new  equipment,  infrastructure,  or  farm-
ing and forestry projects to minimize costs 
and  keep  economies  from  getting  locked 
into high- carbon conditions that would be 
expensive to alter later. Relaxing the wher-
ever, whenever rule—as would necessarily 
happen in the real world, especially in the 
absence of a global carbon price—dramat-
ically increases the cost of mitigation. 

The implication is that there are enor-
mous gains to global efforts—on this point, 
analysts are unanimous. If any country or 
group of countries does not mitigate, oth-
ers must reach into higher- cost mitigation 
options to achieve a given global target. For 
example, by one estimate, the nonparticipa-
tion of the United States, which is respon-
sible for 20 percent of world emissions, in 
the  Kyoto  Protocol  increases  the  cost  of 
achieving  the  original  target  by  about  60 
percent.46

Both  equity  and  efficiency  argue  for 
developing financial instruments that sepa-
rate who finances mitigation from where it 
happens. Otherwise, the substantial miti-
gation  potential  in  developing  countries 
(65–70  percent  of  emission  reductions, 
adding up to 45–70 percent of global miti-
gation  investments  in  2030)47  will  not  be 
fully  tapped,  substantially  increasing  the 
cost  of  achieving  a  given  target.  Taking 
it to the extreme, a lack of financing that 
results  in  fully  postponing  mitigation  in 
developing  countries  to  2020  could  more 
than double the cost of stabilizing around 
2°C.48 With mitigation costs estimated to 
add up to $4 trillion to $25 trillion49 over 
the next century, the losses implied by such 

delays are so large that there are clear eco-
nomic benefits for high- income countries 
committed to limiting dangerous climate 
change to finance early action in develop-
ing  countries.50  More  generally,  the  total 
cost of mitigation could be greatly reduced 
through  well- performing  carbon- finance 
mechanisms, financial transfers, and price 
signals  that  help  approximate  the  out-
come produced by the whenever, wherever 
assumption. 

To manage risk better and protect the poor-
est.      In  many  places  previously  uncom-
mon risks are becoming more widespread. 
Consider floods, once rare but now increas-
ingly common, in Africa and the first hur-
ricane ever recorded in the South Atlantic, 
which hit Brazil in 2004.51 Reducing disas-
ter risk—through community- based early 
warning  systems,  climate  monitoring, 
safer infrastructure, and strengthened and 
enforced zoning and building codes, along 
with  other  measures—becomes  more 
important  in  a  changing  climate.  Finan-
cial and institutional innovations can also 
limit risks to health and livelihoods. This 
requires  domestic  action—but  domestic 
action will be greatly enhanced if it is sup-
ported by international finance and sharing 
of best- practice. 

But as discussed in chapter 2, actively 
reducing risk will never be enough because 
there  will  always  be  a  residual  risk  that 
must  also  be  managed  through  better 
preparedness  and  response  mechanisms. 
The implication is that development may 
need  to  be  done  differently,  with  much 
greater emphasis on climate and weather 
risk.  International  cooperation  can  help, 
for  example,  through  pooling  efforts  to 
improve the production of climate infor-
mation and its broad availability (see chap-
ter 7) and through sharing best practices to 
cope with the changing and more variable 
climate.52

Insurance  is  another  instrument  to 
manage the residual risk, but it has its limi-
tations. Climate risk is increasing along a 
trend  and  tends  to  affect  entire  regions 
or large groups of people simultaneously, 
making  it  difficult  to  insure.  And  even 
with  insurance,  losses  associated  with 

 

Overview: Changing the Climate for Development 

13

catastrophic  events  (such  as  widespread 
flooding  or  severe  droughts)  cannot  be 
fully  absorbed  by  individuals,  communi-
ties, and the private sector. In a more vola-
tile climate, governments will increasingly 
become insurers of last resort and have an 
implicit responsibility to support disaster 
recovery and reconstruction. This requires 
that governments protect their own liquid-
ity in times of crisis, particularly poorer or 
smaller countries that are financially vul-
nerable to the impacts of climate change: 
Hurricane Ivan caused damages equivalent 
to 200 percent of Grenada’s GDP.53 Having 
immediate  funds  available  to  jump- start 
the  rehabilitation  and  recovery  process 
reduces the derailing effect of disasters on 
development. 

Multicountry facilities and reinsurance 
can help. The Caribbean Catastrophe Risk 
Insurance  Facility  spreads  risk  among  16 
Caribbean countries, harnessing the rein-
surance  market  to  provide  liquidity  to 
governments quickly following destructive 
hurricanes and earthquakes.54 Such facili-
ties may need help from the international 
community. More generally, high- income 
countries  have  a  critical  role  in  ensur-
ing that developing countries have timely 
access to the needed resources when shocks 
hit, whether by supporting such facilities or 
through the direct provision of emergency 
funding.

But  insurance  and  emergency  fund-
ing  are  only  one  part  of  a  broader  risk-
 management  framework.  Social  policies 
will  become  more  important  in  helping 
people cope with more frequent and per-
sistent  threats  to  their  livelihoods.  Social 
policies  reduce  economic  and  social  vul-
nerability and increase resilience to climate 
change.  A  healthy,  well- educated  popula-
tion  with  access  to  social  protection  can 
better cope with climate shocks and climate 
change. Social protection policies will need 
to be strengthened where they exist, devel-
oped where they are lacking, and designed 
so that they can be expanded quickly after 
a  shock.55  Creating  social  safety  nets  in 
countries that do not yet have them is criti-
cal,  and  Bangladesh  shows  how  it  can  be 
done even in very poor countries (box 4). 
Development  agencies  could  help  spread 

Box 4      Safety nets: From supporting incomes to reducing 
vulnerability to climate change

Bangladesh has had a long history of 
cyclones and floods, and these could 
become more frequent or intense. The 
government has safety nets that can 
be tailored fairly easily to respond to 
the effects of climate change. The best 
examples are the vulnerable- group 
feeding program, the food- for- work 
program, and the new employment 
guarantee program.

The vulnerable- group feeding 

program runs at all times and usually 
covers more than 2 million house-
holds. But it is designed to be ramped 
up in response to a crisis: following 
the cyclone in 2008, the program 
was expanded to close to 10 million 
households. Targeting, done by the 
lowest level of local government and 
monitored by the lowest administra-
tive level, is considered fairly good. 
The food- for- work program, which 
normally operates during the low agri-
culture season, is ramped up during 
emergencies. It too is run in collabo-
ration with local governments, but 
program management has been sub-
contracted to nongovernmental orga-
nizations in many parts of the country. 
Workers who show up at the work site 
are generally given work, but there is 
usually not enough to go around, so 
the work is rationed through rotation.

The new employment guarantee 

program provides those with no 
other means of income (including 
access to other safety nets) with 
employment for up to 100 days at 
wages linked to the low- season 
agricultural wage. The guarantee 
element ensures that those who 
need help get it. If work cannot be 
provided, the individual is entitled to 
40 days of wages at the full rate and 
then 60 days at half the rate. 

Bangladesh’s programs, and others 
in India and elsewhere, suggest some 
lessons. Rapid response requires rapid 
access to funding, targeting rules to 
identify people in need—chronic 
poor or those temporarily in need—
and procedures agreed on well before 
a shock hits. A portfolio of “shovel-
 ready” projects can be preidentified 
as particularly relevant to increasing 
resilience (water storage, irrigation 
systems, reforestation, and embank-
ments, which can double as roads in 
low- lying areas). Experience from India 
and Bangladesh also suggests the 
need for professional guidance (engi-
neers) in the selection, design, and 
implementation of the public works 
and for equipment and supplies. 

Source: Contributed by Qaiser Khan.

successful models of social safety nets and 
tailor  them  to  the  needs  created  by  the 
changing climate. 

To ensure adequate food and water for all 
countries.      International action is critical 
to manage the water and food security chal-
lenges posed by the combination of climate 
change  and  population  pressures—even 
with  improved  agricultural  productivity 
and  water- use  efficiency.  One  fifth  of  the 
world’s freshwater renewable resources are 
shared between countries.56 That includes 
261  transboundary  river  basins,  home  to 
40 percent of the world’s people and gov-
erned by over 150 international treaties that 
do not always include all riparian states.57 
If countries are to manage these resources 

14 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 0

more intensively, they will have to scale up 
cooperation on international water bodies 
through  new  international  treaties  or  the 
revision  of  existing  ones.  The  system  of 
water allocation will need to be reworked 
due to the increased variability, and coop-
eration can be effective only when all ripar-
ian countries are involved and responsible 
for managing the watercourse. 

Similarly, increasing arid conditions in 
countries that already import a large share 
of  their  food,  along  with  more  frequent 
extreme events and growth in income and 
population, will increase the need for food 
imports.58  But  global  food  markets  are 
thin—relatively few countries export food 
crops.59 So small changes in either supply or 
demand can have big effects on prices. And 
small  countries  with  little  market  power 
can find it difficult to secure reliable food 
imports. 

To ensure adequate water and nutrition 
for  all,  the  world  will  have  to  rely  on  an 
improved trade system less prone to large 
price shifts. Facilitating access to markets 
for developing countries by reducing trade 
barriers,  weatherproofing  transport  (for 
example, by increasing access to year- round 
roads), improving procurement methods, 

Figure 7     Global CO2e emissions by sector: Energy, 
but also agriculture and forestry, are major sources

Waste and
wastewater

3%

Power
26%

Land-use
change and

forestry

17%

Transportation

13%

Residential and

commercial buildings

8%

Agriculture

14%

Industry

19%

Source: IPCC 2007a, figure 2.1.
Note: Share of anthropogenic (human- caused) greenhouse 
gas emissions in 2004 in CO2e (see figure 1 for the definition 
of CO2e). Emissions associated with land use and land- use 
change, such as agricultural fertilizers, livestock, deforesta-
tion, and burning, account for about 30 percent of total green-
house gas emissions. And uptakes of carbon into forests and 
other vegetation and soils constitute an important carbon 
sink, so improved land- use management is essential in efforts 
to reduce greenhouse gases in the atmosphere.

and providing better information on both 
climate and market indexes can make food 
trade more efficient and prevent large price 
shifts.  Price  spikes  can  also  be  prevented 
by  investing  in  strategic  stockpiles  of  key 
grains and foodstuffs and in risk- hedging 
instruments.60

Act differently: To transform energy, 
food production, and decision- making 
systems
Achieving the needed emission reductions 
will require a transformation both of our 
energy system and of the way we manage 
agriculture, land use, and forests (figure 7). 
These transformations must also incorpo-
rate the needed adaptations to a changing 
climate.  Whether  they  involve  deciding 
which crop to plant or how much hydro-
electric  power  to  develop,  decisions  will 
have to be robust to the variety of climate 
outcomes we could face in the future rather 
than being optimally adapted to the climate 
of the past.

To ignite a veritable energy revolution.      If 
financing is available, can emissions be cut 
sufficiently deeply or quickly without sacri-
ficing growth? Most models suggest that they 
can, although none find it easy (see chapter 
4).  Dramatically  higher  energy  efficiency, 
stronger  management  of  energy  demand, 
and  large- scale  deployment  of  existing 
low- CO2- emitting electricity sources could 
produce about half the emission reductions 
needed to put the world on a path toward 
2°C (figure 8). Many have substantial co- 
benefits but are hampered by institutional 
and financial constraints that have proven 
hard to overcome. 

So  known  technologies  and  practices 
can buy time—if they can be scaled up. For 
that to happen, appropriate energy pricing 
is  absolutely  essential.  Cutting  subsidies 
and increasing fuel taxes are politically dif-
ficult,  but  the  recent  spike  and  fall  in  oil 
and gas prices make the time opportune for 
doing so. Indeed, European countries used 
the  1974  oil  crisis  to  introduce  high  fuel 
taxes. As a result, fuel demand is about half 
what it likely would have been had prices 
been close to those in the United States.61 
Similarly, electricity prices are twice as high 

 

Overview: Changing the Climate for Development 

15

in Europe as they are in the United States 
and  electricity  consumption  per  capita  is 
half.62  Prices  help  explain  why  European 
emissions per capita (10 tons of CO2e) are 
less  than  half  those  in  the  United  States  
(23  tons).63  Global  energy  subsidies  in 
developing  countries  were  estimated  at 
$310  billion  in  2007,64  disproportionately 
benefiting  higher- income  populations. 
Rationalizing energy subsidies to target the 
poor and encourage sustainable energy and 
transport  could  reduce  global  CO2  emis-
sions and provide a host of other benefits. 
But pricing is only one tool for advanc-
ing the energy- efficiency agenda, which suf-
fers from market failures, high transaction 
costs,  and  financing  constraints.  Norms, 
regulatory reform, and financial incentives 
are  also  needed—and  are  cost- effective. 
Efficiency standards and labeling programs 
cost about 1.5 cents a kilowatt- hour, much 
less  than  any  electricity  supply  options,65 
while industrial energy performance targets 

spur innovation and increase competitive-
ness.66 And because utilities are potentially 
effective  delivery  channels  for  making 
homes, commercial buildings, and indus-
try more energy efficient, incentives have to 
be created for utilities to conserve energy. 
This can be done by decoupling a utility’s 
profits  from  its  gross  sales,  with  profits 
instead  increasing  with  energy  conserva-
tion successes. Such an approach is behind 
California’s  remarkable  energy  conserva-
tion  program;  its  adoption  has  become  a 
condition for any U.S. state to receive fed-
eral energy- efficiency grants from the 2009 
fiscal stimulus.

For renewable energy, long- term power-
 purchase  agreements  within  a  regulatory 
framework that ensures fair and open grid 
access for independent power producers will 
attract investors. This can be done through 
mandatory purchases of renewable energy at 
a fixed price (known as a feed- in tariff) as in 
Germany and Spain; or through renewable 

Figure 8     The full portfolio of existing measures and advanced technologies, not a silver bullet, will be needed to get the world onto a 2°C path

CO2e (gigatons)
70

60

50

40

30

20

10

a l

u

s

s   u

s   a

s

e

s i n

u

B

2°C trajectory

Demand reduction

Renewables 
(hydro, solar, wind, 
bioenergy)

Nuclear

Fossil CCS

Forest sinks

Other greenhouse gases 
(CH4, N2O, F-gases)

Fossil fuel switch
(coal to gas)

0
2000

2010

2020

2030

Source: WDR team with data from IIASA 2009.

2040
Year

2050

2060

2070

2080

16 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 0

portfolio standards that require a minimum 
share of power to come from renewables, as 
in many U.S. states.67 Importantly, predict-
ably higher demand is likely to reduce the 
costs  of  renewables,  with  benefits  for  all 
countries.  In  fact,  experience  shows  that 
expected demand can have an even higher 
impact  than  technological  innovation  in 
driving down prices (figure 9). 

But new technologies will be indispens-
able: every energy model reviewed for this 
Report concludes that it is impossible to get 
onto  the  2°C  trajectory  with  only  energy 
efficiency  and  the  diffusion  of  existing 
technologies. New or emerging technolo-
gies,  such  as  carbon  capture  and  storage, 
second- generation biofuels, and solar pho-
tovoltaics, are also critical. 

Few  of  the  needed  new  technologies 
are  available  off  the  shelf.  Ongoing  car-
bon  capture  and  storage  demonstration 
projects currently store only about 4 mil-
lion tons of CO2 annually.68 Fully proving 
the viability of this technology in different 
regions and settings will require about 30 
full- size plants at a total cost of $75 billion 
to $100 billion.69 Storage capacity of 1 bil-
lion tons a year of CO2 is necessary by 2020 
to stay within 2°C warming. 

Investments in biofuels research are also 
needed.  Expanded  production  using  the 
current  generation  of  biofuels  would  dis-
place large areas of natural forests and grass-
lands and compete with the production of 
food.70 Second- generation biofuels that rely 

Figure 9      High expected demand drove cost reductions in solar photovoltaics by allowing for 
larger- scale production

Cost reduction by factor ($/watt)

$25

$20

$15

$10

$5

0

$25.30

Expected demand effect

43%

R&D

30%

1979 price

Plant size

Efficiency

22%

Other

$3.68

5%

Unexplained

2001 price

Source: Adapted from Nemet 2006.
Note: Bars show the portion of the reduction in the cost of solar photovoltaic power, from 1979 to 2001, 
accounted for by different factors such as plant size (which is determined by expected demand) and improved 
efficiency (which is driven by innovation from R&D). The “other” category includes reductions in the price of 
the key input silicon (12 percent) and a number of much smaller factors (including reduced quantities of silicon 
needed for a given energy output, and lower rates of discarded products due to manufacturing error).

on nonfood crops may reduce competition 
with  agriculture  by  using  more  marginal 
lands. But they could still lead to the loss of 
pasture land and grassland ecosystems and 
compete for water resources.71 

Breakthroughs  in  climate- smart  tech-
nologies  will  require  substantially  more 
spending for research, development, dem-
onstration, and deployment. As mentioned 
earlier, global public and private spending 
on  energy  RD&D  is  modest,  both  rela-
tive to estimated needs and in comparison 
with what innovative industries invest. The 
modest  spending  means  slow  progress, 
with  renewable  energy  still  accounting 
for only 0.4 percent of all patents.72 More-
over,  developing  countries  need  access  to 
these  technologies,  which  requires  boost-
ing domestic capacity to identify and adapt 
new technologies as well as strengthening 
international  mechanisms  for  technology 
transfer (see chapter 7).

To transform land and water management 
and manage competing demands.      By 2050 
the world will need to feed 3 billion more 
people and cope with the changing dietary 
demands of a richer population (richer peo-
ple eat more meat, a resource- intensive way 
to obtain proteins). This must be done in a 
harsher climate with more storms, droughts, 
and floods, while also incorporating agricul-
ture in the mitigation agenda—because agri-
culture drives about half the deforestation 
every year and directly contributes 14 per-
cent of overall emissions. And ecosystems, 
already weakened by pollution, population 
pressure,  and  overuse,  are  further  threat-
ened by climate change. Producing more and 
protecting better in a harsher climate while 
reducing greenhouse gas emissions is a tall 
order. It will require managing the compet-
ing demands for land and water from agri-
culture, forests and other ecosystems, cities, 
and energy. 

So agriculture will have to become more 
productive, getting more crop per drop and 
per  hectare—but  without  the  increase  in 
environmental  costs  currently  associated 
with intensive agriculture. And societies will 
have to put much more effort into protecting 
ecosystems. To avoid pulling more land into 
cultivation and spreading into “unmanaged” 

 

Overview: Changing the Climate for Development 

17

land  and  forests,  agricultural  productivity 
will have to increase, perhaps by as much as 
1.8 percent a year compared to 1 percent a 
year without climate change.73 Most of that 
increase  will  have  to  occur  in  developing 
countries because agriculture in high- income 
countries is already close to maximum fea-
sible  yields.  Fortunately,  new  technologies 
and  practices  are  emerging  (box  5).  Some 
improve productivity and resilience as they 
sequester carbon in the soil and reduce the 
nutrient runoff that damages aquatic ecosys-
tems. But more research is needed to under-
stand how to scale them up.

Increased efforts to conserve species and 
ecosystems will need to be reconciled with 
food production (whether agriculture or fish-
eries). Protected areas—already 12 percent 
of the earth’s land but only a tiny portion of 
the ocean and fresh water system—cannot 
be the only solution to maintaining biodi-
versity, because species ranges are likely to 
shift outside the boundaries of such areas. 
Instead  ecoagricultural  landscapes,  where 
farmers create mosaics of cultivated and nat-
ural habitats, could facilitate the migration 

of  species.  While  benefiting  biodiversity, 
ecoagriculture practices also increase agri-
culture’s resilience to climate change along 
with  farm  productivity  and  incomes.  In 
Central America farms using these practices 
suffered half or less of the damage inflicted 
on others by Hurricane Mitch.75

Better management of water is essential 
for agriculture to adapt to climate change. 
River  basins  will  be  losing  natural  water 
storage  in  ice  and  snow  and  in  reduced 
aquifer recharge, just as warmer tempera-
tures  increase  evaporation.  Water  can  be 
used more efficiently through a combina-
tion of new and existing technologies, bet-
ter  information,  and  more  sensible  use. 
And that can be done even in poor coun-
tries and among small farmers: in Andhra 
Pradesh, India, a simple scheme, in which 
farmers monitor their rain and groundwa-
ter  and  learn  new  farming  and  irrigation 
techniques, has caused 1 million farmers to 
voluntarily reduce groundwater consump-
tion to sustainable levels.75

Efforts  to  increase  water  resources 
include dams, but dams can be only a part 

Box 5      Promising approaches that are good for farmers and good for the environment

Promising practices
Cultivation practices such as zero- tillage 
(which involves injecting seeds directly 
into the soil instead of sowing on 
ploughed fields) combined with residue 
management and proper fertilizer use can 
help to preserve soil moisture, maximize 
water infiltration, increase carbon storage, 
minimize nutrient runoff, and raise yields. 
Now being used on about 2 percent of 
global arable land, this practice is likely 
to expand. Zero tillage has mostly been 
adopted in high- income countries, but 
is expanding rapidly in countries such as 
India. In 2005, in the rice–wheat farming 
system of the Indo- Gangetic plain, farm-
ers adopted zero- tillage on 1.6 million 
hectares; by 2008, 20–25 percent of the 
wheat in two Indian states (Haryana and 
Punjab) was cultivated using minimum 
tillage. And in Brazil, about 45 percent of 
cropland is farmed using these practices.
Promising technologies
Precision agriculture techniques for tar-
geted, optimally timed application of the 

minimum necessary fertilizer and water 
could help the intensive, high- input farms 
of high- income countries, Asia, and Latin 
America to reduce emissions and nutrient 
runoff, and increase water- use efficiency. 
New technologies that limit emissions 
of gaseous nitrogen include controlled-
 release nitrogen through the deep place-
ment of supergranules of fertilizer or 
the addition of biological inhibitors to 
fertilizers. Remote sensing technologies 
for communicating precise information 
about soil moisture and irrigation needs 
can eliminate unnecessary application 
of water. Some of these technologies 
may remain too expensive for most 
developing- country farmers (and could 
require payment schemes for soil carbon 
conservation or changes in water pric-
ing). But others such as biological inhibi-
tors require no extra labor and improve 
productivity. 
Learning from the past
Another approach building on a tech-
nology used by indigenous peoples in 

the Amazon rain forest could sequester 
carbon on a huge scale while improv-
ing soil productivity. Burning wet crop 
residues or manure (biomass) at low 
temperatures in the almost complete 
absence of oxygen produces biochar, 
a charcoal- type solid with a very high 
carbon content. Biochar is highly stable 
in soil, locking in the carbon that would 
otherwise be released by simply burning 
the biomass or allowing it to decom-
pose. In industrial settings this process 
transforms half the carbon into biofuel 
and the other half into biochar. Recent 
analysis suggests biochar may be able to 
store carbon for centuries, possibly mil-
lennia, and more studies are underway 
to verify this property.

Sources: de la Torre, Fajnzylber, and Nash 
2008; Derpsch and Friedrich 2009; Eren-
stein 2009; Erenstein and Laxmi 2008; Leh-
mann 2007; Wardle, Nilsson, and Zackrisson 
2008.

18 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 0

of  the  solution,  and  they  will  need  to  be 
designed flexibly to deal with more variable 
rainfall.  Other  approaches  include  using 
recycled  water  and  desalination,  which, 
while costly, can be worthwhile for high-
 value use in coastal areas, especially if pow-
ered by renewable energy (see chapter 3). 

But  changing  practices  and  technolo-
gies can be a challenge, particularly in poor, 
rural, and isolated settings, where introduc-
ing new ways of doing things requires work-
ing with a large number of very risk- averse 
actors located off the beaten track and fac-
ing  different  constraints  and  incentives. 
Extension  agencies  usually  have  limited 
resources to support farmers and are staffed 
with engineers and agronomists rather than 
trained communicators. Taking advantage 
of emerging technologies will also require 
bringing higher technical education to rural 
communities. 

To  transform  decision- making  processes: 
Adaptive policy making to tackle a riskier and 
more complex environment.      Infrastructure 
design and planning, insurance pricing, and 
numerous private decisions—from planting 
and harvesting dates to siting factories and 
designing buildings—have long been based 
on stationarity, the idea that natural systems 
fluctuate within an unchanging envelope of 
variability. With climate change, stationarity 
is dead.76 Decision makers now have to con-
tend with the changing climate compound-
ing  the  uncertainties  they  already  faced. 
More decisions have to be made in a context 
of  changing  trends  and  greater  variability, 
not to mention possible carbon constraints.

The  approaches  being  developed  and 
applied by public and private agencies, cities, 
and countries around the world from Aus-
tralia to the United Kingdom are showing 
that it is possible to increase resilience even 
in the absence of expensive and sophisticated 
modeling of future climate.77 Of course bet-
ter  projections  and  less  uncertainty  help, 
but these new approaches tend to focus on 
strategies that are “robust” across a range of 
possible future outcomes, not just optimal 
for a particular set of expectations (box 6).78 
Robust strategies can be as simple as pick-
ing seed varieties that do well in a range of 
climates. 

Robust  strategies  typically  build  flex-
ibility, diversification, and redundancy in 
response  capacities  (see  chapter  2).  They 
favor  “no- regrets”  actions  that  provide 
benefits  (such  as  water  and  energy  effi-
ciency) even without climate change. They 
also  favor  reversible  and  flexible  options 
to keep the cost of wrong decisions as low 
as possible (restrictive urban planning for 
coastal  areas  can  easily  be  relaxed  while 
forced retreats or increased protection can 
be difficult and costly). They include safety 
margins to increase resilience (paying the 
marginal costs of building a higher bridge 
or  one  that  can  be  flooded,  or  extending 
safety  nets  to  groups  on  the  brink).  And 
they rely on long- term planning based on 
scenario  analysis  and  an  assessment  of 
strategies  under  a  wide  range  of  possible 
futures.79 Participatory design and imple-
mentation  is  critical,  because  it  permits 
the use of local knowledge about existing 
vulnerability and fosters ownership of the 
strategy by its beneficiaries. 

Policy making for adaptation also needs 
to be adaptive itself, with periodic reviews 
based on the collection and monitoring of 
information,  something  increasingly  fea-
sible at low cost thanks to better technolo-
gies. For example, a key problem in water 
management is the lack of knowledge about 
underground  water,  or  about  who  con-
sumes what. New remote- sensing technol-
ogy makes it possible to infer groundwater 
consumption, identify which farmers have 
low water productivity, and specify when to 
increase or decrease water applications to 
maximize  productivity  without  affecting 
crop yields (see chapter 3).

Making it happen:  
New pressures, new instruments, 
and new resources
The previous pages describe the many steps 
needed to manage the climate change chal-
lenge. Many read like the standard fare of 
a  development  or  environmental  science 
textbook: improve water resource manage-
ment, increase energy efficiency, promote 
sustainable agricultural practices, remove 
perverse subsidies. But these have proven 
elusive in the past, raising the question of 
what might make the needed reforms and 

 

Overview: Changing the Climate for Development 

19

Box 6      Ingenuity needed: Adaptation requires new tools and new knowledge

Regardless of mitigation efforts, human-
ity will need to adapt to substantial 
changes in the climate—everywhere, and 
in many different fields.
Natural capital
A diversity of natural assets will be 
needed to cope with climate change and 
ensure productive agriculture, forestry, 
and fisheries. For example, crop variet-
ies are needed that perform well under 
drought, heat, and enhanced CO2. But the 
private- sector-  and farmer- led process 
of choosing crops favors homogeneity 
adapted to past or current conditions, 
not varieties capable of producing con-
sistently high yields in warmer, wetter, or 
drier conditions. Accelerated breeding 
programs are needed to conserve a wider 
pool of genetic resources of existing 
crops, breeds, and their wild relatives. 
Relatively intact ecosystems, such as 
forested catchments, mangroves, and 
wetlands, can buffer the impacts of cli-
mate change. Under a changing climate 
these ecosystems are themselves at risk, 
and management approaches will need 
to be more proactive and adaptive. Con-
nections between natural areas, such as 

migration corridors, may be needed to 
facilitate species movements to keep up 
with the change in climate.
Physical capital
Climate change is likely to affect infra-
structure in ways not easily predictable 
and varying greatly with geography. 
For example, infrastructure in low- lying 
areas is threatened by flooding rivers and 
rising seas whether in Tangier Bay, New 
York City, or Shanghai. Heat waves soften 
asphalt and can require road closures; 
they affect the capacity of electricity 
transmission lines and warm the water 
needed to cool thermal and nuclear 
power plants just as they increase elec-
tricity demand. Uncertainties are likely to 
influence not only investment decisions 
but the design of infrastructure that will 
need to be robust to the future climate. 
Similar uncertainty about the reliability of 
water supply is leading to both integrated 
management strategies and improved 
water- related technologies as hedges 
against climate change. Greater technical 
knowledge and engineering capabilities 
will be needed to design future infra-
structure in the light of climate change.

Human health
Many adaptations of health systems 
to climate change will initially involve 
practical options that build on existing 
knowledge. But others will require new 
skills. Advances in genomics are making 
it possible to design new diagnostic tools 
that can detect new infectious diseases. 
These tools, combined with advances in 
communications technologies, can detect 
emerging trends in health and provide 
health workers with early opportunities 
to intervene. Innovations in a range of 
technologies are already transforming 
medicine. For example, the advent of 
hand- held diagnostic devices and video-
 mediated consultations are expanding 
the prospects for telemedicine and 
making it easier for isolated communi-
ties to connect to the global health 
infrastructure.

Sources: Burke, Lobell, and Guarino 2009; 
Ebi and Burton 2008; Falloon and Betts, 
forthcoming; Guthrie, Juma, and Sillem 
2008; Keim 2008; Koetse and Rietveld 2009; 
National Academy of Engineering 2008; 
Snoussi and others 2009.

behavior changes possible. The answer lies 
in  a  combination  of  new  pressures,  new 
instruments, and new resources. 

New pressures are coming from a grow-
ing  awareness  of  climate  change  and  its 
current  and  future  costs.  But  awareness 
does  not  always  lead  to  action:  to  suc-
ceed,  climate- smart  development  policy 
must tackle the inertia in the behavior of 
individuals  and  organizations.  Domes-
tic perception of climate change will also 
determine the success of a global deal—its 
adoption but also its implementation. And 
while many of the answers to the climate 
and development problem will be national 
or even local, a global deal is needed to gen-
erate new instruments and new resources 
for  action  (see  chapter  5).  So  while  new 
pressures must start at home with chang-
ing behaviors and shifting public opinion, 
action must be enabled by an efficient and 
effective international agreement, one that 
factors in development realities. 

New pressures: Success hinges  
on changing behavior and shifting  
public opinion
International  regimes  influence  national 
policies  but  are  themselves  a  product  of 
domestic  factors.  Political  norms,  gover-
nance structures, and vested interests drive 
the  translation  of  international  law  into 
domestic  policy,  while  shaping  the  inter-
national regime.80 And in the absence of a 
global enforcement mechanism, the incen-
tives for meeting global commitments are 
domestic. 

To succeed, climate- smart development 
policy has to factor in these local determi-
nants. The mitigation policies that a country 
will follow depend on domestic factors such 
as the energy mix, the current and potential 
energy sources, and the preference for state 
or  market- driven  policies.  The  pursuit  of 
ancillary local benefits—such as cleaner air, 
technology transfers, and energy security—
is crucial to generating sufficient support.

20 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 0

Climate- smart  policies  also  have  to 
tackle the inertia in the behavior of individ-
uals and organizations. Weaning modern 
economies from fossil fuels and increasing 
resilience  to  climate  change  will  require 
attitudinal  shifts  by  consumers,  business 
leaders,  and  decision  makers.  The  chal-
lenges in changing ingrained behaviors call 
for a special emphasis on nonmarket poli-
cies and interventions.

Throughout the world disaster risk man-
agement programs are focused on changing 
community perceptions of risk. The City of 
London  has  made  targeted  communica-
tion and education programs a centerpiece 
of  its  “London  Warming”  Action  Plan. 
And utilities across the United States have 
begun  using  social  norms  and  peer  com-
munity pressure to encourage lower energy 
demand: simply showing households how 
they are faring relative to others, and sig-
naling approval of lower than average con-
sumption  is  enough  to  encourage  lower 
energy use (see chapter 8). 

Addressing  the  climate  challenge  will 
also  require  changes  in  the  way  govern-
ments  operate.  Climate  policy  touches  on 
the mandate of many government agencies, 
yet belongs to none. For both mitigation and 
adaptation, many needed actions require a 
long- term perspective that goes well beyond 
those of any elected administration. Many 
countries,  including  Brazil,  China,  India, 
Mexico,  and  the  United  Kingdom,  have 
created  lead  agencies  for  climate  change, 
set up high- level coordination bodies, and 
improved the use of scientific information 
in policy making (see chapter 8). 

Cities,  provinces,  and  regions  provide 
political and administrative space closer to 
the sources of emissions and the impacts of 
climate change. In addition to implement-
ing and articulating national policies and 
regulations, they perform policy- making, 
regulatory, and planning functions in sec-
tors key to mitigation (transportation, con-
struction, public services, local advocacy) 
and adaptation (social protection, disaster 
risk  reduction,  natural  resource  manage-
ment). Because they are closer to citizens, 
these governments can raise public aware-
ness and mobilize private actors.81 And at 
the  intersection  of  the  government  and 
the  public,  they  become  the  space  where 

government accountability for appropriate 
responses is played out. That is why many 
local governments have preceded national 
governments in climate action (box 7).

New instruments and new resources: 
The role of a global agreement
Immediate and comprehensive action is not 
feasible without global cooperation, which 
requires a deal perceived as equitable by all 
parties—high- income countries, which need 
to make the most immediate and stringent 
efforts;  middle- income  countries,  where 
substantial mitigation and adaptation need 
to happen; and low- income countries, where 
the priority is technical and financial assis-
tance to cope with vulnerability to today’s 
conditions, let alone unfolding changes in 
the climate. The deal must also be effective 
in  achieving  climate  goals,  incorporating 
lessons from other international agreements 
and  from  past  successes  and  failures  with 
large  international  transfers  of  resources. 
Finally, it has to be efficient, which requires 
adequate funding and financial instruments 
that can separate where mitigation happens 
from who funds it—thereby achieving miti-
gation at least cost. 

An  equitable  deal.      Global  cooperation 
at  the  scale  needed  to  deal  with  climate 
change can happen only if it is based on a 
global agreement that addresses the needs 
and  constraints  of  developing  countries, 
only  if  it  can  separate  where  mitigation 
happens  from  who  bears  the  burden  of 
this effort, and only if it creates financial 
instruments  to  encourage  and  facilitate 
mitigation, even in countries that are rich 
in  coal  and  poor  in  income  or  that  have 
contributed little or nothing historically to 
climate  change.  Whether  these  countries 
seize the opportunity to embark on a more 
sustainable development path will be heav-
ily influenced by the financial and techni-
cal  support  that  higher- income  countries 
can muster. Otherwise the transition costs 
could be prohibitive. 

Global  cooperation  will  require  more 
than  financial  contributions,  however. 
Behavioral economics and social psychol-
ogy  show  that  people  tend  to  reject  deals 
they perceive as unfair toward them, even 
if they stand to benefit.82 So the fact that 

 

Overview: Changing the Climate for Development 

21

Box 7      Cities reducing their carbon footprints

The movement toward carbon- neutral 
cities shows how local governments are 
taking action even in the absence of 
international commitments or stringent 
national policies. In the United States, 
which has not ratified the Kyoto Protocol, 
close to a thousand cities have agreed to 
meet the Kyoto Protocol target under the 
Mayors’ Climate Protection agreement. In 
Rizhao, a city of 3 million people in north-
ern China, the municipal government 
combined incentives and legislative tools 
to encourage the large- scale efficient 
use of renewable energy. Skyscrapers are 
built to use solar power, and 99 percent 
of Rizhao’s households use solar- power 
heaters. Almost all traffic signals, street 
lights, and park illuminations are powered 

by photovoltaic solar cells. In total the 
city has over 500,000 square meters of 
solar water heating panels, the equiva-
lent of about 0.5 megawatts of electric 
water heaters. As a result of these efforts, 
energy use has fallen by nearly a third and 
CO2 emissions by half. 

Examples of movements to carbon-

 neutral cities are mushrooming well 
beyond China. In 2008 Sydney became 
the first city in Australia to become carbon 
neutral, through energy efficiency, renew-
able energy, and carbon offsets. Copenha-
gen is planning to cut its carbon emissions 
to zero by 2025. The plan includes invest-
ments in wind energy and encouraging 
the use of electric and hydrogen- powered 
cars with free parking and recharging.

More than 700 cities and local govern-
ments around the world are participating 
in a “Cities for Climate Protection Cam-
paign” to adopt policies and implement 
quantifiable measures to reduce local 
greenhouse gas emissions (http://www 
.iclei.org). Together with other local gov-
ernment associations, such as the C40 
Cities Climate Leadership Group and the 
World Mayors Council on Climate Change, 
they have embarked on a process that 
seeks empowerment and inclusion of cities 
and local governments in the UN Frame-
work Convention on Climate Change. 

Sources: Bai 2006; World Bank 2009d; C40 
Cities Climate Leadership Group, http://www 
.c40cities.org (accessed August 1, 2009).

it is in everyone’s interest to collaborate is 
no guarantee of success. There are real con-
cerns  among  developing  countries  that  a 
drive to integrate climate and development 
could  shift  responsibility  for  mitigation 
onto the developing world. 

Enshrining  a  principle  of  equity  in  a 
global deal would do much to dispel such 
concerns and generate trust (see chapter 5). 
A  long- term  goal  of  per  capita  emissions 
converging to a band could ensure that no 
country  is  locked  into  an  unequal  share 
of  the  atmospheric  commons.  India  has 
recently stated that it would never exceed 
the  average  per  capita  emissions  of  high-
 income  countries.83  So  drastic  action  by 
high- income countries to reduce their own 
carbon  footprint  to  sustainable  levels  is 
essential. This would show leadership, spur 
innovation, and make it feasible for all to 
switch to a low- carbon growth path. 

Another  major  concern  of  developing 
countries is technology access. Innovation 
in  climate- related  technologies  remains 
concentrated  in  high- income  countries, 
although developing countries are increas-
ing  their  presence  (China  is  seventh  in 
overall  renewable  energy  patents,84  and 
an  Indian  firm  is  now  the  leader  in  on- 
road  electric  cars85).  In  addition,  devel-
oping  countries—at  least  the  smaller  or 
poorer ones—may need assistance to pro-
duce  new  technology  or  tailor  it  to  their 

circumstances.  This  is  particularly  prob-
lematic for adaptation, where technologies 
can be very location specific.

International transfers of clean technol-
ogies have so far been modest. They have 
occurred in at best one- third of the projects 
funded  through  the  Clean  Development 
Mechanism (CDM), the main channel for 
financing investments in low- carbon tech-
nologies  in  developing  countries.86  The 
Global  Environment  Facility,  which  has 
historically  allocated  about  $160  million 
a  year  to  climate  mitigation  programs,87 
is  supporting  technology  needs  assess-
ments  in  130  countries.  About  $5  billion 
has  recently  been  pledged  under  the  new 
Clean Technology Fund to assist develop-
ing  countries  by  supporting  large,  risky 
investments involving clean technologies, 
but there are disputes over what constitutes 
clean technology. 

Building technology agreements into a 
global climate deal could boost technology 
innovation and ensure developing-  country 
access. International collaboration is criti-
cal  for  producing  and  sharing  climate-
 smart technologies. On the production side, 
cost- sharing  agreements  are  needed  for 
large- scale and high- risk technologies such 
as carbon capture and storage (see chapter 
7). International agreements on standards 
create markets for innovation. And inter-
national  support  for  technology  transfer 

22 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 0

can take the form of joint production and 
technology sharing—or financial support 
for  the  incremental  cost  of  adopting  new 
cleaner  technology  (as  was  done  through 
the Multilateral Fund for the Implementa-
tion of the Montreal Protocol on Substances 
that Deplete the Ozone Layer).

A global deal will also have to be accept-
able to high- income countries. They worry 
about the financial demands that could be 
placed  on  them  and  want  to  ensure  that 
financial transfers deliver the desired adap-
tation and mitigation results. They also are 
concerned that a tiered approach allowing 
developing countries to delay actions might 
affect their own competitiveness with lead-
ing middle- income countries.

An effective deal: Lessons from aid effective-
ness  and  international  agreements.      An 
effective  climate  deal  will  achieve  agreed 
targets  for  mitigation  and  adaptation.  Its 
design can build on the lessons of aid effec-
tiveness and international agreements. Cli-
mate finance is not aid finance, but the aid 
experience  does  offer  critical  lessons.  In 
particular,  it  has  become  clear  that  com-
mitments are seldom respected unless they 
correspond  to  a  country’s  objectives—the 
conditionality  versus  ownership  debate. 
So  funding  for  adaptation  and  mitigation 
should be organized around a process that 
encourages recipient- country development 
and ownership of a low- carbon development 
agenda. The aid experience also shows that a 
multiplicity of funding sources imposes huge 
transaction costs on recipient countries and 
reduces effectiveness. And while the sources 
of funding might be separate, the spending 
of adaptation and mitigation resources must 
be fully integrated into development efforts.
International agreements also show that 
tiered approaches can be an appropriate way 
of bringing hugely different partners into a 
single deal. Look at the World Trade Orga-
nization: special and differential treatment 
for developing countries has been a defining 
feature of the multilateral trading system for 
most of the postwar period. Proposals are 
emerging in the climate negotiations around 
the  multitrack  framework  put  forward  in 
the  UNFCCC’s  Bali  Action  Plan.88  These 
proposals would have developed countries 

commit to output targets, where the “out-
put” is greenhouse gas emissions, and devel-
oping countries commit to policy changes 
rather than emission targets. 

This approach is appealing for three rea-
sons. First, it can advance mitigation oppor-
tunities that carry development co- benefits. 
Second, it is well suited to developing coun-
tries, where fast population and economic 
growth is driving the rapid expansion of the 
capital stock (with opportunities for good 
or bad lock- in) and increases the urgency of 
moving energy, urban, and transport sys-
tems toward a lower- carbon path. A policy-
 based track can also offer a good framework 
for countries with a high share of hard- to-
 measure emissions from land use, land- use 
change, and forestry. Third, it is less likely 
to require monitoring of complex flows—a 
challenge  for  many  countries.  Neverthe-
less, some overall monitoring and evalua-
tion of these approaches is critical, if only 
to understand their effectiveness.89

An efficient deal: The role of  
climate finance
Climate  finance  can  reconcile  equity  and 
efficiency by separating where climate action 
takes place from who pays for it. Sufficient 
finance flowing to developing countries—
combined with capacity building and access 
to  technology—can  support  low- carbon 
growth  and  development.  If  mitigation 
finance is directed to where mitigation costs 
are lowest, efficiency will increase. If adapta-
tion finance is directed to where the needs 
are greatest, undue suffering and loss can be 
avoided. Climate finance offers the means to 
reconcile equity, efficiency, and effectiveness 
in dealing with climate change.

But  current  levels  of  climate  finance 
fall  far  short  of  foreseeable  needs.  The 
estimates  presented  in  table  1  suggest 
mitigation  costs  in  developing  countries 
could  reach  $140–$175  billion  a  year  by 
2030  with  associated  financing  needs  of 
$265–$565 billion. Current flows of miti-
gation finance averaging some $8 billion a 
year to 2012 pale in comparison. And the 
estimated $30–$100 billion that could be 
needed annually for adaptation in develop-
ing countries dwarfs the less than $1 billion 
a year now available (figure 10).

 

Overview: Changing the Climate for Development 

23

Compounding the shortfalls in climate 
finance are significant inefficiencies in how 
funds  are  generated  and  deployed.  Key 
problems  include  fragmented  sources  of 
finance; high costs of implementing market 
mechanisms such as the Clean Development 
Mechanism; and insufficient, distortionary 
instruments for raising adaptation finance.
Chapter 6 identifies nearly 20 different 
bilateral and multilateral funds for climate 
change currently proposed or in operation. 
This fragmentation has a cost identified in 
the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness: 
each fund has its own governance, raising 
transaction costs for developing countries; 
and alignment with country development 
objectives may suffer if sources of finance 
are  narrow.  Other  tenets  of  the  Paris 
Declaration, including ownership, donor 
harmonization, and mutual accountabil-
ity,  also  suffer  when  financing  is  highly 
fragmented.  An  eventual  consolidation 
of  funds  into  a  more  limited  number  is 
clearly warranted. 

Looking forward, pricing carbon (whether 
through  a  tax  or  through  a  cap  and  trade 
scheme) is the optimal way of both generat-
ing carbon- finance resources and directing 
those resources to efficient opportunities. In 
the near future, however, the CDM and other 
performance- based mechanisms for carbon 
offsets are likely to remain the key market-
 based instruments for mitigation finance in 
developing countries and are therefore criti-
cal in supplementing direct transfers from 
high- income countries. 

The  CDM  has  in  many  ways  exceeded 
expectations, growing rapidly, stimulating 
learning,  raising  awareness  of  mitigation 
options, and building capacity. But it also 
has many limitations, including low devel-
opment co- benefits, questionable addition-
ality (because the CDM generates carbon 
credits for emission reductions relative to a 
baseline, the choice of baseline can always 
be questioned), weak governance, inefficient 
operation, limited scope (key sectors such 
as transport are not covered), and concerns 
about market continuity beyond 2012.90 For 
the effectiveness of climate actions it is also 
important to understand that CDM trans-
actions do not reduce global carbon emis-
sions beyond agreed commitments—they 

Figure 10     The gap is large: Estimated annual 
incremental climate costs required for a 2°C 
trajectory compared with current resources

Constant 2005$, billions
200

Mitigation:

$139 billion–$175 billion

Adaptation:

$28 billion–$100 billion

Funding for

adaptation and

mitigation
$9 billion

175

150

125

100

75

50

25

0

2008–2012

2030

Sources: See table 1 on page 9 and the discussion in chapter 6.
Note: Mitigation and adaptation costs for developing coun-
tries only. Bars represent the range of estimates for the 
incremental costs of the adaptation and mitigation efforts 
associated with a 2°C trajectory. Mitigation financing needs 
associated with the incremental costs depicted here are 
much higher, ranging between $265 billion and $565 billion 
annually by 2030.

simply change where they occur (in devel-
oping  rather  than  developed  countries) 
and lower the cost of mitigation (thereby 
increasing efficiency).

The  Adaptation  Fund  under  the  Kyoto 
Protocol employs a novel financing instru-
ment in the form of a 2 percent tax on cer-
tified emission reductions (units of carbon 
offset generated by the CDM). This clearly 
raises  finance  that  is  additional  to  other 
sources, but as pointed out in chapter 6, this 
approach has several undesirable character-
istics. The instrument is taxing a good (miti-
gation  finance)  rather  than  a  bad  (carbon 
emissions) and like any tax, there are inevi-
table inefficiencies (deadweight losses). Anal-
ysis of the CDM market suggests that most 
of the lost gains from trade as a result of the 

24 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 0

tax would fall on developing-  country suppli-
ers of carbon credits.91 Adaptation finance 
will  also  require  an  allocation  mechanism 
that ideally would embrace the principles of 
transparency,  efficiency,  and  equity—effi-
cient approaches would direct finance to the 
most vulnerable countries and those with the 
greatest capacity to manage adaptation, while 
equity would require that particular weight 
be given to the poorest countries.

Strengthening and expanding the climate 
finance regime will require reforming exist-
ing instruments and developing new sources 
of climate finance (see chapter 6). Reform of 
the CDM is particularly important in view 
of its role in generating carbon finance for 
projects in developing countries. One set of 
proposals  aims  at  reducing  costs  through 
streamlining  project  approval,  including 
upgrading  the  review  and  administrative 
functions.  A  key  second  set  of  proposals 
focuses  on  allowing  the  CDM  to  support 
changes  in  policies  and  programs  rather 
than limit it to projects. “Sector no- lose tar-
gets” are an example of a performance- based 
scheme, where demonstrable reductions in 
sectoral carbon emissions below an agreed 
baseline could be compensated through the 
sale of carbon credits, with no penalty if the 
reductions are not achieved.

Forestry is another area where climate 
finance can reduce emissions (box 8). Addi-
tional  mechanisms  for  pricing  forest  car-
bon are likely to emerge from the current 
climate  negotiations.  Already  several  ini-
tiatives, including the World Bank’s Forest 
Carbon Partnership Facility, are exploring 
how financial incentives can reduce defores-
tation in developing countries and thereby 
reduce carbon emissions. The major chal-
lenges include developing a national strat-
egy  and  implementation  framework  for 
reducing emissions from deforestation and 
degradation; a reference scenario for emis-
sions; and a system for monitoring, report-
ing, and verification. 

Efforts to reduce emissions of soil car-
bon  (through  incentives  to  change  till-
ing  practices,  for  example)  could  also  be 
a  target  of  financial  incentives—and  are 
essential  to  ensure  natural  areas  are  not 
converted to food and biofuel production. 
But the methodology is less mature than for 

forest carbon, and major monitoring issues 
would need to be resolved (see box 8). Pilot 
programs  must  be  developed  rapidly  to 
encourage  more  resilient  and  sustainable 
agriculture  and  to  bring  more  resources 
and innovation to a sector that has lacked 
both in recent decades.92

Within  countries  the  role  of  the  public 
sector will be critical in creating incentives 
for climate action (through subsidies, taxes, 
caps,  or  regulations),  providing  informa-
tion  and  education,  and  eliminating  mar-
ket  failures  that  inhibit  action.  But  much 
of  the  finance  will  come  from  the  private 
sector, particularly for adaptation. For pri-
vate  infrastructure  service  providers  the 
flexibility of the regulatory regime will be 
crucial in providing the right incentives for 
 climate- proofing  investments  and  opera-
tions. While it will be possible to leverage 
private finance for specific adaptation invest-
ments  (such  as  flood  defenses)  experience 
to date with public- private partnerships on 
infrastructure in developing countries sug-
gests that the scope will be modest.

Generating  additional  finance  for 
adaptation  is  a  key  priority,  and  innova-
tive  schemes  such  as  auctioning  assigned 
amount units (AAUs, the binding caps that 
countries accept under the UNFCCC), tax-
ing international transport emissions, and a 
global carbon tax have the potential to raise 
tens  of  billions  of  dollars  of  new  finance 
each year. For mitigation it is clear that hav-
ing an efficient price for carbon, through 
either a tax or cap- and- trade, will be trans-
formational. Once this is achieved, the pri-
vate sector will provide much of the needed 
finance as investors and consumers factor 
in the price of carbon. But national carbon 
taxes  or  carbon  markets  will  not  neces-
sarily provide the needed flows of finance 
to developing countries. If the solution to 
the  climate  problem  is  to  be  equitable,  a 
reformed  CDM  and  other  performance-
 based  schemes,  the  linking  of  national 
carbon markets, the allocation and sale of 
AAUs, and fiscal transfers will all provide 
finance to developing countries.

As this Report goes to press, countries 
are engaged in negotiations on a global cli-
mate agreement under the auspices of the 
UNFCCC.  Many  of  these  same  countries 

 

Overview: Changing the Climate for Development 

25

Box 8      The role of land use, agriculture, and forestry in managing climate change

earn $400 million to $2 billion a year. 
As for soil carbon, even in Africa, where 
relatively carbon- poor lands cover close 
to half the continent, the potential for 
soil carbon sequestration is 100 million 
to 400 million tons of CO2e a year. At $10 
a ton, this would be on par with current 
official development assistance to Africa. 
Largely through the efforts of a group 

of developing countries that formed 
the Coalition for Rainforests, land use, 
land- use change, and forestry account-
ing were reintroduced into the UNFCCC 
agenda. Those countries seek opportuni-
ties to contribute to reducing emissions 
under their common but differentiated 
responsibility and to raise carbon finance 
to better manage their forested systems. 
Negotiations over what has become 
known as REDD (Reduced Emissions from 
Deforestation and Forest Degradation) 
continue, but most expect some ele-
ments of REDD to be part of an agree-
ment in Copenhagen. 

Initiatives on soil carbon are not so 

advanced. While carbon sequestration in 
agriculture would be an inexpensive, tech-
nically simple, and efficient response to 
climate change, developing a market for 
it is no easy feat. A pilot project in Kenya 
(see chapter 3) and soil carbon offsets on 
the Chicago Climate Exchange point to 
opportunities. Three steps can help move 
soil carbon sequestration forward.

First, the carbon monitoring should fol-
low an “activity- based” approach, where 
emission reductions are estimated based 
on the activities carried out by the farmer 
rather than on much more expensive 
soil analyses. Specific and conservative 
emission reduction factors can be applied 
for different agroecological and climatic 
zones. This is simpler, cheaper, and more 
predictable for the farmer, who knows up 
front what the payments, and possible 
penalties, are for any given activity. 
Second, transaction costs can be 

reduced by “aggregators,” who combine 
activities over many smallholder farms, as 
in the Kenya pilot project. By working with 
many farms, aggregators can build up a 
permanent buffer and average out occa-
sional reversals in sequestration. Pooling 
over a portfolio of projects with conserva-
tive estimates of permanence can make 
soil carbon sequestration fully equivalent 
to CO2 reduction in other sectors.

Third, logistical help, especially for poor 

farmers who need help to finance up- 
front costs, must include strengthened 
extension services. They are key to dis-
seminating knowledge about sequestra-
tion practices and finance opportunities.

Sources: Canadell and others 2007; Eliasch 
2008; FAO 2005; Smith and others 2008; 
Smith and others 2009; Tschakert 2004; 
UNEP 1990; Voluntary Carbon Standard 
2007; World Bank 2008c.

It’s not just about energy: At high carbon prices the combined mitigation potential of agriculture 
and forestry is greater than that of other individual sectors of the economy 
Potential emission reduction (GtCO2e/yr)
7

Non-OECD/EIT
EIT
OECD
World total

Land use, agriculture, and forestry have a 
substantial mitigation potential but have 
been contentious in the climate negotia-
tions. Could emissions and uptakes be 
measured with sufficient accuracy? What 
can be done about natural fluctuations in 
growth and losses from fires associated 
with climate change? Should countries 
get credits for actions taken decades or 
centuries before the climate negotia-
tions? Would credits from land- based 
activities swamp the carbon market and 
drive down the carbon price, reducing 
incentives for further mitigation? Progress 
has been made on many of these issues, 
and the Intergovernmental Panel on Cli-
mate Change has developed guidelines 
for measuring land- related greenhouse 
gases. 

Net global deforestation averaged 

7.3 million hectares a year from 2000 to 
2005, contributing about 5.0 gigatons of 
CO2 a year in emissions, or about a quar-
ter of the emission reduction needed. 
Another 0.9 gigaton reduction could 
come from reforestation and better forest 
management in developing countries. 
But improved forest management and 
reduced deforestation in developing 
countries are currently not part of the 
international Clean Development Mecha-
nism of the UNFCCC. 

There is also interest in creating a 

mechanism for payments for improved 
management of soil carbon and other 
greenhouse gases produced by agri-
culture. Technically about 6.0 gigatons 
of CO2e in emissions could be reduced 
through less tillage of soils, better wetland 
and rice paddy management, and bet-
ter livestock and manure management. 
About 1.5 gigatons of emission reductions 
a year could be achieved in agriculture for 
a carbon price of $20 a ton of CO2e (figure). 

Forestry and agricultural mitigation 
would produce many co- benefits. The 
maintenance of forests keeps open a 
wider diversity of livelihood options, 
protects biodiversity, and buffers against 
extreme events such as floods and land-
slides. Reduced tillage and better fertilizer 
management can improve productivity. 
And the resources generated could be 
substantial—at least for countries with 
large forests: if the forest carbon markets 
meet their full potential, Indonesia could 

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

<100
<100
<50
<50
<20
<20
Energy
supply

<50

<100
<20
Transport

<50

<100
<20
Buildings

<50

<100
<20
Industry

<50

<100
<20
Agriculture

<50

<100
<20
Forestry

<20

<100
<50
Waste

Carbon price ($/tCO2e)

Source: Barker and others 2007b, figure TS.27.
Note: EIT = economies in transition. The ranges for global economic potentials as assessed in each sector are 
shown by black vertical lines.

26 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 0

are  also  in  the  throes  of  one  of  the  most 
severe  financial  crises  of  recent  decades. 
Fiscal difficulties and urgent needs could 
make it difficult to get legislatures to agree 
to spend resources on what is incorrectly 
perceived as solely a longer- term threat. 

Yet a number of countries have adopted 
fiscal recovery packages to green the econ-
omy  while  restoring  growth,  for  a  global 
total  of  more  than  $400  billion  over  the 
next few years in the hope of stimulating 
the  economy  and  creating  jobs.93  Invest-
ments  in  energy  efficiency  can  produce  a 
triple  dividend  of  greater  energy  savings, 
fewer emissions, and more jobs.

The current climate negotiations, to cul-
minate in Copenhagen in December 2009, 
have been making slow progress—inertia 
in the political sphere. For all the reasons 
highlighted in this Report—inertia in the 
climate  system,  inertia  in  infrastructure, 
inertia  in  socioeconomic  systems—a  cli-
mate deal is urgently needed. But it must be 
a smart deal, one that creates the incentives 
for efficient solutions, for flows of finance 
and the development of new technologies. 
And it must be an equitable deal, one that 
meets the needs and aspirations of develop-
ing countries. Only this can create the right 
climate for development. 

Notes

1. Extreme  poverty  is  defined  as  living  on 

$1.25 a day or less. Chen and Ravallion 2008.

2. FAO 2009b.
3. Article 2 of the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) calls 
for  stabilizing  greenhouse  gas  concentrations 
in the atmosphere at a level that “would prevent 
dangerous anthropogenic [human- caused] inter-

ference  with  the  climate  system.”  http://unfccc 
.int/resource/docs/convkp/conveng.pdf  (accessed 
August 1, 2009).

4. Defined  as  carbon  emitted  per  dollar  of 

GDP.

5. On  a  global  scale,  this  would  reduce  CO2 
emissions by 4–6 gigatons a year given the cur-
rent energy mix in the power sector and industry 
(IEA  2008e).  Similar  reductions  would  be  pos-
sible in the building sector in high- income coun-
tries. See, for example, Mills 2009.

6. World Bank 2009b.
7. de la Torre, Fajnzylber, and Nash 2008.
8. Greenhouse  gases  each  have  different 
heat- trapping  potential.  The  carbon  dioxide 
equivalent (CO2e) concentration can be used to 
describe the composite global warming effect of 
these gases in terms of the amount of CO2 that 
would  have  the  same  heat- trapping  potential 
over a specified period of time.

9. Authors’  calculations,  based  on  data  from 
Climate  Analysis  Indicators  Tool  (WRI  2008). 
The range is much greater if small island states 
such as Barbados (4.6 tons of CO2e per capita) 
and oil producers such as Qatar (55 tons of CO2e 
per capita) or the United Arab Emirates (39 tons 
of CO2e per capita) are included. 

10. IEA 2008c.
11. Edmonds and others 2008; Hamilton 2009. 
Blanford, Richels, and Rutherford (2008) also show 
substantial savings from countries announcing in 
advance the date when they will engage in mitiga-
tion, because that allows those investing in long-
 lived assets to factor in the likely change in future 
regulatory  regimes  and  carbon  prices  and  there-
fore minimizes the number of stranded assets.

12. Financial  crises  that  are  highly  synchro-
nized across countries are associated with similar 
durations  and  are  followed  by  similar  recover-
ies,  although  the  losses  tend  to  be  more  severe 
(5 percent of GDP on average). IMF 2009, table 
3.1.  Even  the  Great  Depression  in  the  United 
States  lasted  only  three  and  a  half  years,  from 
August 1929 to March 1933. National Bureau of 

Many people are taking action to protect our environment. I think that only by 

working as a team will we succeed in making a difference. Even children can join 

together to help because we are the next generation and we should treasure our 

own natural environment.

—Adrian Lau Tsun Yin, China, age 8 

Anoushka Bhari, Kenya, age 8

 

Overview: Changing the Climate for Development 

27

Economic  Research  Business  Cycle  Expansion 
and Contraction database, http://www.nber.org/
cycles.html (accessed August 1, 2009).

13. Matthews and Caldeira 2008.
14. Schaeffer and others 2008.
15. While the question of what constitutes dan-
gerous  climate  change  requires  value  judgments, 
summaries of recent research by the Intergovern-
mental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) suggest 
that warming by more than 2°C above preindus-
trial levels sharply increases risks, so that “signifi-
cant  benefits  result  from  constraining  tempera-
tures  to  not  more  than  1.6°C–2.6°C.”  Fisher  and 
others 2007; IPCC 2007b; IPCC 2007c; Parry and 
others 2007. Recent scientific publications further 
support the notion that warming should be con-
strained to remain as close as possible to 2°C above 
preindustrial  temperatures.  Focus  A  on  science; 
Mann 2009; Smith and others 2009. The organiz-
ers of the 2009 International Scientific Congress on 
Climate Change concluded that “there is increas-
ing  agreement  that  warming  above  2°C  would 
be  very  difficult  for  contemporary  societies  and 
ecosystems  to  cope  with.”  http://climatecongress 
.ku.dk/ (accessed August 1, 2009). Other calls for 
not allowing warming to exceed 2°C include Euro-
pean  Commission  2007;  SEG  2007;  and  Interna-
tional  Scientific  Steering  Committee  2005.  The 
leaders  of  Australia,  Brazil,  Canada,  China,  the 
European Union, France, Germany, India, Indone-
sia, Italy, Japan, the Republic of Korea, Mexico, the 
Russian Federation, South Africa, the United King-
dom, and the United States—meeting at the Major 
Economies Forum on Energy and Climate in July 
2009—recognized  “the  scientific  view  that  the 
increase in global average temperature above pre-
 industrial  levels  ought  not  to  exceed  2°C.”  http://
usclimatenetwork.org/resource- database/MEF_
Declarationl- 0.pdf (accessed August 1, 2009).

16. IPCC 2007c.
17. Raupach and others 2007.
18. Lawrence  and  others  2008;  Matthews 
and Keith 2007; Parry and others 2008; Scheffer, 
Brovkin,  and  Cox  2006;  Torn  and  Harte  2006; 
Walter and others 2006.

19. Horton and others 2008.
20. This estimate does not take into account 
the increase of damages from storm surges, and 
it uses current population and economic activi-
ties. So in the absence of large- scale adaptation, 
it is likely to be a significant underestimate. Das-
gupta and others 2009.

21. Stern 2007.
22. Easterling and others 2007, table 5.6, p 299.
23. Parry and others 2007, table TS.3, p 66.
24. Nordhaus and Boyer 2000. Stern (2007) also 
finds  that  losses  associated  with  climate  change 
would be much greater in India and Southeast Asia 
than the world average.

25. Nordhaus  2008;  Stern  2007;  Yohe  and 

others 2007, figure 20.3.

26. The  PAGE  model,  used  for  the  Stern 
Review  of  Climate  Change,  estimates  that  80 
percent of the costs of damages would be borne 
by  developing  countries;  Hope  (2009),  with 
further data breakdowns communicated by the 
author. The RICE model (Nordhaus and Boyer 
2000), as expanded to include adaptation in de 
Bruin,  Dellink,  and  Agrawala  (2009),  suggests 
that about three- quarters of the costs of dam-
ages  would  be  borne  by  developing  countries. 
See  also  Smith  and  others  (2009);  Tol  (2008). 
Note  that  this  may  well  be  an  underestimate, 
since it does not take into account the value of 
lost ecosystem services. See chapter 1 for a dis-
cussion  of  the  limitation  of  models’  ability  to 
capture costs of impacts. 

27. Noted  during  consultations  with  East 

African and Latin American countries. 

28. Barbera  and  McConnell  1990;  Barrett 
2003; Burtraw and others 2005; Jaffe and others 
1995; Meyer 1995.

29. Hope 2009; Nordhaus 2008.
30. Nordhaus 2008.
31. Few models incorporate adaptation costs. 
See de Bruin, Dellink, and Agrawala (2009) for a 
discussion.

32. Nordhaus 2008, p. 86, figure 5.3. Nordhaus 
finds the additional cost of stabilizing warming at 
2°C rather than his optimal target of 3.5°C to be 
0.3 percent of GDP annually. The additonal cost 
of 2.5°C rather than 3.5°C is less than 0.1 percent 
of GDP annually.

33. The developing- country average is 1.5 per-
cent  of  GDP;  it  includes  health  insurance  and 
excludes life insurance. Swiss Re 2007.

34. McKinsey & Company 2009.
35. In  constant  2005  dollars.  World  Bank 

2009c.

36. Adger and others 2009.
37. IPCC 2001. 
38. Mignone and others 2008. This is true in 
the absence of effective and acceptable geoengi-
neering technology (see chapter 7). 

39. This  can  result  from  economies  of  scale 
in technology provision (as was the case for the 
French  nuclear  program  and  appears  to  be  an 
issue  for  concentrated  solar  power);  network 
effects  (for  a  highway  or  rail  construction  pro-
gram);  or  demographic  or  economic  shocks. 
This and the rest of the paragraph are based on 
Shalizi and Lecocq 2009.

40. Shalizi and Lecocq 2009.
41. Folger 2006; Levin and others 2007.
42. Häfele  and  others  1981,  as  cited  in  Ha- 

Duong, Grubb, and Hourcade 1997. 

43. Davis and Owens 2003; IEA 2008b; Nemet 

and Kammen 2007; SEG 2007; Stern 2007.

28 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 0

44. Repetto 2008.
45. Stern 2007, part VI.
46. Based  on  the  formula  used  in  Nordhaus 

2008. 

47. These are rounded values based on the fol-
lowing. The IPCC estimates that at carbon prices 
up to $50 a ton CO2e, about 65 percent of emis-
sion  reduction  would  take  place  in  developing 
countries in 2030 (Barker and others 2007a, table 
11.3). McKinsey & Company (2009) estimates this 
share at 68 percent for a 450 ppm scenario if done 
using  a  least- cost  allocation.  As  to  the  least- cost 
share of global mitigation investments in 2030 tak-
ing place in developing countries, it is estimated at 
44–67 percent for a 450 ppm CO2e concentration 
(see table 4.2: 44 percent, MESSAGE; 56 percent, 
McKinsey; 67 percent, IEA ETP) although an out-
lying estimate is offered by REMIND (91 percent). 
Over the course of the century (using present value 
of all investments to 2100), the estimated share of 
developing  countries  is  somewhat  higher,  with 
ranges between 66 percent (Edmonds and others 
2008) and 71 percent (Hope 2009). 
48. Edmonds and others 2008.
49. For a 425–450 ppm CO2e, or 2°C, stabili-
zation  scenario,  IIASA  (2009)  estimates  the  cost 
at $4 trillion; Knopf and others (forthcoming) at 
$6 trillion; Edmonds and others (2008) at $9 tril-
lion; Nordhaus (2008) at $11 trillion; and Hope 
(2009)  at  $25  trillion.  These  are  present  values, 
and the large differences among them are largely 
driven by the different discount rate used. All fol-
low  a  first- best  scenario  where  mitigation  takes 
place wherever and whenever most cost- effective. 

50. Hamilton 2009. 
51. The  Nameless  Hurricane,  http://science.
nasa.gov/headlines/y2004/02apr_hurricane.htm 
(accessed March 12, 2009).

52. Rogers 2009; Westermeyer 2009.
53. OECS 2004.
54. World Bank 2008a.
55. Kanbur 2009.
56. FAO 2009a.
57. Worldwatch  Institute,  “State  of  the  World 
2005 Trends and Facts: Water Conflict and Security 
Cooperation,” http://www.worldwatch.org/node/69 
(accessed July 1, 2009); Wolf and others 1999.

58. Easterling  and  others  2007;  Fisher  and 

others 2007.

59. FAO 2008.
60. von Braun and others 2008; World Bank 

2009a.

61. Sterner 2007. The average fuel price in the 
Euro area in 2007 was more than twice what it was 
in the United States ($1.54 a liter as opposed to 63 
cents  a  liter). Variations  in  emissions  not  driven 
by income can be captured by the residuals of a 
regression  of  emissions  per  capita  on  income. 
When  these  residuals  are  regressed  on  gasoline 

prices, the elasticity is estimated at –0.5, meaning 
that a doubling of fuel prices would halve emis-
sions, holding income per capita constant.

62. Based  on  average  electricity  prices  for 
households in 2006–07 from the U.S. Energy Infor-
mation  Agency,  http://www.eia.doe.gov/emeu/ 
international/elecprih.html (accessed August 1, 2009).

63. Emission data is from WRI (2008). 
64. IEA  2008d;  UNEP  2008.  A  2004  report 
by  the  European  Environment  Agency  (EEA 
2004) estimated European subsidies to energy at 
€30 billion in 2001, two- thirds for fossil fuels, the 
rest for nuclear and renewables.

65. http://www.eia.doe.gov/emeu/international/

elecprih.html (accessed July 2009).

66. Price and Worrell 2006.
67. ESMAP 2006.
68. http://co2captureandstorage.info/index.htm  

(accessed August 1, 2009).

69. Calvin  and  others,  forthcoming;  IEA 

2008a.

70. Gurgel, Reilly, and Paltsev 2007; IEA 2006; 

Wise and others 2009.

71. NRC  2007;  Tilman,  Hill,  and  Lehman 

2006; WBGU 2009.
72. OECD 2008.
73. Lotze- Campen and others 2009; Wise and 

others 2009. See chapter 3 for a discussion.

74. Scherr and McNeely 2008.
75. World Bank 2007b.
76. Milly and others 2008.
77. Fay, Block, and Ebinger 2010; Ligeti, Pen-

ney, and Wieditz 2007; Heinz Center 2007.

78. Lempert and Schlesinger 2000.
79. Keller, Yohe, and Schlesinger 2008.
80. Cass 2005; Davenport 2008; Dolsak 2001; 

Kunkel, Jacob, and Busch 2006.

81. Alber and Kern 2008.
82. Guth,  Schmittberger,  and  Schwarze  1982; 
Camerer and Thaler 1995; Irwin 2009; Ruffle 1998.
83. Times  of  India,  http://timesofindia.india 
times.com/NEWS/India/Even- in- 2031- Indias-
 per- capita- emission- will- be- 1/7th- of- US/ 
articleshow/4717472.cms (accessed August 2009).

84. Dechezleprêtre and others 2008. 
85. Maini 2005; Nagrath 2007.
86. Haites and others 2006.
87. http://www.gefweb.org/uploadedFiles/ 
Publications/ClimateChange- FS- June2009.pdf 
(accessed July 6, 2009).

88. http://unfccc.int/meetings/cop_13/items/ 

4049.php (accessed August 1, 2009).

89. The  development  and  aid  community 
has been moving toward impact evaluation and 
results- based  aid,  suggesting  a  degree  of  frus-
tration  with  input- based  programs  (where  the 
quantity of funds disbursed and the number of 
schools built were monitored, as opposed to the 
number of children graduating from schools or 

 

Overview: Changing the Climate for Development 

29

improvements  in  their  performance).  However, 
there is some difference in the way “input- based” 
approaches are defined in this case, because the 
“inputs” are policy changes rather than narrowly 
defined financial inputs—adoption and enforce-
ment  of  a  fuel  efficiency  standard  rather  than 
public spending on an efficiency program. Nev-
ertheless, monitoring and evaluation would still 
be important to learn what works.

90. Olsen 2007; Sutter and Parreno 2007; Olsen 
and  Fenhann  2008;  Nussbaumer  2009;  Michael-
owa and Pallav 2007; Schneider 2007.

91. Fankhauser, Martin, and Prichard, forth-

coming.

92. World Bank 2007d.
93. Stimulus  packages  around  the  world  are 
expected to inject about $430 billion in key climate 
change areas over the next few years: $215 billion 
will be spent on energy efficiency, $38 billion on 
low- carbon  renewables,  $20  billion  on  carbon 
capture  and  storage,  and  $92  billion  on  smart 
grids. Robins, Clover, and Singh 2009. See chapter 
1 for a discussion of expected job creation. 

References
Adger, W. N., S. Dessai, M. Goulden, M. Hulme, 

I. Lorenzoni, D. R. Nelson, L. O. Naess, J. 
Wolf, and A. Wreford. 2009. “Are There Social 
Limits to Adaptation to Climate Change?” 
Climatic Change 93 (3–4): 335–54.

Agrawala, S., and S. Fankhauser. 2008. Economic 

Aspects of Adaptation to Climate Change: 
Costs, Benefits and Policy Instruments. Paris: 
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and 
Development.

Alber, G., and K. Kern. 2008. “Governing Climate 

Change in Cities: Modes of Urban Climate 
Governance in Multi- Level Systems.” Paper 
presented at the OECD Conference on Com-
petitive Cities and Climate Change, Milan, 
October 9–10.

Bai, X. 2006. “Rizhao, China: Solar- Powered 

City.” In State of the World 2007: Our Urban 
Future, ed. Worldwatch Institute. New York: 
W.W. Norton & Company Inc. 

Barbera, A. J., and V. D. McConnell. 1990. “The 

Impacts of Environmental Regulations on 
Industry Productivity: Direct and Indirect 
Effects.” Journal of Environmental Economics 
and Management 18 (1): 50–65.

Barbier, E. B., and S. Sathirathai, ed. 2004. 

Shrimp Farming and Mangrove Loss in Thai-
land. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar Pub-
lishing.

Barker, T., I. Bashmakov, A. Alharthi, M. Amann, 

L. Cifuentes, J. Drexhage, M. Duan, O. Eden-
hofer, B. Flannery, M. Grubb, M. Hoogwijk, F. I. 

Ibitoye, C. J. Jepma, W. A. Pizer, and K. Yamaji. 
2007a. “Mitigation From a Cross- Sectoral Per-
spective.” In Climate Change 2007: Mitigation. 
Contribution of Working Group III to the Fourth 
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change, ed. B. Metz, O. R. 
Davidson, P. R. Bosch, R. Dave, and L. A. Meyer. 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Barker, T., I. Bashmakov, L. Bernstein, J. E. Bog-

ner, P. R. Bosch, R. Dave, O. R. Davidson, B. S. 
Fisher, S. Gupta, K. Halsnaes, B. Heij, S. Khan 
Ribeiro, S. Kobayashi, M. D. Levine, D. L. Mar-
tino, O. Masera, B. Metz, L. A. Meyer, G.- J. Nab-
uurs, A. Najam, N. Nakic´enovic´, H.- H. Rogner, 
J. Roy, J. Sathaye, R. Schock, P. Shukla, R. E. H. 
Sims, P. Smith, D. A. Tirpak, D. Urge- Vorsatz, 
and D. Zhou. 2007b. “Technical Summary.” In 
Climate Change 2007: Mitigation. Contribution 
of Working Group III to the Fourth Assessment 
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Cli-
mate Change, ed. B. Metz, O. R. Davidson, P. R. 
Bosch, R. Dave, and L. A. Meyer. Cambridge, 
UK: Cambridge University Press.

Barrett, S. 2003. Environment and Statecraft: 

The Strategy of Environmental Treaty- Making. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Blanford, G. J., R. G. Richels, and T. F. Rutherford. 
2008. “Revised Emissions Growth Projections 
for China: Why Post- Kyoto Climate Policy Must 
Look East.” Harvard Project on International 
Climate Agreements, Harvard Kennedy School 
Discussion Paper 08- 06, Cambridge, MA.

BTS (Bureau of Transportation Statistics). 2008. 
Key Transportation Indicators November 2008. 
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Trans-
portation.

Burke, M., D. B. Lobell, and L. Guarino. 2009. 

“Shifts in African Crop Climates by 2050 
and the Implications for Crop Improvement 
and Genetic Resources Conservation.” Global 
Environmental Change 19 (3): 317–325.

Burtraw, D., D. A. Evans, A. Krupnick, K. Palmer, 

and R. Toth. 2005. “Economics of Pollution 
Trading for SO2 and NOx.” Discussion Paper 
05- 05, Resources for the Future, Washington, 
DC.

Calvin, K., J. Edmonds, B. Bond- Lamberty, L. 
Clarke, P. Kyle, S. Smith, A. Thomson, and 
M. Wise. Forthcoming. “Limiting Climate 
Change to 450 ppm CO2 Equivalent in the 
21st Century.” Energy Economics. 

Camerer, C., and R. H. Thaler. 1995. “Anomalies: 
Ultimatums Dictators and Manners.” Journal 
of Economic Perspectives 9 (2): 109–220.

Canadell, J. G., C. Le Quere, M. R. Raupach, C. B. 

Field, E. T. Buitenhuis, P. Ciais, T. J. Conway, 

30 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 0

N. P. Gillett, R. A. Houghton, and G. Marland. 
2007. “Contributions to Accelerating Atmo-
spheric CO2 Growth from Economic Activity, 
Carbon Intensity, and Efficiency of Natural 
Sinks.” Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences 104 (47): 18866–70.

Cass, L. 2005. “Measuring the Domestic Salience 

of International Environmental Norms: Cli-
mate Change Norms in German, British, and 
American Climate Policy Debates.” Paper pre-
sented at the International Studies Associa-
tion, March 15, Honolulu.

Chen, S, and M. Ravallion. 2008. “The Develop-

ing World Is Poorer than We Thought, But 
No Less Successful in the Fight against Pov-
erty.” Policy Research Working Paper 4703, 
World Bank, Washington, DC.

Clarke, L., J. Edmonds, V. Krey, R. Richels, S. 
Rose, and M. Tavoni. Forthcoming. “Inter-
national Climate Policy Architectures: Over-
view of the EMF 22 International Scenarios.” 
Energy Economics. 

Dasgupta, S., B. Laplante, C. Meisner, D. Wheeler, 

and J. Yan. 2009. “The Impact of Sea Level 
Rise on Developing Countries: A Comparative 
Analysis.” Climatic Change 93 (3–4): 379–88.

Davenport, D. 2008. “The International Dimen-
sion of Climate Policy.” In Turning Down the 
Heat: The Politics of Climate Policy in Affluent 
Democracies, ed. H. Compston and I. Bailey. 
Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Macmillan.

Davis, G., and B. Owens. 2003. “Optimizing the 

Level of Renewable Electric R&D Expendi-
tures Using Real Options Analysis.” Energy 
Policy 31 (15): 1589–1608.

de Bruin, K., R. Dellink, and S. Agrawala. 2009. 
“Economic Aspects of Adaptation to Climate 
Change: Integrated Assessment Modeling of 
Adaptation Costs and Benefits.” Environment 
Working Paper 6, Organisation for Economic 
Co- operation and Development, Paris.

de la Torre, A., P. Fajnzylber, and J. Nash. 2008. 

Low Carbon, High Growth: Latin American 
Responses to Climate Change. Washington, 
DC: World Bank.

Dechezleprêtre, A., M. Glachant, I. Hascic, N. 
Johnstone, and Y. Ménière. 2008. Invention 
and Transfer of Climate Change Mitigation 
Technologies on a Global Scale: A Study Draw-
ing on Patent Data. Paris: CERNA.

Deltacommissie. 2008. Working Together with 
Water: A Living Land Builds for Its Future. 
Netherlands: Deltacommissie.

Derpsch, R., and T. Friedrich. 2009. “Global 

Overview of Conservation Agriculture Adop-
tion.” In Lead Papers, 4th World Congress on 

Conservation Agriculture, February 4–7, 2009, 
New Delhi, India. New Delhi: World Congress 
on Conservation Agriculture. 

DOE (U.S. Department of Energy). 2009. “Car-

bon Dioxide Information Analysis Center 
(CDIAC).” DOE, Oak Ridge, TN. 

Dolsak, N. 2001. “Mitigating Global Climate 

Change: Why Are Some Countries More 
Committed than Others?” Policy Studies Jour-
nal 29 (3): 414–36.

Easterling, W., P. Aggarwal, P. Batima, K. Brander, 

L. Erda, M. Howden, A. Kirilenko, J. Morton, 
J.- F. Soussana, J. Schmidhuber, and F. Tubiello. 
2007. “Food, Fibre and Forest Products.” In 
Climate Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation and 
Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group 
II to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Inter-
governmental Panel on Climate Change. ed. M. 
Parry, O. F. Canziani, J. P. Palutikof, P. J. van 
der Linden, and C. E. Hanson. Cambridge, 
UK: Cambridge University Press.

Ebi, K. L., and I. Burton. 2008. “Identifying 

Practical Adaptation Options: An Approach 
to Address Climate Change- related Health 
Risks.” Environmental Science and Policy 11 
(4): 359–69.

Edmonds, J., L. Clarke, J. Lurz, and M. Wise. 

2008. “Stabilizing CO2 Concentrations with 
Incomplete International Cooperation.” Cli-
mate Policy 8 (4): 355–76.

EEA (European Environment Agency). 2004. 
“Energy Subsidies in the European Union: 
A Brief Overview.” Technical Report 1/2004, 
EEA, Copenhagen.

Eliasch, J. 2008. Climate Change: Financing Global 
Forests: The Eliasch Review. London: Earthscan.

Erenstein, O. 2009. “Adoption and Impact of 
Conservation Agriculture Based Resource 
Conserving Technologies in South Asia.” In 
Lead Papers, 4th World Congress on Conser-
vation Agriculture, February 4–7, 2009, New 
Delhi, India. New Delhi: World Congress on 
Conservation Agriculture.

Erenstein, O., and V. Laxmi. 2008. “Zero Till-

age Impacts in India’s Rice-Wheat Systems: A 
Review.” Soil and Tillage Research 100 (1–2): 
1–14.

ESMAP (Energy Sector Management Assistance 

Program). 2006. Proceedings of the Interna-
tional Grid- Connected Renewable Energy Pol-
icy Forum. Washington, DC: World Bank.

European Commission. 2007. “Limiting Global 

Climate Change to 2 Degrees Celsius—The 
Way Ahead for 2020 and Beyond: Impact 
Assessment Summary.” Commission Staff 
Working Document, Brussels.

 

Overview: Changing the Climate for Development 

31

Falloon, P., and R. Betts. Forthcoming. “Climate 
Impacts on European Agriculture and Water 
Management in the Context of Adaptation 
and Mitigation: The Importance of an Inte-
grated Approach.” Science of the Total Envi-
ronment. 

tum Bargaining.” Journal of Economic Behav-
ior and Organization 3 (4): 367–88.

Guthrie, P., C. Juma, and H. Sillem, eds. 2008. 
Engineering Change: Towards a Sustainable 
Future in the Developing World. London: 
Royal Academy of Engineering. 

Fankhauser, S., N. Martin, and S. Prichard. Forth-

Ha- Duong, M., M. Grubb, and J.- C. Hourcade. 

coming. “The Economics of the CDM Levy: 
Revenue Potential, Tax Incidence and Dis-
tortionary Effects.” Working paper, London 
School of Economics.

FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization). 

2005. “Global Forest Resources Assessment 
2005: Progress towards Sustainable Forest 
Management.” Forestry Paper 147, Rome.

———. 2007. “The World’s Mangroves 

1980–2005.” Forestry Paper 153, Rome.

———. 2008. Food Outlook: Global Market 

Analysis. Rome: FAO.

———. 2009a. “Aquastat.” Rome. 
———. 2009b. “More People than Ever Are Vic-

tims of Hunger.” Press release, Rome.

Fay, M., R. I. Block, and J. Ebinger. 2010. Adapt-
ing to Climate Change in Europe and Central 
Asia. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Fisher, B. S., N. Nakic´enovic´, K. Alfsen, J. Corfee 
Morlot, F. de la Chesnaye, J.- C. Hourcade, K. 
Jiang, M. Kainuma, E. La Rovere, A. Matysek, 
A. Rana, K. Riahi, R. Richels, S. Rose, D. van 
Vuuren, and R. Warren. 2007. “Issues Related 
to Mitigation in the Long- Term Context.” In 
Climate Change 2007: Mitigation. Contribu-
tion of Working Group III to the Fourth Assess-
ment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change, ed. B. Metz, O. R. Davidson, 
P. R. Bosch, R. Dave, and L. A. Meyer. Cam-
bridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Folger, T. 2006. “Can Coal Come Clean? How 

to Survive the Return of the World’s Dirtiest 
Fossil Fuel.” December. Discover Magazine.

Government of Bangladesh. 2008. Cyclone Sidr 
in Bangladesh: Damage, Loss and Needs Assess-
ment for Disaster Recovery and Reconstruction. 
Dhaka: Government of Bangladesh, World 
Bank, and European Commission.

Guan, D., and K. Hubacek. 2008. “A New and 

Integrated Hydro- Economic Accounting and 
Analytical Framework for Water Resources: A 
Case Study for North China.” Journal of Envi-
ronmental Management 88 (4): 1300–1313.
Gurgel, A. C., J. M. Reilly, and S. Paltsev. 2007. 

“Potential Land Use Implications of a Global 
Biofuels Industry.” Journal of Agricultural and 
Food Industrial Organization 5 (2): 1–34.

Güth, W., R. Schmittberger, and B. Schwarze. 
1982. “An Experimental Analysis of Ultima-

1997. “Influence of Socioeconomic Inertia 
and Uncertainty on Optimal CO2- Emission 
Abatement.” Nature 390: 270–73.

Häfele, W., J. Anderer, A. McDonald, and N. 

Nakic´enovic´. 1981. Energy in a Finite World: 
Paths to a Sustainable Future. Cambridge, 
MA: Ballinger.

Haites, E., D. Maosheng, and S. Seres. 2006. 

“Technology Transfer by CDM Projects.” Cli-
mate Policy 6: 327–44.

Hamilton, K. 2009. “Delayed Participation in a 

Global Climate Agreement.” Background note 
for the WDR 2010. 

Hare, B., and M. Meinshausen. 2006. “How 

Much Warming Are We Committed to and 
How Much Can Be Avoided?” Climatic 
Change 75 (1–2): 111–49.

Heinz Center. 2007. A Survey of Climate Change 
Adaptation Planning. Washington, DC: John 
Heinz III Center for Science, Economics and 
the Environment.

Hof, A. F., M. G. J. den Elzen, and D. P. van 

Vuuren. 2008. “Analyzing the Costs and Ben-
efits of Climate Policy: Value Judgments and 
Scientific Uncertainties.” Global Environmen-
tal Change 18 (3): 412–24.

Hope, C. 2009. “How Deep Should the Deep 

Cuts Be? Optimal CO2 Emissions over Time 
under Uncertainty.” Climate Policy 9 (1): 3–8.

Horton, R., C. Herweijer, C. Rosenzweig, J. 

Liu, V. Gornitz, and A. C. Ruane. 2008. “Sea 
Level Rise Projections for Current Genera-
tion CGCMs Based on the Semi- Empirical 
Method.” Geophysical Research Letters 35: 
L02715–doi:10.1029/2007GL032486.

Houghton, R. A. 2009. “Emissions of Carbon 

from Land Management.” Background note 
for the WDR 2010.

ICCT (International Council on Clean Trans-

portation). 2007. Passenger Vehicle Greenhouse 
Gas and Fuel Economy Standard: A Global 
Update. Washington, DC: ICCT.

IEA (International Energy Agency). 2006. World 

Energy Outlook 2006. Paris: International 
Energy Agency.

———. 2008a. CO2 Capture and Storage—A 
Key Abatement Option. Paris: International 
Energy Agency.

32 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 0

———. 2008b. Energy Efficiency Policy Rec-

ommendations: In Support of the G8 Plan of 
Action. Paris: International Energy Agency.

———. 2008c. Energy Technology Perspective 2008: 
Scenarios and Strategies to 2050. Paris: Interna-
tional Energy Agency.

———. 2008d. World Energy Outlook 2008. 

Paris: International Energy Agency.

———. 2008e. Worldwide Trends in Energy Use 
and Efficiency: Key Insights from IEA Indicator 
Analysis. Paris: International Energy Agency. 
IIASA (International Institute for Applied Sys-

tems Analysis). 2009. “GGI Scenario Data-
base.” Laxenburg, Austria. 

IMF (International Monetary Fund). 2009. 

World Economic Outlook: Crisis and Recovery. 
Washington, DC: IMF.

International Scientific Steering Committee. 
2005. Avoiding Dangerous Climate Change: 
International Symposium on the Stabilization 
of Greenhouse Gas Concentrations. Report of 
the International Scientific Steering Commit-
tee. Exeter, UK: Hadley Centre Met Office.
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 

Change). 2001. Climate Change 2001: Synthe-
sis Report. Contribution of Working Groups I, 
II and III to the Third Assessment Report of the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 
Geneva: IPCC.

———. 2007a. Climate Change 2007: Synthesis 
Report. Contribution of Working Groups I, II 
and II to the Fourth Assessment Report of the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 
Geneva: IPCC.

———. 2007b. “Summary for Policymakers.” 

In Climate Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation 
and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working 
Group II to the Fourth Assessment Report of the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 
M. L. Parry, O. F. Canziani, J. P. Palutikof,  
P. J. van der Linden, and C. E. Hanson. Cam-
bridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
———. 2007c. “Summary for Policymakers.” 

In Climate Change 2007: The Physical Science 
Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the 
Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmen-
tal Panel on Climate Change, ed. S. Solomon, D. 
Qin, M. Manning, Z. Chen, M. Marquis, K. B. 
Averyt, M. Tignor, and H. L. Miller. Cambridge, 
UK: Cambridge University Press.

Irwin, T. 2009. “Implications for Climate 

Change Policy of Research on Cooperation 
in Social Dilemma.” Policy Research Working 
Paper 5006, World Bank, Washington, DC. 

Jaffe, A., S. R. Peterson, P. R. Portney, and R. N. 

Stavins. 1995. “Environmental Regulation and 

the Competitiveness of U.S. Manufacturing: 
What Does the Evidence Tell Us?” Journal of 
Economic Literature 33 (1): 132–63.

Kanbur, R. 2009. “Macro Crises and Target-

ing Transfers to the Poor.” Cornell Food and 
Nutrition Policy Program, Working Paper 
236, Ithaca, NY. 

Karim, M. F., and N. Mimura. 2008. “Impacts 

of Climate Change and Sea- Level Rise on 
Cyclonic Storm Surge Floods in Bangla-
desh.” Global Environmental Change 18 (3): 
490–500.

Keim, M. E. 2008. “Building Human Resilience: 

The Role of Public Health Preparedness 
and Response as an Adaptation to Climate 
Change.” American Journal of Preventive Med-
icine 35 (5): 508–16.

Keller, K., G. Yohe, and M. Schlesinger. 2008. 

“Managing the Risks of Climate Thresholds: 
Uncertainties and Information Needs.” Cli-
matic Change 91: 5–10.

Knopf, B., O. Edenhofer, T. Barker, N. Bauer, L. 

Baumstark, B. Chateau, P. Criqui, A. Held, 
M. Isaac, M. Jakob, E. Jochem, A. Kitous, S. 
Kypreos, M. Leimbach, B. Magné, S. Mima, 
W. Schade, S. Scrieciu, H. Turton, and D. van 
Vuuren. Forthcoming. “The Economics of 
Low Stabilisation: Implications for Techno-
logical Change and Policy.” In Making Cli-
mate Change Work for Us, ed. M. Hulme and 
H. Neufeldt. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press.

Koetse, M., and P. Rietveld. 2009. “The Impact 

of Climate Change and Weather on Trans-
port: An Overview of Empirical Findings.” 
Transportation Research Part D: Transport and 
Environment 14 (3): 205–21.

Kunkel, N., K. Jacob, and P.- O. Busch. 2006. 
“Climate Policies : (The Feasibility of) a 
Statistical Analysis of their Determinants.” 
Paper presented at the Human Dimensions of 
Global Environmental Change, Berlin.

Lawrence, D. M., A. G. Slater, R. A. Tomas,  

M. M. Holland, and C. Deser. 2008. “Acceler-
ated Arctic Land Warming and Permafrost 
Degradation during Rapid Sea Ice Loss.” 
Geophysical Research Letters 35: L11506–
doi:10.1029/2008GL033985.

Lehmann, J. 2007. “A Handful of Carbon.” 

Nature 447: 143–44.

Lempert, R. J., and M. E. Schlesinger. 2000. 
“Robust Strategies for Abating Climate 
Change.” Climatic Change 45 (3–4): 387–401.
Levin, K., B. Cashore, S. Bernstein, and G. Auld. 
2007. “Playing It Forward: Path Dependency, 
Progressive Incrementalism, and the ‘Super 

 

Overview: Changing the Climate for Development 

33

Wicked’ Problem of Global Climate Change.” 
Paper presented at the International Studies 
Association 48th Annual Convention, Febru-
ary 28, Chicago.

Ligeti, E., J. Penney, and I. Wieditz. 2007. Cities 
Preparing for Climate Change: A Study of Six 
Urban Regions. Toronto: Clean Air Partnership.

Lotze- Campen, H., A. Popp, J. P. Dietrich, and 

M. Krause. 2009. “Competition for Land 
between Food, Bioenergy and Conservation.” 
Background note for the WDR 2010.

Lüthi, D., M. Le Floch, B. Bereiter, T. Blunier, 

J.- M. Barnola, U. Siegenthaler, D. Ray-
naud, J. Jouzel, H. Fischer, K. Kawamura, 
and T. F. Stocker. 2008. “High- Resolution 
Carbon Dioxide Concentration Record 
650,000–800,000 Years before Present.” 
Nature 453 (7193): 379–82.

Maini, C. 2005. “Development of a Globally 

Competitive Electric Vehicle in India.” Journal 
of the Indian Insitute of Science 85: 83–95.

Mann, M. 2009. “Defining Dangerous Anthropo-
genic Interference.” Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences 106 (11): 4065–66.

Matthews, H. D., and K. Caldeira. 2008. “Stabi-

lizing Climate Requires Near- zero Emissions.” 
Geophysical Research Letters 35: L04705–
doi:10.1029/2007GL032388.

Matthews, H. D., and D. W. Keith. 2007. 
“Carbon- cycle Feedbacks Increase the 
Likelihood of a Warmer Future.” Geo-
physical Research Letters 34: L09702–
doi:10.1029/2006GL028685.

McKinsey & Company. 2009. Pathways to a 

Low- carbon Economy. Version 2 of the Global 
Greenhouse Gas Abatement Cost Curve. 
 McKinsey & Company.

McNeely, J. A., and S. J. Scherr. 2003. Ecoagricul-
ture: Strategies to Feed the World and Save Bio-
diversity. Washington, DC: Island Press.

Meyer, S. M. 1995. “The Economic Impact of 
Environmental Regulation.” Journal of Envi-
ronmental Law and Practice 3 (2): 4–15.

Michaelowa, A., and P. Pallav. 2007. Additional-

ity Determination of Indian CDM Projects: 
Can Indian CDM Project Developers Outwit 
the CDM Executive Board? Zurich: University 
of Zurich.

Mignone, B. K., R. H. Socolow, J. L. Sarmiento, 

and M. Oppenheimer. 2008. “Atmospheric 
Stabilization and the Timing of Carbon Miti-
gation.” Climatic Change 88 (3–4): 251–65.

Mills, E. 2009. Building Commissioning: A 

Golden Opportunity for Reducing Energy Costs 
and Greenhouse Gas Emissions. Berkeley, CA: 
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory.

Milly, P. C. D., J. Betancourt, M. Falkenmark,  

R. M. Hirsch, Z. W. Kundzewicz, D. P. Letten-
maier, and R. J. Stouffer. 2008. “Stationarity Is 
Dead: Whither Water Management?” Science 
319 (5863): 573–74.

Müller, C., A. Bondeau, A. Popp, K. Waha, and 
M. Fader. 2009. “Climate Change Impacts on 
Agricultural Yields.” Background note for the 
WDR 2010.

Nagrath, S. 2007. “Gee Whiz, It’s a Reva! The 
Diminutive Indian Electric Car Is a Hit on 
the Streets of London.” Businessworld 27(2), 
October 16.

National Academy of Engineering. 2008. Grand 
Challenges for Engineering. Washington, DC: 
National Academy of Sciences.

Nemet, G. 2006. “Beyond the Learning Curve: 
Factors Influencing Cost Reductions in Pho-
tovoltaics.” Energy Policy 34 (17): 3218–32.

Nemet, G., and D. M. Kammen. 2007. “U.S. 

Energy Research and Development: Declining 
Investment, Increasing Need, and the Feasibil-
ity of Expansion.” Energy Policy 35 (1): 746–55.

Nordhaus, W. 2008. A Question of Balance: 

Weighing the Options on Global Warming Poli-
cies. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

Nordhaus, W., and J. Boyer. 2000. Warming the 
World: Economic Models of Climate Change. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

NRC (National Research Council). 2007. Water 

Implications of Biofuels Production in the 
United States. Washington, DC: National 
Academies Press.

Nussbaumer, P. 2009. “On the Contribution of 

Labeled Certified Emission Reductions to 
Sustainable Development: A Multi- criteria 
Evaluation of CDM Projects.” Energy Policy 
37 (1): 91–101.

OECD (Organisation for Economic Co- operation 

and Development). 2008. Compendium of 
Patent Statistics 2008. Paris: OECD.

OECS (Organization of Eastern Caribbean 

States). 2004. Grenada: Macro-Socio- Economic 
Assessment of the Damages Caused by Hurri-
cane Ivan. St. Lucia: OECS.

Olsen, K. H. 2007. “The Clean Development 
Mechanism’s Contribution to Sustainable 
Development: A Review of the Literature.” 
Climatic Change 84 (1): 59–73.

Olsen, K. H., and J. Fenhann. 2008. “Sustainable 
Development Benefits of Clean Development 
Mechanism Projects. A New Methodology 
for Sustainability Assessment Based on Text 
Analysis of the Project Design Documents 
Submitted for Validation.” Energy Policy 36 
(8): 2819–30.

34 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 0

Parry, M., O. F. Canziani, J. P. Palutikof, and 

coauthors. 2007. “Technical Summary.” In, 
Climate Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation 
and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working 
Group II to the Fourth Assessment Report of the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 
ed. M. Parry, O. F. Canziani, J. P. Palutikof,  
P. J. van der Linden, and C. E. Hanson. Cam-
bridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Parry, M., J. Palutikof, C. Hanson, and J. Lowe. 

2008. “Squaring Up to Reality.” Nature 2: 68–71.

Price, L., and E. Worrell. 2006. “Global Energy 

Use, CO2 Emissions, and the Potential for 
Reduction in the Cement Industry.” Paper 
presented at the International Energy Agency 
Workshop on Cement Energy Efficiency, Paris.

Project Catalyst. 2009. Adaptation to Climate 

Change: Potential Costs and Choices for a 
Global Agreement. London: ClimateWorks 
and European Climate Foundation.

Raupach, M. R., G. Marland, P. Ciais, C. Le Quéré, 
J. G. Canadell, G. Klepper, and C. B. Field. 2007. 
“Global and Regional Drivers of Accelerating 
CO2 Emissions.” Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences 104 (24): 10288–93.

Repetto, R. 2008. “The Climate Crisis and the 
Adaptation Myth.” School of Forestry and 
Environmental Studies Working Paper 13, 
Yale University, New Haven, CT.

Robins, N., R. Clover, and C. Singh. 2009. A 

Climate for Recovery: The Colour of Stimulus 
Goes Green. London, UK: HSBC.

Rogers, D. 2009. “Environmental Information 

Services and Development.” Background note 
for the WDR 2010.

Ruffle, B. J. 1998. “More Is Better, But Fair Is Fair: 

Tipping in Dictator and Ultimatum Games.” 
Games and Economic Behavior 23 (2): 247–65.

Schaeffer, M., T. Kram, M. Meinshausen, D. P. 

van Vuuren, and W. L. Hare. 2008. “Near-
  Linear Cost Increase to Reduce Climate 
Change Risk.” Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences 105 (52): 20621–26.
Scheffer, M., V. Brovkin, and P. Cox. 2006. 

“Positive Feedback between Global Warm-
ing and Atmospheric CO2 Concentra-
tion Inferred from Past Climate Change.” 
Geophysical Research Letters 33: L10702–
doi:10.1029/2005GL025044.

Scherr, S. J., and J. A. McNeely. 2008. “Bio-
diversity Conservation and Agricultural 
Sustainability: Towards a New Paradigm of 
Ecoagriculture Landscapes.” Philosophical 
Transactions of the Royal Society 363: 477–94.

Schneider, L. 2007. Is the CDM Fulfilling Its 

Environmental and Sustainable Development 

Objective? An Evaluation of the CDM and 
Options for Improvement. Berlin: Institute for 
Applied Ecology.

SEG (Scientific Expert Group on Climate 

Change). 2007. Confronting Climate Change: 
Avoiding the Unmanageable and Managing the 
Unavoidable. Washington, DC: Sigma Xi and 
the United Nations Foundation. 

Shalizi, Z. 2006. “Addressing China’s Grow-

ing Water Shortages and Associated Social 
and Environmental Consequences.” Policy 
Research Working Paper 3895, World Bank, 
Washington, DC.

Shalizi, Z., and F. Lecocq. 2009. “Economics of 

Targeted Mitigation Programs in Sectors with 
Long- Lived Capital Stock.” Policy Research 
Working Paper 5063, World Bank, Washing-
ton, DC.

Smith, P., D. Martino, Z. Cai, D. Gwary, H. H. 

Janzen, P. Kumar, B. McCarl, S. Ogle, F. 
O’Mara, C. Rice, R. J. Scholes, O. Siro-
tenko, M. Howden, T. McAllister, G. Pan, V. 
Romanenkov, U. Schneider, S. Towprayoon, 
M. Wattenbach, and J. U. Smith. 2008. 
“Greenhouse Gas Mitigation in Agriculture.” 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society 
363 (1492): 789–813.

Smith, J. B., S. H. Schneider, M. Oppenheimer, 
G. W. Yohe, W. Hare, M. D. Mastrandrea, A. 
Patwardhan, I. Burton, J. Corfee- Morlot,  
C. H. D. Magadza, H.- M. Füssel, A. B. Pittock, 
A. Rahman, A. Suarez, and J.- P. van Ypersele. 
2009. “Assessing Dangerous Climate Change 
Through an Update of the Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC): Reasons 
for Concern”. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences 106 (11): 4133–37.

Snoussi, M., T. Ouchani, A. Khouakhi, and I. 

Niang- Diop. 2009. “Impacts of Sea- level Rise 
on the Moroccan Coastal Zone: Quantifying 
Coastal Erosion and Flooding in the Tangier 
Bay.” Geomorphology 107 (1–2): 32–40.
Stern, N. 2007. The Economics of Climate 

Change: The Stern Review. Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge University Press.

Sterner, T. 2007. “Fuel Taxes: An Important 

Instrument for Climate Policy.” Energy Policy 
35: 3194–3202.

Sutter, C., and J. C. Parreno. 2007. “Does the Cur-
rent Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) 
Deliver its Sustainable Development Claim? 
An Analysis of Officially Registered CDM Proj-
ects.” Climatic Change 84 (1): 75–90.

Swiss Re. 2007. “World Insurance in 2006: Pre-
miums Came Back to ‘Life’.” Zurich: Sigma 
4/2007.

 

Overview: Changing the Climate for Development 

35

Tilman, D., J. Hill, and C. Lehman. 2006. 

“Carbon-  Negative Biofuels from Low- Input 
High- Diversity Grassland Biomass.” Science 
314: 1598–1600.

Tol, R. S. J. 2008. “Why Worry about Climate 

Change? A Research Agenda.” Environmental 
Values 17 (4): 437–70.

Torn, M. S., and J. Harte. 2006. “Missing Feed-

backs, Asymmetric Uncertainties, and the 
Underestimation of Future Warming.” Geo-
physical Research Letters 33 (10): L10703–
doi:10.1029/2005GL025540.

Tschakert, P. 2004. “The Costs of Soil Carbon 

Sequestration: An Economic Analysis for 
Small- Scale Farming Systems in Senegal.” 
Agricultural Systems 81 (3): 227–53.

UNEP (United Nations Environment Pro-

gramme). 1990. Global Assessment of Soil Deg-
radation. New York: UNEP.

———. 2008. Reforming Energy Subsidies: 

Opportunities to Contribute to the Climate 
Change Agenda. Nairobi: UNEP Division of 
Technology, Industry and Economics.

UNFCCC (United Nations Framework Con-
vention on Climate Change). 2008. Invest-
ment and Financial Flows to Address Climate 
Change: An Update. Bonn: UNFCCC.

Voluntary Carbon Standard. 2007. “Guidance 

for Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land Use 
Projects.” VCS Association, Washington, DC. 

von Braun, J., A. Ahmed, K. Asenso- Okyere, 
S. Fan, A. Gulati, J. Hoddinott, R. Pandya-
 Lorch, M. W. Rosegrant, M. Ruel, M. Torero, 
T. van Rheenen, and K. von Grebmer. 2008. 
“High Food Prices: The What, Who, and How 
of Proposed Policy Actions.” Policy Brief, 
International Food Policy Research Institute, 
Washington, DC.

Walter, K. M., S. A. Zimov, J. P. Chanton, D. 

Verbyla, and F. S. Chapin III. 2006. “Methane 
Bubbling from Siberian Thaw Lakes as a Posi-
tive Feedback to Climate Warming.” Nature 
443: 71–75.

Wardle, D. A., M.- C. Nilsson, and O. Zackrisson. 

2008. “Fire- derived Charcoal Causes Loss of 
Forest Humus.” Science 320 (5876): 629.

WBGU (German Advisory Council on Global 

Change). 2009. Future Bioenergy and Sustain-
able Land Use. London: Earthscan.

Westermeyer, W. 2009. “Observing the Climate 
for Development.” Background note for the 
WDR 2010.

Wise, M. A., K. V. Calvin, A. M. Thomson, L. E. 
Clarke, B. Bond- Lamberty, R. D. Sands, S. J. 
Smith, A. C. Janetos, and J. A. Edmonds. 2009. 

The Implications of Limiting CO2 Concen-
trations for Agriculture, Land Use, Land- use 
Change Emissions and Bioenergy. Richland, 
WA: Pacific Northwest National Laboratory 
(PNNL).

Wolf, A. T., J. A. Natharius, J. J. Danielson, B. S. 
Ward, and J. K. Pender. 1999. “International 
Basins of the World.” International Journal of 
Water Resources Development 15 (4): 387–427.
World Bank. 2007a. East Asia Environment Mon-
itor 2007: Adapting to Climate Change. Wash-
ington, DC: World Bank.

———. 2007b. India Groundwater AAA Mid-
 term Review. Washington, DC: World Bank.

———. 2007c. Making the Most of Scarcity: 

Accountability for Better Water Management 
Results in the Middle East and North Africa. 
Washington, DC: World Bank.

———. 2007d. World Development Report 2008. 
Agriculture for Development. Washington, DC: 
World Bank.

———. 2008a. The Caribbean Catastrophe Risk 
Insurance Facility: Providing Immediate Fund-
ing after Natural Disasters. Washington, DC: 
World Bank. 

———. 2008b. South Asia Climate Change 
Strategy. Washington, DC: World Bank.

———. 2008c. World Development Indicators 

2008. Washington, DC: World Bank.

———. 2009a. Improving Food Security in Arab 

Countries. Washington, DC: World Bank.

———. 2009b. Making Development Climate 

Resilient: A World Bank Strategy for Sub-
 Saharan Africa. Washington, DC: World Bank.

———. 2009c. The Economics of Adaptation 

to Climate Change. Washington, DC: World 
Bank.

———. 2009d. “World Bank Urban Strategy.” 

World Bank, Washington, DC. 

WRI (World Resources Institute). 2008. “Cli-

mate Analysis Indicators Tool (CAIT).” Wash-
ington, DC. 

Xia, J., L. Zhang, C. Liu, and J. Yu. 2007. “Towards 

Better Water Security in North China.” Water 
Resources Management 21 (1): 233–47.

Yohe, G. W., R. D. Lasco, Q. K. Ahmad, N. Arnell, S. 
J. Cohen, C. Hope, A. C. Janetos, and R. T. Perez. 
2007. “Perspectives on Climate Change and Sus-
tainability.” In Climate Change 2007: Impacts, 
Adaptation and Vulnerability. Contribution 
of Working Group II to the Fourth Assessment 
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change, ed. M. L. Parry, O. F. Canziani, J. P. Palu-
tikof, P. J. van der Linden, and C. E. Hanson. 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

CHApTER 1

Understanding the Links between 
Climate Change and Development

In about 2200 bce a shift in the Medi-

terranean westerly winds and a reduc-
tion in the Indian monsoon produced 
300 years of lower rainfall and colder 
temperatures that hit agriculture from the 
Aegean Sea to the Indus River. This change 
in climate brought down Egypt’s pyramid-
 building  Old  Kingdom  and  Sargon  the 
Great’s empire in Mesopotamia.1 After only 
a  few  decades  of  lower  rainfall,  cities  lin-
ing the northern reaches of the Euphrates, 
the  breadbasket  for  the  Akkadians,  were 
deserted.  At  the  city  of  Tell  Leilan  on  the 
northern Euphrates, a monument was halted 
half- built.2 With the city abandoned, a thick 
layer of wind- blown dirt covered the ruins. 
Even intensively irrigated southern Meso-
potamia, with its sophisticated bureaucracy 
and elaborate rationing, could not react fast 
enough to the new conditions. Without the 
shipments of rainfed grain from the north, 
and faced with parched irrigation ditches 
and migrants from the devastated northern 
cities, the empire collapsed.3

Key messages
Development goals are threatened by climate change, with the heaviest impacts on poor 
countries and poor people. Climate change cannot be controlled unless growth in both rich and 
poor countries becomes less greenhouse-gas-intensive. We must act now: country develop-
ment decisions lock the world into a particular carbon intensity and determine future warming. 
Business-as-usual could lead to temperature increases of 5°C or more this century. And we 
must act together: postponing mitigation in developing countries could double mitigation costs, 
and that could well happen unless substantial financing is mobilized. But if we act now and act 
together, the incremental costs of keeping warming around 2°C are modest and can be justified 
given the likely dangers of greater climate change.

Societies have always depended on the 
climate but are only now coming to grips 
with the fact that the climate depends on 
their actions. The steep increase in green-
house gases since the Industrial Revolution 
has transformed the relationship between 
people  and  the  environment.  In  other 
words, not only does climate affect develop-
ment but development affects the climate.

Left  unmanaged,  climate  change  will 
reverse development progress and compro-
mise the well- being of current and future 
generations. It is certain that the earth will 
get  warmer  on  average,  at  unprecedented 
speed. Impacts will be felt everywhere, but 
much of the damage will be in developing 
countries. Millions of people from Bangla-
desh to Florida will suffer as the sea level 
rises, inundating settlements and contami-
nating freshwater.4 Greater rainfall variabil-
ity  and  more  severe  droughts  in  semiarid 
Africa will hinder efforts to enhance food 
security and combat malnourishment.5 The 
hastening disappearance of the Himalayan 
and Andean glaciers—which regulate river 
flow, generate hydropower, and supply clean 
water for over a billion of people on farms 
and  in  cities—will  threaten  rural  liveli-
hoods and major food markets (map 1.1).6

That is why decisive, immediate action 
is  needed.  Even  though  the  debate  about 
the  costs  and  benefits  of  climate  change 
mitigation continues, the case is very strong 
for immediate action to avoid unmanage-
able  increases  in  temperature.  The  unac-
ceptability  of  irreversible  and  potentially 
catastrophic impacts and the uncertainty 
about how, and how soon, they could occur 

38 

WO R L D   D E V E LOpM E N T   R EpO RT   2 0 1 0

Map 1.1      More than a billion people depend on water from diminishing Himalayan glaciers

(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)

(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)

(cid:135)
(cid:135)

Map 1.1

(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)

(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135) (cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135) (cid:135)
(cid:135)(cid:135)
•
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)(cid:135)
(cid:135)(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135) (cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)

(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)

(cid:135)

INDUS

200 million

(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)

(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)

(cid:135)

(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)

(cid:135)

(cid:135)

(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)

(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)

(cid:135)

(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)

(cid:135)

(cid:135)
(cid:135)

(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)

(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)

(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)

(cid:135)

(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)

(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)

(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135) (cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)

(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)

(cid:135)

(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)

(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)

(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)

(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)

(cid:135)
(cid:135)(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)

(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)

(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)

(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)

(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
GANGES
400 million

(cid:135)

(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)

(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)

(cid:135)

(cid:135)
(cid:135)

(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)

(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)

(cid:135)
(cid:135)

(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)

(cid:135)
(cid:135)

(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)(cid:135)

(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)

(cid:135)
(cid:135)

(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)

(cid:135)
(cid:135)

(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)

(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135) (cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135) (cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135) (cid:135)
(cid:135)(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)(cid:135)(cid:135)
(cid:135)(cid:135)(cid:135)
(cid:135)(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)(cid:135)
(cid:135)(cid:135)(cid:135)(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)(cid:135) (cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135) (cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)(cid:135)
(cid:135)(cid:135)(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)(cid:135)
(cid:135)(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135) (cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)(cid:135)
(cid:135)(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135) (cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135) (cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135) (cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)(cid:135) (cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135) (cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
BRAHMAPUTRA
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
60 million

(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)

(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)

(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)

(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)

(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)

(cid:135)

(cid:135)

(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)

(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)

(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)
(cid:135)

HWANG HE
150 million

YANGTZE
450 million

GANGES-

BRAHMAPUTRA

DELTA

120 million

IRRAWADDY
35 million

SALWEEN
20 million

MEKONG
60 million

Population density (persons/sq. km)

0–100

1001–2000

101–250

>2000

251–500

No data

501–1000

Rivers

River basins

(cid:135)(cid:135)(cid:135)(cid:135)(cid:135)(cid:135)(cid:135)(cid:135)(cid:135)(cid:135)(cid:135)(cid:135)(cid:135)(cid:135)(cid:135)(cid:135)(cid:135)(cid:135)(cid:135)(cid:135)(cid:135)(cid:135)(cid:135)(cid:135)(cid:135)(cid:135)(cid:135)(cid:135)(cid:135)(cid:135)(cid:135)(cid:135)(cid:135)(cid:135)(cid:135)(cid:135)(cid:135)(cid:135)(cid:135)(cid:135)(cid:135)(cid:135)

Glaciers

Sources: Center for International Earth Science Information Network, http://sedac.ciesin.columbia.edu/gpw/global.jsp (accessed 
May 15, 2009); Armstrong and others 2005; ESRI 2002; WDR team.
Note: The glaciers of the Himalayas and Tibetan Plateau regulate the supply of water throughout the year in major river basins 
supporting large agricultural and urban populations, with meltwater providing between 3 and 45 percent of river flow in the Gan-
ges and Indus, respectively. Reduced storage as ice and snowpack will result in larger flows and flooding during rainy months 
and water shortages during warmer, drier months when water is most needed for agriculture. Glacier locations shown in the map 
only include glaciers larger than 1.5 sq. km in area. Numbers indicate how many people live in each river basin.

compel bold actions. The strong inertia in 
the  climate  system,  in  the  built  environ-
ment,  and  in  the  behavior  of  individuals 
and institutions requires that this action be 
urgent and immediate. 

Over  the  past  two  centuries  the  direct 
benefits  of  carbon- intensive  development 
have  been  concentrated  largely  in  today’s 
high- income  countries.  The  inequity  in 
the global distribution of past and current 
emissions, and in current and future dam-
ages, is stark (figure 1.1; see also focus A fig-
ure FA.6 and the overview). But if countries 
are willing to act, the economic incentives 
for a global deal exist.

The  window  of  opportunity  to  choose 
the  right  policies  to  deal  with  climate 
change and promote development is clos-
ing. The further countries go along current 
emissions trajectories, the harder it will be 
to reverse course and alter infrastructures, 
economies,  and  lifestyles.  High-income 
countries  must  face  head- on  the  task  of 

cutting their own emissions by reshaping 
their  built  and  economic  environments. 
They also need to promote and finance the 
transition to low- carbon growth in develop-
ing countries. Better application of known 
practices  and  fundamental  transforma-
tions—in  natural  resource  management, 
energy provision, urbanization, social safety 
nets, international financial transfers, tech-
nological innovation, and governance, both 
international and national—are needed to 
meet the challenge. 

Increasing  people’s  opportunities  and 
material well- being without undermining 
the  sustainability  of  development  is  still 
the main challenge for large swaths of the 
world, as a severe financial and economic 
crisis wreaks havoc across the globe. Stabi-
lizing the financial markets and protecting 
the real economy, labor markets, and vul-
nerable groups are the immediate priority. 
But the world must exploit this moment of 
opportunity for international cooperation 

 

Understanding the Links between Climate Change and Development 

39

Figure 1.1      Individuals’ emissions in high- income countries overwhelm those in developing countries

CO2e/person (tons)
30 Australia
Canada

United States
Brazil

Russian Federation

Germany

Japan

High-income country
Middle-income country
Low-income country
Emissions from land-use change

United Kingdom

Ukraine
Italy

Indonesia

South Africa

France

Iran, Islamic Rep. of

Mexico

Turkey

Thailand

China

Peru
Myanmar

Iraq; Colombia

Congo, Dem. Rep.

Algeria

Nigeria

Egypt, Arab Rep. of

Philippines
Uganda

India

Ghana
Vietnam

Pakistan

Ethiopia

Tanzania

Bangladesh

Sudan

Chad;
Kenya;
Niger;
Rwanda

25

20

15

10

5

0

0.30

0.19

0.13

0.22

0.10

1.32

0.15

1.13

0.16

0.16

Population in 2005 (billions)

Sources: Emissions of greenhouse gases in 2005 from WRI 2008, augmented with land- use change emissions from Houghton 2009; population from World Bank 2009c. 
Note: The width of each column depicts population and the height depicts per capita emissions, so the area represents total emissions. Per capita emissions of Qatar (55.5 tons of carbon 
dioxide equivalent per capita), UAE (38.8), and Bahrain (25.4)—greater than the height of the y- axis—are not shown. Among the larger countries, Brazil, Indonesia, the Democratic Republic 
of Congo, and Nigeria have low energy- related emissions but significant emissions from land- use change; therefore, the share from land- use change is indicated by the hatching. 

and domestic intervention to tackle the rest 
of development’s problems. Among them, 
and a top priority, is climate change.

By  definition,  then,  unmitigated  climate 
change  is  incompatible  with  sustainable 
development.

Unmitigated climate change is 
incompatible with sustainable 
development
Development that is socially, economically, 
and environmentally sustainable is a chal-
lenge, even without global warming. Eco-
nomic growth is needed, but growth alone 
is not enough if it does not reduce poverty 
and  increase  the  equality  of  opportunity. 
And failing to safeguard the environment 
eventually  threatens  economic  and  social 
achievements.  These  points  are  not  new. 
They only echo what still is, after more than 
20 years, perhaps the most widely used defi-
nition of sustainable development: “devel-
opment that meets the needs of the present 
without compromising the ability of future 
generations  to  meet  their  own  needs.”7 

Climate change threatens to reverse 
development gains 
An  estimated  400  million  people  escaped 
poverty between 1990 and 2005, the date of 
the latest estimate8—although the unfolding 
global financial crisis and the spike in food 
prices between 2005 and 2008 have reversed 
some of these gains.9 Since 1990 infant mor-
tality rates dropped from 106 per 1,000 live 
births to 83.10 Yet close to half the popula-
tion of developing countries (48 percent) are 
still in poverty, living on less than $2 a day.11 
Nearly a quarter—1.6 billion—lack access 
to electricity,12 and one in six lack access to 
clean  water.13  Around  10  million  children 
under five still die each year from prevent-
able and treatable diseases such as respira-
tory infections, measles, and diarrhea.14

40 

WO R L D   D E V E LOpM E N T   R EpO RT   2 0 1 0

In the last half century the use of natu-
ral resources (among them fossil fuels) has 
supported  improvements  in  well- being, 
but when accompanied by resource degra-
dation and climate change, such use is not 
sustainable.  Neglecting  the  natural  envi-
ronment in the pursuit of growth, people 
have made themselves more vulnerable to 
natural disasters (see chapter 2). And the 
poorest often rely more directly on natu-
ral resources for their livelihoods. Roughly 
70  percent  of  the  world’s  extremely  poor 
people live in rural areas.

By 2050 the global population will reach 
9  billion,  barring  substantial  changes  in 
demographic trends, with 2.5 billion more 
people  in  today’s  developing  countries. 
Larger  populations  put  more  pressure  on 
ecosystems  and  natural  resources,  inten-
sify the competition for land and water, and 
increase the demand for energy. Most of the 
population increase will be in cities, which 
could help limit resource degradation and 
individual energy consumption. But both 
could increase, along with human vulner-
ability, if urbanization is poorly managed.

Climate change imposes an added burden 
on development.15 Its impacts are already 
visible, and the most recent scientific evi-
dence shows the problem is worsening fast, 
with current trajectories of greenhouse gas 
(GHG) emissions and sea- level rise outpac-
ing previous projections.16 And the disrup-
tions to socioeconomic and natural systems 
are  happening  even  now—that  is,  even 
sooner than previously thought (see focus 
A on science).17 Changing temperature and 
precipitation averages and a more variable, 
unpredictable, or extreme climate can alter 
today’s yields, earnings, health, and physi-
cal safety and ultimately the paths and lev-
els of future development.

Climate change will affect numerous sec-
tors and productive environments, includ-
ing agriculture, forestry, energy, and coastal 
zones, in developed and developing coun-
tries. Developing economies will be more 
affected by climate change, in part because 
of their greater exposure to climate shocks 
and in part because of their low adaptive 
capacity. But no country is immune. The 
2003 summer heat wave killed more than 
70,000 people in a dozen European coun-
tries (map 1.2). The mountain pine beetle 

epidemic  in  western  Canadian  forests, 
partly  a  consequence  of  milder  winters, 
is ravaging the timber industry, threaten-
ing  the  livelihoods  and  health  of  remote 
communities,  and  requiring  millions  in 
government spending for adjustment and 
prevention.18 Attempts to adapt to similar 
future threats, in developed and developing 
countries, will have real human and eco-
nomic costs even as they cannot eliminate 
all direct damage.

Warming can have a big impact on both 
the  level  and  growth  of  gross  domestic 
product (GDp), at least in poor countries. 
An examination of year- to- year variations 
in temperature (relative to a country’s aver-
age)  shows  that  anomalously  warm  years 
reduce  both  the  current  level  and  subse-
quent  growth  rate  of  GDp  in  developing 
countries.19 Consecutive warm years might 
be expected to lead to adaptation, lessen-
ing the economic impacts of warming, yet 
the  developing  countries  with  more  pro-
nounced  warming  trends  have  had  lower 
growth rates.20 Evidence from Sub- Saharan 
Africa  indicates  that  rainfall  variability, 
projected  to  increase  substantially,  also 
reduces GDp and increases poverty.21

Agricultural productivity is one of many 
factors driving the greater vulnerability of 
developing  countries  (see  chapter  3,  map 
3.3). In northern Europe and North Amer-
ica  crop  yields  and  forest  growth  might 
increase under low levels of warming and 
carbon  dioxide  (CO2)  fertilization.22  But 
in China and Japan yields of rice, a major 
global staple, will likely decline, while yields 
of  wheat,  maize,  and  rice  in  Central  and 
South Asia will be particularly hard hit.23 
prospects for crops and livestock in rainfed 
semiarid lands in Sub- Saharan Africa are 
also  bleak,  even  before  warming  reaches 
2–2.5°C above preindustrial levels.24

India’s  post- 1980  deceleration  in  the 
increase  of  rice  productivity  (from  the 
Green  Revolution  in  the  1960s)  is  attrib-
utable  not  only  to  falling  rice  prices  and 
deteriorating  irrigation  infrastructure,  as 
previously postulated, but also to adverse 
climate  phenomena  from  local  pollution 
and global warming.25 Extrapolating from 
past year- to- year variations in climate and 
agricultural outcomes, yields of major crops 
in India are projected to decline by 4.5 to 

September 2009
Map 1.2

 

Understanding the Links between Climate Change and Development 

41

Map 1.2      Rich countries are also affected by anomalous climate: The 2003 heat wave killed more than 70,000 
people in Europe

Number of deaths

Affected

Not affected

UNITED
KINGDOM
301

THE

NETHERLANDS

965

BELGIUM
1,175

LUXEMBOURG

166

GERMANY

9,355

SWITZERLAND

1,039

SLOVENIA

289

CROATIA
788

FRANCE
19,490

ITALY
20,089

PORTUGAL

2,696

SPAIN
15,090

Source: Robine and others 2008.
Note: Deaths attributed to the heat wave are those estimated to be in excess of the deaths that would have occurred in the 
absence of the heat wave, based on average baseline mortality trends.

9  percent  within  the  next  three  decades, 
even allowing for short- term adaptations.26 
The  implications  of  such  climate  change 
for  poverty—and  GDp—could  be  enor-
mous  given  projected  population  growth 
and the evidence that one percentage point 
of agricultural GDp growth in developing 
countries increases the consumption of the 
poorest third of the population by four to 
six percentage points.27

The impacts of climate change on health 
add  to  the  human  and  economic  losses, 
especially  in  developing  countries.  The 
World  Health  Organization  estimates  that 
climate  change  caused  a  loss  of  5.5  mil-
lion disability- adjusted life years in 2000— 
84 percent of them in Sub- Saharan Africa and 
East and South Asia.28 As temperatures rise, 

the number of people exposed to malaria and 
dengue will increase, with the burden most 
pronounced in developing countries.29 The 
incidence of drought, projected to increase 
in the Sahel and elsewhere, is strongly cor-
related  with  past  meningitis  epidemics  in 
Sub- Saharan Africa.30 Declining agricultural 
yields in some regions will increase malnu-
trition,  reducing  people’s  resistance  to  ill-
ness. The burden of diarrheal diseases from 
climate change alone is projected to increase 
up  to  5  percent  by  2020  in  countries  with 
per  capita  incomes  below  $6,000.  Higher 
temperatures  are  likely  to  increase  cardio-
vascular illness, especially in the tropics but 
also in higher- latitude (and higher- income) 
countries—more  than  offsetting  the  relief 
from fewer cold- related deaths.31

42 

WO R L D   D E V E LOpM E N T   R EpO RT   2 0 1 0

Map 1.3      Climate change is likely to increase poverty in most of Brazil, especially its poorest regions

Median income ($PPP)

Effects of climate change on poverty (percentage points) 

< 4000

7001–8000

4001–5000

8001–10000

5001–6000

>10000

6001–7000

No data

-4–0

3–4

0–1

4–5

1–2

>5

2–3

No data

Sources: Center for International Earth Science Information Network, http://sedac.ciesin.columbia.edu/gpw/global.jsp (accessed May 15, 2009); Dell, Jones, and Olken 2009; 
Assunçao and Chein 2008.
Note: Climate- change poverty impact estimates for mid- 21st century based on a projected decline in agricultural yields of 18 percent. The change in poverty is expressed in per-
centage points; for example, the poverty rate in the northeast, estimated at 30 percent (based on $1 a day with year 2000 data), could rise by 4 percentage points to 34 percent. 
The estimates allow for internal migration, with the poverty outcomes of migrants counted in the sending municipality.

Adverse climate trends, variability, and 
shocks do not discriminate by income, but 
better- off  people  and  communities  can 
more  successfully  manage  the  setbacks 
(map  1.3).  When  Hurricane  Mitch  swept 
through Honduras in 1998, more wealthy 
households than poor ones were affected. 
But  poor  households  lost  proportionally 
more: among affected households, the poor 
lost 15 to 20 percent of their assets, while 
the richest lost only 3 percent.32 The longer-
 term impacts were greater too: all affected 
households  suffered  a  slowdown  in  asset 
accumulation, but the slump was greater for 
poorer households.33 And impacts varied by 
gender (box 1.1): male- headed households, 
with  greater  access  to  new  lodging  and 
work,  spent  shorter  periods  in  postdisas-
ter shelters compared with female- headed 
households,  which  struggled  to  get  back 
on their feet and remained in the shelters 
longer.34

A  cycle  of  descent  into  poverty  could 
emerge  from  the  confluence  of  climate 
change,  environmental  degradation,  and 
market and institutional failures. The cycle 
could  be  precipitated  by  the  gradual  col-
lapse  of  a  coastal  ecosystem,  less  predict-
able  rainfall,  or  a  more  severe  hurricane 
season.35  While  large- scale  natural  disas-
ters  cause  the  most  visible  shocks,  small 
but repeated shocks or subtle shifts in the 
distribution  of  rainfall  throughout  the 
year can also produce abrupt yet persistent 
changes in welfare.

Empirical evidence on poverty traps—
defined as consumption permanently below 
a given threshold—is mixed.36 But there is 
growing evidence of slower physical asset 
recovery and human capital growth among 
the poor after shocks. In Ethiopia a season 
with  starkly  reduced  rainfall  depressed 
consumption even after four to five years.37 
Instances  of  drought  in  Brazil  have  been 

 

Understanding the Links between Climate Change and Development 

43

Box 1.1      Empowered women improve adaptation and mitigation outcomes

Women and men experience climate 
change differently. Climate- change 
impacts and policies are not gender 
neutral because of differences in respon-
sibility, vulnerability, and capacity for 
mitigation and adaptation. Gender- based 
patterns of vulnerability are shaped by the 
value of and entitlement to assets, access 
to financial services, education level, social 
networks, and participation in local orga-
nizations. In some circumstances, women 
are more vulnerable to climate shocks 
to livelihoods and physical safety—but 
there is evidence that in contexts where 
women and men have equal economic 
and social rights, disasters do not discrimi-
nate. Empowerment and participation of 
women in decision making can lead to 
improved environmental and livelihood 
outcomes that benefit all.
Women’s participation in disaster 
management saves lives
Community welfare before, during, and 
after extreme climatic events can be 
improved by including women in disaster 
preparedness and rehabilitation. Unlike 
other communities that witnessed numer-
ous deaths, La Masica, Honduras, reported 
no deaths during and after Hurricane Mitch 
in 1998. Gender- sensitive community 
education on early warning systems and 
hazard management provided by a disas-
ter agency six months before the hurricane 
contributed to this achievement. Although 
both men and women participated in 
hazard management activities, ultimately, 
women took over the task of continuously 
monitoring the early warning system. Their 
enhanced risk awareness and manage-
ment capacity enabled the municipality to 
evacuate promptly. Additional lessons from 

postdisaster recovery indicate that put-
ting women in charge of food distribution 
systems results in less corruption and more 
equitable food distribution.

Women’s participation boosts 
biodiversity and improves water 
management
Between 2001 and 2006 the Zammour 
locality in Tunis saw an increase in veg-
etal area, biodiversity preservation, and 
stabilization of eroding lands in the 
mountainous ecosystem—the result of an 
antidesertification program that invited 
women to share their perspectives during 
consultations, incorporated local women’s 
knowledge of water management, and 
was implemented by women. The proj-
ect assessed and applied innovative and 
effective rainwater collection and preser-
vation methods, such as planting in stone 
pockets to reduce the evaporation of irri-
gation water, and planting of local species 
of fruit trees to stabilize eroded lands. 

Women’s participation enhances 
food security and protects forests 
In Guatemala, Nicaragua, El Salvador, and 
Honduras women have planted 400,000 
maya nut trees since 2001. Beyond 
enhanced food security, women and their 
families can benefit from climate  change 
finance, as the sponsoring Equilibrium 
Fund pursues carbon- trading opportuni-
ties with the United States and Europe. 
In Zimbabwe, women lead over half of 
the 800,000 farm households living in 
communal areas, where women’s groups 
manage forest resources and develop-
ment projects through tree planting, 
nursery development, and woodlot own-
ership and management.

Women represent at least half of the 

world’s agricultural workers, and women 
and girls remain predominantly respon-
sible for water and firewood collection. 
Adaptation and mitigation potential, 
especially in the agriculture and forestry 
sectors, cannot be fully realized without 
employing women’s expertise in natural 
resource management, including tradi-
tional knowledge and efficiency in using 
resources.

Women’s participation supports 
public health 
In India indigenous peoples know medici-
nal herbs and shrubs and apply these for 
therapeutic uses. Indigenous women, as 
stewards of nature, are particularly knowl-
edgeable and can identify almost 300 
useful forest species.

Globally, whether in Central America, 

North Africa, South Asia, or Southern 
Africa, gender- sensitive climate  change 
adaptation and mitigation programs 
show measurable results: women’s full 
participation in decision making can 
and will save lives, protect fragile natural 
resources, reduce greenhouse gases, and 
build resilience for current and future 
generations. Mechanisms or financing for 
disaster prevention, adaptation, and miti-
gation will remain insufficient unless they 
integrate women’s full participation—
voices and hands—in design, decision 
making, and implementation.

Sources: Contributed by Nilufar Ahmad, 
based on Parikh 2008; Lambrou and Laub 
2004; Neumayer and Plumper 2007; Smyth 
2005; Aguilar 2006; UNISDR 2007; UNDP 
2009; and Martin 1996. 

followed  by  significantly  reduced  rural 
wages  in  the  short  term,  with  the  wages 
of affected workers catching up with their 
peers’ only after five years.38

In addition limited access to credit, insur-
ance, or collateral hampers poor households’ 
opportunities  to  make  productive  invest-
ments or leads them to choose investments 
with low risk and low returns to guard against 
future shocks.39 In villages throughout India 
poorer farmers have mitigated climatic risk 
by investing in assets and technologies with 

low sensitivity to rainfall variation but also 
with low average returns, locking in patterns 
of inequality in the country.40

Climate  shocks  can  also  permanently 
affect  people’s  health  and  education. 
Research  in  Côte  d’Ivoire  linking  rain-
fall patterns and investment in children’s 
education  shows  that  in  regions  experi-
encing  greater- than- usual  weather  vari-
ability,  school  enrollment  rates  declined 
by  20  percent  for  both  boys  and  girls.41 
And  when  coupled  with  other  problems, 

44 

WO R L D   D E V E LOpM E N T   R EpO RT   2 0 1 0

environmental shocks can have long- term 
effects. people exposed to drought and civil 
strife in Zimbabwe during early childhood 
(between 12 and 24 months of age) suffered 
from a height loss of 3.4 centimeters, close 
to 1 fewer years of schooling, and a nearly 
six- month  delay  in  starting  school.  The 
estimated effect on lifetime earnings was 14 
percent, a big difference to someone near 
the poverty line.42

Balancing growth and assessing policies 
in a changing climate
Growth:  Changing  carbon  footprints  and 
vulnerabilities.      By 2050 a large share of 
the population in today’s developing coun-
tries will have a middle- class lifestyle. But 
the planet cannot sustain 9 billion people 
with the carbon footprint of today’s aver-
age  middle- class  citizen.  Annual  emis-
sions would nearly triple. Moreover, not all 
development  increases  resilience:  growth 
may not happen fast enough and can create 
new vulnerabilities even as it reduces oth-
ers.  And  poorly  designed  climate  change 
policies could themselves become a threat 
to sustainable development. 

But  it  is  ethically  and  politically  unac-
ceptable to deny the world’s poor the oppor-
tunity to ascend the income ladder simply 
because the rich reached the top first. Devel-
oping countries now contribute about half 
of annual greenhouse gas emissions but have 
nearly 85 percent of the world’s population; 
the  energy- related  carbon  footprint  of  the 
average citizen of a low-  or middle- income 
country is 1.3 or 4.5 metric tons of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (CO2e), respectively, com-
pared with 15.3 in high- income countries.43 
Moreover,  the  bulk  of  past  emissions—
and  thus  the  bulk  of  the  existing  stock  of 
greenhouse  gases  in  the  atmosphere—is 
the responsibility of developed countries.44 
Resolving  the  threat  of  climate  change  to 
human  well- being  thus  not  only  depends 
on climate- smart development—increasing 
incomes and resilience while reducing emis-
sions relative to projected increases. It also 
requires  climate- smart  prosperity  in  the 
developed countries—with greater resilience 
and absolute reductions in emissions. 

Evidence  shows  that  policy  can  make 
a big difference in how carbon footprints 

change when incomes grow.45 The average 
carbon footprint of citizens in rich coun-
tries,  including  oil  producers  and  small 
island  states,  varies  by  a  factor  of  twelve, 
as  does  the  energy  intensity  of  GDp,46 
suggesting  that  carbon  footprints  do  not 
always increase with income. And today’s 
developing economies use much less energy 
per capita than developed countries such as 
the  United  States  did  at  similar  incomes, 
showing  the  potential  for  lower- carbon 
growth.47

Adaptation  and  mitigation  need  to  be 
integrated  into  a  climate- smart  develop-
ment  strategy  that  increases  resilience, 
reduces the threat of further warming, and 
improves development outcomes. Adapta-
tion and mitigation measures can advance 
development,  and  prosperity  can  raise 
incomes  and  foster  better  institutions.  A 
healthier population living in better- built 
houses and with access to bank loans and 
social  security  is  better  equipped  to  deal 
with  a  changing  climate  and  its  conse-
quences. Advancing robust, resilient devel-
opment  policies  that  promote  adaptation 
is needed today because changes in the cli-
mate, already begun, will increase even in 
the short term.

The spread of economic prosperity has 
always  been  intertwined  with  adaptation 
to  changing  ecological  conditions.  But  as 
growth has altered the environment and as 
environmental change has accelerated, sus-
taining growth and adaptability demands 
greater capacity to understand our environ-
ment, generate new adaptive technologies 
and practices, and diffuse them widely. As 
economic historians have explained, much 
of  humankind’s  creative  potential  has 
been directed at adapting to the changing 
world.48 But adaptation cannot cope with 
all the impacts related to climate change, 
especially as larger changes unfold in the 
long term (see chapter 2).49

Countries  cannot  grow  out  of  harm’s 
way fast enough to match the changing cli-
mate. And some growth strategies, whether 
driven  by  the  government  or  the  market, 
can also add to vulnerability—particularly 
if they overexploit natural resources. Under 
the Soviet development plan, irrigated cot-
ton cultivation expanded in water- stressed 

 

Understanding the Links between Climate Change and Development 

45

Central Asia and led to the near disappear-
ance of the Aral Sea, threatening the liveli-
hoods of fishermen, herders, and farmers.50 
And clearing mangroves—natural coastal 
buffers against storm surges—to make way 
for  intensive  shrimp  farming  or  housing 
development increases the physical vulner-
ability  of  coastal  settlements,  whether  in 
Guinea or in Louisiana.

Climate shocks can strain normally ade-
quate  infrastructure  or  reveal  previously 
untested institutional weaknesses, even in 
fast- growing  and  high- income  countries. 
For example, despite impressive economic 
growth for more than two decades, and in 
part because of accompanying labor- market 
transitions, millions of migrant workers in 
China were stranded during the unexpect-
edly intense snow storms in January 2008 
(map  1.4).  The  train  system  collapsed  as 
workers  returned  home  for  the  Chinese 
New  Year,  stranding  millions,  while  the 
southern  and  central  provinces  suffered 
food  shortages  and  power  failures.  Hur-
ricane  Katrina  exposed  the  United  States 
as  unprepared  and  ill  equipped,  showing 
that even decades of steady prosperity do 
not always produce good planning (and by 
extension, good adaptation). Nor do high 
average incomes guarantee protection for 
the poorest communities.

Mitigation  policies—for  better  or  worse.    
Mitigation policies can be exploited to pro-
vide  economic  co- benefits  in  addition  to 
emission  reductions  and  can  create  local 
and regional opportunities. Biofuels could 
make  Brazil  the  world’s  next  big  energy 
supplier—its ethanol production has more 
than doubled since the turn of the century.51 
A  large  share  of  unexploited  hydropower 
potential  is  in  developing  countries,  par-
ticularly in Sub- Saharan Africa (map 1.5). 
North  Africa  and  the  Middle  East,  with 
year- round  exposure  to  sunlight,  could 
benefit from increased European demand 
for solar energy (see chapter 4, box 4.15).52 
Yet  comparative  advantage  in  renewable 
energy production in many countries still 
is  not  optimally  exploited,  evidenced  by 
the  proliferation  of  solar  power  produc-
tion in Northern Europe rather than North 
Africa. 

But mitigation policies can also go wrong 
and reduce welfare if ancillary effects are not 
considered in design and execution. Relative 
to cleaner cellulosic ethanol production and 
even gasoline, corn- based biofuel produc-
tion  in  the  United  States  imposes  higher 
health costs from local pollution and offers 
only dubious CO2 emission reductions (fig-
ure 1.2).53 Moreover, biofuel policies in the 
United  States  and  Europe  have  diverted 
inputs  from  food  to  fuel  production  and 

Map 1.4      The January 2008 storm in China severely disrupted mobility, a pillar of its economic 
growth

IBRD 37176
September 2009
Map 1.4

Beijing

Shijiazhuang

Lanzhou

Longhai Line

Xi’an

Zhengzhou

Luoyang

Tianjin

Jinan
Jinghu Line

Qingdao

D.P.R.

OF

KOREA

Chengdu

Jingguang Line

Hefei

Chongqing

Wuhan

Nanjing

Suzhou

Shanghai

Hangzhou

Changsha

Nanchang

Jingjiu Line

Fuzhou

Guangzhou

Shenzhen

VIETNAM

LAO
P.D.R.

Provinces affected

Minimally/not affected

Moderately affected

Severely affected

high
medium
low

Travel flow from coastal
T
regions to rural regions

Railway network

Major passenger rail line

Sources: ACASIAN 2004; Chan 2008; Huang and Magnoli 2009; United States Department of Agriculture Foreign 
Agricultural Service, Commodity Intelligence Report, February 1 2008, http://www.pecad.fas.usda.gov/high-
lights/2008/02/MassiveSnowStorm.htm (accessed July 14, 2009); Ministry of Communications, Government of 
the People’s Republic of China, “The Guarantee Measures and Countermeasures for Extreme Snow and Rainfall 
Weather,” February 1 2008, http://www.china.org.cn/e- news/news080201- 2.htm (accessed July 14, 2009).
Note: Width of arrows reflects estimates of size of travel flows during the Chinese New Year holiday, based on 
reversal of estimated labor migration flows. Total internal migration is estimated between 130 million and 180 
million people. Assessment of severity of the storm’s impact is based on cumulative precipitation in the month 
of January and Chinese news and government communications at the time of the storm.

46 

WO R L D   D E V E LOpM E N T   R EpO RT   2 0 1 0

IBRD 37201
September 2009
Map 1.5

Map 1.5      Africa has enormous untapped hydropower potential, compared to lower potential but more 
exploitation of hydro resources in the United States

N

il

e

r

e

N i g

e

u

B e n

25% of world electricity 
production in 2005 

Total electricity 
production 
Economically feasible 
hydropower 
Current hydropower 
production 

B

l

u

e

 

N

i
l

e

W

h

i
t

e

 

N

i

l

e

Lukaga

Chire

Zambezi

Ubangi

o n go

C

laba

a
u

L

Orange

United States 

Sub-Saharan

Africa 

 
)
s
n
o
i
l
l
i

m

(
 

 

5
0
0
2
n
i
 
r
a
e
y

 
/
 

s
r
u
o
h
 
t
t
a
w
a
g
i
G

4.50

4.00

3.50

3.00

2.50

2.00

1.50

1.00

0.50

0.00

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Economically feasible hydropower in Sub–Saharan Africa (GWh per year) 

< 2,000

2,001–5,000

5,001–10,000

10,001–50,000

Undetermined or
not applicable

Sources: International Journal on Hydropower and Dams, World Atlas, 2006 (http://hydropower-dams.com, accessed July 9, 2009); 
IEA Energy Balances of OECD Countries 2008; and IEA Energy Balances of Non- OECD Countries 2007 (http://www.oecd.org/ 
document/10/0,3343,en_21571361_33915056_39154634_1_1_1_1,00.html, accessed July 9, 2009).
Note: The United States has exploited over 50 percent of its hydropower potential, compared to only 7–8 percent in the countries 
of Sub- Saharan Africa. Total electricity production in the United States is shown for scale.

contributed  to  increases  in  global  food 
prices.54 Such food price hikes often increase 
poverty rates.55 The overall impact on pov-
erty depends on the structure of the econ-
omy, because net producers will benefit from 
higher prices, and net buyers will be worse 
off. But many governments in food- surplus 
countries, including Argentina, India, and 

Ukraine, have responded with export bans 
and other protectionist measures, limiting 
the gains for domestic producers, reducing 
grain supplies, and narrowing the scope for 
future market solutions.56

The interrelationship of trade and mit-
igation policies is not straightforward. It 
has been suggested that the carbon content 

 

Understanding the Links between Climate Change and Development 

47

of exports be counted in the carbon tally 
of  the  destination  country,  so  that  the 
exporting countries are not punished for 
specializing in the heavy industrial goods 
consumed  by  others.  But  if  importers 
place a border tax on the carbon content of 
goods to equalize the carbon price, export-
ing countries would still bear some of the 
burden through a loss in competitiveness 
(see focus C on trade).

Green  taxes.      As  outlined  in  chapter  6, 
carbon taxes can be an efficient instrument 
for  controlling  carbon  emissions—but 
changes  in  the  tax  system  to  incorporate 
environmental  costs  (green  taxes)  could 
be regressive, depending on the country’s 
economic structure, the quality of target-
ing,  and  the  distribution  of  burden  shar-
ing. In the United Kingdom a carbon tax 
imposed equally on all households would 
be very regressive, consistent with findings 
from other OECD countries.57 The reason is 

Figure 1.2      Corn- based biofuels in the United States 
increase CO2 emissions and health costs relative to 
gasoline

Nonmarket costs ($/liter)

0.40

0.30

0.20

0.10

0.00

Heat source for ethanol production

Corn
wastes

Natural

gas

Coal

Gasoline

Corn ethanol

Cost of GHG emissions
from production and use
Cost of GHG emissions due to land-use change

Health cost from
particulates

Source: Hill and others 2009.
Note: Costs are in terms of dollar per liter of gasoline or 
gasoline equivalent. Health costs (green) are estimated costs 
because of particulate matter emissions, from the produc-
tion and end- use combustion of an additional liter of ethanol. 
Greenhouse- gas emission costs (blue) assume a carbon price 
of $120 a ton, based on the estimated price of carbon capture 
and storage. A portion (diagonal hatching in figure) of the 
greenhouse gas emissions associated with corn ethanol pro-
duction comes from clearing, conversion, or cultivation of land.

that spending on energy constitutes a larger 
share of total expenditures for poor house-
holds than for rich ones. But the regressive 
effect could be offset either through scaled 
tariff design or a targeted program based 
on existing social policy mechanisms.58

And green taxes in developing countries 
could even be progressive, as suggested by 
a recent study for China. Most poor house-
holds in China reside in rural areas and con-
sume products much less carbon intensive 
than those consumed by generally better-
 off  urban  households.  If  revenues  from  a 
carbon tax were recycled into the economy 
on an equal per capita basis, the progressive 
effect would be larger still.59

Gaining  political  support  for  green 
taxes and ensuring they do not harm the 
poor  will  not  be  easy.  Revenue  recycling 
would  be  critical  for  Latin  America  and 
Eastern Europe, where a significant share 
of the poor live in urban areas and would 
be  directly  hurt  by  green  taxes.  But  such 
revenue recycling, as well as the targeting 
suggested by the Great Britain study, would 
require  a  strong  commitment  to  such  a 
policy shift, difficult in the many develop-
ing countries where regressive subsidies for 
energy  and  other  infrastructure  services 
are politically entrenched. Without revenue 
recycling, the impact of carbon pricing or 
green taxes—even if progressive—is likely 
to harm the poor because poor households 
spend as much as 25 percent of their income 
on electricity, water, and transport. It is also 
likely to be politically difficult because even 
the average household spends about 10 per-
cent of its income on these services.60

The real income of the poorest will also 
be reduced in the near term as the higher 
up- front  costs  of  greener  infrastructure 
construction,  operation,  and  services  hit 
the supply side of the economy.61 A green 
tax could have a direct effect on households 
(caused  by  the  increase  in  energy  prices) 
and an indirect effect (on total household 
expenditure  as  a  result  of  higher  costs  of 
production  and  thus  prices  of  consumer 
goods). A study in Madagascar found that 
the indirect effects could represent 40 per-
cent  of  the  welfare  losses  through  higher 
prices  of  food,  textiles,  and  transport.62 
Despite the greater direct consumption of 

48 

WO R L D   D E V E LOpM E N T   R EpO RT   2 0 1 0

infrastructure services by the middle class, 
the poorest quintile was projected to suffer 
the biggest loss in real income.

There is ample scope around the world 
for better energy tariff and subsidy design 
that both increases cost recovery and bet-
ter targets benefits to the poor.63 Climate 
change  (and  green  tax  proceeds)  may 
make it worthwhile and feasible to expand 
income support programs to countries that 
now  rely  on  energy  and  water  pricing  as 
part of their social policy. Greater energy 
efficiency reduces costs for everyone, while 
greener technologies can be less expensive 
than traditional carbon- intensive ones. For 
example,  upgrading  to  improved  wood-
 fired  cook  stoves  in  rural  Mexico  could 
reduce  emissions  by  160  million  tons  of 
CO2 over the next 20 years, with net eco-
nomic gains (from lower direct energy costs 
and better health) of $8 to $24 for each ton 
of avoided CO2 emissions.64

Evaluating the tradeoffs
While few still debate the need for action 
to  mitigate  climate  change,  controversy 
remains over how much and how soon to 
mitigate.  Holding  the  changes  in  global 
average  temperatures  below  “dangerous” 
levels (see focus A on science) would require 
immediate and global actions—actions that 
are costly—to reduce emissions from pro-
jected levels by 50 to 80 percent by 2050.

A growing literature shows that the case 
for  immediate  and  significant  mitigation 
is  stronger  when  taking  into  account  the 
inertia in the climate system, meaning that 
warming  and  its  impacts  cumulate  slowly 
but are to a considerable extent irreversible; 
the inertia of the built environment, which 
implies a higher cost of reducing emissions 
in the future if higher- emission fixed capi-
tal is put into place today; and the benefit 
of reducing the greater uncertainty and risk 
of  catastrophic  outcomes  associated  with 
higher temperatures.65

Any response to climate change involves 
some weighing of pros and cons, strengths 
and  weaknesses,  benefits  and  costs.  The 
question  is  how  this  evaluation  is  to  be 
undertaken.  Cost- benefit  analysis  is  a 
crucial  tool  for  policy  evaluation  in  the 
unavoidable context of competing priorities 

and scarce resources. But monetizing costs 
and benefits can too easily omit nonmar-
ket environmental goods and services and 
becomes impossible if future risks (and atti-
tudes toward risk) are highly uncertain. 

Additional  decision  tools,  comple-
menting  cost- benefit  analysis,  are  needed 
to  establish  overall  goals  and  acceptable 
risks.  Multicriteria  approaches  can  pro-
vide insights about tradeoffs that are not all 
expressed in monetary terms. In the face of 
risk aversion and uncertainty about future 
climate  risks,  the  “tolerable  windows” 
approach can identify emissions paths that 
stay  within  chosen  boundaries  of  accept-
able risk and then evaluate the cost of doing 
so.66 “Robust decision making” can high-
light policies that provide an effective hedge 
against undesirable future outcomes.67

The cost- benefit debate: Why it’s not 
just about the discount rate
The economic debate about the cost- benefit 
analysis of climate change policy has been 
particularly  active  since  the  publication 
of  the  Stern  Review  of  the  Economics  of 
Climate Change in 2007. That report esti-
mated the potential cost of unmitigated cli-
mate change to be very high—a permanent 
annualized loss of 5–20 percent of GDp—
and  argued  for  strong  and  immediate 
action. The report’s recommendations con-
tradicted many other models that make an 
economic case for more gradual mitigation 
in the form of a “climate policy ramp.”68

The  academic  debate  on  the  appropri-
ate  discount  rate—which  drives  much 
of  the  difference  between  Stern’s  result 
and the others—will most likely never be 
resolved (box 1.2).69 Stern used a very low 
discount rate. In this approach, commonly 
justified on ethical grounds, the fact that 
future  generations  will  likely  be  richer  is 
the only factor that makes the valuation of 
future welfare lower than that of today; in 
all other ways, the welfare of future genera-
tions is just as valuable as the welfare of the 
current generation.70 Good arguments can 
be presented in favor of both high and low 
discount rates. Unfortunately, intergenera-
tional welfare economics cannot help solve 
the  debate—because  it  raises  more  ques-
tions than it can answer.71

 

Understanding the Links between Climate Change and Development 

49

Box 1.2      The basics of discounting the costs and benefits of climate change mitigation

The evaluation of resource allocation 
across time is a staple of applied eco-
nomics and project management. Such 
evaluations have been used extensively 
to analyze the problem of costs and ben-
efits of climate  change mitigation. But big 
disagreements remain about the correct 
values of the parameters.

The social discount rate expresses the 
monetary costs and benefits incurred in 
the future in terms of their present value, 
or their value to decision makers today. 
By definition, then, the primary tool of 
intergenerational welfare analysis—total 
expected net present value—collapses 
the distribution of welfare over time. 
Determining the appropriate value for the 
elements of the discount rate in the con-
text of a long- term problem like climate 
change involves deep economic and ethi-
cal considerations (see box 1.4).

Three factors determine the discount 

rate. The first is how much weight to 
give to the welfare enjoyed in the future, 
strictly because it comes later rather 
than sooner. This pure rate of time pref-
erence can be thought of as a measure 
of impatience. The second factor is the 
growth rate in per capita consumption: 
if growth is rapid, future generations will 
be much wealthier, reducing the value 
assigned today to losses from future 
climate damages compared with costs 
of mitigation borne today. The third fac-
tor is how steeply the marginal utility of 
consumption (a measure of how much an 
additional dollar is enjoyed) declines as 
income rises.a 

There is no universal agreement on 

how to choose the numerical values for 
each of the three factors that determine 
the social discount rate. Both ethical 

judgments and empirical information 
that attempt to assess preferences from 
past behavior are used, sometimes in 
combination. Because the costs of miti-
gation policies are borne immediately, 
and the possibly large benefits of such 
policies (avoided damages) are enjoyed 
far in the future, the choice of parameters 
for the social discount rate strongly influ-
ences climate- policy prescriptions.
Sources: Stern 2007; Stern 2008; Dasgupta 
2008; Roemer 2009; Sterner and Persson 
2008.
a. The marginal utility of consumption 
declines as income rises because an addi-
tional dollar of consumption provides more 
utility to a poor person than to a person 
already consuming a lot. The steepness of 
the change—known as the elasticity of the 
marginal utility of consumption with respect 
to changes in income level—also measures 
tolerance of risk and inequality.

Yet  the  call  for  rapid  and  significant 
action  to  mitigate  greenhouse  gas  emis-
sions is not solely dependent on a low dis-
count  rate.  While  its  role  in  determining 
the relative weight of costs and benefits is 
important, other factors raise the benefits 
of  mitigation  (avoided  damages)  in  ways 
that also strengthen the case for rapid and 
significant mitigation, even with a higher 
discount rate.72

Broader  impacts.      Most  economic  mod-
els of climate change impacts do not ade-
quately factor in the loss of biodiversity and 
associated ecosystem services—a paradoxi-
cal omission that amounts to analyzing the 
tradeoffs between consumption goods and 
environmental  goods  without  including 
environmental goods in individuals’ utility 
function.73 Although the estimated market 
value of lost environmental services may be 
difficult to calculate and may vary across 
cultures and value systems, such losses do 
have  a  cost.  The  losses  increase  the  rela-
tive price of environmental services as they 
become  relatively  and  absolutely  scarcer. 
Introducing  environmental  losses  into 
a  standard  integrated  assessment  model 
significantly  increases  the  overall  cost  of 

unmitigated climate change.74 In fact, fac-
toring the loss of biodiversity into a stan-
dard model results in a strong call for more 
rapid  mitigation,  even  with  a  higher  dis-
count rate.

More  accurately  modeled  dynamics: 
Threshold effects and inertia.      The dam-
age function, which links changes in tem-
peratures to associated monetized damages, 
is usually modeled in cost- benefit analysis 
as  rising  smoothly.  But  mounting  scien-
tific evidence suggests that natural systems 
could  exhibit  nonlinear  responses  to  cli-
mate change as a consequence of positive 
feedbacks,  tipping  points,  and  thresholds 
(box 1.3). positive feedbacks could occur, 
for example, if warming causes the perma-
frost to thaw, releasing the vast amounts of 
methane (a potent greenhouse gas) it con-
tains  and  further  accelerating  warming. 
Thresholds or tipping points are relatively 
rapid and large- scale changes in natural (or 
socioeconomic) systems that lead to serious 
and irreversible losses. positive feedbacks, 
tipping  points,  and  thresholds  mean  that 
there might be great value to keeping both 
the pace and magnitude of climate change 
as low as possible.75

50 

WO R L D   D E V E LOpM E N T   R EpO RT   2 0 1 0

Box 1.3      Positive feedbacks, tipping points, thresholds, and nonlinearities in natural and 
socioeconomic systems

Positive feedbacks in the  
climate system
Positive feedbacks amplify the effects 
of greenhouse gases. One such positive 
feedback is the change in reflectiveness, 
or albedo, of the earth’s surface: highly 
reflective surfaces like ice and snow 
bounce the sun’s warming rays back out 
to the atmosphere, but as higher tempera-
tures cause ice and snow to melt, more 
energy is absorbed on the earth’s surface, 
leading to further warming and more 
melting, as the process repeats itself.
Tipping points in natural systems
Even smooth, moderate changes in the 
climate can lead a natural system to a 
point beyond which relatively abrupt, 
possibly accelerating, irreversible, and 
ultimately very damaging changes occur. 
For example, regional forest die- off could 
result from the combination of drought, 
pests, and higher temperatures that 
combine to exceed physiological limits. A 
possible tipping point of global concern 
is the melting of the ice sheet that covers 
much of Greenland. Past a certain level of 
warming, summer melt will not refreeze 
in winter, dramatically increasing the rate 
of melting and leading to a sea- level rise 
of 6 meters.
Thresholds in socioeconomic systems
The economic cost of direct impacts could 
also present strong threshold effects—a 
result of the fact that current infrastruc-
tures and production practices are engi-
neered to be robust only to previously 
experienced variation in weather condi-
tions. This suggests that any increases 
in impacts will be driven primarily by 
rising concentrations of population and 
assets rather than by climate—so long as 

weather events remain within the enve-
lope of past variations—but that impacts 
could increase sharply if climate condi-
tions consistently exceed these boundar-
ies in the future.
Nonlinearities and indirect  
economic effects
The economic response to these impacts 
is itself nonlinear, in part because climate-
 change impacts will simultaneously 
increase the need for adaptation and 
potentially decrease adaptive capacity. 
Direct impacts can also beget indirect 
effects (macroeconomic feedbacks, busi-
ness interruptions, and supply- chain 
disruptions) that increase more than 
dollar for dollar in response to greater 

direct damages. This effect is evident in 
some natural disasters. Recent evidence 
in Louisiana shows that the economy has 
the capacity to absorb up to $50 billion of 
direct losses with minimal indirect losses. 
But indirect losses increase rapidly with 
more destructive disasters (figure). Direct 
losses from Hurricane Katrina reached 
$107 billion, with indirect losses adding 
another $42 billion; a simulated disaster 
with direct losses of $200 billion would 
cause an additional $200 billion in indi-
rect losses.

Sources: Schmidt 2006; Kriegler and others 
2009; Adams and others 2009; Hallegatte 
2008; personal communication from 
Stéphane Hallegatte, May 2009.

Indirect losses increase even more steeply as direct damages rise: Estimates from Louisiana

Indirect losses ($ billions)
400

350

300

250

200

150

100

50

0

–50

0

50

100

150

200

250

300

Source: Data provided by Stéphane Hallegatte, based on Hallegatte 2008.

Direct losses ($ billions)

Substantial inertia in the climate sys-
tem  adds  to  the  concern  about  positive 
feedbacks,  threshold  effects,  and  irre-
versibility  of  climate   change  impacts. 
Scientists  have  found  that  the  warming 
caused  by  increases  in  greenhouse  gas 
concentration  may  be  largely  irrevers-
ible for a thousand years after emissions 
stop.76 postponing mitigation forgoes the 
option of a lower warming trajectory: for 

example,  a  delay  of  more  than  10  years 
would likely preclude stabilization of the 
atmosphere at any less than 3°C of warm-
ing.77 In addition, the climate system will 
keep changing for several centuries even 
after concentrations of greenhouse gases 
stabilize  (see  overview).  So  only  imme-
diate  mitigation  preserves  the  option 
value—that is, avoids the loss of options 
in stabilization outcomes.

 

Understanding the Links between Climate Change and Development 

51

Inertia is also substantial in the built envi-
ronment—transport,  energy,  housing,  and 
the urban form (the way cities are designed). 
In response to this inertia, some argue for 
postponing mitigation investments to avoid 
getting locked into higher cost, lower- carbon 
investments  unnecessarily,  instead  waiting 
until better, less expensive technology allows 
quick ramping up of mitigation and more is 
known about the risks societies will need to 
protect against.

But it is not possible in practice to post-
pone major investments in infrastructure 
and energy provision without compromis-
ing economic development. Energy demand 
is  likely  to  triple  in  developing  countries 
between 2002 and 2030. In addition, many 
power plants in high- income countries were 
built in the 1950s and 1960s so are coming 
to the end of their useful life, implying that 
many new plants will need to be built over 
the  next  10–20  years  even  with  constant 
demand.  Currently,  coal  plants  remain 
among the cheapest option for many coun-
tries—in addition to offering energy secu-
rity for those with ample coal reserves. If all 
coal- burning power plants scheduled to be 
built in the next 25 years come into opera-
tion, their lifetime CO2 emissions would be 
equal to those of all coal- burning activities 
since the beginning of industrialization.78 
Consequently,  the  absence  of  stronger 
emission  reduction  commitments  by  the 
power  sector  today  will  lock  in  relatively 
high emission trajectories.

Nor  is  it  always  possible  to  cost-
 effectively  retrofit  such  investments  on  a 
large  scale.  Retrofits  are  not  always  pos-
sible, and they can be prohibitively costly. 
Staying  with  the  coal  example,  carbon 
capture and storage—a technology that is 
being  developed  to  capture  the  CO2  pro-
duced by a fossil- fuel power plant and store 
it underground—requires that the plant be 
located within 50 to 100 miles of an appro-
priate  CO2  storage  site  or  else  the  cost  of 
transporting the carbon becomes prohibi-
tively high.79 For countries endowed with 
an abundance of potential storage sites, this 
is not an issue: about 70 percent of China’s 
power plants happen to be close enough to 
storage sites and therefore could reasonably 
be retrofitted if and when the technology 

becomes  commercially  available.  This  is 
not the case in India, South Africa, or many 
other countries, where retrofits will prove 
unaffordable  unless  new  plants  are  sited 
close to the few existing storage sites (see 
chapters 4 and 7).

Developing countries, with less existing 
infrastructure than developed countries, 
have  a  f lexibility  advantage  and  could 
potentially  leapfrog  to  cleaner  technolo-
gies.  Developed  countries  must  provide 
leadership in bringing new technologies to 
market and sharing knowledge from their 
experiences of deployment. The ability to 
change emissions trajectories depends on 
the availability of appropriate and afford-
able technology, which will not be in place 
at some future date without research and 
development (R&D) investment, dissemi-
nation,  and  learning- by- doing  starting 
today.

Opportunities to shift from higher-  to 
lower- carbon  long- lived  capital  stock  are 
not equally available over time.80 The choice 
to switch to a more energy and economi-
cally efficient system realistically cannot be 
made in the future if the required technolo-
gies are not yet on the shelf and at sufficient 
scale to be affordable and if people do not 
yet  have  the  know- how  to  use  them  (see 
chapter 7).81 Effective, affordable backstop 
mitigation  technologies  for  transforming 
energy systems will not be available in the 
future  without  active  research  and  dem-
onstration  initiatives  that  move  potential 
technologies  along  the  cost  and  learning 
curves.  To  that  end,  developed  countries 
need  to  provide  leadership  in  developing 
and bringing new technologies to market 
and in sharing knowledge from their expe-
riences of deployment.

Accounting for uncertainties.      Economic 
assessments  of  climate  change  policies 
must factor in the uncertainties about the 
size  and  timing  of  adverse  impacts  and 
about the feasibility, cost, and time pro-
files  of  mitigation  efforts.  A  key  uncer-
tainty missed by most economic models is 
the possibility of large catastrophic events 
related to climate change (see focus A on 
science), a topic that is at the center of an 
ongoing  debate.82  The  underlying  prob-

52 

WO R L D   D E V E LOpM E N T   R EpO RT   2 0 1 0

ability  distribution  of  such  catastrophic 
risks is unknown and will likely remain so. 
More aggressive mitigation almost surely 
will  reduce  their  likelihood,  though  it  is 
very difficult to assess by how much. The 
possibility of a global catastrophe, even one 
with very low probability, should increase 
society’s willingness to pay for faster and 
more  aggressive  mitigation  to  the  extent 
that it helps to avoid calamity.83

Even  without  considering  these  cata-
strophic  risks,  substantial  uncertainties 
remain  around  climate  change’s  ecologi-
cal and economic impacts. The likely pace 
and  ultimate  magnitude  of  warming  are 
unknown.  How  changes  in  climate  vari-
ability and extremes—not just changes in 
mean temperature—will affect natural sys-
tems and human well- being is uncertain. 
Knowledge is limited about people’s ability 
to adapt, the costs of adaptation, and the 
magnitude of unavoided residual damages. 
Uncertainty about the speed of discovering, 
disseminating, and adopting new technolo-
gies is also substantial.

These uncertainties only increase with 
the pace and amount of warming—a major 
argument  for  immediate  and  aggressive 
action.84 Greater uncertainty requires adap-
tation strategies that can cope with many 
different  climates  and  outcomes.  Such 
strategies exist (and are discussed below), 
but  they  are  less  efficient  than  strategies 
that could be designed with perfect knowl-
edge.  So  uncertainty  is  costly.  And  more 
uncertainty increases costs.

Without  inertia  and  irreversibility, 
uncertainty  would  not  matter  so  much, 
because  decisions  could  be  reversed  and 
adjustments  would  be  smooth  and  cost-
less. But tremendous inertia—in the cli-
mate  system,  in  the  built  environment, 
and  in  the  behavior  of  individuals  and 
institutions—makes it costly, if not impos-
sible,  to  adjust  in  the  direction  of  more 
stringent mitigation if new information is 
revealed or new technologies are slow to 
be discovered. So inertia greatly increases 
the potential negative implications of cli-
mate policy decisions under uncertainty. 
And  uncertainty  combined  with  inertia 
and  irreversibility  argue  for  greater  pre-
cautionary mitigation.

The  economics  of  decision  making 
under uncertainty makes a case that uncer-
tainty about the effects of climate change 
calls for more rather than less mitigation.85 
Uncertainty makes a strong argument for 
adopting an iterative approach to selecting 
targets—starting with an aggressive stance. 
This  is  not  lessened  by  the  prospect  of 
learning (acquiring new information that 
changes our assessment of uncertainty).

Normative choices on aggregation and values.    
Climate   change  policies  require  tradeoffs 
between  short- term  actions  and  long- term 
benefits,  between  individual  choices  and 
global  consequences.  So  climate   change 
policy  decisions  are  driven  fundamentally 
by ethical choices. Indeed, such decisions are 
about concern for the welfare of others.

Directly  including  the  benefits  from 
nonmarket  environmental  goods—and 
their  existence  for  future  generations—
in  economic  models  of  well- being  is  one 
approach  for  capturing  these  tradeoffs.87 
In  practice  the  ability  to  quantify  such 
tradeoffs has been limited, but this frame-
work does provide a point of departure for 
further assessment of the increased value 
that  societies  assign  to  the  environment 
as  income  increases,  of  possible  tradeoffs 
between  current  consumption  and  costly 
efforts to safeguard the welfare—and exis-
tence—of future generations.88

Moreover,  the  way  a  model  aggregates 
impacts  across  individuals  or  countries  of 
different income levels significantly affects 
the value of estimated losses.89 To capture a 
dimension of equity additional to the inter-
generational concerns expressed in the dis-
count rate, equity weights can be applied to 
reflect that the loss of a dollar means more 
to  a  poor  person  than  to  a  rich  one.  Such 
an approach better captures human welfare 
(rather than just income). And because poor 
people and poor countries are more exposed 
to  climate  change,  this  approach  substan-
tially  increases  estimated  aggregate  losses 
from climate change. By contrast, summing 
up global damages in dollars and expressing 
them as a share of global GDp—implicitly 
weighting damages by contribution to total 
output—amounts  to  giving  a  much  lower 
weight to the losses of poor people.

 

Understanding the Links between Climate Change and Development 

53

Value systems also play a role in environ-
mental  policy  decisions.  Recently  climate 
change has emerged as a human rights issue 
(box 1.4). And most societies have ethical 
or religious systems that value nature and 
identify human responsibilities for the stew-
ardship of the earth and its natural riches—
though  the  results  often  fall  short  of  the 
espoused ideals. In the first half of the 1600s, 
Japan was hurtling toward an environmental 

catastrophe through massive deforestation. 
But as early as 1700 it had an elaborate sys-
tem  of  woodland  management  in  place.90 
One  reason  the  Tokugawa  shogunate,  the 
rulers at the time, decided to act was con-
cern for future family generations—a con-
cern that resulted from Confucian cultural 
traditions91—and a desire to maintain the 
hereditary  political  system.  Today,  Japan’s 
territory is almost 80 percent forested.92

Box 1.4      Ethics and climate change

The complexity of climate change high-
lights several ethical questions. Issues 
of fairness and justice are particularly 
important given the long temporal and 
geographical disconnect between green-
house gas emissions and their impacts. 
At least three major ethical dimensions 
arise in the climate  change problem: 
evaluating impacts, considering intergen-
erational equity, and distributing respon-
sibilities and costs. 
Evaluating impacts
Several disciplines, economics included, 
argue that welfare should be the over-
arching criterion in policy evaluation. But 
even within a “discounted utilitarianism” 
framework, there are large disagree-
ments, most notably about which dis-
count rate to use and how to aggregate 
welfare across individuals in the present 
and future. One common argument is 
that there is no sound ethical reason to 
discount economic and human impacts 
just because they are anticipated to hap-
pen 40—or even 400—years hence. A 
counterargument is that it is not equita-
ble for the current generation to allocate 
resources to mitigating future climate 
change if other investments are seen to 
have a higher return, thus coming back to 
the problem of weighing costs and ben-
efits of alternative uncertain options.
Recent discussion has focused on 

human rights as the relevant criterion 
for evaluating impacts. Some human 
rights—particularly economic and social 
rights—will be jeopardized by climate-
 change impacts and possibly some policy 
responses. These include the right to 
food, the right to water, and the right to 
shelter. Climate impacts may also have 

direct and indirect effects on exercising 
and realizing civil and political rights. But 
establishing causation and attribution is a 
serious problem and may limit the scope 
for applying human rights law to interna-
tional or domestic disputes.

Because the causes of climate change 
are diffuse, the direct link between the 
emissions of a country and the impacts 
suffered in another are difficult to estab-
lish in a litigation context. A further obsta-
cle to defining responsibility and harm in 
legal terms is the diffusion of emissions 
and impacts over time: in some cases, 
the source of the harm has occurred over 
multiple generations, and the damages 
felt today may also by felt by many future 
generations.

Considering intergenerational equity
Intergenerational equity is an integral 
part of the evaluation of impacts. How 
intergenerational equity is incorporated 
in an underlying economic model has sig-
nificant implications. As noted in box 1.2, 
standard present- value criteria discount 
future costs and benefits, collapsing the 
distribution of welfare over time to the 
present moment. Alternative formula-
tions include maximizing the current gen-
eration’s utility, incorporating its altruistic 
concerns for future generations, and 
taking into account the uncertainty of the 
existence of future generations.

Distributing responsibilities  
and costs
Probably the most contentious issue 
is who should bear the burden of solv-
ing the climate  change problem. One 
ethical response is the “polluter pays” 
principle: responsibilities should be 

allocated according to each country’s or 
group’s contribution to climate change. 
A particular version of this view is that 
cumulative historical emissions need to 
be taken into account when establish-
ing responsibilities. A counterargument 
holds that “excusable ignorance” grants 
immunity to past emitters, because they 
were not aware of the consequences of 
their actions, but this argument has been 
criticized on the grounds that the poten-
tial negative effects of greenhouse gases 
on the climate have been understood for 
some time.

A further dimension of responsibility 

concerns how people have benefited 
from the past emissions of greenhouse 
gases (see overview figure 3). While these 
benefits clearly have been enjoyed by 
the developed countries, which have 
contributed the bulk of atmospheric CO2 
so far, developing countries also gained 
some benefits from the resulting prosper-
ity. One response is to ignore the past 
and allot equal per capita entitlements 
to all future emissions. Yet another view 
recognizes that what is ultimately impor-
tant is not the distribution of emissions 
but rather the distribution of economic 
welfare, including climate change dam-
ages and mitigation costs. This suggests 
that in a world of unequal wealth, greater 
responsibility for bearing costs falls to 
the better off—although this conclusion 
does not preclude mitigation actions 
being undertaken in poorer countries 
with external finance provided by high-
 income countries (see chapter 6).

Sources: Singer 2006; Roemer 2009; Caney 
2009; World Bank 2009b. 

54 

WO R L D   D E V E LOpM E N T   R EpO RT   2 0 1 0

Alternative frameworks for decision 
making
Uncertainty, inertia, and ethics point to the 
need for caution and thus to the need for 
more immediate and aggressive mitigation, 
but  the  analytical  debate  over  how  much 
more  continues  among  economists  and 
policy  makers.  The  conclusions  of  differ-
ent cost- benefit analyses are very sensitive 
to  initial  assumptions  such  as  the  base-
line  scenario,  the  abatement  and  damage 
functions,  and  the  discount  rate,  includ-
ing  implicit  assumptions  embedded  in 
model formulations93—which can lead to 
decision- making gridlock.

Alternative  decision- making  frame-
works  that  incorporate  broader- based 
assessments  of  costs  and  benefits,  allow-
ance  for  risk  aversion,  and  the  impli-
cations  of  ethical  judgments  can  more 
effectively  support  decision  making  in 
the face of numerous knowledge gaps and 
obstacles. Including some of the valuation 
issues noted above (option values, ecosys-
tem services, risks of discontinuities) into 
a broader cost- benefit analysis is desirable 
(albeit difficult). More, however, is needed 
to  make  the  normative  consequences  of 
policy choices as transparent as possible to 
inform decision makers aiming to estab-
lish concrete environmental and develop-
ment  targets  and  policies.  That  can  help 
them win the support of the myriad stake-
holders who will experience the real- world 
costs and benefits.

One alternative is a tolerable windows, 
or  “guardrail,”  approach.  A  window  of 
mitigation  goals,  or  a  range  bounded  by 
guardrails,  is  chosen  to  limit  tempera-
ture  change  and  the  rate  of  change  to 
what are considered—heuristically or on 
the  basis  of  expert  judgment—to  be  tol-
erable levels.94 The window is defined by 
constraints derived from several climate-
 sensitive systems. One constraint could be 
determined by society’s aversion to a given 
GDp loss, associated with a given amount 
and rate of temperature change. A second 
could  be  defined  by  society’s  aversion  to 
social  strife  and  inequitable  impacts.  A 
third  could  be  concern  about  warming 
 thresholds, beyond which certain ecosys-
tems collapse.95

The  guardrails  approach  does  not 
require a monetary estimate of the damages, 
because the constraints are determined by 
what is judged to be tolerable in each system 
(for instance, it might be difficult to trans-
late into GDp figures the number of people 
displaced after a severe drought). Drivers 
of the value of emission guardrails include 
scientific  analysis  of  the  potential  for 
threshold effects, as well as nonmonetized 
judgments about residual risks and vulner-
abilities  that  would  remain  under  differ-
ent  mitigation  and  adaptation  strategies. 
The  costs  of  remaining  within  proposed 
sets of guardrails need to be considered in 
relation to the judgments surrounding the 
levels of climate safety provided by the dif-
ferent guardrails. On this sort of multicri-
teria  basis,  decision  makers  can  make  an 
informed and more comprehensive assess-
ment of where it is best to set the guardrails 
(and  this  assessment  can  be  periodically 
revisited over time).

This approach can be complemented by 
decision support techniques, such as robust 
decision  making,  to  address  difficult- to-
 evaluate  uncertainties.96  In  the  context  of 
unknown probabilities and a highly uncer-
tain  future,  a  robust  strategy  answers  the 
question, “What actions should we take, given 
that we cannot predict the future, to reduce 
the possibility of an undesirable outcome to 
an acceptable level?”97 In the context of cli-
mate change, policy becomes a contingency 
problem—what is the best strategy given a 
variety of possible outcomes?—rather than a 
traditional optimization problem. The intel-
lectual underpinnings of this approach are 
not new; they can be traced back to the work 
by Savage in the early 1950s on “minimizing 
the maximum regret.”98 

Looking for robust rather than just opti-
mal strategies is done through what essen-
tially amounts to scenario- based planning. 
Different scenarios are created, and alter-
native policy options are compared based 
on their robustness—the ability to avoid a 
given  outcome—across  the  different  sce-
narios.  Such  analysis  includes  “shaping 
actions” that influence the future, “hedg-
ing actions” that reduce future vulnerabil-
ity, and “signposts” that indicate the need 
for a reassessment or change of strategies. 

 

Understanding the Links between Climate Change and Development 

55

Robust decision analysis can also be done 
with  more  formal  quantitative  tools,  in 
an  exploratory  modeling  approach,  using 
mathematical methods for characterizing 
decisions and outcomes under conditions 
of deep uncertainty. 

Under  robust  decision  making,  costs, 
benefits, and the tradeoffs inherent in cli-
mate  policies  are  assessed  under  all  sce-
narios.  The  policy  prescription  is  not  to 
pursue an “optimal” policy—in the tradi-
tional  sense  of  maximizing  utility—that 
performs, on average, better than the oth-
ers. Instead, sound policies are those that 
withstand unpredictable futures in a robust 
way. In this framing near- term policies can 
be understood as a hedge against the cost 
of policy adjustments—lending support to 
efforts to invest in R&D and infrastructure 
today  to  keep  open  the  option  of  a  low-
 carbon future tomorrow.99

The costs of delaying the global 
mitigation effort
Today’s global warming was caused over-
whelmingly by emissions from rich coun-
tries.100  Developing  countries  are  rightly 
concerned  about  the  consequences  of 
imposing limitations on their growth. This 
supports  the  argument,  embodied  in  the 
principle  of  “common  but  differentiated 
responsibilities”  in  the  United  Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change 
(UNFCCC), which holds that high-income 
countries  should  lead  in  reducing  emis-
sions,  given  both  their  historical  respon-
sibility  and  their  significantly  higher  per 
capita  emissions  today.  Developed  coun-
tries’ much greater financial and technolog-
ical resources further argue for their taking 
on the bulk of mitigation costs, regardless 
of where the mitigation occurs.

But emission reductions by rich countries 
alone will not be enough to limit warming 
to  tolerable  levels.  While  cumulative  per 
capita  past  emissions  are  small  especially 
in low- income but also in middle- income 
countries,101  total  annual  energy- related 
CO2 emissions in middle- income countries 
have caught up with those of rich countries, 
and the largest share of current emissions 
from  land-use  change  comes  from  tropi-
cal countries.102 More important, projected 

changes in fossil- fuel use in middle- income 
countries suggest that their CO2 emissions 
will  continue  to  increase  and  will  exceed 
the  cumulative  emissions  of  developed 
countries in the coming decades.103

The implication, as stated in the UNFCCC 
and the Bali Action plan,104 is that all nations 
have  a  role  in  an  agreement  that  reduces 
global emissions and that this role has to be 
commensurate with their development sta-
tus. In this approach, developed countries 
take the lead in meeting significant reduction 
targets, and they assist developing countries 
in laying the foundations for lower- carbon 
growth pathways and meeting their citizens’ 
adaptation needs. The UNFCC also calls for 
developed countries to compensate develop-
ing countries for the additional mitigation 
and adaptation costs developing countries 
will incur.

A  critical  component  of  global  action 
is a global mechanism allowing those who 
mitigate to differ from those who pay (the 
subject of chapter 6). Negotiated interna-
tional  financial  transfers  can  enable  the 
direct  financing—by  high-income  coun-
tries—of mitigation measures undertaken 
in  developing  countries.  (In  developing 
countries,  mitigation  will  often  entail 
reorienting  future  emission  trajectories 
to  more  sustainable  levels,  not  reducing 
absolute emission levels.) Unlocking large-
 scale finance from the high- income coun-
tries seems a great challenge. However, if 
high- income countries are committed to 
achieving lower total global emissions, it 
is in their interest to provide the financing 
to ensure that significant mitigation takes 
place  in  developing  countries.  Estimates 
of global mitigation costs usually assume 
that  mitigation  will  happen  wherever  or 
whenever  it  is  cheapest.  Many  low- cost 
measures  to  reduce  emissions  relative  to 
projected  trajectories  are  in  developing 
countries. So global least- cost mitigation 
paths  always  imply  that  a  large  share  of 
mitigation  is  in  developing  countries—
regardless of who pays.105

Delayed action by any country to signif-
icantly lower emission trajectories implies 
a higher global cost for any chosen mitiga-
tion target. For example, delaying mitiga-
tion actions in developing countries until 

56 

WO R L D   D E V E LOpM E N T   R EpO RT   2 0 1 0

2050 could more than double the total cost 
of meeting a particular target, according to 
one estimate.106 Another estimate suggests 
that an international agreement that cov-
ers only the five countries with the high-
est total emissions (covering two- thirds of 
emissions) would triple the cost of achiev-
ing a given target, compared with full par-
ticipation.107 The reason is that shrinking 
the pool of mitigation opportunities avail-
able for reaching a set target requires pur-
suing not only the negative-  and low- cost 
measures but also high- cost measures.

Although  developed  and  developing 
countries have similar potential for nega-
tive cost (net benefit) measures and high-
 cost measures, the middle range of low- cost 
mitigation  options  is  predominantly  in 
developing countries (with many in agri-
culture and forestry). Exploiting all avail-
able measures will be crucial for achieving 
substantial mitigation. This point is illus-
trated  by  the  McKinsey  analysis  (figure 
1.3a),  but  the  results  are  not  exclusive  to 
it.  If  developing  countries  do  not  reduce 
their emission trajectories, the total cost of 
any  chosen  amount  of  mitigation  will  be 
much higher (the marginal cost of abate-
ment  in  developed  countries  alone—the 
red  line  in  figure  1.3b—is  always  higher 
than if the global portfolio of options—the 
orange line in figure 1.3b—is considered). 
The  decline  in  total  mitigation  potential 
and the increase in global mitigation costs 
stemming from an approach involving mit-
igation  mostly  in  high-income  countries 
do not depend on any particular model.108 
Nor do they depend on any differences in 
opportunities and costs between developed 
and developing countries: if the developed 
countries  declined  to  reduce  their  emis-
sions, similarly global costs would rise and 
some amount of potential abatement would 
be forgone (figure 1.3c).

These  increases  in  global  abatement 
costs  represent  pure  deadweight  losses—
wasted additional costs that yield zero wel-
fare gains. Avoiding such losses (the shaded 
wedges between the marginal cost curves 
in figures 1.3b and 1.3c) creates plenty of 
incentives and space to negotiate the loca-
tion  and  financing  of  mitigation  actions 
while making all participants better off. It 

is much cheaper for the world as a whole 
to reach a given mitigation goal with a full 
portfolio of measures occurring in all coun-
tries. It is so much cheaper that, provided 
enough countries are committed to a global 
mitigation objective, all will be better off if 
the  developed  countries  bear  the  cost  of 
financing scaled- up measures in develop-
ing countries today.

Developed  countries  have  the  means 
and incentives to transfer enough finance 
to non- Annex I countries109 to make them 
at least as well off by receiving transfers and 
scaling up their mitigation efforts imme-
diately,  compared  with  delaying  commit-
ment a decade or more before phasing in 
their own national targets and policies. For 
a given mitigation target, each dollar trans-
ferred to that end could yield an average of 
three dollars in welfare gains by eliminat-
ing  deadweight  losses—gains  that  can  be 
shared  according  to  negotiated  terms.  In 
other words, the participation of develop-
ing  countries  in  reaching  a  global  target 
is worth a lot. Sharing the large recovered 
deadweight losses can form a strong incen-
tive for universal participation in a fair deal. 
It is not a zero- sum game.110

That said, it is crucial not to underesti-
mate the difficulties of reaching agreement 
on global emissions targets. The reason is 
that such agreement suffers from a kind of 
international “tragedy of the commons”: all 
countries can benefit from global partici-
pation, but unilateral incentives to partici-
pate are weak for most countries. This is the 
case not only because all countries would 
like to free ride, enjoying the benefits with-
out bearing the costs.111 Most countries are 
small enough that if one decided to defect 
from  a  global  agreement,  the  agreement 
would  not  unravel.  When  applied  to  all 
countries, however, this reasoning under-
mines the possibility of reaching a deal in 
the first place.112

In fact, simulations exploring a variety 
of  coalition  structures  and  international 
resource  transfers  to  persuade  reluctant 
participants to stay in the coalition reveal 
the difficulty in reaching a stable agreement 
(one that is consistent with self- interest) to 
undertake  deep  and  costly  cuts  in  global 
emissions.  Stable  and  effective  coalitions 

Figure 1.3      Assessing deadweight losses from partial participation in a climate deal

a. Global greenhouse gas mitigation marginal cost curve beyond 2030 business-as-usual

Land-use and land-use change, mostly in developing 
countries: reduced deforestation, grassland 
management, soil restoration, afforestation, 
changed agronomy practices, livestock practices, 
reduced intensive agricultural conversion

Advanced technologies:
carbon capture and storage

Efficiency in buildings:
residential and commercial;
building envelope, heat & water

Marginal mitigation cost ($/tCO2e)
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
–20
–40
–60
–80
–100
–120
–140
–160

0

More efficient motors;
energy co-generation;
electricity from landfill waste;
gasoline plug-in hybrid engine

Negative costs: Long-term savings
outweigh initial costs

10

Small hydro and nuclear power 
in developing countries

Renewable energy: on- and off-shore wind,
solar photovoltaic energy, concentrated solar power

Marginal cost, all countries
Mitigation measure in a developing country
Mitigation measure in a high-income country

20

30

40

Mitigation potential (GtCO2e/year)

b. Deadweight loss from only mitigating in developed countries: a limited participation marginal cost curve

Marginal mitigation cost ($/tCO2e)
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
–20
–40
–60
–80
–100
–120
–140
–160

0

Gt of forgone mitigation at $120/tCO2e

Additional cost of
achieving 10 Gt of
mitigation

10

20

30

40

Mitigation potential (GtCO2e/year)

Marginal cost, all countries
Marginal cost, only
high-income countries
Deadweight loss

c. Deadweight loss from only mitigating in developing countries: a limited participation marginal cost curve

Marginal mitigation cost ($/tCO2e)
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
–20
–40
–60
–80
–100
–120
–140
–160

0

Gt of forgone mitigation at $120/tCO2e

Additional cost of achieving
25 Gt of mitigation

10

20

Mitigation potential (GtCO2e/year)

Marginal cost, all countries
Marginal cost, only
developing countries
Deadweight loss

30

40

Source: McKinsey & Company 2009 with further data breakdown provided for WDR 2010 team.
Note: The bars in (a) represent various mitigation measures, with the width indicating the amount of emission reduction each measure would achieve and the height indicating the 
cost, per ton of avoided emissions, of the measure. Tracing the height of the bars creates a marginal mitigation cost curve. Panels (b) and (c) show the marginal mitigation cost curve 
if mitigation only takes place in high-income countries (b) or only in developing countries (c), as well as the resulting deadweight losses associated with these scenarios. Such dead-
weight losses could be avoided or minimized through financial mechanisms that allow a separation between who pays and who mitigates, and ensure the most cost-effective mitiga-
tion measures are adopted.

58 

WO R L D   D E V E LOpM E N T   R EpO RT   2 0 1 0

are possible for milder and less costly global 
emissions cuts, but such cuts do not suffi-
ciently address the threats to sustainability 
of greater climate change.113

Seizing the moment: Immediate 
stimulus and long- term 
transformations 
In 2008 the global economy suffered a dra-
matic  shock,  triggered  by  disruptions  in 
the  housing  and  financial  markets  in  the 
United  States  and  eventually  encompass-
ing  many  countries.  The  world  had  not 
experienced such a financial and economic 
upheaval since the Great Depression. Credit 
markets  froze,  investors  fled  to  safety, 
scores  of  currencies  realigned,  and  stock 
markets dropped sharply. At the height of 
the financial volatility the stock market in 
the United States lost $1.3 trillion in value 
in one session.114

The ongoing consequences for the real 
economy  and  development  indicators 
around the world are huge—and continue 
to unfold. The global economy is projected 
to contract in 2009. Unemployment is on 
the rise around the world. The United States 
alone had lost almost 5 million jobs between 
December 2007, when the recession began 
and March 2009.115 Some estimates suggest 
32 million job losses in developing coun-
tries.116 Between 53 million and 90 million 
people will fail to escape poverty because 
of the fallout during 2009.117 Official devel-
opment assistance—already well below the 
committed targets for several donor coun-
tries—is likely to decline as public finances 
in developed countries worsen and atten-
tion shifts toward domestic priorities. 

Some regions are becoming more vulner-
able to future challenges as a consequence 
of  the  economic  downturn:  Sub- Saharan 
economies grew rapidly in the first years of 
the 21st century, but the collapse of com-
modity prices and global economic activity 
will test this trend. Countries and commu-
nities around the world that rely on remit-
tances from nationals working in developed 
countries  are  severely  affected  as  these 
financial transfers fall.118 In Mexico remit-
tances fell by $920 million in the six months 
leading up to March 2009—a decline of 14 
percent.119

The  financial  crisis  presents  an  added 
burden to development efforts and a likely 
distraction  from  the  urgency  of  climate 
change. Individual, community, and coun-
try vulnerability to the climate threat will 
increase as economic growth slows down, 
revenues disappear, and assistance shrinks. 
While  the  economic  slowdown  will  be 
matched  by  a  temporary  deceleration  in 
emissions, people remain vulnerable to the 
warming already in the pipeline; and with-
out concerted efforts to decouple emissions 
from growth, emissions will again acceler-
ate as economic recovery takes hold.

Governments  in  many  developed  and 
developing  countries  are  responding  to 
the  crisis  by  expanding  public  spending. 
Spending proposed in several national and 
regional stimulus plans totals $2.4 trillion 
to $2.8 trillion.120 Governments expect that 
this spending increase will protect or create 
jobs by increasing effective demand—one 
of the main priorities for halting the down-
turn. The World Bank has proposed that 0.7 
percent of high- income countries’ stimulus 
packages be channeled into a “vulnerability 
fund” to minimize the social costs of the 
economic crisis in developing countries.122

The case for a green stimulus 
Despite  the  economic  chaos  the  case  for 
urgent  action  against  climate  change 
remains.  And  it  becomes  more  pressing 
given the increase in poverty and vulnera-
bility around the world. Thus recent public 
debates have focused on the possibility of 
using fiscal packages to push for a greener 
economy, combating climate change while 
restoring growth.

How can both the economic slump and 
climate  change  be  tackled  with  the  fiscal 
stimulus? Solving the climate  change prob-
lem requires government intervention, not 
least  because  climate  change  is  created  by 
a  large- scale  negative  externality.  And  the 
once- in- a  lifetime  crisis  in  the  financial 
markets and the real economy calls for pub-
lic spending. 

Investment in climate policy can be an 
efficient way to deal with the economic cri-
sis in the short term. Low- carbon technolo-
gies could generate a net increase in jobs, 
because they can be more labor intensive 

 

Understanding the Links between Climate Change and Development 

59

than  high- carbon  sectors.122  Some  esti-
mates suggest that $1 billion in government 
spending on green projects in the United 
States  can  create  30,000  jobs  in  a  year, 
7,000  more  than  generated  by  traditional 
infrastructure.123 Other estimates suggest 
that spending $100 billion would generate 
almost 2 million jobs—about half of them 
directly.124 But as with any short- term stim-
ulus, the job gains might not be sustained 
in the long run.125

Green spending around the world
Several governments have included a share 
of  “green”  investments  in  their  stimulus 
proposals—including  low- carbon  tech-
nologies,  energy  efficiency,  research  and 
development,  and  water  and  waste  man-
agement (figure 1.4). The Republic of Korea 
will devote 80.5 percent of its fiscal plan to 
green projects. Some $100 billion to $130 
billion  of  the  U.S.  stimulus  package  has 
been  allocated  to  climate- change- related 
investments.  Overall,  some  $436  billion 
will be disbursed in green investments as 
part of fiscal stimuli around the world, with 
half expected to be used during 2009.126

The efficiency of these investments will 
depend on how quickly they can be imple-
mented;  how  well  targeted  they  can  be 
in  creating  jobs  and  utilizing  underused 
resources; and how much they shift econo-
mies toward long- lived, low- carbon infra-
structure, reduced emissions, and increased 
resilience.127  Investments  in  energy  effi-
ciency in public buildings, for instance, are 
appealing because they are usually “shovel 
ready,” are very labor intensive, and generate 

Figure 1.4      Global green stimulus spending is rising

long- term savings for the public sector.128 
Similar virtues can be found in helping to 
finance  other  energy- efficiency  measures 
that  reduce  the  social  cost  of  energy  in 
private  buildings,  as  well  as  in  water  and 
sanitation facilities and in improved traf-
fic flows.

In each country the portfolio of projects 
and investments varies widely, according to 
the specific conditions of the economy and 
the needs for job creation. Most stimulus 
packages  in  Latin  America,  for  instance, 
will be spent on public works—including 
highways—with limited mitigation poten-
tial.129  In  the  Republic  of  Korea,  where 
960,000  jobs  are  expected  to  be  created 
in the next four years, a large part of the 
investment—$13.3 billion of $36 billion—
will  be  allocated  to  three  projects:  river 
restoration, expansion of mass transit and 
railroads, and energy conservation in vil-
lages  and  schools,  programs  projected  to 
create  500,000  jobs.130  China  will  devote 
$85  billion  to  rail  transport  as  a  low-
 carbon alternative to road and air transport 
that can also help alleviate transportation 
bottlenecks.  Another  $70  billion  will  be 
allocated  for  a  new  electricity  grid  that 
improves the efficiency and availability of 
electricity.131 In the United States two fairly 
inexpensive projects—$6.7 billion for ren-
ovating federal buildings, and another $6.2 
billion for weatherizing homes—will create 
an estimated 325,000 jobs a year.132

In most developing countries the projects 
in stimulus packages do not have a strong 
emission- reduction  component,  but  they 
could improve resilience to climate change 

Size of green share of total stimulus package ($, billions)
Size of total stimulus package ($, billions)

12.4
485.9

221.3
586.1

94.1
787.0

2.5
26.7

2.1
30.4

2.6
31.8

7.1
33.7

30.7
38.1

1.3
103.5

13.8
104.8

Australia United
Kingdom

Canada

France

Korea,
Rep. of

Source: Robins, Clover, and Singh 2009.

Italy

Germany

Japan

China

United States

60 

WO R L D   D E V E LOpM E N T   R EpO RT   2 0 1 0

and create jobs. Improving water and sani-
tation networks in Colombia, for example, 
is estimated to create 100,000 direct jobs per 
$1 billion invested while reducing the risk 
of water- borne illnesses.133 Both developing 
and  developed  countries  should  consider 
adaptation measures such as streambed and 
wetland restoration, which can be particu-
larly labor intensive and thus reduce both 
the physical and financial vulnerability of 
some  groups.  The  challenge  would  be  to 
ensure  that  the  adaptation  measures  are 
sustained  after  the  expenditure  program 
ends.

These  preliminary  figures  will  likely 
change  as  the  crisis  unfolds.  There  is  no 
guarantee that the green elements of the fis-
cal stimulus will succeed in either generat-
ing jobs or changing the carbon mix of the 
economy. And even in the best- case scenario, 
the fiscal interventions will not be enough 
to eliminate the risk of high- carbon lock- in 
and climate vulnerability. But the opportu-
nity to jump- start green investments and lay 
the foundation for low- carbon economies is 
real and needs to be seized.

Fundamental transformations in the 
medium and long term
Incorporating sound low- carbon and high-
 resilience investment components in fiscal 
expansions  to  combat  the  financial  crisis 
will not be enough to thwart the long- term 
problems posed by climate change. Funda-
mental transformations are needed in social 
protection,  in  carbon  finance,  in  research 
and development, in energy markets, and in 
the management of land and water.

Over  the  medium  and  long  terms  the 
challenge  is  to  find  new  paths  to  reach 
the twin goals of sustaining development 
and limiting climate change. Reaching an 
equitable and fair global deal would be an 
important step toward avoiding worst- case 
scenarios. But it requires transforming the 
carbon- intensive  lifestyles  of  rich  coun-
tries (and rich people everywhere) and the 
carbon- intensive growth paths of develop-
ing countries. This in turn requires com-
plementary socioeconomic changes.

Modifications  in  social  norms  that 
reward a low- carbon lifestyle could prove a 
powerful element of success (see chapter 8). 

But behavioral change needs to be matched 
with  institutional  reform,  additional 
finance,  and  technological  innovation  to 
avoid  irreversible,  catastrophic  increases 
in temperature. In any case and under any 
scenario,  strong  public  policy  can  help 
economies absorb the shocks of unavoid-
able climate impacts, minimize net social 
losses, and protect the welfare of those who 
most stand to lose. 

The  response  to  climate  change  could 
generate momentum to improve the devel-
opment  process  and  promote  welfare-
 enhancing  reforms  that  need  to  happen 
anyway.  For  example,  the  joint  efforts  to 
increase  energy  efficiency  and  promote 
development  could  find  a  policy—and 
physical—expression  in  greener,  more 
resilient cities. Improving urban design to 
promote  energy  efficiency—through,  say, 
more public transportation and a conges-
tion  charge—can  increase  physical  secu-
rity and the quality of life. Much depends 
on the degree to which existing inadequate 
institutional  mechanisms  and  policies 
can be strengthened or replaced thanks to 
greater political space for change brought 
about by the threat of global warming and 
to  increased  international  technical  and 
financial assistance. 

Individual citizens will have a large role 
in the public debate and implementation of 
solutions. Opinion surveys show that peo-
ple around the world are concerned about 
climate  change,  even  in  the  recent  finan-
cial turmoil134 (though evidence on recent 
trends  in  the  United  States  is  mixed).135 
Most governments also recognize, at least 
in  discourse,  the  enormity  of  the  danger. 
And  the  international  community  has 
acknowledged the problem, as exemplified 
by the 2007 Nobel peace prize awarded for 
the scientific assessment and communica-
tion to the public of climate change.

The  challenge  for  decision  makers  is 
to  ensure  that  this  awareness  creates  the 
momentum for reform of institutions and 
behavior  and  serves  the  needs  of  those 
most vulnerable.136 The financial crises of 
the 1990s catalyzed the revamping of social 
safety nets in Latin America, giving birth 
to  progresa–Oportunidades  in  Mexico 
and Bolsa Escola–Bolsa Familia in Brazil, 

 

Understanding the Links between Climate Change and Development 

61

among the best innovations in social policy 
in decades.138

The  current  crisis  has  eroded  faith  in 
unregulated  markets.  As  a  consequence, 
better  regulation,  more  intervention,  and 
greater  government  accountability  are 
expected. For dealing with climate change, 
additional  climate- smart  regulation  is 
needed to induce innovative approaches to 
mitigation  and  adaptation.  Such  policies 
create an opening for the scale and scope of 
government interventions needed to correct 
climate change—the biggest market failure 
in human history.

Notes

1. Weiss and Bradley 2001.
2. Ristvet and Weiss 2000.
3. Weiss 2000.
4. Harrington  and  Walton  2008;  IWM  and 

CEGIS 2007. 

5. Schmidhuber and Tubiello 2007.
6. Bates and others 2008.
7. WCED 1987.
8. Chen and Ravaillon 2008.
9. World Bank 2009a.
10. United Nations 2008.
11. Chen and Ravaillon 2008.
12. IEA 2007.
13. United Nations 2008.
14. United Nations 2008.
15. UNDp 2008.
16. IARU 2009.
17. Smith and others 2009. 
18. patriquin  and  others  2005;  patriquin, 
Wellstead,  and White  2007;  pacific  Institute  for 
Climate Solutions 2008.

19. Note that this relationship holds even when 
controlling for the fact that poorer countries tend to 
be warmer on average. Dell, Jones, and Olken 2008.

20. Dell, Jones, and Olken 2008.
21. Brown and others 2009.

22. IpCC 2007b.
23. Cruz and others 2007.
24. Easterling and others 2007.
25. Auffhammer,  Ramanathan,  and  Vincent 

2006.

26. Guiteras 2007.
27. Ligon and Sadoulet 2007.
28. Campbell- Lendrum, Corvalan, and pruss-

 Ustun 2003.

29. Among the many diverse regions and coun-
tries  affected  are  Colombia  (Vergara  2009),  the 
Caucasus (Rabie and others 2008), Ethiopia (Con-
falonieri and others 2007), and the islands of the 
South pacific (potter 2008).

30. Molesworth and others 2003.
31. Confalonieri and others 2007.
32. Confalonieri and others 2007; Morris and 

others 2002.

33. Carter and others 2007.
34. World Bank 2001.
35. Azariadis and Stachurski 2005.
36. Lokshin  and  Ravallion  2000;  Jalan  and 

Ravallion 2004; Dercon 2004.

37. Dercon 2004.
38. Mueller and Osgood 2007.
39. Azariadis and Stachurski 2005.
40. Rosenzweig and Binswanger 1993.
41. Jensen 2000.
42. Alderman, Hoddinott, and Kinsey 2006.
43. Figures  include  all  greenhouse  gases  but 
do not include emissions from land-use change. 
If  estimates  of  land- use  change  emissions  are 
added,  the  share  of  developing  countries  in 
global emissions is closer to 60 percent.

44. WRI 2008.
45. Chomitz and Meisner 2008.
46. Authors’  calculations,  based  on  data  from 
CAIT  (WRI  2008).  Greenhouse  gas  emissions 
(excluding  land- use  change)  per  capita  range 
from  4.5  to  55.5  metric  tons  CO2e  (7  to  27,  if 
small- island states and oil producers are excluded) 
among  high- income  countries.  Emissions  per 
$1,000 of output at market exchange rates range 
from  0.15  to  1.72  metric  tons  in  high- income 

“Take care of your earth,

Look after its creatures. 

Don’t leave your children,

A planet that’s dead.”

—Lakshmi Shree, India, age 12 

62 

WO R L D   D E V E LOpM E N T   R EpO RT   2 0 1 0

countries; measuring output at purchasing power 
parity, the range is 0.20 to 1.04 metric tons.

47. Marcotullio and Schulz 2007.
48. Rosenberg 1971.
49. IpCC 2007a.
50. Lipovsky 1995.
51. “Annual  Brazilian  Ethanol  Exports”  and 
“Brazilian  Ethanol  production,”  http://english 
.unica.com.br/dadosCotacao/estatistica/  (accessed 
December 2008).

52. Ummel and Wheeler 2008.
53. Hill and others 2009.
54. Mitchell 2008.
55. Ivanic and Martin 2008.
56. Ng and Aksoy 2008; World Bank 2008.
57. Cramton and Kerr 1999.
58. Ekins and Dresner 2004.
59. Brenner, Riddle, and Boyce 2007.
60. Benitez and others 2008.
61. Estache 2009.
62. Andriamihaja and Vecchi 2007.
63. Komives and others 2005.
64. Johnson and others 2008.
65. pindyck 2007; Weitzman 2009a; Hallegatte, 

Dumas, and Hourcade 2009.

66. Yohe 1999; Toth and Mwandosya 2001.
67. Lempert and Schlesinger 2000.
68. Nordhaus 2008a. For a discussion of mod-
els and their results, see, for example, Heal 2008; 
Fisher and others 2007; Tol 2005; and Hourcade 
and Ambrosi 2007.

69. The  5  percent  estimate  is  largely  driven 
by the discount rate, but the margin between 5 
percent  and  20  percent  is  based  on  the  inclu-
sion  of  nonmarket  impacts  (health  and  envi-
ronment),  possibly  higher  sensitivity  of  the 
climate  to  greenhouse  gases,  and  the  use  of 
equity  weighting.  Stern  2007;  Dasgupta  2007; 
Dasgupta 2008. 

70. For a discussion, see Dasgupta 2007; Das-

gupta 2008; and box 1.4.

71. Dasgupta 2008.
72. Heal 2008; Sterner and persson 2008.
73. Guesnerie 2004; Heal 2005; Hourcade and 

Ambrosi 2007.

74. Sterner and persson 2008.
75. Hourcade  and  others  (2001)  explore  the 
sensitivity of seven different integrated assessment 
models to the shape of the damage function and 
find  that  optimal  concentration  trajectories  can 
imply significant departure from current emission 
trends if significant damages occur with warming 
of 3°C or 500 parts per milion (ppm) CO2 concen-
tration. More generally, they note that early action 
can be justified if a nonzero probability is assigned 
to damages increasing very rapidly with warming, 
so that damages grow more rapidly than the rate at 
which discounting shaves down their weight. 

76. Solomon and others 2009.
77. Mignone and others 2008.
78. Folger 2006; Auld and others 2007.
79. Carbon capture and storage technology is 

described in chapter 4, box 4.6.
80. Shalizi and Lecocq 2009.
81. For a general discussion, see Arthur 1994; 
for  a  more  specific  application  of  increasing 
returns and the need to invest in innovation in the 
area of energy efficiency, see Mulder 2005.

82. Weitzman 2007; Weitzman 2009a; Weitz-

man 2009b; Nordhaus 2009.

83. Gjerde, Grepperud, and Kverndokk 1999; 

Kousky and others 2009.

84. Hallegatte, Dumas, and Hourcade 2009.
85. See  pindyck  (2007)  and  Quiggin  (2008) 

for recent reviews.

86. O’Neill and others 2006.
87. In  their  model,  Sterner  and  persson 
(2008) include environmental goods in the util-
ity function.

88. portney and Weyant 1999.
89. Fisher  and  others  2007;  Hourcade  and 

Ambrosi 2007; Tol 2005.

90. Diamond 2005.
91. Komives and others 2007; Diamond 2005.
92. Diamond 2005.
93. Hof, den Elzen, and van Vuuren 2008.
94. Bruckner and others 1999.
95. Yohe 1999.
96. Toth and Mwandosya 2001.
97. Lempert and Schlesinger 2000.
98. Savage 1951; Savage 1954.
99. Klaus, Yohe, and Schlesinger 2008.
100. IpCC 2007a.
101. See  overview  figure  3  for  cumulative 

emissions relative to population share.

102. According to the IEA (2008), non- OECD 
(Organisation  for  Economic  Co- operation  and 
Development) countries reached the same level of 
annual energy- related emissions as OECD coun-
tries in 2004 (approximately 13 gigatons of CO2 a 
year). The World Resource Institute’s CAIT emis-
sion indicator database suggests the same conclu-
sion using the World Bank’s definition of devel-
oped and developing countries; WRI 2008.

103. Wheeler and Ummel 2007.
104. Chapter  5,  box  5.1,  describes  the  Bali 

Action plan in detail.

105. For  2030,  this  has  been  estimated  at 
65–70  percent  of  the  emission  reduction,  or 
45–70  percent  of  the  investment  cost.  Over  the 
course  of  the  century  (using  net  present  value 
to  2100)  the  estimated  share  of  investments 
that should take place in developing countries is 
65–70 percent. See overview note 47 for sources.

106. Edmonds and others 2008.
107. Nordhaus 2008b.

 

Understanding the Links between Climate Change and Development 

63

108. See,  for  example,  Edmonds  and  others 

Adams, H. D., M. Guardiola- Claramonte, G. A. 

2008.

109. See note 108 above and chapter 5, box 5.1.
110. Hamilton 2009.
111. Barrett 2006; Barrett 2007.
112. Barrett and Stavins 2003.
113. Carraro, Eykmans, and Finus 2009; per-
sonal communication with Carlo Carraro, 2009. 

114. Brinsley and Christie 2009. 
115. Bureau of Labor Statistics 2009.
116. ILO 2009.
117. World Bank 2009a.
118. Ratha, Mohapatra, and Xu 2008.
119. Banco  de  México,  http://www.banxico 
.org.mx/SieInternet/consultarDirectorioInternet 
Action.do?accion=consultarCuadro&idCuadro
=CE99&locale=es (accessed May 15, 2009).

120. Robins, Clover, and Singh 2009.
121. Robert  B.  Zoellick,  “A  Stimulus  pack-
age for the World,” New York Times, January 22, 
2009.

122. Fankhauser, Sehlleier, and Stern 2008.
123. Houser, Mohan, and Heilmayr 2009.
124. pollin and others 2008.
125. Fankhauser, Sehlleier, and Stern 2008.
126. Robins, Clover, and Singh 2009.
127. Bowen and others 2009.
128. Bowen and others 2009; Houser, Mohan, 

and Heilmayr 2009.

129. Schwartz, Andres, and Dragoiu 2009.
130. Barbier 2009.
131. Barbier 2009.
132. Authors’  calculations  based  on  Houser, 

Mohan, and Heilmayr 2009.

133. Schwartz, Andres, and Dragoiu 2009.
134. Accenture 2009.
135. pew Research Center for people and the 

press 2009.

136. Ravallion 2008.
137. These  programs  pionered  the  use  of 
incentive- based transfers to poor households to 
supplement  incomes  while  directly  encourag-
ing  poverty- combating  behaviors.  In  contrast 
to  traditional  income  support,  these  programs 
provide cash to poor househods conditional on 
their participation in nutrition and health pro-
grams  (immunizations,  pre- natal  care)  or  on 
their  children’s  school  attendance.  Fiszbein  and 
Schady 2009.

References
ACASIAN (Australian Consortium for the 

Barron- Gafford, J. C. Villegas, D. D. Breshears, 
C. B. Zou, p. A. Troch, and T. E. Huxman. 
2009. “Temperature Sensitivity of Drought-
 Induced Tree Mortality portends Increased 
Regional Die- Off under Global- Change- Type 
Drought.” Proceedings of the National Acad-
emy of Sciences 106 (17): 7063–66.

Aguilar, L. 2006. “Climate Change and Disas-

ter Mitigation: Gender Makes a Difference.” 
International Union for Conservation of 
Nature, Gland, Switzerland.

Alderman, H., J. Hoddinott, and B. Kinsey. 2006. 

“Long- Term Consequences of Early Child-
hood Malnutrition.” Oxford Economic Papers 
58 (3): 450–74.

Andriamihaja, N., and G. Vecchi. 2007. “An Eval-
uation of the Welfare Impact of Higher Energy 
prices in Madagascar.” Working paper Series 
106, World Bank, Africa Region, Washington, 
DC.

Armstrong, R., B. Raup, S. J. S. Khalsa, R. Barry, 

J. Kargel, C. Helm, and H. Kieffer. 2005. 
“GLIMS Glacier Database.” National Snow 
and Ice Data Center, Boulder, CO. 

Arthur, W. B. 1994. Increasing Returns and Path-
 Dependence in the Economy. Ann Arbor, MI: 
University of Michigan press.

Assunçao, J. J., and F. Chein. 2008. “Climate 

Change, Agricultural productivity and pov-
erty.” Background paper for de la Torre and 
others, 2008, Low Carbon, High Growth: Latin 
America Responses to Climate Change. Wash-
ington, DC: World Bank.

Auffhammer, M., V. Ramanathan, and J. R. Vin-

cent. 2006. “Integrated Model Shows that 
Atmospheric Brown Clouds and Greenhouse 
Gases Have Reduced Rice Harvests in India.” 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci-
ences 103 (52): 19668–72.

Auld, G, S. Bernstein, B. Cashore, and K. Levin. 
2007. “playing It Forward: path Dependency, 
progressive Incrementalism, and the ‘Super 
Wicked’ problem of Global Climate Change.” 
paper presented at the International Studies 
Association annual convention, February 28, 
Chicago.

Azariadis, C., and J. Stachurski. 2005. “poverty 

Traps.” In Handbook of Economic Growth, vol. 
1, ed. p. Aghion and S. Durlauf. Amsterdam: 
Elsevier.

Asian Spatial Information and Analysis Net-
work). 2004. “China Rail Transport Network 
database.” Griffith University, Brisbane. 

Barbier, E. B. 2009. A Global Green New Deal. 
Nairobi: United Nations Environment pro-
gramme.

Accenture. 2009. Shifting the Balance from Inten-
tion to Action: Low Carbon, High Opportunity, 
High Performance. New York: Accenture.

Barrett, S. 2006. “The problem of Averting 

Global Catastrophe.” Chicago Journal of Inter-
national Law 6 (2): 1–26.

64 

WO R L D   D E V E LOpM E N T   R EpO RT   2 0 1 0

———. 2007. Why Cooperate? The Incentive 

to Supply Global Public Goods. Oxford, UK: 
Oxford University press.

Barrett, S., and R. Stavins. 2003. “Increasing par-

ticipation and Compliance in International 
Climate Change Agreements.” International 
Environmental Agreements: Politics, Law and 
Economics 3 (4): 349–76.

Bates, B., Z. W. Kundzewicz, S. Wu, and J. palu-

tikof. 2008. “Climate Change and Water.” 
Technical paper, Intergovernmental panel on 
Climate Change, Geneva.

Benitez, D., R. Fuentes Nieva, T. Serebrisky, and 

Q. Wodon. 2008. “Assessing the Impact of 
Climate Change policies in Infrastructure 
Service Delivery: A Note on Affordability and 
Access.” Background note for the WDR 2010.

Bowen, A., S. Fankhauser, N. Stern, and D. 

Zenghelis. 2009. An Outline of the Case for 
a “Green” Stimulus. London: Grantham 
Research Institute on Climate Change and 
the Environment and the Centre for Climate 
Change Economics and policy.

Brenner, M. D., M. Riddle, and J. K. Boyce. 2007. 
“A Chinese Sky Trust? Distributional Impacts 
of Carbon Charges and Revenue Recycling in 
China.” Energy Policy 35 (3): 1771–84.

Brinsley, J., and R. Christie. 2009. “paulson to 
Work Quickly with Congress to Revive plan 
(Update 1).” Bloomberg, September 29.

Brown, C., R. Meeks, Y. Ghile, and K. Hunu. 2009. 
“An Empirical Analysis of the Effects of Climate 
Variables on National Level Economic Growth.” 
Background paper for the WDR 2010.

Bruckner, T., G. petschel- Held, F. L. Toth, H.- M. 

Füssel, C. Helm, M. Leimbach, and H.- J. 
Schellnhuber. 1999. “Climate Change Deci-
sion Support and the Tolerable Windows 
Approach.” Environmental Modeling and 
Assessment 4: 217–34.

Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2009. “Employment 

Situation Summary.” Washington, DC.

Campbell- Lendrum, D. H., C. F. Corvalan, 
and A. pruss- Ustun. 2003. “How Much 
Disease Could Climate Change Cause?” In 
Climate Change and Human Health: Risks 
and Responses, ed. A. J. McMichael, D. H. 
Campbell- Lendrum, C. F. Corvalan, K. L. Ebi, 
A. Githeko, J. D. Scheraga, and A. Woodward. 
Geneva: World Health Organization.

Caney, S. 2009. “Ethics and Climate Change.” 

Background paper for the WDR 2010.

Carraro, C., J. Eykmans, and M. Finus. 2009. 
“Optimal Transfers and participation Deci-
sions in International Environmental Agree-

ments.” Review of International Organizations 
1 (4): 379–96.

Carter, M. R., p. D. Little, T. Mogues, and W. 
Negatu. 2007. “poverty Traps and Natural 
Disasters in Ethiopia and Honduras.” World 
Development 35 (5): 835–56.

Chan, K. W. 2008. “Internal Labor Migration 

in China: Trends, Geographical Distribution 
and policies.” paper presented at the pro-
ceedings of United Nations Expert Group 
Meeting on population Distribution, Urban-
ization, Internal Migration and Develop-
ment, New York.

Chen, S., and M. Ravaillon. 2008. “The Develop-

ing World Is poorer than We Thought, But 
No Less Successful in the Fight against pov-
erty.” policy Research Working paper 4703, 
World Bank, Washington, DC.

Chomitz, K., and C. Meisner. 2008. “A Simple 

Benchmark for CO2 Intensity of Economies.” 
Washington, DC: Background Note for the 
World Bank Internal Evaluation Group on 
Climate Change and the World Bank Group.
Confalonieri, U., B. Menne, R. Akhtar, K. L. Ebi, 
M. Hauengue, R. S. Kovats, B. Revich, and A. 
Woodward. 2007. “Human Health.” In Cli-
mate Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation and 
Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group 
II to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Inter-
governmental Panel on Climate Change, ed. M. 
L. parry, O. F. Canziani, J. p. palutikof, p. J. van 
der Linden, and C. E. Hanson. Cambridge, 
UK: Cambridge University press.

Cramton, p., and S. Kerr. 1999. “The Distri-

butional Effect of Carbon Regulation: Why 
Auctioned Carbon permits Are Attractive and 
Feasible.” In The Market and the Environment, 
ed. T. Sterner. Northampton, UK: Edward 
Elgar publishing.

Cruz, R. V., H. Harasawa, M. Lal, S. Wu, Y. 

Anokhin, B. punsalmaa, Y. Honda, M. Jafari, 
C. Li, and N. Huu Ninh. 2007. “Asia.” In Cli-
mate Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation and 
Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group 
II to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Inter-
governmental Panel on Climate Change, ed. M. 
L. parry, O. F. Canziani, J. p. palutikof, p. J. van 
der Linden, and C. E. Hanson. Cambridge, 
UK: Cambridge University press.

Dasgupta, p. 2007. “Comments on the Stern 
Review’s Economics of Climate Change.” 
National Institute Economic Review 199: 4–7.
———. 2008. “Discounting Climate Change.” 

Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 37 (2): 
141–69.

 

Understanding the Links between Climate Change and Development 

65

Dell, M., B. F. Jones, and B. A. Olken. 2008. “Cli-

mate Change and Economic Growth: Evi-
dence from the Last Half Century.” Working 
paper 14132, National Bureau of Economic 
Research, Cambridge, MA. 

———. 2009. “Temperature and Income: Rec-
onciling New Cross- Sectional and panel Esti-
mates.” American Economic Review 99 (2): 
198–204.

Dercon, S. 2004. “Growth and Shocks: Evidence 
from Rural Ethiopia.” Journal of Development 
Economics 74 (2): 309–29.

Diamond, J. 2005. Collapse: How Societies 

Fiszbein, A., and N. Schady. 2009. Conditional 
Cash Transfers: Reducing Present and Future 
Poverty. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Folger, T. 2006. “Can Coal Come Clean? How 

to Survive the Return of the World’s Dirtiest 
Fossil Fuel.” December. Discover Magazine.

Gjerde, J., S. Grepperud, and S. Kverndokk. 

1999. “Optimal Climate policy under the pos-
sibility of a Catastrophe.” Resource and Energy 
Economics 21 (3–4): 289–317.

Guesnerie, R. 2004. “Calcul Economique 
et Développement Durable.” La Revue 
Economique 55 (3): 363–82.

Choose to Fail or Succeed. New York: Viking.

Guiteras, R. 2007. “The Impact of Climate 

Easterling, W., p. Aggarwal, p. Batima, K. Brander, 

L. Erda, M. Howden, A. Kirilenko, J. Morton, 
J.- F. Soussana, J. Schmidhuber, and F. Tubiello. 
2007. “Food, Fibre and Forest products.” In 
Climate Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation and 
Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group 
II to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Inter-
governmental Panel on Climate Change, ed. M. 
parry, O. F. Canziani, J. p. palutikof, p. J. van der 
Linden, and C. E. Hanson. Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge University press.

Edmonds, J., L. Clarke, J. Lurz, and M. Wise. 

2008. “Stabilizing CO2 Concentrations with 
Incomplete International Cooperation.” Cli-
mate Policy 8 (4): 355–76.

Ekins, p., and S. Dresner. 2004. Green Taxes and 

Charges: Reducing their Impact on Low- income 
Households. York, UK: Joseph Rowntree 
Foundation.

ESRI (Environmental Systems Research Institute). 

2002. “ESRI Data and Maps.” Redlands, CA. 

Estache, A. 2009. “How Should the Nexus 

between Economic and Environmental Regu-
lation Work for Infrastructure Services?” 
Background note for the WDR 2010.

Fankhauser, S., F. Sehlleier, and N. Stern. 2008. 
“Climate Change, Innovation and Jobs.” Cli-
mate Policy 8: 421–29.

Fisher, B. S., N. Nakic´enovic´, K. Alfsen, J. Corfee 
Morlot, F. de la Chesnaye, J.- C. Hourcade, K. 
Jiang, M. Kainuma, E. La Rovere, A. Matysek, 
A. Rana, K. Riahi, R. Richels, S. Rose, D. van 
Vuuren, and R. Warren. 2007. “Issues Related 
to Mitigation in the Long- Term Context.” In 
Climate Change 2007: Mitigation. Contribu-
tion of Working Group III to the Fourth Assess-
ment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change, ed. B. Metz, O. R. Davidson, 
p. R. Bosch, R. Dave, and L. A. Meyer. Cam-
bridge, UK: Cambridge University press.

Change on Indian Agriculture.” Department 
of Economics Working paper, Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA.
Hallegatte, S. 2008. “An Adaptive Regional 
Input- Output Model and its Application 
to the Assessment of the Economic Cost of 
Katrina.” Risk Analysis 28 (3): 779–99.

Hallegatte, S., p. Dumas, and J.- C. Hourcade. 

2009. “A Note on the Economic Cost of 
Climate Change and the Rationale to Limit 
it to 2°K.” Background paper for the WDR 
2010.

Hamilton, K. 2009. “Delayed participation in a 

Global Climate Agreement.” Background note 
for the WDR 2010. 

Harrington, J., and T. L. Walton. 2008. “Climate 
Change in Coastal Areas in Florida: Sea Level 
Rise Estimation and Economic Analysis to 
Year 2080.” Florida State University, Tallahas-
see, FL.

Heal, G. 2005. “Intertemporal Welfare Eco-
nomics and the Environment.” In Hand-
book of Environmental Economics, Vol. 3, ed. 
K.- G. Maler and J. R. Vincent. Amsterdam: 
Elsevier.

———. 2008. “Climate Economics: A Meta-
 Review and Some Suggestions.” Working 
paper 13927, National Bureau of Economic 
Research, Cambridge, MA.

Hill, J., S. polasky, E. Nelson, D. Tilman, H. Huo, 

L. Ludwig, J. Neumann, H. Zheng, and D. 
Bonta. 2009. “Climate Change and Health 
Costs of Air Emissions from Biofuels and 
Gasoline.” Proceedings of the National Acad-
emy of Sciences 106 (6): 2077–82.

Hof, A. F., M. G. J. den Elzen, and D. p. van 

Vuuren. 2008. “Analyzing the Costs and Ben-
efits of Climate policy: Value Judgments and 
Scientific Uncertainties.” Global Environmen-
tal Change 18 (3): 412–24.

66 

WO R L D   D E V E LOpM E N T   R EpO RT   2 0 1 0

Houghton, R. A. 2009. “Emissions of Carbon 

from Land Management.” Background note 
for the WDR 2010.

Impact of Relative Sea- Level Rise on Coastal 
Communities and Their Livelihoods in Bangla-
desh. Dhaka: IWM, CEGIS.

Hourcade, J.- C., and p. Ambrosi. 2007. 

Jalan, J., and M. Ravallion. 2004. “Household 

“Quelques Leçons d’un Essai à Risque, 
l’evaluation des Dommages Climatiques par 
Sir Nicholas Stern.” Revue d’economie poli-
tique 117 (4): 33–46.

Hourcade, J.- C., M. Ha- Duong, A. Grübler, and 
R. S. J. Tol. 2001. “INASUD project Findings 
on Integrated Assessment of Climate poli-
cies.” Integrated Assessment 2 (1): 31–35.

Houser, T., S. Mohan, and R. Heilmayr. 2009. “A 

Green Global Recovery? Assessing U.S. Eco-
nomic Stimulus and the prospects for Inter-
national Coordination.” policy Brief pB09- 03, 
World Resources Institute, Washington, DC.

Huang, Y., and A. Magnoli, eds. 2009. Reshaping 

Economic Geography in East Asia. Washing-
ton, DC: World Bank. 

IARU (International Alliance of Research Uni-

versities). 2009. “Climate Change: Global 
Risks, Challenges and Decisions.” IOp Con-
ference Series: Earth and Environmental Sci-
ence. Copenhagen. 

IEA (International Energy Agency). 2007. World 

Energy Outlook 2007. paris: IEA.

———. 2008. World Energy Outlook 2008. paris: 

IEA.

ILO (International Labour Organization). 2009. 

Global Employment Trends: January 2009. 
Geneva: ILO.

IpCC (Intergovernmental panel on Climate 

Change). 2007a. Climate Change 2007: Syn-
thesis Report. Contribution of Working Groups 
I, II, and II to the Fourth Assessment Report 
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change. Geneva: IpCC.

———. 2007b. “Summary for policymakers.” 

In Climate Change 2007: Impacts, Adapta-
tion and Vulnerability. Contribution of Work-
ing Group II to the Fourth Assessment Report 
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change, ed. M. L. parry, O. F. Canziani, J. p. 
palutikof, p. J. van der Linden, and C. E. 
Hanson. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Uni-
versity press.

Income Dynamics in Rural China.” In Insur-
ance against Poverty, ed. S. Dercon. Oxford, 
UK: Oxford University press.

Jensen, R. 2000. “Agricultural Volatility and 

Investments in Children.” American Economic 
Review 90 (2): 399–404.

Johnson, T., F. Liu, C. Alatorre, and Z. Romo. 2008. 
“Mexico Low- Carbon Study—México: Estudio 
para la Disminución de Emisiones de Carbono 
(MEDEC).” World Bank, Washington, DC. 
Klaus, K., G. Yohe, and M. Schlesinger. 2008. 

“Managing the Risks of Climate Thresholds: 
Uncertainties and Information Needs.” Cli-
matic Change 91: 5–10.

Komives, K., V. Foster, J. Halpern, Q. Wodon, 

and R. Abdullah. 2005. Water, Electricity, and 
the Poor: Who Benefits from Utility Subsidies? 
Washington, DC: World Bank.

Komives, K., V. Foster, H. Halpern, Q. Wodon, 

and R. Krznaric. 2007. Food Coupons and 
Bald Mountains: What the History of Resource 
Scarcity Can Teach Us about Tackling Climate 
Change. New York: United Nations Develop-
ment programme.

Kousky, C., O. Rostapshova, M. A. Toman, and 
R. Zeckhauser. 2009. “Responding to Threats 
of Climate Change Catastrophes.” Back-
ground paper for the Economics of Natural 
Disasters, Global Facility for Disaser Reduc-
tion and Recovery, World Bank, Washington, 
DC.

Kriegler, E., J. W. Hall, H. Held, R. Dawson, and 

H. J. Schellnhuber. 2009. “Imprecise prob-
ability Assessment of Tipping points in the 
Climate System.” Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences 106 (13): 5041–46.

Lambrou, Y., and R. Laub. 2004. Gender Perspec-

tives on the Conventions on Biodiversity, Cli-
mate Change and Desertification. Rome: Food 
and Agriculture Organization.

Lempert, R. J., and M. E. Schlesinger. 2000. 
“Robust Strategies for Abating Climate 
Change.” Climatic Change 45 (3–4): 387–401.

Ivanic, M., and W. Martin. 2008. “Implications 

Ligon, E., and E. Sadoulet. 2007. “Estimating 

of Higher Global Food prices for poverty 
in Low- Income Countries.” policy Research 
Working paper 4594, World Bank, Washing-
ton, DC.

IWM (Institute of Water Modelling) and CEGIS 
(Center for Environmental and Geographical 
Information Services). 2007. Investigating the 

the Effects of Aggregate Agricultural Growth 
on the Distribution of Expenditures.” Back-
ground paper for the WDR 2008.

Lipovsky, I. 1995. “The Central Asian Cotton 
Epic.” Central Asian Survey 14 (4): 29–542.
Lokshin, M., and M. Ravallion. 2000. “Short-

 lived Shocks with Long- lived Impacts? 

 

Understanding the Links between Climate Change and Development 

67

Household Income Dynamics in a Transition 
Economy.” policy Research Working paper 
2459, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Marcotullio, p. J., and N. B. Schulz. 2007. “Com-
parison of Energy Transitions in the United 
States and Developing and Industrializing 
Economies.” World Development 35 (10): 
1650–83.

Martin, A. 1996. “Forestry: Gender Makes the 
Difference.” International Union for Conser-
vation of Nature, Gland, Switzerland.

McKinsey & Company. 2009. Pathways to a 

Low- carbon Economy: Version 2 of the Global 
Greenhouse Gas Abatement Cost Curve. 
 McKinsey & Company.

shop on Energy and Environmental Econom-
ics, A Toxa, Spain.

———. 2009. “An Analysis of the Dismal Theo-

rem.” Cowles Foundation Discussion paper 
1686, New Haven, CT.

O’Neill, B. C., p. Crutzen, A. Grübler, M. Ha-
Duong, K. Keller, C. Kolstad, J. Koomey, A. 
Lange, M. Obersteiner, M. Oppenheimer, 
W. pepper, W. Sanderson, M. Schlesinger, N. 
 Treich, A. Ulph, M. Webster, and C. Wilson. 
2006. “Learning and Climate Change.” Cli-
mate Policy 6: 585–89.

pacific Institute for Climate Solutions. 2008. 

“Climate Change and Health in British 
Columbia.” University of Victoria, Victoria.

Mignone, B. K., R. H. Socolow, J. L. Sarmiento, 

parikh, J. 2008. Gender and Climate Change: Key 

and M. Oppenheimer. 2008. “Atmospheric 
Stabilization and the Timing of Carbon Miti-
gation.” Climatic Change 88 (3 - 4): 251–65.

Mitchell, D. 2008. “A Note on Rising Food 

prices.” policy Research Working paper 4682, 
World Bank, Washington, DC.

Molesworth, A. M., L. E. Cuevas, S. J. Connor, A. 

p. Morse, and M. C. Thomson. 2003. “Envi-
ronmental Changes and Meningitis Epidem-
ics in Africa.” Emerging Infectious Diseases 9 
(10): 1287–93.

Morris, S., O. Neidecker- Gonzales, C. Carletto, 
M. Munguia, J. M. Medina, and Q. Wodon. 
2002. “Hurricane Mitch and Livelihoods of 
the Rural poor in Honduras.” World Develop-
ment 30 (1): 39–60.

Mueller, V., and D. Osgood. 2007. “Long- term 
Impacts of Droughts on Labor Markets in 
Developing Countries: Evidence from Brazil.” 
Earth Institute at Columbia University, New 
York. 

Mulder, p. 2005. The Economics of Technology 

Diffusion and Energy Efficiency. Cheltenham, 
UK: Edward Elgar.

Neumayer, E., and T. plumper. 2007. “The Gen-

dered Nature of Natural Disasters: The Impact 
of Catastrophic Events on the Gender Gap in 
Life Expectancy, 1981–2002.” Annals of the Asso-
ciation of American Geographers 97 (3): 551–66.
Ng, F., and M. A. Aksoy. 2008. “Who Are the Net 
Food Importing Countries?” policy Research 
Working paper 4457, World Bank, Washing-
ton, DC.

Nordhaus, W. 2008a. A Question of Balance: 

Weighing the Options on Global Warming Poli-
cies. New Haven, CT: Yale University press.

——— . 2008b. “The Role of Universal partici-
pation in policies to Slow Global Warming.” 
paper presented at the Third Atlantic Work-

Issues. New Delhi: Integrated Research and 
Action for Development.

patriquin, M., A. M. Wellstead, and W. A. White. 

2007. “Beetles, Trees, and people: Regional 
Economic Impact Sensitivity and policy 
Considerations Related to the Mountain 
pine Beetle Infestation in British Columbia, 
Canada.” Forest Policy and Economics 9 (8): 
938–46.

pindyck, R. 2007. “Uncertainty in Environmen-
tal Economics.” Review of Environmental Eco-
nomics and Policy 1 (1): 45–65.

pollin, R., H. Garrett- peltier, J. Heintz, and H. 
Scharber. 2008. Green Recovery: A Program 
to Create Good Jobs and Start Building a Low 
Carbon Economy. Washington, DC: Center for 
American progress.

portney, p. R., and J. p. Weyant. 1999. Discount-

ing and Intergenerational Equity. Washington, 
DC: Resources for the Future.

potter, S. 2008. The Sting of Climate Change: 

Malaria and Dengue Fever in Maritime South-
east Asia and the Pacific Islands. Sydney: Lowy 
Institute for International policy.

Quiggin, J. 2008. “Uncertainty and Climate 

policy.” Economic Analysis and Policy 38 (2): 
203–10.

Rabie, T., S. el Tahir, T. Alireza, G. Sanchez Marti-

nez, K. Ferl, and N. Cenacchi. 2008. “The Health 
Dimension of Climate Change.” Background 
paper for Adapting to Climate Change in Europe 
and Central Asia, ed. M. Fay, R. I. Block, and J. 
Ebinger, 2010, World Bank, Washington, DC. 
Ratha, D., S. Mohapatra, and Z. Xu. 2008. Out-
look for Remittance Flows 2008–2010. Wash-
ington, DC: World Bank.

Ravallion, M. 2008. “Bailing Out the World’s 

poorest.” policy Research Working paper 
4763, World Bank, Washington, DC.

68 

WO R L D   D E V E LOpM E N T   R EpO RT   2 0 1 0

Ristvet, L., and H. Weiss. 2000. “Imperial 

Responses to Environmental Dynamics at 
Late Third Millennium Tell Leilan.” Orient-
 Express 2000 (4): 94–99.

Robine, J.- M., S. L. K. Cheung, S. Le Roy, H. Van 
Oyen, C. Griffiths, J.- p. Michel, and F. R. Herr-
mann. 2008. “Death Toll Exceeded 70,000 in 
Europe during Summer of 2003.” Comptes 
Rendus Biologies 331 (2): 171–78.

Robins, N., R. Clover, and C. Singh. 2009. A 

Climate for Recovery: The Colour of Stimulus 
Goes Green. London: HSBC.

Roemer, J. 2009. “The Ethics of Distribution in a 
Warming planet.” Cowles Foundation Discus-
sion paper 1693, New Haven, CT.

Rosenberg, N. 1971. “Technology and the Envi-

ronment: An Economic Exploration.” Tech-
nology and Culture 12 (4): 543–61.

Rosenzweig, M. R., and H. p. Binswanger. 1993. 
“Wealth, Weather Risk and the Composition 
and profitability of Agricultural Investments.” 
Economic Journal 103 (416): 56–78.

Savage, L. J. 1951. “The Theory of Statistical 

Decision.” Journal of the American Statistical 
Association 46 (253): 55–67.

———. 1954. The Foundations of Statistics. New 

York: John Wiley & Sons.

Schmidhuber, J., and F. N. Tubiello. 2007. 
“Global Food Security under Climate 
Change.” Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences 104 (50): 19703–08.

Schmidt, G. 2006. “Runaway Tipping points of 

No Return.” Real Climate, July 5, 2009.

Schwartz, J., L. Andres, and G. Dragoiu. 2009. 
“Crisis in LAC: Infrastructure Investment, 
Employment and the Expectations of Stimu-
lus.” World Bank, LCSSD Economics Unit, 
Washington, DC. 

Shalizi, Z., and F. Lecocq. 2009. “Economics of 

Targeted Mitigation programs in Sectors with 
Long-Lived Capital Stock.” policy Research 
Working paper 5063, World Bank, Washing-
ton, DC.

Singer, p. 2006. “Ethics and Climate Change: 

Commentary.” Environmental Values 15: 
415–22.

Smyth, I. 2005. “More than Silence: The Gender 
Dimensions of Tsunami Fatalities and Their 
Consequences.” paper presented at the WHO 
Conference on Health Aspects of the Tsunami 
Disaster in Asia, phuket, Thailand.

Solomon, S., G.- K. plattner, R. Knutti, and p. 
Friedlingstein. 2009. “Irreversible Climate 
Change due to Carbon Dioxide Emissions.” 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci-
ences 106 (6): 1704–09.

Stern, N. 2007. The Economics of Climate 

Change: The Stern Review. Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge University press.

———. 2008. Key Elements of a Global Deal on 
Climate Change. London: London School of 
Economics and political Science.

Sterner, T., and U. M. persson. 2008. “An Even 
Sterner Review: Introducing Relative prices 
into the Discounting Debate.” Review of Envi-
ronmental Economics and Policy 2 (1): 61–76.

Tol, R. S. J. 2005. “The Marginal Damage Cost of 
Carbon Dioxide Emissions: An Assessment of 
the Uncertainties.” Energy Policy 33: 2064–74.

Toth, F., and M. Mwandosya. 2001. “Decision-

 making Frameworks.” In Climate Change 
2001: Mitigation. Contribution of Working 
Group III to the Third Assessment Report of the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 
ed. B. Metz, O. Davidson, R. Swart, and J. pan. 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University press.

Ummel, K., and D. Wheeler. 2008. “Desert 
power: The Economics of Solar Thermal 
Electricity for Europe, North Africa, and the 
Middle East.” Working paper 156, Center for 
Global Development, Washington, DC.
UNDp (United Nations Development pro-

gramme). 2008. Human Development Report 
2007/2008. Fighting Climate Change: Human 
Solidarity in a Divided World. New York: UNDp.

———. 2009. Resource Guide on Gender and 

Climate Change. New York: UNDp.

UNISDR (United Nations International Strat-
egy for Disaster Risk Reduction). 2007. Gen-
der Perspective: Working Together for Disaster 
Risk Reduction. Good Practices and Lessons 
Learned. Geneva: UNISDR.

Smith, J. B., S. H. Schneider, M. Oppenheimer, 

United Nations. 2008. The Millennium Develop-

G. W. Yohe, W. Hare, M. D. Mastrandrea, 
A. patwardhan, I. Burton, J. Corfee- Morlot, 
C. H. D. Magadza, H.- M. Füssel, A. B. pittock, 
A. Rahman, A. Suarez, and J.- p. van Ypersele. 
2009. “Assessing Dangerous Climate Change 
through an Update of the Intergovernmental 
panel on Climate Change (IpCC) ‘reasons for 
concern.’” Proceedings of the National Acad-
emy of Sciences 106 (11): 4133–37.

ment Goals Report 2008. New York: UN.

Vergara, W. 2009. “Assessing the potential Con-

sequences of Climate Destabilization in Latin 
America.” Sustainable Development Work-
ing paper 32, World Bank, Latin America and 
Caribbean Region, Washington, DC.

WCED (World Commission on Environment 

and Development). 1987. Our Common 
Future. Oxford, UK: WCED.

 

Understanding the Links between Climate Change and Development 

69

Weiss, H. 2000. “Beyond the Younger Dryas: 
Collapse as Adaptation to Abrupt Climate 
Change in Ancient West Asia and the Eastern 
Mediterranean.” In Environmental Disaster 
and the Archaeology of Human Response, ed. 
G. Bawden and R. M. Reycraft. Albuquerque: 
Maxwell Museum of Anthropology.

Weiss, H., and R. S. Bradley. 2001. “What Drives 

Societal Collapse?” Science 291: 609–10.

Weitzman, M. 2007. “A Review of the Stern 

Review on the Economics of Climate Change.” 
Journal of Economic Literature 45 (3): 
703–24.

———. 2009a. “On Modeling and Interpret-
ing the Economics of Catastrophic Climate 
Change.” Review of Economics and Statistics 
91 (1): 1–19.

———. 2009b. “Reactions to the Nordhaus Cri-
tique.” Harvard University. Cambridge, MA. 

Wheeler, D., and K. Ummel. 2007. “Another 
Inconvenient Truth: A Carbon- Intensive 
South Faces Environmental Disaster, No Mat-
ter What the North Does.” Working paper 
134, Center for Global Development, Wash-
ington, DC.

World Bank. 2001. “Hurricane Mitch: The Gen-

der Effects of Coping and Crises.” Notes of 
the Development Economics Vice presidency 
and poverty Reduction and Economic Man-
agement Network 56, Washington, DC.

———. 2008. “Double Jeopardy: Responding to 

High Food and Fuel prices.” Working paper 
44951, Washington, DC.

———. 2009a. Global Monitoring Report 2009: 
A Development Emergency. Washington, DC: 
World Bank.

———. 2009b. “World Bank Statement to the 
Tenth Session of the United Nations Human 
Rights Council.” Geneva.

———. 2009c. World Development Indicators 

2009. Washington, DC: World Bank.

WRI (World Resources Institute). 2008. “The 
Climate Analysis Indicators Tool (CAIT).” 
Washington, DC. 

Yohe, G. W. 1999. “The Tolerable Windows 

Approach: Lessons and Limitations.” Climatic 
Change 41 (3–4): 283–95.

focus A

The science of climate change

The climate is changing—that is now indisputable. There is a scientific consensus that the world is becoming a warmer 
place principally attributable to human activities. In the words of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) 
in  its  fourth  assessment  report: “Warming  of  the  climate  system  is  unequivocal.”1  For  nearly  1  million  years  before  the 
Industrial Revolution, the carbon dioxide (CO2) concentration in the atmosphere ranged between 170 and 280 parts per 
million (ppm). Levels are now far above that range—387 ppm—higher than the highest point in at least the past 800,000 
years, and the rate of increase may be accelerating.2 Under high- emissions scenarios, concentrations by the end of the 21st 
century could exceed those experienced on the planet for tens of millions of years.

Article  2  of  the  United  Nations 
Framework  Convention  on  Climate 
Change  sets  the  objective  of  achiev-
ing a “stabilization of greenhouse gas 
emissions at a level that would prevent 
dangerous  anthropogenic  interfer-
ence with the climate system.”3 To the 
extent that avoiding “dangerous” inter-
ference is defined in the convention, it 
is  described  as  keeping  emissions  to 
levels that “allow ecosystems to adapt 
naturally to climate change, ensure that 
food production is not threatened and 
enable economic development to pro-
ceed in a sustainable manner.” It is not 
clear that this objective is fully achiev-
able  because  the  warming  already 
observed has been linked to increases 
in droughts, floods, heat waves, forest 
fires,  and  intense  rainfall  events  that 
are  already  threatening  human  and 
natural systems.

There  is  convincing  evidence  that 
the capacity of societies and ecosystems 
to adapt to global warming is severely 
tested beyond warming of 2°C.4 If the 
world is able to limit the human- caused 
temperature  increase  to  about  2°C 
above its preindustrial level, it might be 
possible  to  limit  significant  loss  from 
the  Greenland  and West Antarctic  ice 
sheets and subsequent sea- level rise; to 
limit the increase of floods, droughts, 
and  forest  fires  in  many  regions;  to 
limit the increase of death and illness 
from the spread of infectious and diar-
rheal diseases and from extreme heat; to 
avoid extinction of more than a quar-
ter  of  all  known  species;  and  to  pre-
vent significant declines in global food 
production.5

But, even stabilizing global tempera-
tures at 2°C above preindustrial levels 
will  significantly  change  the  world. 
Earth  has  warmed  0.8°C  on  average 
from  preindustrial  times,  and  high-
 latitude regions are already experiencing 
environmental and cultural disruption; 
further impacts will be unavoidable as 
warming  continues.  A  2°C  warming 
will cause more frequent and stronger 
extreme weather events, including heat 
waves,  increased  water  stress  in  many 
world regions, declining food produc-
tion in many tropical regions, and dam-
aged ecosystems, including widespread 
loss  of  coral  reefs  from  warming  and 
ocean acidification.

Unless the world acts quickly to alter 
emissions pathways, models project that 
by 2100 the global average temperature 
will increase to 2.5–7°C above preindus-
trial levels,6 depending on the amount 
and  rate  of  energy  growth,  limits  on 
fossil- fuel energy sources, and the pace 
of development of carbon- free energy 
technologies (see chapter 4). Although 
this temperature may seem like a mod-
est  increase  compared  with  seasonal 
variations, the lower end of this range 
is the equivalent of moving from Oslo 
to Madrid. The upper end is equivalent 
to the warming that has occurred since 
the peak of the last glacial age, which 
led  to  the  melting  of  two- kilometer 
thick ice that covered northern Europe 
and North America.7 For the next few 
decades,  the  global  average  tempera-
ture is projected to increase 0.2–0.3°C 
a decade,8 a rate of change that will tax 
the ability of species and ecosystems to 
adapt (see focus B on biodiversity).

Defining “dangerous anthropogenic 
interference”  will  be  a  political  deci-
sion,  not  a  scientific  determination. 
A  decade  after  the  Kyoto  Protocol,  as 
we  enter  the  first  period  of  rigorous 
accounting of emissions by developed 
countries, the world is negotiating the 
course of action for the coming decades 
that will largely determine whether our 
children  inherit a  planet that  has  sta-
bilized around 2°C warmer or is on a 
path  to  much  higher  temperatures. 
The term “dangerous” involves several 
components—the  total  magnitude  of 
change, the rate of change, the risk of 
sudden or abrupt change, and the like-
lihood of crossing irreversibly harmful 
thresholds. What is determined to be a 
dangerous degree of climate change can 
be expected to depend on the effects on 
human and natural systems and their 
capacity  to  adapt.  This  focus  looks  at 
how  the  climate  system  works,  at  the 
changes  observed  to  date,  what  a  2°C 
warmer world versus a 5°C or warmer 
world  portends,  the  risks  of  crossing 
irreversible  thresholds,  and  the  chal-
lenge to limit warming to 2°C.

How the climate system works
The climate of Earth is determined by 
the incoming energy from the Sun, the 
outgoing  energy  radiated  from  Earth, 
and  exchanges  of  energy  among  the 
atmosphere, land, oceans, ice, and living 
things. The composition of the atmo-
sphere is particularly important because 
some  gases  and  aerosols  (very  small 
particles)  affect  the  flow  of  incoming 
solar  radiation  and  outgoing  infrared 
radiation. Water vapor, CO2, methane 

 

The science of climate change 

71

(CH4),  ozone  (O3),  and  nitrous  oxide 
(N2O) are all greenhouse gases (GHGs) 
naturally  present  in  the  atmosphere. 
They warm Earth’s surface by imped-
ing the escape of infrared (heat) energy 
into space. The warming effect created 
by  the  natural  levels  of  these  gases  is 
“the  natural  greenhouse  effect.”  This 
effect  warms  the  world  about  33°C 
more than it would be otherwise, keeps 
most of the world’s water in the liquid 
phase, and allows life to exist from the 
equator to near the poles.

Gases released from human activi-
ties have greatly amplified the natural 
greenhouse  effect.  The  global  average 
atmospheric  CO2  concentration  has 
increased significantly since the begin-
ning  of  the  Industrial  Revolution, 
especially  in  the  past  50  years.  Over 
the  20th  century,  the  CO2  concentra-
tion increased from about 280 ppm to 
387 ppm—almost 40 percent—mainly 
because of the burning of carbon- based 
fossil fuels and, to a lesser extent, defor-
estation and changes in land use (box 

FA.1). The combustion of coal, oil, and 
natural gas now contributes about 80 
percent  of  the  CO2  emitted  annually, 
with  land- use  changes  and  defores-
tation  accounting  for  the  remaining 
20 percent.  In  1950 the contributions 
from  fossil  fuels  and  land  use  were 
about equal; since then, energy use has 
grown by a factor of 18. The concen-
trations  of  other  heat- trapping  gases, 
including methane and nitrous oxide, 
have  also  increased  significantly  as  a 
result of fossil- fuel combustion, farm-

Box FA.1      The carbon cycle

The amount of carbon dioxide (CO2) in 
the atmosphere is controlled by biogeo-
chemical cycles that redistribute carbon 
among the ocean, land, living material, 
and atmosphere. The atmosphere cur-
rently contains about 824 gigatons (Gt) of 
carbon. Human- caused emissions of car-
bon in 2007 totaled about 9 Gt of carbon, 
of which about 7.7 Gt (or 28.5 Gt of CO2) 
were from the combustion of fossil fuel 
and the rest were from changes in land 
cover. (One Gt equals a billion metric tons. 
To convert carbon emissions and fluxes 
to CO2 amounts, multiply the amount of 
carbon by 3.67.) 

The atmospheric concentration of 
CO2 is currently increasing at a rate of 
about 2 parts per million (ppm) a year, 
which is equivalent to an increase in the 
atmospheric loading of carbon by about 
4 Gt of carbon a year (in other words, 
about half of the fossil- fuel emissions of 
CO2 lead to a long- term increase in the 
atmospheric concentration). The rest of 
the CO2 emissions are being taken up by 
“carbon sinks”—the ocean and terrestrial 
ecosystems. The oceans take up about 
2 Gt of carbon a year (the difference 
between the 90.6 and the 92.2 indicated 
in the figure, plus a small land-to-ocean 
flux). The net uptake of carbon by oceans 
and by terrestrial systems (photosynthe-
sis minus respiration) and the estimates 
of emissions from land-use change and 
fossil-fuel combustion would result in 
atmospheric concentrations higher than 
are recorded. It appears that terrestrial 
ecosystems are currently taking up the 
excess. A 2.7 Gt “residual sink,” as it is 

ATMOSPHERE (824)

Gross 
primary

production

Land sinks
and land-use

change
emissions

Respiration

Ocean-to-atmosphere

flux

Fossil fuel combustion
and industrial processes

119.6

120.2

2.7

1.5

92.2

90.6

7.7

VEGETATION AND SOILS (2,300)

OCEAN (38,000)

Carbon (Gt)

Natural flux
Anthropogenic flux

SINK (carbon stored)

Source: Adapted from IPCC 2007b.

termed, is assumed to result mainly from 
changes in land cover (net increases 
in forest cover from reforestation and 
afforestation in excess of deforestation) 
and increased carbon uptake because of 
enhanced growth of the world’s forests 
in response to higher CO2 concentrations 
(known as the CO2 fertilization effect). 

Terrestrial ecosystems hold about 

2,300 Gt of carbon—roughly 500 Gt in 
above-ground biomass and about three 
times that amount in the soils. Reducing 
deforestation needs to be an important 
component of slowing emissions growth. 
While every effort should be made to 
increase land storage of carbon, there 
will be challenges as the climate changes 

and the frequency of fire, pest infesta-
tions, drought, and heat stress increases. 
If fossil-fuel emissions continue on a 
business-as-usual path, uptake of emis-
sions by forests and other terrestrial eco-
systems may slow and even reverse, with 
these ecosystems becoming a net source 
of emissions by the end of the century, 
according to some models. And warmer 
oceans will absorb CO2 more slowly, so a 
greater fraction of fossil-fuel emissions 
will remain in the atmosphere.

Sources: Fischlin and others 2007; IPCC 
2000; IPCC 2001; Canadell and others 2007; 
Houghton 2003; Prentice and others 2001; 
Sabine and others 2004.

72 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 0

ing and industrial activities, and land-
 use changes (figure FA.1).9

Some of the pollutants introduced by 
humans warm Earth, and some cool it 
(figure FA.2). Some are long- lived, and 
some short- lived. By trapping infrared 
radiation, carbon dioxide, nitrous oxide, 
and  halocarbons10  warm  Earth,  and 
because  the  increased  concentrations 
of these gases persist for centuries, their 

warming  influence  causes  long- term 
climate change. In contrast, the warm-
ing  influence  of  methane  emissions 
persists for only a few decades, and the 
climatic influences of aerosols—which 
can  either  be  heat- trapping  such  as 
black  carbon  (soot)  or  heat- reducing 
such as reflective sulfates11—persist for 
only days to weeks.12 So while a sharp 
decline in the CO2 emissions from the 

combustion of coal in coming decades 
would reduce long- term warming, the 
associated  reduction  in  the  cooling 
effect  from  sulfur  emissions  caused 
mainly by coal combustion would lead 
to an increase of perhaps 0.5°C.

Temperatures  today  are  already 
0.8°C above preindustrial levels (figure 
FA.3). Were it not for the cooling influ-
ence of reflective particles (such as sul-

Figure FA.1      Global emissions of greenhouse gases have been increasing

a. Increases over time

b. Composition of global emissions in 2004

Gt CO2e/year
5

F-gasses

1.1%

N2O
7.9%

CH4
14.3%

N2O other
N2O agriculture

CH4 other
CH4 waste
CH4 agriculture
CH4 energy

CO2 decay and peat
CO2 deforestation

(deforestation,

decay of biomass)

CO2 

17.3%

CO2
(fossil
fuel use)
56.6%

0

10

5

0

10

5

0

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

50

40

30

20

10

0

CO2 other
CO2 fossil fuel use

CO2 (other)

2.8%

1970

1980

1990

2000 2004

Total greenhouse gases

1970

1980

1990

2000 2004

Source: Reproduced from Barker and others 2007.
Note: This figure shows the sources and growth rates of some of the medium-  to long- term greenhouse gases. Fossil fuels and land- use change have been the major sources of 
CO2, while energy and agriculture contribute about equally to emissions of CH4. N2Ocomes mainly from agriculture. Additional greenhouse gases not included in the figure are 
black carbon (soot), tropospheric ozone, and halocarbons. The comparisons of the equivalent emissions of different gases are based on the use of the 100- year Global Warming 
Potential; see note 9 for explanation.

 

The science of climate change 

73

Figure FA.2      Major factors affecting the climate since the Industrial Revolution

Cooling influences

Warming influences

Carbon dioxide

(CO2)

N2O

Nitrous oxide

CH4

Halocarbons

Methane

Stratospheric

(–0.05)

Tropospheric

Land use

Soot (black carbon) on snow

Human activities

Long-lived
greenhouse

gases

Ozone

Stratospheric
water vapor

Surface
reflectivity

Direct
effect
Cloud
reflective
effect

e
v

i
t
c
e
l
f
e
R

l

s
e
c
i
t
r
a
p

Total net human

activities

Total natural
influences
(solar output)

–2

–1

0

1

2

watts/square meter

Source: Adapted from Karl, Melillo, and Peterson 2009.
Note: The figure above shows the amount of warming influence (orange bars) or cooling influence (blue bars) that differ-
ent factors have had on Earth’s climate since the beginning of the industrial age (from about 1750 to the present). Results 
are in watts per square meter. The top part of the box includes all the major human- induced factors, while the second 
part of the box includes the Sun, the only major natural factor with a long- term effect on climate. The cooling effect of 
individual volcanoes is also natural but is relatively short- lived (2 to 3 years), thus their influence is not included in this 
figure. The bottom part of the box shows that the total net effect (warming influences minus cooling influences) of human 
activities is a strong warming influence. The thin lines on each bar provide an estimate of the range of uncertainty.

Figure FA.3      Global annual average temperature and CO2 concentration continue to climb, 1880–2007
CO2 concentration (ppm)
Global temperature (°C)
400

14.5

14.3

14.1

13.9

13.7

13.5

Above average temperature
Below average temperature
CO2 concentration

380

360

340

320

300

1880

1900

1920

1940

Year

1960

1980

2000

Source: Adapted from Karl, Melillo, and Peterson 2009.
Note: Orange bars indicate temperature above the 1901–2000 average, blue bars are below average temperatures. 
The green line shows the rising CO2 concentration. While there is a clear long- term global warming trend, each 
individual year does not show a temperature increase relative to the previous year, and some years show greater 
changes than others. These year- to- year fluctuations in temperature are attributable to natural processes, such as 
the effects of El Niños, La Niñas, and volcanic eruptions.

fate aerosols) and the decades that it 
takes ocean temperatures to come into 
equilibrium  with  the  increased  trap-
ping of infrared radiation, the global 
average  temperature  increase  caused 
by  human  activities  would  likely 
already be about 1°C warmer than it is 
today. Thus the current elevated con-
centrations of greenhouse gases alone 
are  near  to  committing  the  world  to 
a 2°C warming, a level beyond which 
the  world  can  expect  to  experience 
very  disruptive,  even  “dangerous” 
consequences.13

Changes observed to date and 
the implications of our changing 
understanding of the science
The effects of changes in climate since 
the mid- 19th century are particularly 
evident  today  in  the  observations  of 
higher  average  air  and  ocean  tem-
peratures;  the  widespread  melting 
of  snow  and  ice  around  the  world, 
particularly in the Arctic and Green-
land (figure FA.4); and the increase in 
global sea level. Cold days, cold nights, 
and frosts have become less frequent, 
while  the  frequency  and  intensity  of 
heat waves have increased. Both floods 
and droughts are occurring more fre-
quently.14 The interiors of continents 
have  tended  to  dry  out  despite  an 
overall increase in total precipitation. 
Globally,  precipitation  has  increased, 
as  the  water  cycle  of  the  planet  has 
been sped up by warmer temperatures, 
even  while  the  Sahel  and  Mediterra-
nean regions have seen more frequent 
and  more  intense  droughts.  Heavy 
rainfall and floods have become more 
common,  and  there  is  evidence  that 
the intensities of storms and tropical 
cyclones have increased.15

These  impacts  are  not  distributed 
evenly  across  the  globe  (map  FA.1). 
As  expected,  temperature  changes  are 
greater at the poles, with some regions of 
the Arctic warming 0.5°C in just the past 
30 years.16 At low latitudes—those close 
to the equator—a greater fraction of the 
trapped infrared energy goes into evapo-
ration, limiting warming but providing 

74 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 0

Figure FA.4      Greenland’s melting ice sheet

1992

2002

2007

70°N

70°N

70°N

60°N

60°N

60°N

50°W

40°W

50°W

40°W

50°W

40°W

Permanent ice sheet that melts in summer

Seasonal ice coverage

Permanent ice sheet

Seasonal melt departure (x1000 km2)
100
80
60
40
20
0
–20
–40
–60
–80
–100

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

Year

Sources: Top panel: Adapted from ACIA 2005 and Cooperative Institute for Environmental Sciences (CIRES), http://
cires.colorado.edu/steffen/greenland/melt2005/ (accessed July, 2009). Bottom panel: Reproduced from Mote 2007.
Note: The orange areas on the maps of Greenland show the extent of summer ice melt, which has increased dramat-
ically in recent years. Ten percent more ice was lost in 2007 than in 2005. The bar chart shows that despite annual 
variation in ice cover, significant loss has occurred for more than a decade.

an increase in water vapor that pours out 
as  more  intense  rains  from  convective 
storms and tropical cyclones.

The  resilience  of  many  ecosystems 
is  likely  to  be  exceeded  in  the  coming 
decades by a combination of the effects 
of  climate  change  and  other  stresses, 
including habitat degradation, invasive 
species,  and  air  and  water  pollution. 

Major changes are projected in ecosys-
tems as climate change shifts the ideal 
geographic ranges of plant and animal 
species.  Productivity  of  agriculture, 
forests, and fisheries will be affected as 
will other ecological services.17 Already 
20,000 datasets show a wide range of spe-
cies on the move, with changes averaging 
about six kilometers a decade toward the 

poles or six meters a decade up moun-
tains as an apparent result of the increase 
in temperatures.18 These rapid changes 
are  leading  to  asynchrony  in  many  of 
the long- established predator- prey rela-
tionships, with some species arriving too 
early or too late to find their traditional 
food sources.

Over the past 20 years, our under-
standing  of  the  science  of  climate 
change has greatly improved. In 1995, 
for example, the IPCC concluded: “The 
balance of evidence suggests a discern-
ible  human  influence  on  global  cli-
mate.”19 In 2001 the IPPC concluded: 
“There  is  new  and  stronger  evidence 
that most of the warming observed over 
the last 50 years is attributable to human 
activities.”20 Six years later, in 2007, the 
IPCC concluded: “Warming of the cli-
mate system is unequivocal. Most of the 
observed increase in globally- averaged 
temperatures since the mid- 20th cen-
tury is very likely due to the observed 
increase in anthropogenic greenhouse 
gas concentrations.”21 

In 2001 and 2007 the scientific com-
munity  summarized  the  best  under-
standing of climate change impacts or 
reasons for concern in five categories: 
unique species/threatened ecosystems, 
extreme  events,  breadth  of  impacts, 
total economic impacts, and large- scale 
discontinuities. In the “burning ember” 
charts, the intensity of the red shading 
signifies the degree of concern over the 
effect in question (figure FA.5). Com-
paring column B in the left and right 
panels shows how the change in the best 
available information from 2001 to 2007 
moved the red area closer to the zero 
degree line for extreme events—that is, 
at the current global average tempera-
ture, extreme events are already increas-
ing. A comparison of the two E columns 
shows that the threat of discontinuous 
events,  such  as  changes  in  the  ocean 
conveyor- belt heat- distribution system 
or  catastrophic  thawing  of  the  Arctic 
leading  to  massive  releases  of  meth-
ane, becomes much larger if the world 
warms another 2°C over today’s levels.

Map FA.1      Regional variation in global climate trends over the last 30 years

a. Temperature

focus map 1.1A (top)
focus map 1.1B (bot)

IBRD 37159
September 2009
focus map 1.1A (top)
focus map 1.1B (bot)

Temperature change (°C)

<–1

0.2–0.6

–1– –0.6

0.6–1

–0.6– –0.2

1–1.4

–0.2–0.2

>1.4

No data

Source: Goddard Institute for Space Studies, http://data.giss.nasa.gov/cgi-bin/gistemp/do_nmap.py?year_last=2009&month_last=07&sat=4&sst=1&type=anoms&mean_gen=07&y
ear1=1990&year2=2008&base1=1951&base2=1980&radius=1200&pol=reg (accessed July 2009).
Note: Yellow, orange, and red colors denote average increases in temperatures (°C) from 1980 to the present compared with the previous three decades. Warming has been 
greatest at high latitudes, especially in the Northern Hemisphere.

Temperature change (°C)

–0.6– –0.2

–0.2–0.2

No data

–1– –0.6

0.6–1

<–1

0.2–0.6

1–1.4

b. Precipitation

>1.4

Precipitation change (millimeters per day)

<–1

0.1–0.3

–1– –0.5

0.3–0.5

Precipitation change (millimeters per day)

<–1

0.1–0.3

–1– –0.5

0.3–0.5

–0.5– –0.3

0.5–1

–0.5– –0.3

0.5–1

–0.3– –0.1

>1

–0.3– –0.1

>1

–0.1–0.1

No data

–0.1–0.1

No data

Source: Goddard Institute for Space Studies, http://data.giss.nasa.gov/cgi-bin/precipcru/do_PRCmap.py?type=1&mean_gen=0112&year1=1980&year2=2000&base1=1951&bas
e2=1980 (accessed May 2009).
Note: Yellow denotes increased precipitation in millimeters a day; blue denotes decreases from 1980 to present compared with the previous three decades. Drying has been greatest 
in continental interiors, while rainfall has become more intense in many coastal areas. The changing geographic distribution of rainfall has serious implications for agriculture. 

76 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 0

Figure FA.5      Embers burning hotter: Assessment of risks and damages has increased from 2001 to 2007 

2001 assessment

2007 assessment

Risks to
many

Large
increase

Negative
for most
regions

Higher

Net

negative

in all
metrics

Risks to
many

Large
increase

Negative
for most
regions

High

Net

negative

in all
metrics

5

4

3

2

1

0

5

4

3

2

1

0

Future

 

 

)
C
°
(
 
0
9
9
1
a
c
r
i
c
e
v
o
b
a
e
r
u
t
a
r
e
p
m
e
t
 
n
a
e
m

 

 
l

a
b
o
g
n

l

 

i
 

e
s
a
e
r
c
n
I

Positive or
negative
market
impacts;
majority
of people
adversely
affected

Very
low

Negative
for some
regions;
positive

for

others

C

D

E

–0.6

Distribution
of impacts

Aggregate
impacts

Risks of large

scale

discontinuities

Risks to
some

Increase

A

Risks to
unique
and

threatened
systems

B

Risk of
extreme
weather
events

Positive or
negative
market
impacts;
majority
of people
adversely
affected

Low

Negative
for some
regions;
positive

for

others

C

D

E

Past

–0.6

Distribution
of impacts

Aggregate
impacts

Risks of large

scale

discontinuities

Risks to
some

Increase

A

Risks to
unique
and

threatened
systems

B

Risk of
extreme
weather
events

Source: Reproduced from Smith and others 2009.
Notes: The figure shows risks from climate change, as described in 2001 (left) compared with updated data (right). Climate- change consequences are shown as bars and the 
increases in global mean temperature (°C) above today’s levels (0 degrees to 5 degrees). Each column corresponds to a specific kind of impact. For example, “unique and threat-
ened systems,” such as alpine meadows or arctic ecosystems, are the most vulnerable (illustrated by the shading in column A) and only a small change in temperature may lead 
to great loss. The color scheme represents progressively increasing levels of risk from yellow to red. Between 1900 and 2000 global average temperature increased by ~0.6°C 
(and by nearly 0.2°C in the decade since) and has already led to some impacts. Since 2001 the assessed risk of damages has increased even for temperatures of an additional 1°C 
above today’s levels, or about 2°C total above preindustrial levels.

Since the finalization of the IPCC’s 
fourth assessment report in 2007, new 
information has further advanced sci-
entific understanding. This information 
includes updated observations of recent 
changes  in  climate,  better  attribution 
of observed climate change to human 
and  natural  causal  factors,  improved 
understanding  of  carbon- cycle  feed-
backs,  and  new  projections  of  future 
changes in extreme weather events and 
the potential for catastrophic change.22 
Many  risks  are  now  assessed  to  be 
greater  than  previously  thought,  par-
ticularly the risks of large sea- level rise 
in the current century and of increases 
in extreme weather events.

Future changes if the 
temperature increase  
exceeds 2°C
The physical impacts of future climate 
change  on  humans  and  the  environ-
ment  will  include  increasing  stresses 
on  and  even  collapses  of  ecosystems, 
biodiversity  loss,  changing  timing  of 
growing  seasons,  coastal  erosion  and 
aquifer salinization, permafrost thaw, 
ocean  acidification,23  and  shifting 
ranges  for  pests  and  diseases.  These 
impacts are shown for different tem-
peratures and world regions in figure 
FA.6.

The  physical  effects  of  future  cli-
mate change will have varying impacts 

on people and the environment at dif-
ferent  temperature  increases  and  in 
different  regions  (see  figure  FA.6).  If 
temperatures  reach  2°C  above  prein-
dustrial  levels,  water  availability  will 
be reduced for another 0.4–1.7 billion 
people  in  midlatitudes  and  semiarid 
low latitudes. Those affected by severe 
water shortages will be mainly in Africa 
and Asia. At these higher temperatures, 
most coral reefs would die (box FA.2), 
and  some  crops,  particularly  cereals, 
could  not  be  successfully  grown  in 
the altered climates prevailing in low-
 latitude  regions.  About  a  quarter  of 
plant  and  animal  species  are  likely  to 
be at increased risk of extinction (see 

 

The science of climate change 

Figure FA.6      Projected impacts of climate change by region 

Global mean annual temperature change relative to preindustrial era (°C)

0.8

1.8

2.8

77

5.8

3.8

25 to 40%

Semi-arid/ arid areas increase by 5 to 8%

Additional people with increased water stress

4.8

Sub-Saharan
species at risk of
extinction

10 to 15%

350 to 600

million

5 to 12%

decrease rice

in China

Crop yield
potential

Up to 7 million

Additional people with increased water stress

Additional people at
risk of coastal flooding
each year

AFRICA

ASIA

AUSTRALIA/

NEW

ZEALAND

EUROPE

LATIN

AMERICA

NORTH
AMERICA

POLAR
REGIONS

SMALL
ISLANDS

75 to 250
million

2 to 5% decrease wheat and

maize in India

0.1 to 1.2
billion

Up to 2 million

0.2 to 1.0
billion

Annual bleaching of Great Barrier Reef

3,000 to 5,000 more heat related deaths per year

–10%                                                         Murray-Darling River flow                                                                     –50%

Decreasing water security in south and east Australia and parts of east New Zealand

+5 to +15% in North

0 to –25% in South

+2 to +10% in North

+3 to +4% in South

+10 to +20%

–5 to –35%

Water availability

+10 to +30%

–15 to +30%

+10 to +25%

–10 to +20%

Wheat yield potential

Potential extinction of about 25%
Central Brazilian savanna tree species

Potential extinction of about
45% Amazonian tree species

Many tropical glaciers disappear

Many mid-latitude glaciers disappear

10 to 80
million

80 to 180
million

Additional people with increased water stress

5 to 20% increase crop
yield potential

Decreased space heating and increased space cooling

Increase in depth of
seasonal thaw of
Arctic permafrost

10 to 15%

About 70% increase in hazardous
ozone days

15 to 25%
20 to 35% reduction of
Arctic permafrost area

30 to 50%

Increasing coastal inundation and damage to infrastructure due to sea-level rise

Alien species colonize mid-
and high latitude islands

Agricultural losses up to 5% GDP
in high terrain islands, up to 20%
GDP in low terrain islands

70 to 120% increase forest
area burned in Canada

3 to 8 times increase
in heat wave days in
some cities
10 to 50% Arctic tundra
replaced by forest
15 to 25% polar desert
replaced by tundra
20 to 35% decrease annual
average Arctic sea ice area

0

1

2

3

4

5

Global mean annual temperature change relative to 1980–99 (°C)

Source: Adapted from Parry and others 2007.

78 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 0

Box FA.2      Ocean health: Coral reefs and ocean acidification

The oceans will become more acidic 
over the coming decades and centuries 
as a direct chemical consequence of the 
increasing atmospheric concentration of 
CO2. Absorption of approximately one-
 third of manmade emissions of CO2 over 
the past 200 years has decreased the pH 
of surface seawater by 0.1 units (pH, the 
degree of acidity or alkalinity, is measured 
on a logarithmic scale, and a 0.1 decrease 
in pH represents a 30 percent increase in 
ocean acidity). Projected pH decreases in 
ocean surface waters over the next 100 
years range from 0.3 to 0.5 units, which 
would make the ocean more acidic than it 
has been in many tens of millions of years.a 
One of the most important implications of 
the changing acidity of the oceans is the 
problem that it may cause for the many 
marine photosynthetic organisms and 
animals, such as corals, bivalves, and some 
plankton species that make their shells and 
plates out of calcium carbonate. The pro-
cess of “calcification” will be inhibited as 
the water becomes more acidic. Some of 
the most abundant life forms that will be 

affected are plankton, which form the base 
of the marine food chain and are a major 
food source for fish and marine mammals. 
From the evidence available, there is sig-
nificant uncertainty about whether marine 
species and ecosystems will be able to 
acclimate or evolve in response to such 
rapid changes in ocean chemistry. At this 
stage, research into the impacts of high 
concentrations of CO2 in the oceans is still 
in its infancy. 

But for coral reefs, the adverse conse-
quences are already becoming evident. 
Coral reefs are among the marine ecosys-
tems most vulnerable to the changing 
climate and atmospheric composition 
and are threatened by a combination of 
direct human impacts and global climate 
change. Their loss would directly affect 
millions of people. Coral reefs, both tropi-
cal and deep cold water, are global centers 
of biodiversity. They provide goods and 
services of roughly $375 billion a year to 
nearly 500 million people. About 30 mil-
lion of the world’s poorest people directly 
rely on coral reef ecosystems for food. 

Coral reefs are already being pushed to 
their thermal limits by recent temperature 
increases. Higher sea surface temperatures 
stress corals and cause coral bleaching 
(the loss or death of symbiotic algae), fre-
quently resulting in large- scale mortality. 
An ecological “tipping point” is likely to 
be crossed in many areas if ocean tem-
peratures increase to more than 2°C above 
their preindustrial levels, especially as 
ocean acidification reduces carbonate con-
centrations, inhibiting reef accretion. Once 
the corals die, macroalgae colonize the 
dead reefs and prevent regrowth of cor-
als. Poor management can amplify these 
dynamics, because overfishing of herbi-
vore reef fish leads to greater macroalgae 
abundance, and sediment and nutrient 
runoff from deforestation and poor agri-
cultural practices promote macroalgae 
growth, exacerbating damage to corals.

Sources: Barange and Perry 2008; Doney 
2006; Fabry and others 2008; Wilkinson 2008.
a. Monaco Declaration, http://ioc3.unesco 
.org/oanet/Symposium2008/Monaco 
Declaration.pdf (accessed May 2009).

focus  B).24  Communities  will  suffer 
more heat stress, and coastal areas will 
be more frequently flooded.25

What  if  temperatures  rise  to  5°C 
above preindustrial levels? About 3 bil-
lion additional people would suffer water 
stress, corals would have mostly died off, 
some 50 percent of species worldwide 
would  eventually  go  extinct,  produc-
tivity  of  crops  in  both  temperate  and 
tropical zones would fall, about 30 per-
cent of coastal wetlands would be inun-
dated, the world would be committed 
to several meters of sea- level rise, and 
there would be substantial burden on 
health systems from increasing malnu-
trition and diarrheal and cardiorespi-
ratory diseases.26 Terrestrial ecosystems 
are expected to shift from being carbon 
“sinks”  (storage)  to  being  a  source  of 
carbon; whether this carbon is released 
as carbon dioxide or methane, it would 
still accelerate global warming.27 Many 

small  island  states  and  coastal  plains 
would be flooded by storm surges and 
sea- level  rise  as  the  major  ice  sheets 
deteriorate and the traditional ways of 
life of Arctic peoples would be lost as 
the sea ice retreats. 

Recent  evidence  indicates  that  loss 
of sea ice, the melting of the Greenland 
and Antarctic ice sheets, the rate of sea-
 level rise, and the thawing of the perma-
frost and mountain glaciers are faster 
than  expected  when  the  IPCC  2007 
report was completed.28 New analyses 
suggest that droughts in West Africa29 
and a drying of the Amazon rain for-
est30 may be more probable than previ-
ously thought.31

While  scientific  uncertainty  has 
often been cited as a reason to wait for 
more evidence before acting to control 
climate change, these recent surprises 
all  illustrate  that  uncertainty  can  cut 
the  other  way  as  well  and  that  out-

comes can be worse than expected. As 
the overview and chapter 1 highlight, 
the existence of uncertainties warrant 
a  precautionary  approach  to  climate 
change  given  the  potential  for  irre-
versible impacts and the inertia in the 
climate  system,  in  infrastructure  and 
technology turnover, and in socioeco-
nomic systems.

Crossing thresholds?
These  impacts  do  not  fully  capture 
the  probability  and  uncertainty  of  an 
increase in extreme events or define the 
thresholds of irreversible catastrophic 
events. Although climate change is often 
characterized  as  a  gradual  increase  in 
global average temperature, this depic-
tion is inadequate and misleading in at 
least two ways. 

First,  the  historical  and  paleo-
climatic  records  both  suggest  that 
the  projected  changes  in  the  climate 

 

The science of climate change 

79

could  well  occur  in  jumps  and  shifts 
rather  than  gradually. As  mentioned, 
the Greenland and West Antarctic ice 
sheets  are  particularly  at  risk  from 
global  warming,  and  there  appear 
to  be  mechanisms  that  could  lead  to 
large and rapid changes in the amount 
of  ice  they  store.32  This  is  important 
because total loss of the ice now stored 
in both sheets would eventually raise 
the global sea level by about 12 meters. 
Some analyses indicate that this pro-
cess would proceed slowly in a warm-
ing  world,  taking  as  much  as  several 
millennia or more. But recent studies 
indicate that because these ice sheets 
are  largely  below  sea  level  and  sur-
rounded by warming water, their dete-
rioration  could  happen  much  faster, 
conceivably in only a few centuries.33 
Sharply increased melting of either or 
both of these ice sheets, with accom-
panying changes in ocean circulation, 
is only one of several possibilities for 
tipping points in the climate system of 
a warming world, where changes could 
mean passing a point of no return—
one where a system will shift to a dif-
ferent state, causing the potential for 
severe environmental and societal dis-
locations to go up accordingly.34

Second,  no  one  lives  in  the  global 
average  temperature.  Climate  change 
impacts will differ sharply from region 
to  region  and  often  will  interact  with 
other  environmental  stresses.  For 
example, evaporation and precipitation 
are  both  increasing  and  will  continue 
to  increase  globally,  but  as  the  atmo-
spheric  circulation  shifts,  the  changes 
will  vary  regionally,  with  some  places 
become wetter and some drier. Among 
the likely additional consequences will 
be shifts in storm tracks, more intense 
tropical cyclones and extreme rainfall 
events,  a  higher  snow  line  leading  to 
less  spring  snowpack,  further  shrink-
age  of  mountain  glaciers,35  reduced 
coverage of winter snowfall and sea ice, 
faster evaporation of soil moisture lead-
ing to more frequent and more intense 

droughts  and  fires,  less  extensive  per-
mafrost, and more frequent air pollu-
tion episodes. Shifts in the timing and 
patterns of the world’s monsoons and 
ocean- atmosphere  oscillations  (as  in 
the El Niño/Southern Oscillation and 
the North Atlantic Oscillation) are also 
likely.  Map  FA.2  and  table  FA.1  show 
some  of  the  possible  tipping  points, 
their  location,  and  the  temperatures 
that might trigger change as well as the 
likely impacts.

Can we aim for 2°C warming 
and avoid 5°C or beyond? 
Many studies conclude that stabilizing 
atmospheric concentrations of green-
house  gases  at  450  ppm  CO2  or  its 
equivalent will yield only a 40–50 per-
cent chance of limiting the global aver-
age temperature increase to 2°C above 
preindustrial  levels.36  Many  emission 
paths can get us there, but all require 
emissions  to  peak  in  the  next  decade 
and then to decline worldwide to half 
of  today’s  levels  by  2050,  with  fur-
ther  emissions  reductions  thereafter. 
However,  for  greater  confidence  that 
a  particular  temperature  will  not  be 
exceeded,  the  emissions  reductions 
must  be  even  steeper. As  indicated  in 
figure FA.7c, the “best guess” of a 2°C 
path cannot exclude the possibility of 
hitting 4°C.

A more robust way of thinking about 
the problem is in terms of an emissions 
budget.  Keeping  warming  caused  by 
CO2 alone to 2°C will require limiting 
cumulative  CO2  emissions  to  1  tril-
lion tons (Tt) of carbon (3.7 Tt CO2).37 
The world has already emitted half that 
amount over the previous two- and- a-
 half  centuries.  For  the  21st  century,  a 
business- as- usual  path  would  release 
the  remaining  half  trillion  tons  in  40 
years,  requiring  future  generations  to 
live in a world in which essentially zero 
carbon was emitted.

The concept of a cumulative bud-
get provides a framework for thinking 
about  targets  for  the  short  and  long 

term.  For  example,  the  higher  emis-
sions are in 2020, the lower they will 
need to be in 2050 to stay within the 
same  overall  budget.  If  carbon  emis-
sions are allowed to increase another 
20–40 percent before reductions begin, 
the  rate  of  decline  would  need  to  be 
between 4 percent (the orange path in 
figure FA.7a) and 8 percent (blue path) 
each year to keep to the carbon budget. 
For comparison, at Kyoto the wealthy 
countries  agreed  to  reduce  emis-
sions on average by 5.2 percent from 
1990  levels  over  the  2008–12  period, 
whereas total global emissions would 
need  to  decline  by  4–8  percent  each 
and every year in order to limit warm-
ing to about 2°C.

Warming  caused  by  other  green-
house  gases  such  as  methane,  black 
carbon, and nitrous oxide—which cur-
rently  contribute  about  25  percent  of 
total  warming—means  that  an  even 
lower  limit  for  CO2  will  be  necessary 
to stay near 2°C warming from human 
activities. These other greenhouse gases 
could account for about 125 billion of 
the remaining 500 billion tons in our 
emissions  budget,  meaning  that  the 
carbon dioxide that can be emitted—
measured  in  carbon—is  really  only 
about  375  billion  tons  total.38  Short-
 term measures that reduce 2020 emis-
sions of potent, but short- lived gases, 
such as methane and black carbon or 
tropospheric  ozone,  slow  the  rate  of 
warming.  Indeed,  reducing  black  car-
bon by 50 percent or ozone by 70 per-
cent,39 or halting deforestation would 
each  offset  about  a  decade  of  fossil-
 fuel emissions and would help to limit 
warming in concert with reductions in 
CO2 emissions. To really reduce the risk 
of excessive warming, moving to nega-
tive  emissions  may  also  be  required. 
Accomplishing this—that is, having no 
new emissions and also removing CO2 
from the atmosphere—may be possible 
using  biomass  to  supply  energy,  fol-
lowed  by  sequestration  of  the  carbon 
(see chapter 4). 

80 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 0

Map FA.2      Potential tipping elements in the climate system: Global distribution 

Melt of

Greenland
Ice Sheet

Boreal Forest

Dieback

Arctic Sea Ice Loss

Climatic

Change–Induced

Ozone Hole

IBRD 37098
September 2009
Focus 1.2

Permafrost and

Tundra Loss

Boreal Forest

Dieback

Change in ENSO

Amplitude or Frequency

Dieback
of Amazon
Rainforest

Sahara
Greening

West African
Monsoon Shift

Indian

Monsoon
Instability

Instability of
West Antarctic

Ice Sheet

Source: Adapted from Lenton and others 2008. 
Note: Several regional- scale features of the climate system have tipping points, meaning that a small climate perturbation at a critical point could trigger an abrupt or irreversible 
shift in the system. These could be triggered this century depending on the pace and magnitude of climate change.

Table FA.1      Potential tipping elements in the climate system: Triggers, time- scale, and impacts

Tipping element
Disappearance of Arctic summer sea- ice
Melting of Greenland ice sheet
Melting of West Antarctic ice sheet
Collapse of Atlantic thermohaline circulation
Persistence of El Niño- Southern Oscillation 
(ENSO)
Indian summer monsoon
Sahara/Sahel and West African Monsoon
Drying and dieback of Amazon rainforest
Northward shift of boreal forest
Warming of Antarctic bottom water

Melting of tundra
Melting of permafrost

Triggering level of warming

Transition timescale

+0.5–2°C
+1–2°C
+3–5°C
+3–5°C
+3–6°C

N/A

+3–5°C
+3–4°C
+3–5°C
Unclear

Ongoing
Ongoing

~10 years (rapid)
>300 years (slow)
>300 years (slow)
~100 years (gradual)
~100 years (gradual)

~1 year (rapid)
~10 years (rapid)
~50 years (gradual)
~50 years (gradual)
~100 years (gradual)

~100 years (gradual)
<100 years (gradual)

Release of marine methane hydrates
Source: Adapted from Lenton and others 2008.
Note: An expert elicitation of opinions about the probability of passing a tipping point in a subset of these systems—the melting of the West Antarctic ice sheet, melting of 
Greenland ice sheet, Amazon drying, and ocean circulation (Kriegler and others 2009)—estimated at least a 16 percent probability of one of these events for a warming of 2–4°C. 
The probability would rise to greater than 50 percent for a global mean temperature change above 4°C relative to year 2000 levels. In many cases, these numbers are considerably 
higher than the probability allocated to catastrophic events in current climate- damage assessments; for example, Stern (2007) assumed a 5–20 percent loss of the ice sheets with 
a 10 percent probability for a warming of 5°C.

1,000 to 100,000 years

Unclear

Key impacts
Amplified warming, ecosystem change
Sea-level rise of 2–7 meters
Sea-level rise of 5 meters
Regional cooling in Europe 
Drought in Southeast Asia and elsewhere

Drought 
Increased carrying capacity
Biodiversity loss, decreased rainfall
Biome switch
Changed ocean circulation, reduced 
carbon storage 
Amplified warming, biome switch
Amplified warming from release of methane 
and carbon dioxide
Amplified warming from release of methane

 

The science of climate change 

81

Figure FA.7      Ways to limit warming to 2°C above preindustrial levels

a. Idealized CO2 emission profiles

b. Cumulative carbon emissions

c. Temperature response

Carbon/year (billion tons)

14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
1950

2000

2050
Year

2100

2150

Peak reduction rates

–3% per year

Carbon (trillion tons)
1.2

CO2 induced warming (°C)
4

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

2008 total

1950

2000

2050
Year

2100

2150

3

2

1

0

Likelihood

1950

2000

2050
Year

2100

2150

–4% per year

–8% per year

Observed temperatures relative to 1900–1920

Source: Allen and others 2009a.
Note: Three idealized CO2 emission paths (FA.7a) each consistent with total cumulative emissions (b) of 1 trillion tonnes of carbon. Each of the paths yields the same range of 
projected temperature increase (c) relative to uncertainty in the climate system’s response (grey shading and red error bar), provided the cumulative total is unaffected. The blue, 
green, and red curves in FA.7a are all consistent with the 1 trillion tonne budget, but the higher and later the emissions peak, the faster the emissions have to decline to stay within 
the same cumulative emissions budget. Diamonds in FA.7c indicate observed temperatures relative to 1900–1920. While 2°C is the most likely outcome, temperature increases as 
high as 4°degrees above preindustrial levels cannot be ruled out. 

Notes

1. IPCC  2007b.  The  Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) was orga-
nized in 1988 as a joint effort of the World 
Meteorological  Organization  and  the  UN 
Environment Programme to summarize the 
state of scientific knowledge about climate 
change in a periodic series of major assess-
ments. The first of these was completed in 
1990, the second in 1995, the third in 2001, 
and the fourth in 2007.

2. Raupach and others 2007.
3. http://unfccc.int/essential_background/ 
convention/background/items/1353.php 
(accessed August 30, 2009).

4. Smith and others 2009.
5. Parry and others 2007.
6. Temperature increases at the poles will 

be about double the global average. 

7. Schneider  von  Deimling  and  others 

2006. 

8. The  observed  increases  have  averaged 
about  0.2°C  per  decade  since  1990,  which 
give us confidence in the future projections. 
See  IPCC  2007a,  table  3.1,  which  gives  a 
range  of  0.1–0.6°C  a  decade  across  all  sce-
narios.

9. According to the latest estimates from 
the  World  Meteorological  Organization, 
the  average  CO2  concentration  in  2008 
was 387 parts per million (ppm). Methane 

and nitrous oxide concentrations have also 
increased, reaching new highs of 1,789 and 
321  parts  per  billion  (ppb),  respectively. 
The  carbon  dioxide  equivalent  concentra-
tion  (CO2e)  is  a  quantity  that  describes, 
for a given mixture and amount of green-
house gases, the amount of CO2 that would 
have  the  same  potential  to  contribute  to 
global  warming  measured  over  a  specified 
period. For example, for the same mass of 
gas,  the  Global Warming  Potential  (GWP) 
for  methane  over  a  100- year  period  is  25, 
and for nitrous oxide, 298. This means that 
emissions of 1 metric ton of methane and 
nitrous  oxide,  respectively,  would  cause 
the  same  warming  influence  as  emissions 
of 25 and 298 metric tons of carbon diox-
ide. Fortunately, the mass of the emissions 
of these gases is not as great as for CO2, so 
their  effective  warming  influence  is  less. 
Note,  however,  that  over  different  periods, 
the GWPs can vary; for example, the near-
term  (20- year)  GWP  for  methane  is  75, 
indicating that over short periods of time, 
methane emissions are very important and 
controlling  them  can  slow  the  pace  of  cli-
mate change.

10. Halocarbon  compounds  are  chemi-
cals  containing  carbon  atoms  bonded  to 
halogen atoms (fluorine, chlorine, bromine, 
or iodine). These compounds tend to be very 

persistent  and  nonreactive.  Until  they  were 
banned  to  protect  the  ozone  layer,  many 
were  commonly  used  as  refrigerants  and 
to  form  insulating  materials.  Because  these 
compounds also lead to global warming, the 
banning of them under the Montreal Proto-
col and subsequent amendments has helped 
to limit global warming (in fact, even more so 
than the Kyoto Protocol). While the replace-
ment compounds that have been introduced 
do  contribute  less  to  global  warming  and 
ozone depletion, greatly increased use of the 
replacements could exert a significant warm-
ing influence over time, and so emissions of 
such  compounds  should  be  reduced  over 
coming decades.

11. Natural  removal  of  the  sulfate  par-
ticles  from  the  atmosphere  over  the  few 
weeks following their formation is also the 
primary contributor to acidification of pre-
cipitation  (acid  rain),  which  reduces  soil 
fertility, damages plants and buildings, and 
adversely affects human health.
12. Forster and others 2007.
13. Adger and others 2008; SEG 2007.
14. Millennium  Ecosystem  Assessment 
2005. These seemingly contradictory changes 
are possible because, as temperature goes up, 
both  evaporation  and  the  capacity  of  the 
atmosphere  to  hold  water  vapor  increase. 
With  increased  atmospheric  water  vapor, 

82 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 0

convective rains become more intense, more 
often  leading  to  floods.  At  the  same  time, 
higher temperatures lead to faster evapora-
tion from land areas, causing faster depletion 
of soil moisture and faster onset of droughts. 
As a result a particular region can, at differ-
ent times, face both heavier floods and more 
serious droughts.

15. Webster and others 2005.
16. Melting of snow and ice in high lati-
tudes  leads  to “polar  amplification”  of  the 
temperature increase by replacing reflective 
surfaces with dark soil or open water, both 
of which absorb heat and create a positive 
feedback of further warming or melting.

17. Allison and others 2005.
18. Parry and others 2007.
19. IPCC 1995.
20. IPCC 2001.
21. IPCC 2007a. “Very likely” is used by 
the IPCC to denote greater than 90 percent 
certainty.

22. Füssel  2008;  Ramanathan  and  Feng 

2008.

23. Brewer and Peltzer 2009; McNeil and 

Matear 2008; Silverman and others 2009.

24. Parry and others 2007.
25. Parry and others 2007, table TS3.
26. Battisti and Naylor 2009; Lobell and 

Field 2007. 

27. Global Forest Expert Panel on Adap-

tation of Forests to Climate Change 2009.

28. US National Snow and Ice Data Cen-
ter, http://nsidc.org (accessed August 2009); 
Füssel 2008; Rahmstorf 2007.

29. Shanahan and others 2009.
30. Phillips and others 2009.
31. Allan and Soden 2008.
32. Rignot  and  Kanagaratnam  2006; 

Steffensen and others 2008.

33. Füssel 2008.
34. Lenton and others 2008.
35. UNEP- WGMS 2008.
36. See also discussions in the overview 

and in chapter 4.

37. Allen and others 2009b.
38. Meinshausen and others 2009.
39. Wallack and Ramanathan 2009.

References
ACIA. 2005. Arctic Climate Impact Assess-
ment. New York: Cambridge University 
Press.

Adger, W. N., S. Dessai, M. Goulden, M. 

Hulme, I. Lorenzoni, D. R. Nelson, L. O. 
Naess, J. Wolf, and A. Wreford. 2008. 

“Are There Social Limits to Adaptation 
to Climate Change?” Climatic Change 93 
(3–4): 335–54.

Brewer, P. G., and E. T. Peltzer. 2009. 

“Oceans: Limits to Marine Life.” Science 
324 (5925): 347–48.

Allan, R. P., and B. J. Soden. 2008. “Atmo-

spheric Warming and the Amplification 
of Precipitation Extremes.” Science 321 
(5895): 1481–84.

Allen, M., D. Frame, K. Frieler, W. Hare, 

C. Huntingford, C. Jones, R. Knutti, 
J. Lowe, M. Meinshausen, and S. Raper. 
2009a. “The Exit Strategy.” Nature 
Reports Climate Change 3: 56–58.

Allen, M., D. J. Frame, C. Huntingford, 

C. D. Jones, J. A. Lowe, M. Meinshausen, 
and N. Meinshausen. 2009b. “Warming 
Caused by Cumulative Carbon Emis-
sions towards the Trillionth Tonne.” 
Nature 458: 1163–66.

Allison, E. H., W. N. Adger, M. Badjeck, K. 

Brown, D. Conway, N. K. Dulvy, A. S. 
Halls, A. Perry, and J. D. Reynolds. 2005. 
Effects of Climate Change on the Sus-
tainability of Capture and Enhancement 
Fisheries Important to the Poor: Analysis 
of the Vulnerability and Adaptability of 
Fisherfolk Living in Poverty. London: UK. 
Department for International Develop-
ment (DfID).

Barange, M., and R. I. Perry. 2008. “Physi-
cal and Ecological Impacts of Climate 
Change Relevant to Marine and Inland 
Capture Fisheries and Aquaculture.” 
Paper presented at FAO conference on 
Climate Change and Fisheries and Aqua-
culture. Rome.

Barker, T., I. Bashmakov, L. Bernstein, 

J. E. Bogner, P. R. Bosch, R. Dave, O. R. 
Davidson, B. S. Fisher, S. Gupta, K. 
Halsnaes, B. Heij, S. Khan Ribeiro, S. 
Kobayashi, M. D. Levine, D. L. Martino, 
O. Masera, B. Metz, L. A. Meyer, G.-J. 
Nabuurs, A. Najam, N. Nakic´enovic´, 
H.-H. Rogner, J. Roy, J. Sathaye, R. 
Schock, P. Shukla, R. E. H. Sims, P. Smith, 
D. A. Tirpak, D. Urge-Vorsatz, and D. 
Zhou. 2007. “Technical Summary.” In 
B. Metz, O. R. Davidson, P. R. Bosch, 
R. Dave, and L. A. Meyer, ed., Climate 
Change 2007: Mitigation. Contribution of 
Working Group III to the Fourth Assess-
ment Report of the Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge, 
UK: Cambridge University Press.

Battisti, D. S., and R. L. Naylor. 2009. “His-
torical Warnings of Future Food Insecu-
rity with Unprecedented Seasonal Heat.” 
Science 323 (5911): 240–44.

Canadell, J. G., C. Le Quere, M. R. Rau-
pach, C. B. Field, E. T. Buitenhuis, P. 
Ciais, T. J. Conway, N. P. Gillett, R. A. 
Houghton, and G. Marland. 2007. “Con-
tributions to Accelerating Atmospheric 
CO2 Growth from Economic Activity, 
Carbon Intensity, and Efficiency of Nat-
ural Sinks.” Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences 104 (47): 18866–70.
Doney, S. C. 2006. “The Dangers of Ocean 

Acidification.” Scientific American 294 
(3): 58–65.

Fabry, V. J., B. A. Seibel, R. A. Feely, and 

J. C. Orr. 2008. “Impacts of Ocean Acidi-
fication on Marine Fauna and Ecosystem 
Processes.” ICES Journal of Marine Sci-
ences 65 (3): 414–32.

Fischlin, A., G. F. Midgley, J. T. Price, 

R. Leemans, B. Gopal, C. Turley, 
M. D. A. Rounsevell, O. P. Dube, J. 
Tarazona, and A. A. Velichko. 2007. 
“Ecosystems, Their Properties, Goods 
and Services.” In Climate Change 2007: 
Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. 
Contribution of Working Group II to the 
Fourth Assessment Report of the Inter-
governmental Panel on Climate Change, 
ed. M. Parry, O. F. Canziani, J. P. Palu-
tikof, P. J. van der Linden, and C. E. 
Hanson. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press.

Forster, P., V. Ramaswamy, P. Artaxo, 

T. Bernsten, R. Betts, D. W. Fahey, J. Hay-
wood, J. Lean, D. C. Lowe, G. Myhre, 
J. Nganga, R. Prinn, G. Raga, M. Schulz, 
and R. Van Dorland. 2007. “Changes in 
Atmospheric Constituents and in Radia-
tive Forcing.” In Climate Change 2007: 
The Physical Science Basis. Contribution 
of Working Group I to the Fourth Assess-
ment Report of the Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change, ed. S. Solo-
mon, D. Qin, M. Manning, Z. Chen, M. 
Marquis, K. B. Averyt, M. Tignor, and 
H. L. Miller. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press.

Füssel, H. M. 2008. “The Risks of Climate 
Change: A Synthesis of New Scientific 
Knowledge Since the Finalization of the 
IPCC Fourth Assessment Report.” Back-
ground note for the WDR 2010.

Global Forest Expert Panel on Adapta-
tion of Forests to Climate Change. 
2009. Adaptation of Forests and People 

 

The science of climate change 

83

to Climate Change: A Global Assessment 
Report. Vienna: International Union of 
Forest Research Organizations.

in the Earth’s Climate System.” Proceed-
ings of the National Academy of Sciences 
105 (6): 1786–93.

Houghton, R. A. 2003. “The Contemporary 

Carbon Cycle.” In Treatise on Geochem-
istry, vol 8, Biogeochemistry, ed. W. H. 
Schlesinger. New York: Elsevier.

Lobell, D. B., and C. B. Field. 2007. “Global 
Scale Climate- Crop Yield Relationships 
and the Impacts of Recent Warming.” 
Environmental Research Letters 2: 1–7.

Cruz, N. C. A. Pitman, P. N. Vargas, H. 
Ramirez- Angulo, A. Rudas, R. Salamao, 
N. Silva, J. Terborgh, and A. Torres-
 Lezama. 2009. “Drought Sensitivity of 
the Amazon Rainforest.” Science 323 
(5919): 1344–47.

Prentice, I. C., G. D. Farquhar, M. J. R. 

IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Cli-
mate Change). 1995. Climate Change 
1995: Synthesis Report. Contribution 
of Working Groups I, II, and III to the 
Second Assessment Report of the Inter-
governmental Panel on Climate Change. 
Geneva: IPCC.

———. 2000. IPCC Special Report: Meth-

odological and Technological Issues in 
Technology Transfer—Summary for Poli-
cymakers. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press.

———. 2001. Climate Change 2001: Syn-
thesis Report. Contribution of Working 
Groups I, II and III to the Third Assess-
ment Report of the Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge, 
UK: Cambridge University Press.

———. 2007a. Climate Change 2007: Syn-

thesis Report. Contribution of Working 
Groups I, II and II to the Fourth Assess-
ment Report of the Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change. Geneva: 
IPCC.

———. 2007b. “Summary for Policymak-
ers.” In Climate Change 2007: The Physi-
cal Science Basis. Contribution of Working 
Group I to the Fourth Assessment Report 
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Cli-
mate Change, ed. S. Solomom, D. Qin, 
M. Manning, Z. Chen, M. Marquis, K. B. 
Averyt, M. Tignor, and H. L. Miller. 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University 
Press.

Karl, T. R., J. M. Melillo, and T. C. Peterson. 
2009. Global Climate Change Impacts in 
the United States. Washington, DC: U.S. 
Climate Change Science Program and 
the Subcommittee on Global Change 
Research.

Kriegler, E., J. W. Hall, H. Held, R. Dawson, 

and H. J. Schellnhuber. 2009. “Impre-
cise Probability Assessment of Tipping 
Points in the Climate System.” Proceed-
ings of the National Academy of Sciences 
106 (13): 5041–46.

Lenton, T. M., H. Held, E. Kriegler, J. W. 
Hall, W. Lucht, S. Rahmstorf, and H. J. 
Schellnhuber. 2008. “Tipping Elements 

McNeil, B. I., and R. J. Matear. 2008. 

“Southern Ocean Acidification: A Tip-
ping Point at 450- ppm Atmospheric 
CO2.” Proceedings of the National Acad-
emy of Sciences 105 (48): 18860–64.
Meinshausen, M., N. Meinshausen, W. 

Hare, S. C. B. Raper, K. Frieler, R. Knutti, 
D. J. Frame, and M. R. Allen. 2009. 
“Greenhouse- Gas Emission Targets 
for Limiting Global Warming to 2°C.” 
Nature 458 (7242): 1158–62.

Millennium Ecosystem Assessment. 2005. 
Ecosystems and Human Well- Being: Syn-
thesis Report. Washington, DC: World 
Resources Institute.

Mote, T. L. 2007. “Greenland Surface 

Melt Trends 1973–2007: Evidence of 
a Large Increase in 2007.” Geophysi-
cal Research Letters 34 (22): L22507–
doi:10.1029/2007GL031976.

Parry, M., O. F. Canziani, J. P. Palutikof, and 
Co- authors. 2007. “Technical Summary.” 
In Climate Change 2007: Impacts, Adap-
tation and Vulnerability. Contribution of 
Working Group II to the Fourth Assess-
ment Report of the Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change, ed. M. Parry, 
O. F. Canziani, J. P. Palutikof, P. J. van der 
Linden, and C. E. Hanson. Cambridge, 
UK: Cambridge University Press.

Phillips, O. L., L. E. O. C. Aragao, S. L. 
Lewis, J. B. Fisher, J. Lloyd, G. Lopez-
 Gonzalez, Y. Malhi, A. Monteagudo, 
J. Peacock, C. A. Quesada, G. van der 
Heijden, S. Almeida, I. Amaral, L. 
Arroyo, G. Aymard, T. R. Baker, O. 
Banki, L. Blanc, D. Bonal, P. Brando, J. 
Chave, A. C. A. de Oliveira, N. D. Car-
dozo, C. I. Czimczik, T. R. Feldpausch, 
M. A. Freitas, E. Gloor, N. Higuchi, E. 
Jimenez, G. Lloyd, P. Meir, C. Men-
doza, A. Morel, D. A. Neill, D. Nepstad, 
S. Patino, M. C. Penuela, A. Prieto, F. 
Ramirez, M. Schwarz, J. Silva, M. Sil-
veira, A. S. Thomas, H. Steege, J. Stropp, 
R. Vasquez, P. Zelazowski, E. A. Davila, 
S. Andelman, A. Andrade, K. J. Chao, T. 
Erwin, A. Di Fiore, H. Euridice, H. Keel-
ing, T. J. Killeen, W. F. Laurance, A. P. 

Fasham, M. L. Goulden, M. Heimann, 
V. J. Jaramillo, H. S. Kheshgi, C. Le Quere, 
R. J. Scholes, and D. W. R. Wallace. 2001. 
“The Carbon Cycle and Atmospheric 
Carbon Dioxide.” In Climate Change 
2001: The Scientific Basis. Contribution of 
Working Group I to the Third Assessment 
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel 
on Climate Change, ed. J. T. Houghton, 
Y. Ding, D. J. Griggs, M. Noguer, P. J. van 
der Linden, X. Dai, K. Maskell, and C. A. 
Johnson. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press.

Rahmstorf, S. 2007. “A Semi- Empirical 

Approach to Projecting Future Sea- level 
Rise.” Science 315: 368–70.

Ramanathan, V., and Y. Feng. 2008. “On 
Avoiding Dangerous Anthropogenic 
Interference with the Climate System: 
Formidable Challenges Ahead.” Proceed-
ings of the National Academy of Sciences 
105 (38): 14245–50.

Raupach, M. R., G. Marland, P. Ciais, C. Le 

Quere, J. G. Canadell, G. Klepper, and 
C. B. Field. 2007. “Global and Regional 
Drivers of Accelerating CO2 Emissions.” 
Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences 104 (24): 10288–93.

Rignot, E., and P. Kanagaratnam. 2006. 

“Changes in the Velocity Structure of the 
Greenland Ice Sheet.” Science 311 (5763): 
986–90.

Sabine, C. L., M. Heiman, P. Artaxo, D. C. 
E. Bakker, C.- T. A. Chen, C. B. Field, N. 
Gruber, C. Le Quere, R. G. Prinn, J. E. 
Richey, P. Romero- Lankao, J. A. Sathaye, 
and R. Valentini. 2004. “Current Status 
and Past Trends of the Carbon Cycle.” 
In The Global Carbon Cycle: Integrating 
Humans, Climate, and the Natural World, 
ed. C. B. Field and M. R. Raupach. Wash-
ington, DC: Island Press.

Schneider von Deimling, T., H. Held, A. 
Ganopolski, and S. Rahmstorf. 2006. 
“How Cold Was the Last Glacial Maxi-
mum?” Geophysical Research Letters 33: 
L14709, doi:10.1029/2006GL026484.

SEG (Scientific Expert Group on Climate 

Change). 2007. Confronting Climate 

84 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 0

Change: Avoiding the Unmanageable and 
Managing the Unavoidable. Washington, 
DC: Sigma Xi and the United Nations 
Foundation.

Shanahan, T. M., J. T. Overpeck, K. J. 

Anchukaitis, J. W. Beck, J. E. Cole, D. L. 
Dettman, J. A. Peck, C. A. Scholz, and J. 
W. King. 2009. “Atlantic Forcing of Per-
sistent Drought in West Africa.” Science 
324 (5925): 377–80.

Silverman, J., B. Lazar, L. Cao, K. Caldiera, 
and J. Erez. 2009. “Coral Reefs May Start 
Dissolving When Atmospheric CO2 
Doubles.” Geophysical Research Letters 36 
(5): L05606–doi:10.1029/2008GL036282.

Smith, J. B., S. H. Schneider, M. Oppen-

heimer, G. W. Yohe, W. Hare, M. D. 
Mastrandrea, A. Patwardhan, I. Burton, 
J. Corfee- Morlot, C. H. D. Magadza, 
H.- M. Füssel, A. B. Pittock, A. Rahman, 
A. Suarez, and J.- P. van Ypersele. 2009. 

“Assessing Dangerous Climate Change 
through an Update of the Intergovern-
mental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) 
‘Reasons for concern’.” Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences 106 (11): 
4133–37.

Steffensen, J. P., K. K. Andersen, M. Bigler, 

H. B. Clausen, D. Dahl- Jensen, H. Fis-
cher, K. Goto- Azuma, M. Hansson, S. J. 
Johnsen, J. Jouzel, V. Masson- Delmotte, 
T. Popp, S. O. Rasmussen, R. Roth-
lisberger, U. Ruth, B. Stauffer, M. L. 
Siggaard- Andersen, A. E. Sveinbjorns-
dottir, A. Svensson, and J. W. C. White. 
2008. “High- Resolution Greenland Ice 
Core Data Show Abrupt Climate Change 
Happens in Few Years.” Science 321 
(5889): 680–84.

Stern, N. 2007. The Economics of Climate 
Change: The Stern Review. Cambridge, 
UK: Cambridge University Press.

UNEP- WGMS (United Nations Environ-

ment Programme–World Glacier Moni-
toring Service). 2008. Global Glacier 
Changes: Facts and Figures. Chatelaine, 
Switzerland: DEWA/GRID- Europe.

Wallack, J. S., and V. Ramanathan. 2009. 

“The Other Climate Changers.” Foreign 
Affairs 5 (88): 105–13 .

Webster, P. J., G. J. Holland, J. A. Curry, and 
H. R. Chang. 2005. “Changes in Tropical 
Cyclone Number, Duration, and Inten-
sity in a Warming Environment.” Science 
309 (5742): 1844–46.

Wilkinson, C., ed. 2008. Status of Coral 

Reefs of the World 2008. Townsville: Aus-
tralian Institute of Marine Science. 

pART 1

ChApTER 2

Reducing Human Vulnerability: 
Helping People Help Themselves

Families in Bangladesh are deciding 

whether to rebuild their homes and 
livelihoods after yet another flood—
once  occasional,  now  every  few 
years—or to take their chances in Dhaka, the 
crowded capital. In the tall forests of south-
ern Australia, families are deciding whether 
to rebuild their homes after the most dam-
aging fires in history—aware that they are 
still  in  the  grip  of  the  longest  and  most 
severe drought on record. With losses from 
extreme climate events inevitable, societies 
have explicitly or implicitly chosen the risk 
they bear and the coping strategies to deal 
with them. Some losses are so high and the 
coping so insufficient that development is 
impeded. As the climate changes, more and 
more people risk falling into what is called 
the “adaptation deficit.”

Reducing  vulnerability  and  increasing 
resilience  to  the  climate  has  traditionally 
been the responsibility of households and 
communities1  through  their  livelihood 

Key messages
Further climate change is unavoidable. It will stress people physically and economically, 
particularly in poor countries. Adapting requires robust decision making—planning over a long 
time horizon and considering a broad range of climate and socioeconomic scenarios. Countries 
can reduce physical and financial risks associated with variable and extreme weather. They can 
also protect the most vulnerable. Some established practices will have to be expanded—such 
as insurance and social protection—and others will have to be done differently—such as urban 
and infrastructure planning. These adaptation actions would have benefits even without climate 
change. Promising initiatives are emerging, but applying them on the necessary scale will 
require money, effort, ingenuity, and information.

choices,  asset  allocations,  and  locational 
preferences.  Experience  shows  that  local 
decision  making,  diversity,  and  social 
learning are key features of flexible, resilient 
communities2 and that vulnerable commu-
nities can be effective agents of innovation 
and adaptation.3 But climate change threat-
ens  to  overwhelm  local  efforts,  requiring 
more from national and global supporting 
structures.

people’s vulnerability is not static, and the 
effects of climate change will amplify many 
forms of human vulnerability. Crowded cit-
ies expand into hazardous zones. Natural 
systems are transformed through modern 
agriculture. Infrastructure development—
dams and roads—create new opportunities 
but  can  also  create  new  risks  for  people. 
Climate  change,  superimposed  on  these 
processes, brings additional stress for natu-
ral,  human,  and  social  systems.  people’s 
livelihoods need to function under condi-
tions that will almost certainly change but 
cannot be predicted with certainty.

Whichever  mitigation  pathway  is  fol-
lowed, the temperature and other climate 
changes over the next decades will be very 
similar. Temperatures are already about 1°C 
above those of the preindustrial era, and all 
realistic mitigation scenarios suggest that 
we may expect another 1°C by midcentury. 
The  world  of  2050  and  beyond,  however, 
will be much different from today’s—just 
how different depends on mitigation. Con-
sider two possibilities for this generation’s 
children  and  grandchildren.  In  the  first 
scenario the world is on track to limiting 

88 

WO R L D   D E V E LOpM E N T   R EpO RT   2 0 1 0

temperature  increases  to  2–2.5°C  above 
preindustrial levels. In the second the emis-
sions are much higher, leading eventually 
to temperatures about 5°C or more above 
preindustrial levels.4 

Even on the lower temperature trajectory 
many ecosystems will come under increas-
ing stress, patterns of pests and disease will 
continue  to  change,  and  agriculture  will 
require  significant  changes  in  practice  or 
displacement  in  location.  On  the  higher 
temperature trajectory most of the negative 
trends will be even worse, and the few posi-
tive trends, such as increases in agricultural 
productivity  in  cooler  cropping  regions, 
will be reversed. Agriculture will undergo 
transformational  change  in  practices  and 
locations.  Storm  intensity  will  be  higher. 
And sea levels are likely to rise by about one 
meter.5 Floods, droughts, and extreme tem-
peratures will be much more common.6 The 
past decade has been the hottest on record, 
but by 2070 even the coolest years are likely 
to be hotter than now. As the physical and 
biological  stresses  arising  from  climate 
change increase, so will social tension.

On  the  higher  trajectory,  warming 
could  trigger  feedbacks  in  Earth  systems 
that would make it difficult to further con-
strain temperature increases, regardless of 
mitigation. These feedbacks could rapidly 
collapse ecosystems, as some are predicting 
for the Amazon and the boreal peat lands 
(see focus A). people in that higher-track 
world would see rapidly accelerating losses 
and costs reverberate through their societ-
ies and economies—requiring adaptation 
at a scale unprecedented in human history. 
International  tensions  could  be  expected 
to  rise  over  resources,  and  migration 
away from the areas most affected would 
increase.7

On  the  lower  track,  adaptation  will 
be  challenging  and  costly,  and  business-
as-usual  development  will  be  far  from 
sufficient. Broader and accelerated imple-
mentation of policies that have proved suc-
cessful is paramount as is adaptation that 
harnesses the ingenuity of people, institu-
tions,  and  markets.  On  the  higher  track 
the  question  is  whether  warming  may  be 
approaching,  or  already  exceeding,  lev-
els  to  which  we  can  adapt.8  Some  argue 

convincingly  that  ethics,  culture,  knowl-
edge, and attitudes toward risk limit human 
adaptation more than physical, biological, 
or  economic  thresholds.9  The  adaptation 
effort that will be required by future gener-
ations is thus determined by how effectively 
climate change is mitigated.

Incremental  environmental  impacts 
imply  stronger  physical  constraints  on 
future  development.  Climate-smart  poli-
cies will have to address the challenges of 
a riskier and more complex environment. 
Development practice has to be more adap-
tive  to  shifting  baselines,  grounded  in 
strategies robust to imperfect knowledge.10 
Cropping strategies need to be robust under 
more volatile weather conditions by seeking 
to maintain long-term consistency in out-
put  rather  than  to  maximize  production. 
Urban  planners  in  coastal  cities  need  to 
anticipate demographic developments and 
new risks from rising seas or flooding. pub-
lic health workers need to prepare for sur-
prising  changes  in  climate-linked  disease 
patterns.11  Information  is  crucial  to  sup-
port risk-based planning and strategies—it 
is the basis of good policy and better risk 
management.

Managing  ecosystems  and  their  ser-
vices  will  be  more  important  and  more 
difficult.  Well-managed  landscapes  can 
modulate flood waters. Intact coastal wet-
lands  can  buffer  against  storm  damage. 
But management of natural resources will 
face a rapidly changing climate with more 
extreme events and with ecosystems under 
increasing threats from stresses other than 
climate (such as land-use and demographic 
change).12 Managing such physical risks is 
an integral part of climate-smart develop-
ment—an essential step to avoid avoidable 
impacts on people.

however,  not  all  physical  impacts  are 
avoidable,  particularly  those  linked  to 
extreme  and  catastrophic  events  whose 
probability is difficult to assess under cli-
mate  change.  Eliminating  the  risk  of  the 
most  extreme  events  is  not  possible,  and 
attempting  to  do  so  would  be  extremely 
costly  given  the  uncertainty  about  the 
location  and  timing  of  impacts.  Being 
financially prepared to cope with climate 
impacts is critical for both households and 

 

Reducing Human Vulnerability: Helping People Help Themselves 

89

government.  This  requires  flexible  risk-
spreading mechanisms.

As chapter 1 discusses, the poor have the 
least capacity to manage physical and finan-
cial risk and to make longer-term adapta-
tion decisions. Their lives are affected more 
by  climate,  whether  they  practice  subsis-
tence farming or are landless squatters in a 
floodplain at the urban fringe. Other social 
groups share many of the vulnerabilities of 
the poor stemming from their lack of entitle-
ments, productive assets, and voice.13 Social 
policy, a critical complement to physical and 
financial risk management, provides many 
tools to help manage the risk affecting the 
most vulnerable and to empower commu-
nities to become agents in climate-change 
management.

This chapter focuses on measures that 
will assist people in handling today’s vari-
able climate and the climate changes that 
occur  over  the  next  few  decades.  It  first 
describes  a  policy  framework  based  on 
strategies that are robust to climate uncer-
tainty and management practices that are 
adaptive in the face of dynamic conditions. 
It  then  looks  at  managing  physical  risks, 
financial risks, and social risks.

Adaptive management:  
Living with change
Climate change adds an additional source of 
unknowns for decision makers to manage. 
Real-world decision makers make decisions 
under  uncertainty  every  day,  even  in  the 
absence of climate change. Manufacturers 
invest in flexible production facilities that 
can be profitable across a range of produc-
tion volumes to compensate for unpredict-
able demand. Military commanders insist 
on  overwhelming  numerical  superiority. 
Financial  investors  protect  themselves 
against fluctuations in markets by diversi-
fying. All these forms of hedging are likely 
to lead to suboptimal results for any fixed 
expectation about the future, but they are 
robust in the face of uncertainty.14

A compounding set of uncertainties—
about demographics, technology, markets, 
and climate—requires policies and invest-
ment  decisions  to  be  based  on  imperfect 
and  incomplete  knowledge.  Local  and 
national decision makers face even greater 

uncertainties  because  projections  tend  to 
lose precision at finer scales—an inherent 
problem of downscaling from coarse, aggre-
gate models. If decision parameters cannot 
be observed and measured,15 robust strate-
gies (see chapter 1) that directly address the 
reality of a world of shifting baselines and 
intermittent disturbances16 are the appro-
priate framework in a context of unknown 
probabilities. 

Accepting uncertainty as inherent to the 
climate change problem and robustness as 
a decision criterion implies changing deci-
sion-making strategies for long-lived invest-
ment and long-term planning. It demands 
rethinking  traditional  approaches  that 
assume a deterministic model of the world 
in which the future is predictable.

First,  priority  should  be  given  to  no-
regrets  options:  investment  and  policy 
options  that  provide  benefits  even  with-
out climate change. Such options exist in 
almost every domain—in water and land 
management (see chapter 3), in sanitation 
to reduce water-borne diseases (controlling 
sewer  leakage),  in  disaster  risk  reduction 
(avoiding high-risk zones), in social protec-
tion (providing assistance to the poor). But 
such  options  often  are  not  implemented, 
partly because of a lack of information and 
transaction costs but also because of cogni-
tive and political failures (see chapter 8).17
Second, buying “safety margins” in new 
investments  can  increase  climate  resil-
ience, often at low cost. For instance, the 
marginal cost of building a higher dam or 
including additional groups in a social pro-
tection scheme can be small.18 Safety mar-
gins account not only for possible impacts 
of climate change (more severe events) but 
also for the uncertainty in socioeconomic 
development (changes in demand).

Third,  reversible  and  flexible  options 
need to be favored, accepting that decisions 
can be wrong and thus keeping the cost of 
reversing them as low as possible. Restric-
tive  urban  planning  because  of  uncertain 
flooding  outcomes  can  be  reversed  more 
easily  and  cheaply  than  future  retreat  or 
protection options. Insurance provides flex-
ible ways of managing risk and protecting 
necessary  investment  when  the  direction 
and magnitude of change are uncertain.19 

90 

WO R L D   D E V E LOpM E N T   R EpO RT   2 0 1 0

Farmers  transitioning  to  drought-tolerant 
varieties  (rather  than  investing  in  irriga-
tion)  can  use  insurance  to  protect  their 
seasonal investment in new seeds from an 
exceptionally  severe  drought.  For  storm-
prone areas a combination of early warning 
systems,  evacuation  plans,  and  (possibly 
expensive) property insurance can provide 
more  flexibility  to  save  lives  and  replace 
homes  than  can  protecting  entire  coastal 
areas with infrastructure or depopulating 
them unnecessarily.20

Fourth,  institutionalizing  long-term 
planning  requires  forward-looking  sce-
nario  analysis  and  an  assessment  of 
strategies under a wide range of possible 
futures. This leads to periodic reviews of 
investment (and, if necessary, revisions), 
and it improves policies and practices by 
iterative learning from outcomes. Widen-
ing the spatial scope of planning is equally 
critical  to  be  prepared  for  changes  that 
may propagate over longer distances, such 
as the melting of glaciers that change the 
water  supply  of  urban  zones  hundreds 
of  kilometers  downstream,  widespread 
droughts  that  affect  regional  grain  mar-
kets, or accelerated rural-urban migration 
caused by environmental degradation. But 
the required structural changes can be dif-
ficult because of the inertia in prevailing 
management practices.21

Box 2.1      Characteristics of adaptive management

Adaptive management is an 
approach to guide intervention in 
the face of uncertainty. The principal 
idea is that management actions are 
informed by explicit learning from 
policy experiments and the use of 
new scientific information and tech-
nical knowledge to improve under-
standing, inform future decisions, 
monitor the outcome of interven-
tions, and develop new practices. 
This framework establishes mecha-
nisms to evaluate alternative scenar-
ios and structural and nonstructural 
measures, understand and challenge 
assumptions, and explicitly consider 
uncertainties. Adaptive manage-
ment has a long time horizon for 

planning and capacity building, and 
is aligned with ecological processes 
at appropriate spatial scale. It cre-
ates an enabling framework for 
cooperation between administrative 
levels, sectors, and line departments; 
broad stakeholder participation 
(including research centers and 
non- government organizations) in 
problem solving and decisionmak-
ing; and adaptable legislation to 
support local action and respond to 
new information.

Sources: Adapted from Raadgever and 
others 2008; Olsson, Folke, and Berkes 
2004.

Implementing  such  strategies  through 
adaptive  management  entails  continuous 
information  development,  flexible  and 
robust  planning  and  design,  participa-
tory implementation, and monitoring and 
evaluation of feedback. It realigns decisions 
and management with the scale of ecologi-
cal and social contexts and processes, such 
as watersheds and ecoregions, and can be 
driven by local or community management 
systems.22 It stresses management informed 
by scientific and local knowledge, as well as 
policy  experiments  that  develop  under-
standing, set learning as an objective, and 
improve the ability to make decisions under 
uncertainty (box 2.1).23

Involving  stakeholders  in  planning 
increases ownership and the likelihood that 
actions will be sustained.24 Boston and Lon-
don both have climate-change strategies. In 
Boston  the  process  was  research-led,  with 
inconsistent  stakeholder  engagement.  The 
completed  study,  seen  as  overly  technical, 
has had little impact. London used a bottom-
up approach, engaging many stakeholders. 
And after the London Warming Report was 
released,  the  Climate  Change  partnership 
evolved from the stakeholder organization 
to continue adaptation planning.25

A  risk-based  decision-making  model 
favoring robustness and longer-term plan-
ning,  and  appropriate  local,  community, 
and  national  governance  structures  is 
essential for adaptation to climate change.26 
Increasing  pressure  on  scarce  resources 
(land, water), combined with major socio-
demographic transformations (population 
growth, urbanization, globalization) and a 
shifting climate, provide much less room to 
leave  risks  unmanaged.  A  storm  hitting  a 
modern, rapidly growing coastal city has the 
potential to cause a lot more damage than in 
the past when the coast was less populated 
and built up. In the face of the uncertainty 
arising from climate change, robust strate-
gies and adaptive management provide the 
appropriate  framework  to  better  manage 
physical, financial, and social risks.

Managing physical risks:  
Avoiding the avoidable
Natural systems, when well managed, can 
reduce human vulnerability to climate risks 

 

Reducing Human Vulnerability: Helping People Help Themselves 

91

and  deliver  developmental  co-benefits, 
reduce poverty, conserve biodiversity, and 
sequester  carbon.  Ecosystem-based  adap-
tation—maintaining  or  restoring  natural 
ecosystems  to  reduce  human  vulnerabil-
ity—is a cost-effective approach to reducing 
climate risks and one that offers multiple 
benefits (see focus B). For example, forested 
catchments buffer water flows from moder-
ate rains far better than nonforested catch-
ments,  but  heavier  rains  quickly  saturate 
the  sponge,  so  most  water  moves  quickly 
over  the  land.27  Well-vegetated  wetlands 
downstream  may  be  needed  to  further 
buffer water flows while natural drainage 
systems  carry  it  away.  But  wetlands  con-
verted to agriculture or urban settlements 
and simplified drainage systems inevitably 
fail, leading to flooding. A comprehensive 
response  to  flood  management  includes 
maintaining  catchment  cover,  managing 
wetlands  and  river  channels,  and  siting 

infrastructure and planning urban expan-
sion appropriately. Similarly, coastal man-
grove forests protect against storm surges 
partly  by  absorbing  the  flows  and  partly 
by keeping human settlements behind the 
mangroves farther from the sea.

Build climate-smart cities
half the world’s people now live in cities, a 
share that will rise to 70 percent by 2050.28 
Of  urban  population  growth  (5  million 
new residents a month), 95 percent will be 
in the developing world, with small cities 
growing  fastest.29  Urban  areas  concen-
trate people and economic assets, often in 
hazard-prone areas as cities have histori-
IBRD 37084
cally prospered in coastal areas and at the 
Map 2.1
September 2009
confluence of rivers. In fact, low-elevation 
coastal  zones  at  risk  from  rising  sea  lev-
els and coastal surges are home to about 
600 million people globally and 15 of the 
world’s 20 megacities (map 2.1).30

Map 2.1     At risk: Population and megacities concentrate in low-elevation coastal zones threatened by sea level rise and storm surges

Population in low elevation coastal zones (LECZ) (%)

<2

20–50

2–5

>50

5–10

10–20

Landlocked countries/No data

Mega cities

Outside LECZ

Inside LECZ

Source: United Nations 2008a.
Note: Megacities in 2007 included Beijing, Bombay, Buenos Aires, Cairo, Calcutta, Dhaka, Istanbul, Karachi, Los Angeles, Manila, Mexico City, Moscow, New Delhi, New York, 
Osaka, Rio de Janeiro, São Paulo, Seoul, Shanghai, and Tokyo. Megacities are defined as urban areas with more than 10 million inhabitants. 

92 

WO R L D   D E V E LOpM E N T   R EpO RT   2 0 1 0

Climate  change  is  only  one  of  many 
factors  that  determine  urban  vulner-
ability. For many coastal cities, migration 
increases the population exposed to rising 
sea levels, storm surges, and floods,31 as in 
Shanghai,  where  the  net  annual  influx  of 
people exceeds the natural growth rate by 
a factor of four.32 And many cities in river 
deltas are sinking as a result of groundwater 
extraction and declining sediment deposits 
caused  by  dams  upstream.  While  subsid-
ing land has been an issue for some time in 
many coastal cities (New Orleans, Shang-
hai),  it  is  an  emerging  threat  for  hanoi, 
Jakarta, and Manila.33 Urban development 
farther inland increases the water demand 
upstream, and many rivers, including the 
Nile, no longer reach their delta.

Urbanization,  done  well,  can  increase 
resilience  to  climate-related  risks.  higher 
population  densities  lower  the  per  capita 
costs of providing piped treated water, sewer 
systems,  waste  collection,  and  most  other 
infrastructure and public amenities. Sound 
urban  planning  restricts  development  in 
flood-prone  areas  and  provides  critical 
access  to  services.  Infrastructure  develop-
ments (embankments or levees) can provide 
physical protection for many and will require 
additional  safety  margins  where  climate 
change increases risk. And well-established 
communication, transport, and early warn-
ing systems help evacuate people swiftly, as 
is the case in Cuba, where up to 800,000 peo-
ple are routinely evacuated within 48 hours 
when hurricanes approach.34 Such measures 
can increase the ability of urban dwellers to 
cope with shocks in the short term and adapt 
to a changing climate in the long term.35

Cities are dynamic and highly adaptive 
systems that offer a wide range of creative 
solutions  to  environmental  challenges.  A 
number of countries are looking into new 
urban  development  strategies  that  aim  at 
spreading regional prosperity. The Repub-
lic of Korea has embarked on an ambitious 
program to develop “Innovation Cities” as a 
way to decentralize the country’s economic 
activities.36 Many of these efforts focus on 
technological  innovation  and  offer  new 
opportunities  to  redesign  future  cities  to 
deal with the climate-change challenges.

Attempts  to  influence  the  spatial  pat-
terns of urban areas through public policy 

interventions show mixed results, however. 
The Arab Republic of Egypt’s attempt to cre-
ate satellite cities to decongest Cairo never 
attracted the projected population and did 
little to stop population growth in Cairo, 
partly because of the lack of policies to pro-
mote regional integration.37 Successful pol-
icies facilitate concentration and migration 
during the early stages of urbanization and 
interurban  connectivity  during  the  later 
stages. public investments in infrastructure 
are most effective when they increase social 
equity (through broader access to services) 
and integrate the urban space (through the 
transport system).38 

Urbanization  seldom  is  harmoni-
ous,  generating  pollution  and  pockets  of 
wrenching poverty and social dislocation. 
Today,  urban  areas  in  developing  coun-
tries  are  home  to  746  million  people  liv-
ing below the poverty line (a quarter of the 
world’s poor),39 and the urban poor suffer 
from more than low income and consump-
tion. Overcrowding, insecure tenure, illegal 
settlements  sited  in  landslide-  and  flood-
prone areas, poor sanitation, unsafe hous-
ing, inadequate nutrition, and poor health 
exacerbate  the  vulnerabilities  of  the  810 
million people in urban slums.40

These many vulnerabilities call for com-
prehensive improvements in urban planning 
and  development.  Government  agencies, 
particularly  local  ones,  can  shape  the 
adaptive capacity of households and busi-
nesses (box 2.2). But action by community-
 based and nongovernmental organizations 
(NGOs) is also crucial, particularly those 
that build homes and directly provide ser-
vices, as slum-dweller organizations do.41 
Sound planning and regulation can identify 
high-risk  zones  in  urban  areas  and  allow 
low-income groups to find safe and afford-
able  housing,  as  in  Ilo,  peru,  where  local 
authorities safely accommodated a fivefold 
increase in the population after 1960.42 But 
hard investments in infrastructure may also 
be required to protect urban zones, such as 
coastal cities in North Africa, with seawalls 
and embankments (box 2.3).

A major risk for urban areas is flooding—
often  caused  by  buildings,  infrastructure, 
and  paved  areas  that  prevent  infiltration, 
exacerbated by overwhelmed drainage sys-
tems.  In  well-managed  cities  flooding  is 

 

Reducing Human Vulnerability: Helping People Help Themselves 

93

Box 2.2      Planning for greener and safer cities: The case of Curitiba

Despite a sevenfold population increase 
between 1950 and 1990, Curitiba, Brazil, 
has proven itself to be a clean and efficient 
city, thanks to good governance and social 
cooperation. The cornerstone of Curitiba’s 
success lies in its innovative Plano Director, 
adopted in 1968 and implemented by the 
Instituto de Pesquisa Planejamento Urbano 
de Curitiba (IPPUC). Rather than use high-
tech solutions for urban infrastructure, like 
subways and expensive mechanical gar-
bage separation plants, the IPPUC pursued 
appropriate technology that is effective 
both in cost and application.

Land use and mobility were planned 
in an integrated fashion, and the city’s 
radial (or axial) layout was designed to 
divert traffic from the downtown area 
(three-fourths of the city’s people use a 
highly efficient bus system). The industrial 
center is built close to the city center 
to minimize the commute for workers. 
Numerous natural preservation areas are 
situated around the industrial area to buf-
fer flooding. 

Another part of the city’s success is its 
waste management; 90 percent of its resi-
dents recycle at least two-thirds of their 

trash. In low-income areas where conven-
tional waste management is difficult, the 
“Garbage Purchase” program exchanges 
garbage for bus tokens, surplus food, and 
school notebooks.

Replications are under way. In Juarez, 
Mexico, for example, the Municipal Plan-
ning Institute is building new homes and 
transforming the previously inhabited 
flood zone into a city park.

Source: Roman 2008.

rarely a problem because surface drainage is 
built into the urban fabric to accommodate 
floodwaters from extreme events that exceed 
the capacity of protective infrastructure (see 
box  2.3).  Inadequate  solid  waste  manage-
ment and drain maintenance, by contrast, 
can  quickly  clog  drainage  channels  and 
cause local flooding with even light rainfall; 
in Georgetown, Guyana, such a situation led 
to 29 local floods between 1990 and 1996.43
Cities  also  have  to  look  beyond  their 
borders  to  prepare  for  climate  change. 

Many  Andean  cities  are  reengineering 
their water supplies to accommodate the 
shrinking and eventual disappearance of 
glaciers.  Melting  means  that  dry-season 
water supply is no longer reliable, and res-
ervoirs will need to compensate for the lost 
water storage and regulation function of 
glaciers.44 In the deltas in Southeast Asia, 
the  rapidly  spreading  suburbs  of  cities 
such  as  Bangkok  and  ho  Chi  Minh  City 
are  encroaching  on  rice  fields,  reducing 
water  retention  capacity  and  increasing 

Box 2.3      Adapting to climate change: Alexandria, Casablanca, and Tunis

Alexandria, Casablanca, and Tunis, each 
with 3 million to 5 million people, are 
assessing the extent of the projected 
impacts of climate change and devising 
adaptation scenarios for 2030 through an 
ongoing regional study. The cities’ early 
responses to their increasing vulnerability 
show uneven paths toward adaptation.

In Alexandria the recent construction of 
the corniche, a major six-lane highway built 
right on the coast, has worsened coastal 
erosion and steepened the profile of the 
seabed, causing storm surges to reach 
farther into the city. Sea defenses are being 
built without sufficient engineering stud-
ies or coordination among the responsible 
institutions. A lake near the city, a natural 
receptacle for drainage waters, is suffering 
acute pollution and real-estate pressures to 
reclaim it for construction purposes.

Casablanca responded to recent dev-
astating urban flooding episodes with 

works to improve upstream watershed 
management and to broaden the main 
drainage canals. Leaks in the household 
water distribution network have been 
repaired, with the water saving equal 
to the consumption of about 800,000 
people. But coastal zone management 
remains a concern, given the limited tools 
to control construction and reduce sand 
extraction from beaches.

Tunis is also addressing its urban flood-

ing risks by improving drainage canals 
and controlling informal construction 
around some natural reservoirs. Sea-
walls are being built to defend the most 
threatened coastal neighborhoods, and 
the new master plan directs urban devel-
opment away from the sea. But the city 
center, already below sea level, is subsid-
ing, and harbor and logistic facilities, as 
well as power-generation and water-
treatment plants, are under threat. Major 

urban redevelopment projects, if carried 
out, also risk increasing the city’s vulner-
ability to rising seas.

Adaptation to climate change in Alex-

andria, Casablanca, and Tunis should 
occur primarily through improving 
urban planning; identifying land-use and 
expansion scenarios that would minimize 
vulnerability; addressing the vulnerability 
of key infrastructure assets, such as ports, 
roads, bridges, and water-treatment 
plants; and improving the capacity of 
responsible institutions to coordinate 
responses and manage emergencies. In 
addition, energy efficiency in buildings 
and municipal systems can be consistent 
with increasing resilience to climate 
change while reducing greenhouse gas 
emissions.

Source: Bigio 2008.

94 

WO R L D   D E V E LOpM E N T   R EpO RT   2 0 1 0

the risk of floods.45 The risk can get worse 
when  upstream  storage  areas  reach  their 
capacity and have to discharge water. peak 
river  discharges  in  South  and  Southeast 
Asian river basins are projected to increase 
with  climate  change,  requiring  greater 
upstream efforts to protect urban centers 
downstream (map 2.2).46

Local city governments can promote risk 
reduction and risk-based planning. Creat-
ing a risk information database, developed 
jointly with citizens, businesses, and offi-
cials,  is  the  first  step  in  setting  priorities 
for intervention and identifying hotspots. 
And  establishing  a  city  mandate  through 
executive orders and council legislation can 

Map 2.2     A complex challenge: managing urban growth and flood risk in a changing climate in South and 
Southeast Asia

Sources: WDR team analysis. Flood data: Dartmouth Flood Observatory 2009. Population data: CIESIN 2005.
Note: Living with floods is engrained in the economic activities and culture of people in South and Southeast Asia. The floodplains 
of some of the major river basins (Ganges, top; Mekong, bottom) concentrate a large number of people and expose agriculture and 
growing urban centers to seasonal flood risk. Climate change is likely to bring more intense flooding, partly caused by the melting of 
glaciers in the upper catchment of the Himalaya region and partly by the shorter and more intense monsoon rains, which will likely 
change flood patterns in the region. At the same time urban centers are rapidly encroaching into agricultural areas that serve as 
natural retention zones for flood waters, bringing new complexity to managing flood water and urban expansion in the future.

Brahmaputra GangesMekong0–100101–250251–500501–1000Population density (persons/sq. km) 2005200420032002Previous floods1001–2000>2000No dataRiversIBRD 37132September 2009M 2.2 

Reducing Human Vulnerability: Helping People Help Themselves 

95

facilitate mainstreaming, as in storm- and 
flood-prone Makati City, philippines, where 
the  Disaster  Coordination  Council  plans 
the city’s disaster risk management.47

Many  municipal  actions  to  promote 
local development and resilience to extreme 
events and disasters overlap with the mea-
sures  for  adaptation,  including  water 
supply and sanitation, drainage, prevention-
focused health care, and disaster prepared-
ness (box 2.4). Such interventions are likely 
to be in the immediate interest of decision 
makers in urban contexts (see chapter 8).48 It 
is evidently easier to cast adaptation- oriented 
initiatives as being in the city’s immediate 
interests, in order to break political logjams 
for climate action.49

Building climate-smart cities will involve 
considerable use of emerging technologies. 
however, much of the available technical 
expertise in developing countries is concen-
trated in the central government, with local 
authorities often left to draw from a small 
pool of expertise.50 Urban universities can 
play a key role in supporting efforts by cit-
ies to adopt and implement climate-smart 
practices  through  changes  in  curriculum 
and teaching methods that enable students 
to spend more time in the practical world 
solving local problems.

Keep people healthy
Diseases linked to climate, namely malnu-
trition, diarrheal diseases, and vector-borne 
illnesses (especially malaria), already repre-
sent a huge health burden in some regions, 

particularly Africa and South Asia. Climate 
change will increase that burden and will be 
most consequential for the poor (see chap-
ter 1).51 The estimated additional 150,000 
deaths a year attributable to climate change 
in recent decades may be just the tip of the 
iceberg.52  The  indirect  effects  of  climate 
change mediated by water and sanitation, 
ecosystems, food production, and human 
habitation could be far higher. Children are 
especially  susceptible,  with  malnutrition 
and  infectious  diseases  (mostly  diarrheal 
diseases) part of a vicious cycle causing cog-
nitive and learning disabilities that perma-
nently affect future productivity. In Ghana 
and  pakistan  the  costs  associated  with 
malnutrition  and  diarrheal  diseases  are 
estimated to be as high as 9 percent of gross 
domestic product (GDp) when accounting 
for  long-term  productivity  losses  in  later 
years. These costs will only increase with 
climate change, if adaptation to these con-
ditions is slow.53

The recent heat waves, such as the one 
that killed about 70,000 people in Europe in 
2003, showed that even high-income coun-
tries  can  be  vulnerable.54  heat  waves  are 
likely to increase in frequency and inten-
sity  (map  2.3),55  with  urban  heat  islands 
producing  temperatures  up  to  3.5–4.5°C 
higher than in surrounding rural areas.56 
For  better  preparedness  several  countries 
and  metropolitan  areas  now  have  heat-
health warning systems (box 2.5).

Vector-borne  diseases  are  increasing 
their geographic spread and are reappearing 

Box 2.4      Fostering synergies between mitigation and adaptation

The spatial organization of cities, or their 
urban form, determines energy use and 
efficiency. The concentration of popula-
tion and consumption tends to increase 
rapidly during the early stage of urban-
ization and development. Denser urban 
areas have higher energy efficiency and 
shorter travel distances (see chapter 4, 
box 4.7). But increasing the density of 
people, economic activity, and infrastruc-
ture tends to amplify the effects of cli-
mate on cities. For instance, green space 
can reduce the urban heat-island effects, 
but it can also fall victim to building 

developments. Similarly, increased den-
sity combined with the paving of infiltra-
tion areas hampers urban drainage that 
mitigates flooding. 

Climate-smart urban design can fos-
ter synergies between mitigation and 
adaptation. Promoting renewable energy 
sources tends to favor the decentraliza-
tion of energy supply. Green spaces pro-
vide shading and cooling, reducing the 
need to air-condition buildings or to leave 
the city during heat waves. Green-roofing 
can save energy, attenuate storm water, 
and provide cooling. Synergies between 

adaptation and mitigation are often 
related to building height, layout, spac-
ing, materials, shading, ventilation, and 
air-conditioning. 

Many climate-smart designs, combin-
ing ecological principles, social sensibili-
ties, and energy efficiency, are planned 
for urban areas in China, such as Dongtan, 
close to Shanghai, but so far the plans 
have largely remained blueprints. 
Sources: Girardet 2008; Laukkonen and 
others 2009; McEvoy, Lindley, and Handley 
2006; Wang and Yaping 2004; World Bank 
2008g; Yip 2008.

96 

WO R L D   D E V E LOpM E N T   R EpO RT   2 0 1 0

IBRD 37099
August 2009
Map 2.3

Map 2.3      Northern cities need to prepare for Mediterranean climate—now

Oslo

Stockholm

Helsinki

St. Petersburg

London

Paris

Sandomierz

Ternopol

Berlin

Rome

Vila Real

Soria

Barcelona

Teruel

Badajoz

Chlef

Ouezzane

Istanbul  

Karaman

Nicosia

Source: WDR team, reproduced from Kopf, Ha-Duong, and Hallegatte 2008.
Note: With increasing global temperatures, climate zones will shift north, and by the middle of the 21st century many central and 
northern European cities will “feel” Mediterranean. This is not good news and has major implications: water utilities will need to 
adjust management plans, and health services will need to be prepared for more extreme heat episodes (similar to the 2003 Euro-
pean heat wave). While a few degrees of warming may seem appealing on a cold winter day in Oslo (the scenario shown in the 
map corresponds approximately to a global temperature increase of 1.2°C relative to today), the necessary changes in planning, 
public health management, and urban infrastructure are substantial. Buildings that were designed and engineered for cold harsh 
winters will need to function in a drier and hotter climate, and heritage buildings may suffer irreparable damages. Even more 
challenging is the construction of new buildings today as their design needs to be highly flexible to gradually adjust to drastically 
different conditions over the coming decades.

Box 2.5      Preparing for heat waves

After heat waves in 2003 the Spanish Min-
istry of Health and CatSalut (the regional 
Catalan health service) implemented a 
comprehensive interministerial and inter-
agency action plan to blunt the effects 
of future heat waves on health.a The plan 
incorporates health responses and com-
munications (at all levels of health care) 
triggered by a heat-health warning system. 
The plan has three levels of action dur-

ing the summer season: 
•	 Level	0	starts	on	June	1	and	focuses	on	

preparedness.

•	 Level	1	is	triggered	during	July	and	

August and focuses on meteorological 
assessments (including daily recordings 
of temperature and humidity), disease 
surveillance, assessment of preventive 

actions, and protection of at-risk 
populations. 

•	 Level	2	is	activated	only	if	the	tempera-
ture rises above the warning threshold 
(35°C in coastal areas and 40°C in inland 
areas), at which point health and social 
care and emergency service responses 
are initiated. 

The action plan and its health system 
response hinge on using primary health 
care centers (including social services) in 
the region. The centers identify and local-
ize vulnerable populations to strengthen 
outreach to them and disseminate public 
health information during the summer. 
They also collect health data to monitor and 
evaluate the health impacts of heat waves 
and the effectiveness of interventions. 

Similar actions are under way else-

where. Wales has a framework for heat-
wave preparedness and response. It 
establishes guidelines for preventing and 
treating heat-related illnesses, operates 
an early warning system during the sum-
mer months, and has communication 
mechanisms with the meteorological 
office.b Metropolitan Shanghai has a heat-
health warning system as part of its multi-
hazard management plan.c

Sources:
a. CatSalut 2008.
b. Welsh Assembly Government 2008.
c. Shanghai Multi-Hazard Early Warning Sys-
tem Demonstration Project, http://smb.gov.
cn/SBQXWebInEnglish/TemplateA/Default/
index.aspx (accessed March 13, 2009).

 

Reducing Human Vulnerability: Helping People Help Themselves 

97

in  Eastern  Europe  and  Central  Asia.57 
Malaria already strains economies in tropi-
cal areas,58 killing almost 1 million people a 
year (mostly children), and climate change is 
projected to expose 90 million more people 
(a 14 percent increase) to the disease by 2030 
in Africa alone.59 Dengue has been expand-
ing its geographic range (map 2.4), and cli-
mate change is expected to double the rate 
of people at risk from 30 percent to up to 60 
percent of the world population (or 5 billion 
to 6 billion people) by 2070.60 To detect and 
monitor epidemic-prone diseases, national 
health systems need better surveillance and 

early warning systems.61 Today, surveillance 
in many parts of the world fails to antici-
pate new disease pressure, for example, in 
Africa,  where  malaria  is  reaching  urban 
dwellers with the expansion of urban settle-
ments into areas of transmission.62 Satellite 
remote-sensing and biosensors can improve 
the accuracy and precision of surveillance 
systems  and  prevent  disease  outbreaks 
through  early  detection  of  changes  in  cli-
mate  factors.63  Advanced  seasonal  climate 
forecast models can now predict peak times 
IBRD 37085
map 2.4
for malaria transmission and give regional 
September 2009
authorities in Africa information to operate 

Map 2.4      Climate change accelerates the comeback of dengue in the Americas

UNITED STATES

MEXICO

GUATEMALA

HAITI

JAMAICA

DOMINICAN
REPUBLIC

THE BAHAMAS

COLOMBIA

R.B. DE VENEZUELA

HONDURAS

CUBA

BELIZE

EL SALVADOR

NICARAGUA

COSTA RICA

R.B. DE

VENEZUELA

GUYANA

SURINAME

PANAMA

COLOMBIA

ECUADOR

PERU

BRAZIL

BOLIVIA

CHILE

PARAGUAY

Change in incidence rates of dengue fever
in the Americas
(% change between 1995–1997 and 2005–2007)

ARGENTINA

URUGUAY

Greatly increased rate (>100%)

Increase from 0 cases to positive rate

Increased rate (10% to 100%)

Decreased rate (-100%  to -10%)

Source: PAHO 2009.
Note: Infectious and vector-borne diseases have been expanding into new geographic areas all over the world. In the Americas 
the incidence of dengue fever has been rising because of increasing population density and widespread international travel 
and trade. Changes in humidity and temperature brought about by climate change amplify this threat and allows disease vectors 
(mosquitoes) to thrive in locations previously unsuitable for the disease; see Knowlton, Solomon, and Rotkin-Ellman 2009.

98 

WO R L D   D E V E LOpM E N T   R EpO RT   2 0 1 0

an  early  warning  system  and  longer  lead-
times to respond more effectively.64

Most measures to prevent these diseases 
are not new, but climate change makes the 
better implementation of well- established 
public  health  approaches  even  more 
urgent.65 Breaking the transmission path-
ways requires better management of water 
(urban drainage), improved sanitation and 
hygiene (sewerage systems, sanitation facili-
ties, hand-washing behaviors), and effective 
vector control to limit or eradicate insects 
that transmit disease pathogens.66

Figure 2.1      The number of people affected by climate-related disasters is increasing

Number of people killed per five-year period (millions)
1.00

0.75

0.50

0.25

0

1971–75

1976–80

1981–85

1986–90

1991–95

1996–2000

2001–05

Number of people affected per five-year period (billions)
2.00

1.50

1.00

0.50

0

1971–75

1976–80

1981–85

1986–90

1991–95

1996–2000

2001–05

People affected as a share of population (%)

8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

1971–75

1976–80

1981–85

1986–90

1991–95

1996–2000

2001–05

low-income countries
lower-middle-income countries

upper-middle-income countries
high-income countries

Sources: WDR team; CRED 2009.
Note: Over the past 40 years the death toll has fallen but the number of people affected has doubled every decade. 
(People affected are those requiring immediate assistance during a period of emergency and can also include 
displaced or evacuated people.) In lower-middle-income countries almost 8 percent of the population is affected 
each year. The increase cannot be attributed only to climate change; much results from population increase, 
greater exposure of infrastructure and improved reporting of disasters. However, the impacts on people are just 
as real and show why it is so essential to begin focusing on the current adaptation deficit while looking ahead to a 
more climatically stressful future.

Such  interventions  require  coordi-
nated  intersectoral  action  and  public 
expenditures.  For  water-borne  diseases, 
inter ventions  should  include  the  health 
agency, public works, and utilities.67 Jointly 
 managed  water,  sanitation,  hygiene,  and 
food security—combined with health and 
disaster  management—can  yield  high 
returns.  So  can  engaging  the  private  sec-
tor, if it improves performance. privatizing 
water  services  in  Argentina  in  the  1990s 
dramatically  reduced  the  child  mortality 
linked to water-borne diseases.68

Monitoring  and  managing  the  health 
impacts  of  climate  change  will  require 
greater use of new diagnostic tools. Advances 
in genomics and information technology are 
accelerating  the  design  of  a  wide  range  of 
diagnostic tools that can help in monitoring 
the spread of diseases and the emergence of 
new ones. New communications tools will 
make it easier to collect, analyze, and share 
health  information  in  a  timely  manner.69 
But having such tools will not be sufficient 
without extensive programs to train health 
care workers. Similarly, major institutional 
reforms will need to be introduced to inte-
grate health care into other activities. Schools, 
for example, can be major centers for the pro-
vision of basic health care as well as sources 
of medical information and education.

Prepare for extreme events
Natural  disasters  are  taking  an  increas-
ing  economic  toll,  and  managing  them 
better  is  essential  for  adapting  to  climate 
change. While deaths from weather-related 
natural disasters are on the decline,70 eco-
nomic losses caused by storms, floods, and 
droughts are all rising (from about $20 bil-
lion a year in the early 1980s to $70 billion 
in the early 2000s for high-income countries 
and from $10 billion a year to $15 billion for 
low- and middle-income countries).71 But 
this increase is largely explained by higher 
exposure of economic value per area rather 
than changes in climate.72 The number of 
affected people (people requiring humani-
tarian assistance after disasters) continues 
to increase, with the largest share in lower-
middle-income countries characterized by 
rapid urban growth (figure 2.1).73 About 90 
percent of the economic losses in developing 

 

Reducing Human Vulnerability: Helping People Help Themselves 

99

countries  are  borne  by  households,  busi-
nesses, and governments with the rest cov-
ered by insurance or donor funds.

Unless  disaster  impacts  are  systemati-
cally reduced, past development gains will 
be at risk. So the focus is shifting from cop-
ing with disaster events to forward-looking 
disaster risk management and toward pre-
ventive  rather  than  reactive  measures.  In 
line with the hyogo Framework of Action 
for reducing disaster risks (the 2005 policy 
framework defined by the United Nations), 
recovery  and  reconstruction  are  being 

designed  to  reduce  risks  of  future  disas-
ters, bridging the humanitarian and devel-
opment  agendas.74  The  private  sector  is 
instrumental in this framework, providing 
financial (insurance, risk assessments) and 
technical  (communication,  construction, 
service provision) solutions.75

Climate change greatly increases the need 
for effective management of extreme weather 
events  and  for  disaster  risk  management 
that  increases  preparedness  and  prevents 
losses  (box  2.6).76  In  many  places  previ-
ously uncommon risks are becoming more 

Box 2.6      Beating the odds and getting ahead of impacts: Managing the risk of extreme events 
before they become disasters

Recurrent extreme climate events—
storms, floods, droughts, wildfires—
characterize many parts of the world and 
are part of the climate system. Climate 
change is likely to change patterns of 
extreme events, but negative impacts can 
be reduced through systematic risk man-
agement. The basic steps are assessing 
risk, reducing risk, and mitigating risk.a

Assessing risk, a prerequisite for risk man-
agement, is the basis for informed decision 
making. It focuses action and resources. 
Identifying pertinent risk is the first step 
and generally does not require sophis-
ticated techniques. Rice farmers in Asia 
readily point out their most flood-prone 
fields. Water reservoir managers know the 
difficulties of managing the competing 
demands for electricity and water supply 
when water levels are low. And communi-
ties can identify social groups and indi-
viduals who tend to be affected first when 
adverse weather events occur. 

Quantifying risk is the next step, and a 
variety of approaches exist depending on 
the scope of a risk assessment. Communi-
ties use simple participatory techniques 
based on readily observable indicators 
(such as the market price for staple crops 
during droughts) to trigger action at the 
household and community level, or they 
use community-based mapping to deter-
mine flood-prone areas. Risk assessments 
at the sector level (agriculture or hydro-
power) or for a country generally require 
more systematic and quantitative data 
analysis (mapping agricultural extent or 
regional hydrology).

Understanding risk requires investment 

in scientific, technical, and institutional 

capacity to observe, record, research, 
analyze, forecast, model, and map natural 
hazards and vulnerabilities. Geographic 
information systems can integrate these 
sources of information and give decision 
makers a powerful tool to understand 
risk—both at the national agencies and 
the local level. Many low- and middle-
income countries are now performing 
risk assessments and are systematically 
strengthening their capacity to manage 
disasters better.b

Reducing risk requires mainstreaming 
risk in the overall strategic framework of 
development, a task more important than 
ever as the density of people and infra-
structure increases. Since the late 1990s 
there has been increasing recognition of 
the need to address risks emanating from 
natural hazards in medium-term strategic 
development frameworks, in legislation 
and institutional structures, in sectoral 
strategies and policies, in budgetary pro-
cesses, in individual projects, and in mon-
itoring and evaluation. Mainstreaming 
requires analysis of how potential hazard 
events could affect policies, programs, 
and projects and vice versa. 

Development initiatives do not neces-
sarily reduce vulnerability to natural haz-
ards, and they can unwittingly create new 
vulnerabilities or heighten existing ones. 
Solutions for jointly sustaining develop-
ment, reducing poverty, and strengthen-
ing resilience to hazards thus need to be 
explicitly sought. Disaster risk reduction 
should promote resilience and help com-
munities adapt to new and increased 
risks. But even this cannot be guaranteed. 
For instance, investments in structural 

flood control designed according to cur-
rent probabilities could add to future 
losses by encouraging development in 
flood-prone areas today but leaving them 
more prone to future major damages. So 
climate-change predictions have to be 
taken into account in current decision 
making and longer-term planning.

Mitigating risk entails actions to mini-

mize impacts during an event and its 
immediate aftermath. Early warning and 
surveillance systems harness informa-
tion technology and communication 
systems to provide advance warnings of 
extreme events. For such information to 
save lives, disaster management agencies 
need mechanisms in place to receive and 
communicate information to communi-
ties well ahead of the event. This requires 
systematic preparedness training; capacity 
building and awareness raising; and coor-
dination between national, regional, and 
local entities. Taking swift and targeted 
action after a disaster is equally important, 
including social protection for the most 
vulnerable and a strategy for recovery and 
reconstruction. 

Sources: WDR team; Ranger, Muir-Wood, 
and Priya 2009; United Nations 2007; United 
Nations 2009; NRC 2006; Benson and Twigg 
2007.
a. Here the term mitigation refers to avoid-
ance of losses from extreme weather events, 
for example, by evacuating people from a 
flood plain, through short-term measures in 
anticipation of an immediate threat.
b. Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and 
Recovery, www.gfdrr.org (accessed May 15, 
2009); Prevention, www.proventionconsor-
tium.org (accessed May 15, 2009).

100 

WO R L D   D E V E LOpM E N T   R EpO RT   2 0 1 0

widespread, as in Africa, where the number 
of floods is increasing rapidly (figure 2.2), 
and  in  Brazil,  which  experienced  the  first 
South Atlantic hurricane ever in 2004.77

Generating  information  about  where 
extreme weather impacts are likely and the 
consequences they may have requires socio-
economic data (maps showing population 
density or land values) as well as physical 
information  (records  of  precipitation  or 
extreme  events).78  But  in  a  changing  cli-
mate the past is no longer prologue (once-
rare  events  may  become  more  frequent), 
and  uncertainty  about  the  future  climate 
is  an  important  element  in  assessing  risk 
and evaluating planning decisions. Equally 
important  are  monitoring  and  periodic 
updates  in  socioeconomic  data  to  reflect 

Figure 2.2      Floods are increasing, even in drought-prone Africa

Africa
Rest of the world

Events per five-year period
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0

1971–75

1976–80

1981–85

1986–90

1991–95

1996–2000

2001–05

Source: WDR team analysis from CRED 2009.
Note: Flood events are increasing everywhere but particularly in Africa, with new regions being exposed to 
flooding and with less recovery time between events. Reporting of events may have improved since the 1970s, 
but this is not the main cause of rising numbers of reported floods, because the frequency of other disaster 
events in Africa, such as droughts and earthquakes, has not shown a similar increase.

changes  in  land  use  and  demographics. 
Satellite and geographic information tech-
nology provide powerful means to generate 
physical  and  socioeconomic  information 
rapidly  and  cost-effectively  (box  2.7;  see 
also chapters 3 and 7).

Many  developed  countries  provide 
detailed  flood-risk  maps  as  a  public  ser-
vice to homeowners, businesses, and local 
authorities.79 In China the government has 
drawn such maps since 1976 and publishes 
flood-risk  maps  that  delineate  high-risk 
zones for the most populated river basins. 
With such tools, residents can have infor-
mation on when, how, and where to evacu-
ate. The maps can also be used for land-use 
planning and building design.80 put in the 
hands of local communities, such services 
foster local action, as in Bogota, where sim-
ilar risk-based information for earthquake-
prone  zones  strengthens  the  resilience  of 
communities.81

Risk can never be eliminated, and being 
prepared  to  cope  with  extreme  events  is 
vital  for  protecting  people.  Warning  sys-
tems and response plans (say, for evacua-
tion in an emergency) save lives and prevent 
avoidable losses. Engaging communities in 
preparedness and emergency communica-
tion protects their livelihoods. For example, 
in  Mozambique  communities  along  the 
Búzi River use radios to warn communities 
downstream of flooding.82 Even in remote, 
isolated  communities  local  action  can 
reduce risk, create jobs, and address poverty 

Box 2.7      Satellite data and geo-information are instrumental in managing risk—and inexpensive

Satellite data and geo-information tech-
nology are often available for free or at 
moderate cost, and the software and 
tools to use such technology operate on 
desktop computers. 

Satellites monitor moisture and veg-
etation and provide invaluable informa-
tion to agricultural extension services. 
They track tropical storms and provide 
early warning to coastal communities. 
By mapping flood impacts they support 
recovery and reconstruction opera-
tions. They map forests and biomass and 

empower indigenous forest dwellers 
with information. High-resolution sen-
sors identify urban encroachment into 
hazardous zones. Geographic position-
ing devices used in surveys can reveal 
new information about how households 
interact with the natural environment. 
Geo-information systems streamline data 
management, ensure information is avail-
able when it is needed, and provide a 
cost-effective and rapid tool to build the 
knowledge base for informed policy mak-
ing and for understanding risk patterns in 

places where such data and knowledge 
are currently limited. 

The use of such services and technol-

ogy broadly and effectively in developing 
countries does not require hard invest-
ments—investments in higher education, 
institutional capacity building, mission-
focused regional research centers, and 
promoting private enterprise are the 
main elements. 

Sources: ESA 2002; NRC 2007a, 2007b. 

 

Reducing Human Vulnerability: Helping People Help Themselves 

101

(box 2.8). At the national level, being finan-
cially prepared to provide immediate assis-
tance after disasters is critical for avoiding 
long-term losses for communities.

Managing financial risks: Flexible 
instruments for contingencies
public  policy  creates  a  framework  that 
delineates clear roles and responsibilities for 
the public sector, private sector, households, 
and individuals. Core to such a framework 
is  a  spectrum  of  risk  management  prac-
tices with layered responsibilities. A minor 
drought  that  causes  small  losses  in  crop 
production can be managed by households 
through  informal  and  community-based 
risk sharing unless several small droughts 
occur in short sequence (see chapter 1). A 
more severe drought, one that occurs, say, 
every  10  years,  can  be  managed  through 
risk  transfer  instruments  in  the  private 
sector. But for the most severe and wide-
spread events the government has to act as 
the insurer of last resort. It has to develop a 
framework that allows communities to help 
themselves and the private sector to play an 
active and commercially viable role, while 
making  provisions  to  cover  its  liabilities 
arising from catastrophic events. 

Provide layers of protection
The use and support of insurance mecha-
nisms has gained much attention in the con-
text of adaptation.83 Insurance can protect 
against losses associated with extreme climate 
events and manage costs that cannot be cov-
ered by international aid, by governments, or 
by  citizens.84  Some  novel  approaches  have 
been developed and tested, such as weather-
based derivatives and microinsurance prod-
ucts  on  the  private  market.  Consider  the 
weather-index  insurance  for  smallholder 
farmers  in  India  that  provides  compensa-
tion to hundreds of thousands of farmers in 
case of severe precipitation shortfall—and 
the Caribbean common insurance pool that 
quickly provides governments with liquidity 
after disasters.85

But insurance is not a silver bullet—it is 
only one element in a broader risk manage-
ment framework that promotes risk reduc-
tion (avoiding avoidable losses) and rewards 
sound  risk  management  practices  (just  as 

Box 2.8      Creating jobs to reduce flood risk

Heavy rains are common in Liberia, 
yet drainage systems have not been 
maintained for decades because of 
years of neglect and civil war. As a 
result, flooding has triggered recur-
rent disasters in both rural and urban 
settings. Cleaning the drains was not 
a priority for government officials or 
citizens, because nobody had the 
resources. But after Mercy Corps, an 
international nongovernmental orga-
nization, raised the possibility of cash-

for-work options, government officials 
embraced it. In September 2006 a one-
year project to clear and rehabilitate 
drainage systems was launched in five 
counties. This significantly increased 
the flow of rainwater and reduced 
flooding and related health risks. The 
project also rehabilitated wells and 
improved market access by clearing 
roads and building small bridges. 

Source: Mercy Corps 2008.

homeowners receive a premium reduction if 
they install fire alarms). If climate is trend-
ing in a predictable fashion (toward hotter 
or drier weather conditions, for instance), 
insurance is not viable. Insurance is appro-
priate when impacts are random and rare, 
helping households, businesses, and govern-
ments spread risk over time (by paying regu-
lar premiums rather than covering the full 
costs at once) and geographically (by sharing 
risk with others). So, it does not eliminate 
risk, but it does reduce the variance of losses 
borne by individuals in the insurance pool. 
Insurance  against  storms,  floods,  and 
droughts,  whether  provided  to  govern-
ments or individuals, is difficult to manage. 
Climate risk tends to affect entire regions 
or large groups of people simultaneously; 
for  example,  thousands  of  breeders  in 
Mongolia saw their livestock decimated in 
2002, when a dry summer was followed by 
an  extremely  cold  winter  (box  2.9).  Such 
covariant events characterize many climate 
risks and make insurance very difficult to 
provide because claims tend to cluster and 
require large backup capital and adminis-
trative efforts.86 That is one reason major 
climate  risks  are  not  widely  covered  by 
insurance,  particularly  in  the  developing 
world.  Indeed,  microfinance  institutions 
often limit the share of agricultural loans in 
their portfolio in case widespread weather 
impacts cause their clients to default.87

The provision of financial services has been 
a long-standing challenge in development for 
reasons unrelated to climate change. Access 
to  insurance  products  is  generally  much 

102 

WO R L D   D E V E LOpM E N T   R EpO RT   2 0 1 0

Box 2.9      Public-private partnerships for sharing climate risks: Mongolia livestock insurance

An important concept of climate-risk 
management is risk-sharing by commu-
nities, governments, and businesses. In 
Mongolia livestock herders, the national 
government, and insurance companies 
developed a scheme to manage the 
financial risks arising from severe winter-
spring cold episodes (dzuds) that peri-
odically result in widespread livestock 
mortality. Such episodes killed 17 percent 
of livestock in 2002 (in some areas up 
to 100 percent), amounting to losses of 
$200 million (16 percent of GDP).

In this scheme herders retain the 

responsibility for smaller losses that do 
not affect the viability of their business or 
household, and they often use arrange-
ments with community members to buf-
fer against smaller losses. Larger losses 
(of 10–30 percent) are covered through 

commercial livestock insurance provided 
by Mongolian insurers. A social insurance 
program through the government bears 
the losses associated with catastrophic 
livestock mortality that would overwhelm 
herders and insurers alike. This tiered 
approach defines a clear framework for 
self-insurance by herders, commercial 
insurance, and social insurance.

An important innovation is the use of 

index insurance rather than individual live-
stock insurance, which had been ineffec-
tive because the verification of individual 
losses tends to be fraught with moral haz-
ard and often prohibitively high costs. With 
this new type of insurance, herders are 
compensated based on the average live-
stock mortality rate in their district, and an 
individual loss assessment is not required. 
This gives Mongolian insurers incentives 

to offer commercial insurance to herders, 
which they had been reluctant to do. 

The scheme provides advantages for 
all. Herders can buy insurance against 
unavoidable losses. Insurers can expand 
their business in rural areas, strengthening 
the rural financial service infrastructure. 
The government, by providing a well-
structured social insurance, can better 
manage its fiscal risk. Even though a cata-
strophic event exposes the government to 
significant potential risk, the government 
had been compelled politically to absorb 
even greater risk in the past. Because the 
government covers catastrophic out-
comes, the commercial insurance, limited 
to moderate levels of mortality, can be 
offered at affordable rates.

Sources: Mahul and Skees 2007; Mearns 2004.

weaker in developing countries (figure 2.3), 
a fact reflected in the generally lower penetra-
tion of financial services in rural areas. The 
philippines  Crop  Insurance  Corporation, 
for example, reaches only about 2 percent of 
farmers, largely in the more productive and 
richer zones.88 providing financial services 
to rural populations is challenging and risky, 
because many rural households are not part 
of the monetized economy and have weather-
sensitive livelihoods. In urban settings people 
are more concentrated, but it is still difficult 
to reach the poor in the informal economy.

Climate  change  could  further  erode 
the  insurability  of  climate-related  risk. 
Unchecked  climate  change  could  make 
many climate risks uninsurable or the pre-
miums unaffordable. Insurability requires 
the ability to identify and quantify (or at 
least  estimate  partially)  the  likelihood  of 
an  event  and  the  associated  losses,  to  set 
premiums,  and  to  diversify  risk  among 
individuals  or  collectives.89  Meeting  all 
three conditions makes a risk insurable but 
not  necessarily  profitable  (as  reflected  in 
the low premium-to-claims ratio of many 
agricultural insurance programs) and the 
transaction costs of operating an insurance 
program can be considerable.90 The uncer-
tainties arising from climate change con-
found the actuarial processes that underlie 

insurance markets.91 And diversifying risk 
will  be  more  difficult  as  climate  change 
leads  to  more  synchronized,  widespread, 
and  systemic  effects  globally  and  region-
ally—effects that are difficult to offset in 
other regions or market segments.

The erosion of market-based insurability 
implies a strong reliance on governments 
as insurers of last resort, a role that many 
governments have implicitly taken. But the 
track record of governments has not been 
stellar, in either the developing world or the 
developed. For instance, hurricane Katrina 
in 2005 bankrupted the U.S. flood insur-
ance  program  10  times  over,  with  more 
claims in one year than in its 37-year his-
tory. And few government-sponsored crop 
insurance programs are financially sustain-
able without major subsidies.92 At the same 
time, if the magnitude of losses associated 
with recent catastrophic events is any indi-
cation  of  the  insurability  of  future  losses 
from  climate  change,  it  suggests  a  more 
explicit role of the public sector to absorb 
the  damages  that  are  beyond  the  private 
sector’s capacity.93

Insurance is no panacea for adapting to cli-
mate risks and is only one strategy to address 
some  of  the  impacts  of  climate  change.  It 
generally  is  not  appropriate  for  long-term 
and  irreversible  impacts,  such  as  sea-level 

 

Reducing Human Vulnerability: Helping People Help Themselves 

103

Figure 2.3      Insurance is limited in the developing world

Non–life insurance premium volume in 2006

(total volume = $1.5 trillion)

Latin America
& Caribbean

3%

Africa 1%

Asia
13%

North America

46%

Europe
35%

Oceania 1%

Premium/GDP (%)
5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0

North
America

Non–life insurance penetration in 2006

Oceania

Europe

Asia

Latin America

and the Caribbean

Africa

World

Source: Swiss Re 2007.
Note: Insurance is primarily a developed-country market as indicated by the regional share of premiums (left), and penetration (premium as percent of GDP) of non–life insurance 
(right). Non–life insurance includes property, casualty, and liability insurance (also referred to as general insurance), health insurance, and insurance products not defined as life 
insurance.

rise  and  desertification,  trends  that  would 
lead to massive losses for insurers and thus 
be uninsurable. Insurance must also be con-
sidered within an overall risk-management 
and  adaptation  strategy,  including  sound 
regulation of land-use and building codes, to 
avoid counterproductive behavior—or mal-
adaptation (such as continued settlement on 
a storm-prone coast)—because of the secu-
rity in an insurance contract.94

Keep governments liquid
Financial  planning  prepares  governments 
for catastrophic climate impacts and main-
tains essential government services in the 
immediate aftermath of disasters.95 prear-
ranged  financing  arrangements—such  as 
catastrophe reserve funds, contingent lines 
of credit, and catastrophe bonds—allow gov-
ernments to respond swiftly, scale up social 
protection programs, and avoid longer-term 
losses that accrue to households and com-
munities while people are homeless, out of 
work, and experience basic deprivations.96 
having immediate funds available to jump-
start the rehabilitation and recovery process 
reduces the derailing effect of disasters on 
development.

Many  small  countries  are  financially 
more  vulnerable  to  catastrophic  events 
because  of  the  magnitude  of  disaster-
related  losses  relative  to  the  size  of  their 
economy  (map  2.5);  in  Grenada  in  2004, 

for example, the winds of hurricane Ivan 
caused losses equivalent to more than 200 
percent of GDp.97 Because outside aid is not 
always immediately available, 16 Caribbean 
countries have developed a well-structured 
financial  risk-management  scheme  to 
streamline emergency funding and mini-
mize service interruptions. Operating since 
2007, it provides rapid liquidity to govern-
ments  following  destructive  hurricanes 
and  earthquakes,  using  innovative  access 
to international reinsurance markets that 
can diversify and offset risk globally (box 
2.10).

Even  poor  economies  can  manage  cli-
mate  risks  more  effectively  by  harness-
ing information, markets, good planning, 
and technical assistance. By forming part-
nerships  with  insurers  and  international 
financial  institutions,  governments  can 
overcome the private sector’s reluctance to 
commit  capital  and  expertise  to  the  low-
income market. In 2008 Malawi pioneered 
a weather-based risk management contract 
to protect itself against droughts that would 
lead to national maize production shortfalls 
(often  accompanied  by  high  volatility  in 
regional commodity prices and food inse-
curity). In exchange for a premium an inter-
national reinsurance company committed 
to  pay  an  agreed  amount  to  the  govern-
ment in case of predefined severe drought 
conditions,  as  measured  and  reported  by 

104 

WO R L D   D E V E LOpM E N T   R EpO RT   2 0 1 0

Map 2.5      Small and poor countries are financially vulnerable to extreme weather events

IBRD 37086_F2.5
September 2009

Financial

vulnerability

High

Medium

Low

11–50

51–250

> 250

Critical event
return period

(years)

Not applicable

Source: Mechler and others 2009.
Note: The map shows degree to which countries are financially vulnerable to floods and storms. For example, in countries shaded dark red a severe weather event that would 
exceed the public sector’s financial ability to restore damaged infrastructure and continue with development as planned is expected about once every 11 to 50 years (an annual 
probability of 2–10 percent). The high financial vulnerability of small economies underscores the need for financial contingency planning to increase governments’ resilience 
against future disasters. Only the 74 most disaster-prone countries that experienced direct losses of at least 1 percent of GDP due to floods, storms, and droughts during the past 
30 years were included in the analysis.

the Malawian weather service. The World 
Bank Treasury acted as a trusted intermedi-
ary to the market, increasing confidence in 
the transaction on both sides. Because pay-
ment and drought parameters were defined 
beforehand,  disbursement  from  such  a 
financial product could be rapid, and the 
government could forward-purchase maize 
on regional commodity markets to secure 
food  as  soon  as  possible  before  drought 
would  affect  the  most  vulnerable,  which 
reduces  response  costs  significantly,  and 
decreases  dependence  on  international 
appeals for assistance.98

For these initiatives to be affordable and 
sustainable,  disaster  risk  reduction  needs 

to  be  systematically  promoted  to  mini-
mize  government  reliance  on  such  finan-
cial arrangements for more routine losses. 
Contingent financing has opportunity costs 
and should cover only the most urgent gov-
ernment financial needs and most extreme 
losses.  Agricultural  extension  services, 
building  code  enforcement,  and  strategic 
urban planning are a few examples show-
ing  where  government  action  can  reduce 
avoidable consequences and the likelihood 
of  the  most  extreme  outcomes.  Equally 
important  are  early  warning  systems  that 
provide advance warning and prevent the 
loss of human life and economic damages. 
Such systems, supported by governments, 

 

Reducing Human Vulnerability: Helping People Help Themselves 

105

can have dramatic effects, as in Bangladesh, 
where they have reduced human deaths from 
floods and storms and therefore the need for 
the government to finance the losses.99

Managing social risks: Empower 
communities to protect themselves
Climate  change  does  not  affect  everyone 
equally.100 For poor households even mod-
erate climate stress can result in irreversible 
losses of human and physical capital.101 The 
impacts on children can be long term and 
affect lifetime earnings through education 
(withdrawal  from  school  after  a  shock), 
health (compounding effect of poor sanita-
tion and water- or vector-borne diseases), 
and  stunting.102  Women  in  the  develop-
ing world experience the effects of climate 
disproportionately  because  many  of  their 
household  responsibilities  (gathering  and 
selling  wild  products)  are  affected  by  the 
vagaries of the weather.103 households and 
communities adapt through their livelihood 
choices,  asset  allocations,  and  locational 
preferences,  often  relying  on  traditional 
knowledge  to  inform  these  decisions.104 
people will be both more willing and more 
able to change if they have social support 
systems that combine community sharing, 
publicly provided social insurance (such as 
pensions),  privately  supplied  finance  and 
insurance,  and  publicly  provided  safety 
nets.

Build resilient communities
Building on local and traditional knowledge 
about  managing  climate  risk  is  important 
for two reasons.105 First, many communities, 
notably  indigenous  peoples,  already  have 
context-relevant  knowledge  and  strategies 
for addressing climate risks. Efforts to marry 
development and climate adaptation for vul-
nerable communities will benefit from the 
ways people have always responded to envi-
ronmental  risks,  as  in  Africa  where  com-
munities have adapted to extended periods 
of drought.106 But those traditional coping 
and adaptation strategies can prepare com-
munities only for some perceived risks, not 
for the uncertain and possibly different risks 
brought  by  climate  change.107  In  this  way 
communities might be well adapted to their 

Box 2.10      The Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance 
Facility: Insurance against service interruption after disasters

Among the many challenges facing 
the governments of small island states 
in the aftermath of natural disasters, 
the most urgent is obtaining access 
to cash to implement urgent recovery 
efforts and maintain essential govern-
ment services. This challenge is partic-
ularly acute for Caribbean countries, 
whose economic resilience is limited 
by mounting vulnerability and high 
indebtedness. 

The new Caribbean Catastrophe 

Risk Insurance Facility provides 
Caribbean Community governments 
with an insurance instrument akin 
to business interruption insurance. It 
furnishes short-term liquidity if they 
suffer catastrophic losses from a hur-
ricane or earthquake. 

A wide range of instruments exists 

to finance long-term recovery, but 
this facility fills a gap in financing 
short-term needs through parametric 

insurance. It disburses funds based 
on the occurrence of a predefined 
event of a particular intensity, with-
out having to wait for onsite loss 
assessments and formal confirma-
tions. This type of insurance is gener-
ally less expensive and settles claims 
quickly, because measuring the 
strength of an event is almost instan-
taneous. The facility allows participat-
ing countries to pool their individual 
risks into one better-diversified 
portfolio and facilitates access to the 
reinsurance market, further spread-
ing risks outside the region. 

Such insurance mechanisms should 
be part of a comprehensive financial 
strategy using an array of instruments 
to cover different types of events and 
probabilities.

Sources: Ghesquiere, Jamin, and Mahul 
2006; World Bank 2008e.

climates  but  less  able  to  adapt  to  climate 
change.108 Second, the local nature of adap-
tation  means  that  sweeping  policies  with 
one-size-fits-all prescriptions are not suited 
to serving the needs of different urban and 
rural locations.109

Building  blocks  of  community  resil-
ience—the  capacity  to  retain  critical 
functions,  self-organize,  and  learn  when 
exposed to change—are evident through-
out the world.110 In coastal Vietnam storm 
surges and rising sea levels are already put-
ting  stress  on  coping  mechanisms.  After 
cutbacks of many state services in the late 
1990s, local collective decision making and 
credit and exchange networks substituted 
social capital and learning for government 
planning  and  infrastructure.  (In  recent 
years, however, the government has recog-
nized its role to support community resil-
ience and infrastructure development and 
now  promotes  a  broad  agenda  of  disaster 
risk management).111

In  the  western  Arctic  the  Inuit,  expe-
riencing  diminished  sea  ice  and  shifting 

106 

WO R L D   D E V E LOpM E N T   R EpO RT   2 0 1 0

wildlife distributions, have adjusted the tim-
ing of subsistence activities and are hunting 
a greater variety of species. They are increas-
ing the resilience of their communities by 
sharing food, trading more with one another, 
and by developing new local institutions.112 
Similarly, indigenous communities in devel-
oping  countries  are  adapting  to  climate 
change—for  instance,  through  rainwater 
harvesting, crop and livelihood diversifica-
tion, and changes in seasonal migration—to 
alleviate adverse impacts and take advantage 
of new opportunities.113

In  general,  communities  have  better 
time-, place-, and event-specific knowledge 
of  local  climate  hazards  and  of  how  such 
hazards affect their assets and productive 
activities. Communities also have greater 
capacity to manage local social and ecologi-
cal relationships that will be affected by cli-
mate change. And they typically incur lower 
costs than external actors in implementing 
development  and  environmental  projects 
(figure 2.4). A recent review of more than 
11,000 fisheries found that the likelihood of 
stock collapse can be dramatically reduced 
by moving away from overall harvest limits 

and  introducing  individual  transferable 
catch  quotas  with  local  enforcement.114 
Active participation of local communities 
and  primary  stakeholders  in  comanage-
ment of fisheries is a key to success.115

Beyond  resilience-enhancing  benefits, 
decentralized  resource  management  can 
have  synergistic  benefits  for  mitigation 
and adaptation. For example, forest com-
mons management in tropical regions has 
produced  simultaneous  livelihood  ben-
efits (adaptation) and carbon storage gains 
(mitigation) when local communities own 
their forests, have greater decision-making 
autonomy, and ability to manage larger for-
est patches.116 In many developing countries 
decentralized governance of forests based 
on  principles  of  common-pool  resources 
has given local populations the authority to 
manage forests, use their time- and place-
specific  knowledge  to  create  appropriate 
rules and institutions, and work with gov-
ernment  agencies  to  implement  the  rules 
they have created.117 Enhancing indigenous 
peoples’  land  rights  and  ensuring  their 
role in management has resulted in more 
sustained  and  cost-effective  management 

IBRD 37200
September 2009
Figure 2.4

Figure 2.4      Turning back the desert with indigenous knowledge, farmer action, and social learning

NIGER

Algeria

Libya

Mali

N i g e r

Chad

Burkina

Faso

Nigeria

Change in vegetation greenness, 1982–2006 (%)

11–25

>25

-10–10 (no significant trend)

Sources: WRI and others 2008; Botoni and Reij 2009; Herrmann, Anyamba, and Tucker 2005.
Note: In Niger farmers have turned back the encroaching desert; landscapes that were denuded in the 1980s are now densely studded with trees, shrubs, and crops. This trans-
formation, so vast that its effects can be observed from satellites, has affected 5 million hectares of land (about the size of Costa Rica), which amounts to almost half of the culti-
vated land in Niger. The new economic opportunities created by the regreening have benefited millions of people through increased food security and resilience to drought. Key 
to this success was a low-cost technique known as farmer-managed natural regeneration that adapts a centuries-old technique of woodland management. After some earlier 
success with the reintroduction of this indigenous technique in the 1980s, farmers saw the benefits and spread the word. The social learning effect was enhanced by donors sup-
porting farmer study tours and farmer-to-farmer exchanges. The central government’s role was pivotal in reforming land tenure and forest policies.

 

Reducing Human Vulnerability: Helping People Help Themselves 

107

of forests and biodiversity resources, as in 
Mexico and Brazil.118

Effective  community-based  adaptation 
builds  on  social  learning,  the  process  of 
exchanging knowledge about existing expe-
riences,  and  incorporating  it  with  techni-
cal  scientific  information.119  When  people 
migrate  between  urban  and  rural  areas 
for seasonal employment or in the wake of 
natural  disasters,  their  movements  follow 
flows of earlier movements of relatives and 
friends.120  When  people  adopt  new  tech-
nologies or change cropping patterns, their 
decisions  depend  on  information  flows  in 
social networks.121 When people choose dif-
ferent  areas  to  strengthen  their  skills  and 
education, their decisions are tied to those 
of their peers.122

Community and experience-based social 
learning has been a principal means to cope 
with  climate  risks  in  the  past,  but  it  may 
prove insufficient for climate change. Con-
sequently,  effective  community-oriented 
climate adaptation strategies must balance 
the  assets  of  communities  (greater  local 
capacity and knowledge, potential reserves 
of  social  capital,  lower  costs)  against  the 
deficits (limited scientific knowledge, nar-
row scope for action).

While  numerous  community-based 
adaptation  activities  are  supported  by  a 
wide range of NGOs and other intermedi-
aries, they reach only a minuscule fraction 
of those at risk. A pressing challenge is to 
replicate  their  successes  far  more  widely. 
Scaling up has often been limited by poor 
links,  and  sometimes  tensions,  between 
local stakeholders and government institu-
tions. Issues of authority, responsibility, and 
funding often impede cooperation. Success-
fully  scaling  up  community-driven  devel-
opment will require that its supporters and 
governments  think  of  the  process  beyond 
the project and of transformation or transi-
tion to avoid projects coming to a brutal end 
when funding stops. Capacity, pivotal to suc-
cess, includes motivation and commitment, 
which in turn require appropriate incentives 
at all levels.123 The new Adaptation Fund can 
greatly increase the support for scaling up 
because it is expected to manage resources 
on the order of $0.5 billion to $1.2 billion 

by 2012 and to directly support governments 
at all levels, NGOs, and other intermediary 
agencies.124

Provide safety nets for the most 
vulnerable 
Climate change will amplify vulnerabilities 
and expose more people to climate threats 
more  frequently  and  for  longer  periods. 
This requires social policies to assist groups 
whose  livelihoods  may  gradually  erode 
with climate change. Extreme events may 
also directly affect households and require 
safety nets (social assistance) to prevent the 
most vulnerable from falling economically. 
protracted episodes of climate stress (as is 
common with drought) can contribute to 
commodity price increases and volatility, 
disproportionally  affecting  the  poor  and 
vulnerable, as was the case in the 2008 food 
crises.125 high food prices increase poverty 
for those who need to purchase food to sup-
port  their  families,  and  worsen  nutrition, 
reduce  use  of  health  and  education  ser-
vices, and deplete the productive assets of 
the poor.126 In parts of the developing world 
food  insecurity  and  associated  food  price 
fluctuations  already  represent  a  systemic 
source of risk that is expected to increase 
with climate change.127

Climate  shocks  have  two  important 
characteristics.  First,  there  is  uncertainty 
about  who  exactly  will  be  affected  and 
where. The affected population is often not 
identified  until  a  crisis  is  well  advanced, 
when it is difficult to respond swiftly and 
effectively. Second, the timing of possible 
shocks is not known ahead of time. Both 
aspects have implications for conceptualiz-
ing and designing social policies in response 
to future climate threats. Social protection 
should  be  thought  of  as  a  system,  rather 
than isolated interventions, and should be 
put in place during good times. Safety nets 
need to have flexible financing and contin-
gent  targeting  so  they  can  be  ramped  up 
to provide effective responses for episodic 
shocks.128

To  address  chronic  vulnerabilities,  a 
wide set of safety net instruments provides 
cash  or  in-kind  transfers  to  poor  house-
holds.129  Used  effectively,  they  have  an 

108 

WO R L D   D E V E LOpM E N T   R EpO RT   2 0 1 0

immediate impact on reducing inequality 
and are the first-best approach to address-
ing the poverty implications of commod-
ity price increases; they allow households 
to  invest  in  their  future  livelihoods  and 
manage risk by reducing the incidence of 
negative coping strategies (such as selling 
of livestock during droughts). Safety nets 
can be designed to encourage households to 
invest in human capital (education, train-
ing, nutrition) that increases resilience in 
the long term.

In  response  to  shocks,  safety  nets  can 
have  an  insurance  function  if  they  are 
designed to be scalable and flexible. They 
are often phased, with the priorities shift-
ing from immediate provision of food, san-
itation, and cleanup to eventual recovery, 
rebuilding, and, possibly, disaster preven-
tion and mitigation. To fulfill an insurance 
function,  safety  nets  need  countercycli-
cal  and  scalable  budgets,  targeting  rules 
to  identify  people  with  transitory  needs, 
flexible  implementation  that  allows  rapid 
response following a shock, and basic orga-
nizational procedures and responsibilities 
agreed  on  well  before  a  disaster.130  Early 
warnings provided through seasonal fore-
casts and bulletins can mobilize safety nets 
ahead  of  time  and  prepare  logistics  and 
food deliveries.131

Safety nets will need to be strengthened 
substantially  where  they  exist  and  devel-
oped  where  they  are  lacking.  Many  low-
income countries cannot afford permanent 
transfers to their poor, but scalable safety 
nets that provide a basic form of noncon-
tributory  insurance  can  represent  a  core 
social  protection  that  prevents  mortality 
and  excessive  depletion  of  assets,  even  in 
poor countries where they have not com-
monly been used.132

For instance, the productive Safety Net 
in  Ethiopia  combines  permanent  social 
assistance (a longer-term workfare program 
targeted at 6 million food-insecure house-
holds)  and  scalable  safety  nets  that  can 
be  rapidly  expanded  to  serve  millions  of 
transitory poor households during a major 
drought.  An  important  innovation  is  the 
use of indexes based on observed weather 
impacts  to  quickly  provide  more  scalable 
and  targeted  assistance  to  food-insecure 

areas and insurance-based mechanisms to 
access contingent financing.133

Workfare  programs  can  be  part  of  a 
safety  net’s  response.134  They  are  labor-
intensive public works programs that pro-
vide  income  to  a  target  population  while 
building or maintaining public infrastruc-
ture. These programs focus on assets and 
high-return activities that can increase the 
resilience  of  communities,  such  as  water 
storage,  irrigation  systems,  and  embank-
ments. To be fully effective, however, they 
need  clear  objectives,  suitable  and  well-
conceived  projects,  predictable  funding, 
professional  guidance  in  selection  and 
implementation, and credible monitoring 
and evaluation (box 2.11).

Safety nets can also facilitate the reform 
of energy policy. Raising fuel prices brings 
energy efficiency, economic gains, and fis-
cal savings, but also brings significant polit-
ical and social risks. Safety nets can protect 
the poor from high energy prices and help 
eliminate  large,  burdensome,  regressive, 
and  climate-damaging  energy  subsidies 
(see chapter 1).135 Energy subsidies, a com-
mon response to high fuel prices, are often 
inefficient and not well targeted, but elimi-
nating them is often problematic. Several 
middle-income  countries  (Brazil,  China, 
Colombia, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, and 
Turkey)  have  recently  used  safety  nets  to 
facilitate  the  removal  of  fossil-fuel  subsi-
dies.136  Cash  transfer  payments  following 
the removal of subsidies must be carefully 
targeted to ensure that the poor are reason-
ably  compensated—the  reform  in  Indo-
nesia  showed  that,  even  with  substantial 
mistargeting, the bottom four deciles of the 
population still gained during the transfer 
period.137

Facilitate migration in response  
to climate change
Migration  will  often  be  an  effective 
response  to  climate  change—and  unfor-
tunately the only response in some cases. 
Estimates of the number of people at risk 
of  migration,  displacement,  and  reloca-
tion by 2050 vary from to 200 million to 
as high as 1 billion.138 (But these estimates 
are based on broad assessments of people 
exposed  to  increasing  risks  rather  than 

 

Reducing Human Vulnerability: Helping People Help Themselves 

109

Box 2.11      Workfare in India under the Indian National Rural Employment Guarantee Act

India over time has developed an employ-
ment guarantee program built on an 
earlier successful scheme in the state of 
Maharashtra. The program establishes, 
through self-selection, the right of up to 
100 days of employment at the statutory 
minimum wage for every household that 
volunteers. Households do not have to 
demonstrate need, and some wages are 
paid even if work cannot be provided. 
The program makes provision for at 

least a third of the work to be available to 
women, on-site child care, and medical 
insurance for work injuries; work must 
be provided promptly and within five 

kilometers of the household where pos-
sible. The operation is transparent with 
lists of works and contractors publicly 
available and on the program’s Web site, 
allowing public oversight against corrup-
tion and inefficiency. Since the program’s 
inception in 2005, 45 million households 
have contributed 2 billion days of labor 
and undertaken 3 million tasks.a

With appropriate guidance, the pro-

gram can support climate-smart develop-
ment. It operates at scale and can direct 
significant labor toward appropriate 
adaptive works, including water con-
servation, catchment protection, and 

plantations. It provides funds for tools 
and other items necessary to complete 
activities and technical support for 
designing and implementing the proj-
ects. It can thus become a core part of 
village development through produc-
tive, climate-resilient asset creation and 
maintenance.b

Sources:
a. National Rural Employment Guarantee  
Act—2005, http://nrega.nic.in/ (accessed May 
2009).
b. CSE India, http://www.cseindia.org/
programme/nrml/update_january08.htm 
(accessed May 15, 2009); CSE 2007.

analyses of whether exposure will lead them 
to migrate.139) Adaptation, such as coastal 
protection, will offset climate impacts and 
reduce migration.140

Today’s  movements  are  a  crude  guide 
to the geography of movements in the near 
future (box 2.12). Migration related to cli-
mate change is likely to be predominantly 
from rural areas in developing countries to 
towns and cities. policies to facilitate migra-
tion should consider that most of the world’s 
migrants move within their own countries 
and that the migration routes used by eco-
nomic  and  involuntary  migrants  overlap 
significantly.

Little  evidence  suggests  that  migra-
tion caused by climate change provokes or 
exaggerates conflict, but that could change. 
people migrating because of environmen-
tal changes are likely disempowered, with 
little  capacity  to  wage  conflict.141  Where 
migration coincides with conflict, the rela-
tionship may not be causal.142 Similarly, the 
link between violent conflict and resource 
scarcity (water wars)143 or degradation has 
rarely been substantiated (poverty and dys-
functional institutions have more explana-
tory power).144 But uncertainty about the 
causal chains does not imply that future cli-
mate-induced migration would not increase 
the potential for conflict when coinciding 
with pressure on resources, food insecurity, 
catastrophic events, and lack of governance 
in the receiving region.145

The negative portrayal of migration can 
foster policies that seek to reduce and con-
trol its incidence and do little to address the 
needs of those who migrate, when migration 
may be the only option for those affected by 
climate hazards. Indeed, policies designed 
to  restrict  migration  rarely  succeed,  are 
often self-defeating, and increase the costs 
to migrants and to communities of origin 
and  destination.146  In  facilitating  migra-
tion as a response to climate impacts, it is 
better  to  formulate  integrated  migration 
and development policies that address the 
needs  of  voluntary  migrants  and  support 
their entrepreneurial abilities and techni-
cal skills. 

To  the  extent  possible,  policies  should 
discourage settlement of migrants in areas 
with  high  exposure  to  persistent  climate 
hazards (map 2.6). Between 1995 and 2005, 
3  million  people  were  displaced  by  civil 
unrest in Colombia, mostly to small or mid-
sized cities. Many have moved to marginal 
city areas prone to flooding or landslides or 
near waste dumps, while their lack of edu-
cation  and  job  skills  leaves  them  earning 
only 40 percent of the minimum salary.147 
Anticipating  involuntary  migration  and 
resettlement, forward-looking plans should 
identify alternative sites, apply compensa-
tion formulas that allow migrants to relo-
cate and develop new sources of livelihoods, 
and build public and social infrastructure 
for  community  life.  Again,  such  policies 

110 

WO R L D   D E V E LOpM E N T   R EpO RT   2 0 1 0

Box 2.12      Migration today

The estimates of climate-change-induced 
migration are highly uncertain and 
ambiguous. In the short term climate 
stress is likely to add incrementally to 
existing migration patterns (map at left) 
rather than generating entirely new flows 
of people. The majority of the world’s 
migrants move within their own coun-
tries. For example, there are nearly as 
many internal migrants in China alone 
(about 130 million) as there are interna-
tional migrants in all countries (estimated 
to be 175 million in 2000). Most internal 
migrants are economic migrants, moving 
from rural to urban areas. There is also 
significant, if poorly estimated, rural-
rural migration, which tends to smooth 
demand and supply in rural labor mar-
kets, and which serves as a step in the 
migration path of rural migrants. 

International migration is largely a 

phenomenon in the developed world. Of 
international migrants, about two-thirds 
move between developed countries. The 
growth in new arrivals is higher in the 
developed than the developing countries, 

and about half of all international migrants 
are women. Half of the world’s interna-
tional migrants originate from 20 coun-
tries. Less than 10 percent of the world’s 
international migrants are people forced 
to cross an international border for fear of 
persecution (the definition of refugees). 
Many forced migrants, however, fall under 
the definition of internally displaced per-
sons (map at right), estimated to number 
26 million people globally. The routes and 
intermediaries used by migrants fleeing 
conflicts, ethnic strife, and human rights 
violations are increasingly the same as 
those used by economic migrants. The 
available international statistics do not 
allow a specific attribution of internal dis-
placement due to environmental degrada-
tion or natural disasters, but most of the 
forced migration linked to climate change 
is likely to remain internal and regional.
Migration flows are not random, but 
patterned, with flows of migrants con-
centrating around places where existing 
migrants have demonstrated that a life 
can be established and can help future 

migrants to overcome the barriers to 
movement. These patterns are largely 
explained by barriers to movement and 
the requirements to overcome them. Bar-
riers include financial ones as the costs of 
transport, housing on arrival, and living 
expenses while developing new income 
streams. Observations suggest that there 
is a “migration hump,” where the rate of 
migration from a community increases 
as incomes rise beyond a level necessary 
to meet subsistence needs, and then 
decreases again as the gap between 
incomes at the place of origin and the 
main destination closes. The migration 
hump explains why the poorest of the 
poor do not migrate or migrate only very 
short distances. 

IBRD 37094
September 2009
Box 2.12

Sources: Tuñón 2006; World Bank 2008f; 
United Nations 2005; United Nations 2006; 
Migration DRC 2007; de Haas 2008; Lucas 
2006; Sorensen, van Hear, and Engberg-
 Pedersen 2003; Amin 1995; Lucas 2006; 
Lucas 2005; Massey and Espana 1987; de 
Haan 2002; Kolmannskog 2008.

International labor migration

Internal displacement

23.0
23.0
2.0
2.0

3.5
3.5
15.2
15.2

19.1
19.1
12.5
12.5

18.6
18.6
25.9
25.9

11.8
11.8
8.7
8.7

8.4
8.4
10.0
10.0

7.2
7.2
13.5
13.5

0.7
0.7
0.5
0.5

5.1
5.1
11.3
11.3

2.7
2.7
0.6
0.6

Share of international migration by region (%)
Total number of migrants in 2000 = 175 million (100%)

Inflows

Outflows

Internally displaced persons (millions)

0–0.1

0.5–1

0.1–0.2

>1

0.2–0.5

None / No data

Sources: Parsons and others 2007; IDMC 2008

stand  in  sharp  contrast  to  many  ongoing 
efforts to address the needs of involuntary 
migrants and refugees—whether they are 
internally displaced or cross international 
borders.

Recent  experience  has  suggested  some 
lessons for resettling migrants. The first is 
to involve the communities to be resettled 

in  planning  the  move  and  in  reconstruc-
tion—and  to  rely  as  little  as  possible  on 
outside  contractors  and  agencies.  Those 
being resettled must receive compensation 
at the standards and prices in the receiving 
region, and they should be involved in the 
design and construction of infrastructure 
in  the  new  location.  Where  possible,  the 

 

Reducing Human Vulnerability: Helping People Help Themselves 

111

Map 2.6      Senegalese migrants settle in flood-prone areas around urban Dakar

September 2009

Guediawaye

Pikine

Guediawaye

Pikine

Dakar

Dakar

Dakar,
Dakar,
SENEGAL
SENEGAL

Population change between 1999 and 2008
(number of inhabitants/pixel)

<0

0–50

51–100

101–250

251–500

>500

Flood risk

Low

Medium

High

Very high flood risk

Source: Geoville Group 2009.
Note: Slow economic growth in the agricultural sector has made Dakar the destination of an exodus from the rest of the country. Forty percent of Dakar’s new inhabitants between 
1988 and 2008 have moved into zones of high flood potential, twice as high as that of Dakar’s urban (19 percent) and rural communes (23 percent). Because urban expansion is geo-
graphically limited, the influx of migrants has resulted in a very high concentration of people in urban and peri-urban zones (in the map, 16 pixels constitute one square kilometer). 

decision-making structures in the commu-
nity being resettled should be respected to 
the fullest extent.

Looking ahead to 2050:  
Which world?

A recurring theme of this Report is that 
the inertia in social, climate, and biologi-
cal  systems  supports  the  case  for  action 
now. Some children alive today will be in 

leadership positions in 2050. On a path to 
a  2°C  warmer  world,  they  will  face  dra-
matic changes. however, managing these 
changes  will  be  but  one  of  their  many 
challenges. heading toward a 5°C warmer 
world,  the  outlook  will  be  far  more  dis-
mal. It will be clear that mitigation efforts 
over more than half a century have been 
inadequate.  Climate  change  will  not  be 
simply one of many challenges—it will be 
the dominant challenge.

“I would like to reach out to our world leaders to help initiate 

educational awareness and local government efforts to empower 

children to protect and restore the environment. Social and Political 

Institutions must respond and adapt strategies to protect public 

health, particularly for children. As a fifth grader, I think these are 

possible ways in order to ensure the survival of our Mother Earth.”

Raisa Kabir, Bangladesh, age 10

—Dave Laurence A. Juntilla, Philippines, age 11 

112 

WO R L D   D E V E LOpM E N T   R EpO RT   2 0 1 0

Notes

1. WRI and others 2008; heltberg, Siegel, and 

Jorgensen 2009.

2. Tompkins and Adger 2004.
3. Enfors and Gordon 2008.
4. The first is approximately the B1 SRES sce-
nario where the world is on track to stabilization 
of greenhouse gases at 450–550 ppm CO2e and 
eventually  a  temperature  of  about  2.5°C  above 
preindustrial levels, and the second where emis-
sions  are  significantly  higher  is  approximately 
the  A1B  SRES  scenario,  which  would  lead  to 
stabilization at about 1,000 ppm and eventually 
temperatures about 5°C above preindustrial lev-
els; see Solomon and others 2007.

5. horton and others 2008; parry and others 

2007; Rahm storf and others 2007.

6. Allan and Soden 2008.
7. WBGU 2008.
8. Adger and others 2008.
9. Repetto 2008.
10. Lempert and Schlesinger 2000.
11. Keim 2008.
12. Millennium Ecosystem Assessment 2005.
13. Ribot, forthcoming.
14. Lempert  and  Schlesinger  2000;  Lempert 

2007.

15. Lewis 2007.
16. Lempert  and  Schlesinger  2000;  Lempert 

and Collins 2007.

17. Bazerman 2006.
18. Groves and Lempert 2007.
19. Ward and others 2008.
20. hallegatte 2009.
21. pahl-Wostl  2007;  Brunner  and  others 
2005; Tompkins and Adger 2004; Folke and oth-
ers 2002.

22. Cumming, Cumming, and Redman 2006.
23. Olsson, Folke, and Berkes 2004; Folke and 

others 2005; Dietz, Ostrom, and Stern 2003.

24. Dietz and Stern 2008.
25. Ligeti, penney, and Wieditz 2007.
26. pahl-Wostl 2007.
27. FAO and CIFOR 2005.
28. United Nations 2008b.
29. United Nations 2008a.
30. Balk,  McGranahan, 

and  Anderson 
2008.  Low-elevation  coastal  zones  are  defined 
as  coastal  land  below  10  meters  elevation;  see 
Socioeconomic  Data  and  Application  Center, 
http://sedac.ciesin.columbia.edu/gpw/lecz.jsp 
(accessed January 8, 2009).

31. McGranahan, Balk, and Anderson 2007.
32. The net migration rate in Shanghai has been 
4–8 percent, compared with approximately minus 
2 percent attributable to natural growth between 
1995 and 2006; see United Nations 2008a.

33. Nicholls and others 2008.
34. Simms and Reid 2006.
35. World Bank 2008a.
36. Seo 2009.
37. World Bank 2008g.
38. World Bank 2008g.
39. Using a $2.15 a day poverty line; see Raval-

lion, Chen, and Sangraula 2007.

40. United Nations 2008a.
41. Satterthwaite 2008.
42. Díaz palacios and Miranda 2005. 
43. pelling 1997.
44. World Bank 2008c.
45. hara, Takeuchi, and Okubo 2005.
46. Bates and others 2008.
47. World Bank 2008a.
48. Satterthwaite and others 2007.
49. McEvoy, Lindley, and handley 2006.
50. Laryea-Adjei 2000. 
51. Confalonieri and others 2007.
52. Only  includes  major  cause-specific  mor-
tality and excludes indirect effects and morbidity; 
see McMichael and others 2004; Global humani-
tarian Forum 2009.

53. World Bank 2008b.
54. Robine and others 2008.
55. Solomon  and  others  2007;  Luber  and 

McGeehin 2008.

56. Corburn 2009. 
57. Fay, Block, and Ebinger 2010. 
58. Gallup and Sachs 2001.
59. hay and others 2006; this estimation only 
accounts for the expansion of the disease vector; 
population growth will compound this effect and 
increase  the  population  at  risk  by  390  million 
people (or 60 percent) relative to the 2005 popu-
lation baseline.

60. hales  and  others  2002;  without  climate 
change  only  35  percent  of  the  projected  global 
population in 2085 would be at risk.

61. WhO  2008;  de  la  Torre,  Fajnzylber,  and 

Nash 2008.

62. Keiser and others 2004.
63. Rogers and others 2002.
64. World Climate programme 2007.
65. WhO  2005;  Frumkin  and  McMichael 

2008.

66. Better sanitation and hygiene are good for 
health, as evidenced by the impact of sanitation 
improvements  on  urban  child  health  in  Salva-
dor,  Brazil,  a  city  with  2.4  million  people.  The 
program  reduced  the  prevalence  of  diarrheal 
diseases by 22 percent across the city in 2003–04 
and by 43 percent in high-risk communities. The 
improvements  were  mostly  attributable  to  new 
infrastructure (Barreto and others 2007).

67. AMWA 2007.

 

Reducing Human Vulnerability: Helping People Help Themselves 

113

68. Galiani, Gertler, and Schargrodsky 2005.
69. Richmond 2008.
70. A  growing  body  of  evidence  suggests 
that existing disaster loss data miss most of the 
small events that may account for as much as a 
quarter of deaths attributed to natural hazards, 
and that decision makers in many municipali-
ties  have  relatively  low  awareness  of  the  risks 
climate  change  poses  for  their  cities’  popula-
tions  and  infrastructure;  see  Awuor,  Orindi, 
and  Adwera  2008;  Bull-Kamanga  and  others 
2003; Roberts 2008.

71. hoeppe and Gurenko 2006.
72. United Nations 2009.
73. United Nations 2008a.
74. International Strategy for Disaster Reduc-
tion, http://www.unisdr.org/eng/hfa/hfa.htm 
(accessed March 12, 2009).

75. World Economic Forum 2008. 
76. Milly and others 2002.
77. The  Nameless  hurricane,  http://science.
nasa.gov/headlines/y2004/02apr_hurricane.htm 
(accessed March 12, 2009).

78. Ranger, Muir-Wood, and priya 2009.
79. An  example  is  the  information  services 
provided  by  the  Scottish  Environment  protec-
tion Agency, www.sepa.org.uk/flooding (accessed 
March 12, 2009).
80. Lin 2008.
81. Ghesquiere, Jamin, and Mahul 2006.
82. Ferguson 2005.
83. Linnerooth-Bayer and Mechler 2006.
84. Mills 2007.
85. Manuamorn  2007;  Giné,  Townsend,  and 

Vickery 2008; World Bank 2008e.

86. hochrainer and others 2008.
87. Christen and pearce 2005.
88. Llanto, Geron, and Almario 2007.
89. Kunreuther and Michel-Kerjan 2007; Tol 

1998.

90. World Bank 2005.
91. Mills 2005; Dlugolecki 2008; ABI 2004.
92. Skees 2001.
93. This  raises  important  issues:  land-use 
regulation and codes are required and need to be 
enforced. Mandatory insurance may be required 
by  law  in  high-risk  areas.  There  are  also  equity 
concerns: what to do with people who have lived 
in  high-risk  areas  all  along  but  cannot  afford 
true risk-based premiums?

94. Kunreuther and Michel-Kerjan 2007.
95. Cummins and Mahul 2009.
96. See  Cardenas  and  others  2007  for  an 
example  of  the  use  of  market  instruments  for 
sovereign financial risk management for natural 
disasters in Mexico.

97. Mechler and others 2009.

98. World Bank to Offer Index-based Weather 
Derivative  Contracts,  http://go.worldbank.org/ 
9GXG8E4Gp1 (accessed May 15, 2009).
99. Government of Bangladesh 2008.
100. Bankoff, Frerks, and hilhorst 2004.
101. Dercon 2004.
102. Alderman, hoddinott, and Kinsey 2006; 
Bartlett  2008;  UNICEF  2008;  del  Ninno  and 
Lundberg 2005.

103. Francis and Amuyunzu-Nyamongo 2008; 

Nelson and others 2002.

104. Ensor  and  Berger  2009;  Goulden  and 

others 2009; Gaillard 2007.

105. Adger and others 2005; Orlove, Chiang, 
and  Cane  2000;  Srinivasan  2004; Wilbanks  and 
Kates 1999.

106. Stringer and others, forthcoming; Twom-

low and others 2008.

107. Nelson, Adger, and Brown 2007.
108. Walker and others 2006.
109. Gaiha,  Imai,  and  Kaushik  2001;  Martin 

and prichard 2009.
110. Gibbs 2009.
111. Adger 2003.
112. Berkes and Jolly 2002.
113. Macchi 2008; Tebtebba Foundation 2008.
114. Costello, Gaines, and Lynham 2008.
115. pomeroy and pido 1995.
116. Chhatre and Agrawal, forthcoming.
117. Ostrom 1990; Berkes 2007; Agrawal and 

Ostrom 2001; Larson and Soto 2008.

118. Sobrevila 2008; White and Martin 2002.
119. Bandura  1977;  Levitt  and  March  1988; 
Ellison and Fudenberg 1993; Ellison and Fuden-
berg 1995.

120. Granovetter  1978;  Kanaiaupuni  2000; 

portes and Sensenbrenner 1993.

121. Buskens  and  Yamaguchi  1999;  Rogers 

1995.

122. Foskett and helmsley-Brown 2001.
123. Gillespie 2004.
124. World Bank 2009.
125. Ivanic and Martin 2008.
126. Grosh and others 2008.
127. Lobell and others 2008.
128. Kanbur 2009; Ravallion 2008.
129. Grosh and others 2008.
130. Grosh  and  others  2008;  Alderman  and 

haque 2006.

131. Famine Early Warning Systems Network, 

www.fews.net (accessed May 15, 2009).

132. Alderman and haque 2006; Vakis 2006.
133. hess, Wiseman, and Robertson 2006. 
134. del Ninno, Subbarao, and Milazzo 2009.
135. IEG 2008; Komives and others 2005.
136. World Bank 2008d.
137. World Bank 2006.

114 

WO R L D   D E V E LOpM E N T   R EpO RT   2 0 1 0

138. Myers 2002; Christian Aid 2007.
139. Barnett and Webber 2009.
140. Black 2001; Anthoff and others 2006.
141. Gleditsch, Nordås, and Salehyan 2007.
142. Reuveny 2007.
143. Barnaby 2009.
144. Theisen 2008; Nordås and Gleditsch 2007.
145. WBGU 2008; Campbell and others 2007.
146. de haas 2008.
147. Bartlett and others 2009.

References
ABI (Association of British Insurers). 2004. A 
Changing Climate for Insurance: A Summary 
Report for Chief Executives and Policymakers. 
London: ABI.

Adger, W. N. 2003. “Social Capital, Collective 

Action, and Adaptation to Climate Change.” 
Economic Geography 79 (4): 387–404.

Analysis.” Research Working paper 96, Tyndall 
Center for Climate Change, Norwich, UK.

Awuor, C. B., V. A. Orindi, and A. Adwera. 2008. 

“Climate Change and Coastal Cities: The 
Case of Mombasa, Kenya.” Environment and 
Urbanization 20 (1): 231–42.

Balk, D., G. McGranahan, and B. Anderson. 

2008. “Urbanization and Ecosystems: Current 
patterns and Future Implications.” In The 
New Global Frontier: Urbanization, Poverty 
and Environment in the 21st Century, ed. G. 
Martine, G. McGranahan, M. Montgomery, 
and R. Fernandez-Castilla. London: Earth-
scan.

Bandura, A. 1977. Social Learning Theory. New 

York: General Learning press.

Bankoff, G., G. Frerks, and D. hilhorst. 2004. 

Mapping Vulnerability: Disasters, Development 
and People. London: Earthscan.

Adger, W. N., S. Dessai, M. Goulden, M. hulme, 

Barnaby, W. 2009. “Do Nations Go to War over 

I. Lorenzoni, D. R. Nelson, L. O. Naess, J. 
Wolf, and A. Wreford. 2008. “Are There Social 
Limits to Adaptation to Climate Change?” 
Climatic Change 93 (3–4): 335–54.

Adger, W. N., T. p. hughes, C. Folke, S. R. Car-

penter, and J. Rockstrom. 2005. “Social-
 ecological Resilience to Coastal Disasters.” 
Science 309 (5737): 1036–39.

Agrawal, A., and E. Ostrom. 2001. “Collective 

Action, property Rights, and Decentralization 
in Resource Use in India and Nepal.” Politics 
and Society 29 (4): 485–514.

Alderman, h., and T. haque. 2006. “Counter-
cyclical Safety Nets for the poor and Vulner-
able.” Food Policy 31 (4): 372–83.

Alderman, h., J. hoddinott, and B. Kinsey. 2006. 

“Long Term Consequences of Early Child-
hood Malnutrition.” Oxford Economic Papers 
58 (3): 450–74.

Allan, R. p., and B. J. Soden. 2008. “Atmospheric 

Warming and the Amplification of Extreme 
precipitation Events.” Science 321: 1481–84.
Amin, S. 1995. “Migrations in Contemporary 
Africa: A Retrospective View.” In The Migra-
tion Experience in Africa, ed. J. Baker and T. A. 
Aina. Uppsala: Nordic Africa Institute.

AMWA (Association of Metropolitan Water 

Agencies). 2007. Implications of Climate 
Change for Urban Water Utilities. Washington, 
DC: AMWA.

Anthoff, D., R. J. Nicholls, R. S. J. Tol, and A. T. 
Vafeidis. 2006. “Global and Regional Expo-
sure to Large Rises in Sea-level: A Sensitivity 

Water?” Nature 458: 282–83.

Barnett, J., and M. Webber. 2009. Accommodat-

ing Migration to Promote Adaptation to Cli-
mate Change. Stockholm: Commission on 
Climate Change and Development.

Barreto, M. L., B. Genser, A. Strina, A. M. Assis, 

R. F. Rego, C. A. Teles, M. S. prado, S. M. 
Matos, D. N. Santos, L. A. dos Santos, and S. 
Cairncross. 2007. “Effect of City-wide Sani-
tation programme on Reduction in Rate of 
Childhood Diarrhoea in Northeast Brazil: 
Assessment by Two Cohort Studies.” Lancet 
370: 1622–28.

Bartlett, S. 2008. “Climate Change and Urban 

Children: Impacts and Implications for Adap-
tation in Low and Middle Income Coun-
tries.” Environment and Urbanization 20 (2): 
501–19.

Bartlett, S., D. Dodman, J. haroy, D. Satter-

thwaite, and C. Tacoli. 2009. “Social Aspects 
of Climate Change in Low and Middle 
Income Nations.” paper presented at the 
Cities and Climate Change: Responding 
to an Urgent Agenda. World Bank Fifth 
Urban Research Symposium, Marseille, 
June 28–30.

Bates, B., Z. W. Kundzewicz, S. Wu, and J. palu-

tikof. 2008. “Climate Change and Water.” 
Technical paper, Intergovernmental panel on 
Climate Change, Geneva.

Bazerman, M. h. 2006. “Climate Change as a 
predictable Surprise.” Climatic Change 77: 
179–93.

 

Reducing Human Vulnerability: Helping People Help Themselves 

115

Benson, C., and J. Twigg. 2007. Tools for Main-
streaming Disaster Risk Reduction: Guidance 
Notes for Development Organizations. Geneva: 
proVention Consortium.

Berkes, F. 2007. “Understanding Uncertainty 
and Reducing Vulnerability: Lessons from 
Resilience Thinking.” Natural Hazards 41 (2): 
283–95.

Berkes, F., and D. Jolly. 2002. “Adapting to Cli-

mate Change: Social Ecological Resilience in a 
Canadian Western Arctic Community.” Ecol-
ogy and Society 5 (2): 18.

Bigio, A. G. 2008. “Concept Note: Adapting 

to Climate Change in the Coastal Cities of 
North Africa.” World Bank, Middle East and 
Northern Africa Region, Washington, DC.

Black, R. 2001. “Environmental Refugees: Myth 
or Reality?” New Issues in Refugee Research 
Working paper 34, United Nations high 
Commissioner for Refugees, Geneva.

Botoni, E., and C. Reij. 2009. “La Transforma-
tion Silencieuse de l’Environnement et des 
Systèmes de production au Sahel : Impacts 
des Investissements publics et privés dans la 
Gestion des Ressources Naturelles.” Techni-
cal report, Free University Amsterdam and 
Comité permanent Inter-États de Lutte con-
tre la Sécheresse dans le Sahel (CILSS), Oua-
gadougou, Burkina Faso.

Brunner, R. D., T. A. Steelman, L. Coe-Juell, 
C. M. Cromley, C. M. Edwards, and D. W. 
Tucker. 2005. Adaptive Governance: Integrat-
ing Science, Policy, and Decisions Making. New 
York: Columbia University press.

Bull-Kamanga, L., K. Diagne, A. Lavell, F. Lerise, h. 

MacGregor, A. Maskrey, M. Meshack, M. pel-
ling, h. Reid, D. Satterthwaite, J. Songsore, K. 
Westgate, and A. Yitambe. 2003. “Urban Devel-
opment and the Accumulation of Disaster Risk 
and Other Life-Threatening Risks in Africa.” 
Environment and Urbanization 15 (1): 193–204.

Buskens, V., and K. Yamaguchi. 1999. “A New 

Model for Information Diffusion in hetero-
geneous Social Networks.” Socio-logical Meth-
odology 29 (1): 281–325.

Campbell, K. M., J. Gulledge, J. R. McNeill,  

J. podesta, p. Ogden, L. Fuerth, R. J. Woolsey, 
A. T. J. Lennon, J. Smith, R. Weitz, and D. Mix. 
2007. The Age of Consequences: The Foreign 
Policy and National Security Implications of 
Global Climate Change. Washington, DC: 
Center for a New American Security and the 
Center for Strategic and International Stud-
ies.

Cardenas, V., S. hochrainer, R. Mechler, G. 

pflug, and J. Linnerooth-Bayer. 2007. “Sov-
ereign Financial Disaster Risk Management: 
The Case of Mexico.” Environmental Hazards 
7 (1): 40–53.

CatSalut. 2008. Action Plan to Prevent the Effects 

of a Heat Wave on Health. Barcelona: Gener-
alitat de Catalunya Departament de Salut.
Chhatre, A., and A. Agrawal. Forthcoming. 

“Carbon Storage and Livelihoods Genera-
tion through Improved Governance of Forest 
Commons.” Science. 

Christen, R. p., and D. pearce. 2005. Managing 
Risks and Designing Products for Agricultural 
Microfinance: Feature of an Emerging Model. 
Washington, DC: CGAp; Rome: IFAD.

Christian Aid. 2007. Human Tide: The Real 
Migration Crisis. London: Christian Aid.
CIESIN (Center for International Earth Sci-

ence Information Network). 2005. “Gridded 
population of the World (GpWv3).” CIESIN, 
Columbia University, and Centro Internacio-
nal de Agricultura Tropical, palisades, NY. 
Confalonieri, U., B. Menne, R. Akhtar, K. L. 
Ebi, M. hauengue, R. S. Kovats, B. Revich, 
and A. Woodward. 2007. “human health.” 
In Climate Change 2007: Impacts, Adapta-
tion and Vulnerability. Contribution of Work-
ing Group II to the Fourth Assessment Report 
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change, ed. M. L. parry, O. F. Canziani, J. 
p. palutikof, p. J. van der Linden, and C. E. 
hanson. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Uni-
versity press.

Corburn, J. 2009. “Cities, Climate Change and 

Urban heat Island Mitigation: Localising 
Global Environmental Science.” Urban Studies 
46 (2): 413–27.

Costello, C., S. D. Gaines, and J. Lynham. 2008. 

“Can Catch Shares prevent Fisheries Col-
lapse?” Science 321 (5896): 1678–81.

CRED (Centre for Research on the Epidemi-
ology of Disasters). 2009. “EM-DAT: The 
International Emergency Disasters Database.” 
CRED, Université Catholique de Louvain, 
Ecole de Santé publique, Louvain. 

CSE (Center for Science and Environment). 

2007. “An Ecological Act: A Backgrounder to 
the National Rural Employment Guarantee 
Act (NREGA),” CSE, New Delhi. 

Cumming, G. S., D. h. M. Cumming, and C. L. 
Redman. 2006. “Scale Mismatches in Social-
Ecological Systems: Causes, Consequences, 
and Solutions.” Ecology and Society 11 (1): 14.

116 

WO R L D   D E V E LOpM E N T   R EpO RT   2 0 1 0

Cummins, J. D., and O. Mahul. 2009. Catastro-
phe Risk Financing in Developing Countries. 
Principles for Public Intervention. Washington, 
DC: World Bank.

Dartmouth Flood Observatory. 2009. “Global 
Active Archive of Large Flood Events.” Dart-
mouth College, hanover, Nh. Available at 
www.dartmouth.edu/~floods. Accessed Janu-
ary 19, 2009. 

de haan, A. 2002. “Migration and Livelihoods in 
historical perspectives: A Case Study of Bihar, 
India.” Journal of Development Studies 38 (5): 
115–42.

de haas, h. 2008. “The Complex Role of Migra-
tion in Shifting Rural Livelihoods: A Moroc-
can Case Study.” In Global Migration and 
Development, ed. T. van Naerssen, E. Spaan, 
and A. Zoomers. London: Routledge.

de la Torre, A., p. Fajnzylber, and J. Nash. 2008. 

Low Carbon, High Growth: Latin American 
Responses to Climate Change. Washington, 
DC: World Bank.

del Ninno, C., and M. Lundberg. 2005. “Tread-

ing Water: The Long-term Impact of the 1998 
Flood on Nutrition in Bangladesh.” Economics 
and Human Biology 3 (1): 67–96.

del Ninno, C., K. Subbarao, and A. Milazzo. 

2009. “how to Make public Works Work: A 
Review of the Experiences.” Discussion paper 
0905, Social protection and Labor, World 
Bank, Washington, DC. 

Dercon, S. 2004. Insurance against Poverty. 

Oxford, UK: Oxford University press.

Díaz palacios, J., and L. Miranda. 2005. “Con-
certación (Reaching Agreement) and plan-
ning for Sustainable Development in Ilo, 
peru.” In Reducing Poverty and Sustain-
ing the Environment: The Politics of Local 
Engagement, ed. S. Bass, h. Reid, D. Satter-
thwaite, and p. Steele. London: Earthscan.

Dietz, T., E. Ostrom, and p. C. Stern. 2003. “The 

Struggle to Govern the Commons.” Science 
302 (5652): 1907–12.

Dietz, T., and p. C. Stern, eds. 2008. Public Par-
ticipation in Environmental Assessment and 
Decision Making. Washington, DC: National 
Academies press. 

Dlugolecki, A. 2008. “Climate Change and the 

Insurance Sector.” Geneva Papers on Risk 
and Insurance—Issues and Practice 33 (1): 
71–90.

———. 1995. “Word-of-Mouth Communica-
tion and Social Learning.” Quarterly Journal 
of Economics 110 (1): 93–125.

Enfors, E. I., and L. J. Gordon. 2008. “Dealing 

with Drought: The Challenge of Using Water 
System Technologies to Break Dryland pov-
erty Traps.” Global Environmental Change 18 
(4): 607–16.

Ensor, J., and R. Berger. 2009. “Community-

Based Adaptation and Culture in Theory and 
practice.” In Adapting to Climate Change: 
Thresholds, Values, Governance, ed. N. Adger, 
I. Lorenzoni, and K. L. O’Brien. Cambridge, 
UK: Cambridge University press.

ESA (European Space Agency). 2002. Sustain-
able Development: The Space Contribution: 
From Rio to Johannesburg—Progress Over the 
Last 10 Years. paris: ESA for the Committee 
on Earth Observation Satellites.

Fankhauser, S., N. Martin, and S. prichard. 

Forthcoming. “The Economics of the CDM 
Levy: Revenue potential, Tax Incidence, and 
Distortionary Effects.” Working paper, Lon-
don School of Economics.

FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization) and 

CIFOR (Center for International Forestry 
Research). 2005. “Forests and Floods: Drown-
ing In Fiction or Thriving On Facts?” FAO 
Regional Office for Asia and the pacific publi-
cation 2005/03, Bangkok.

Fay, M., R. I. Block, and J. Ebinger, eds. 2010. 
Adapting to Climate Change in Europe and 
Central Asia. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Ferguson, N. 2005. Mozambique: Disaster Risk 

Management Along the Rio Búzi. Case Study on 
the Background, Concept, and Implementation 
of Disaster Risk Management in the Context of 
the GTZ-Programme for Rural Development 
(PRODER). Duren: German Gesellschaft für 
Technische Zusammenarbeit, Governance and 
Democracy Division.

Folke, C., S. Carpenter, T. Elmqvist, L. Gunder-

son, C. S. holling, B. Walker, J. Bengtsson, 
F. Berkes, J. Colding, K. Danell, M. Falken-
mark, L. Gordon, R. Kasperson, N. Kautsky, 
A. Kinzig, S. Levin, K.-G. Mäler, F. Moberg, 
L. Ohlsson, p. Olsson, E. Ostrom, W. Reid, J. 
Rockström, h. Savenije, and U. Svedin. 2002. 
Resilience and Sustainable Development: Build-
ing Adaptive Capacity in a World of Transfor-
mations. Stockholm: Environmental Advisory 
Council to the Swedish Government.

Ellison, G., and D. Fudenberg. 1993. “Rules of 

Folke, C., T. hahn, p. Olsson, and J. Norberg. 

Thumb for Social Learning.” Journal of Politi-
cal Economy 101 (4): 612–43.

2005. “Adaptive Governance of Social-

 

Reducing Human Vulnerability: Helping People Help Themselves 

117

 ecological Systems.” Annual Review of Envi-
ronment and Resources 30: 441–73.

Foskett, N., and J. hemsley-Brown. 2001. Choos-
ing Futures: Young People’s Decision-Making in 
Education, Training and Career Markets. Lon-
don: RoutledgeFalmer.

Francis, p., and M. Amuyunzu-Nyamongo. 2008. 

“Bitter harvest: The Social Costs of State 
Failure in Rural Kenya.” In Assets, Livelihoods, 
and Social Policy, ed. C. Moser and A. A. Dani. 
Washington, DC: World Bank.

Frumkin, h., and A. J. McMichael. 2008. “Cli-
mate Change and public health: Thinking, 
Communicating, Acting.” American Journal of 
Preventive Medicine 35 (5): 403–10.

Gaiha, R., K. Imai, and p. D. Kaushik. 2001. “On 
the Targeting and Cost Effectiveness of Anti-
poverty programmes in Rural India.” Devel-
opment and Change 32 (2): 309–42.

Gaillard, J.-C. 2007. “Resilience of Traditional 

Societies in Facing Natural hazards.” Disaster 
Prevention and Management 16 (4): 522–44.

Galiani, S., p. Gertler, and E. Schargrodsky. 2005. 

“Water for Life: The Impact of the privatiza-
tion of Water Services on Child Mortality.” 
Journal of Political Economy 113 (1): 83–120.

Gallup, J. L., and J. D. Sachs. 2001. “The Eco-

nomic Burden of Malaria.” American Journal of 
Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 64 (1–2): 85–96.
Geoville Group. 2009. “Spatial Analysis of Natu-
ral hazard and Climate Change Risks in peri-
Urban Expansion Areas of Dakar, Senegal.” 
paper presented at the World Bank Urban 
Week 2009. Washington, DC.

Ghesquiere, F., L. Jamin, and O. Mahul. 2006. 
“Earthquake Vulnerability Reduction pro-
gram in Colombia: A probabilistic Cost-Ben-
efit Analysis.” policy Research Working paper 
3939, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Gibbs, M. T. 2009. “Resilience: What Is It and 
What Does It Mean for Marine policymak-
ers?” Marine Policy 33 (2): 322–31.

Gillespie, S. 2004. “Scaling Up Community-

Driven Development: A Synthesis of Experi-
ence.” FCND Discussion paper 181, Food 
Consumption and Nutrition Division, Inter-
national Food policy Research Institute, 
Washington, DC.

Giné, X., R. Townsend, and J. Vickery. 2008. 

“patterns of Rainfall Insurance participation 
in Rural India.” World Bank Economic Review 
22 (3): 539–66.

Girardet, h. 2008. Cities People Planet: Urban 
Development and Climate Change. 2nd ed. 
Chichester, UK: John Wiley & Sons.

Gleditsch, N., R. Nordås, and I. Salehyan. 2007. 

“Climate Change and Conflict: The Migra-
tion Link.” Coping with Crisis Working paper 
Series, International peace Academy, New 
York (May).

Global humanitarian Forum. 2009. The 

Anatomy of A Silent Crisis. Geneva: Global 
humanitarian Forum.

Goulden, M., L. O. Naess, K. Vincent, and W. 
N. Adger. 2009. “Accessing Diversification, 
Networks and Traditional Resource Manage-
ment as Adaptations to Climate Extremes.” In 
Adapting to Climate Change: Thresholds, Val-
ues, Governance, ed. N. Adger, I. Lorenzoni, 
and K. O’Brien. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University press.

Government of Bangladesh. 2008. Cyclone Sidr 
in Bangladesh: Damage, Loss and Needs Assess-
ment for Disaster Recovery and Reconstruction. 
Dhaka: Government of Bangladesh, World 
Bank, and the European Commission.

Granovetter, M. 1978. “Threshold Models of 
Collective Behavior.” American Journal of 
Sociology 83 (6): 1420–43.

Grosh, M. E., C. del Ninno, E. Tesliuc, and A. 

Ouerghi. 2008. For Protection and Promotion: 
The Design and Implementation of Effective 
Safety Nets. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Groves, D. G., and R. J. Lempert. 2007. “A New 

Analytic Method for Finding policy-Relevant 
Scenarios.” Global Environmental Change 17 
(1): 73–85.

hales, S., N. de Wet, J. Maindonald, and A. 

Woodward. 2002. “potential Effect of popu-
lation and Climate Changes on Global Dis-
tribution of Dengue Fever: An Emperical 
Model.” Lancet 360: 830–34.

hallegatte, S. 2009. “Strategies to Adapt to an 
Uncertain Climate Change.” Global Environ-
mental Change 19 (2): 240–47.

hara, Y., K. Takeuchi, and S. Okubo. 2005. 

“Urbanization Linked with past Agricultural 
Landuse patterns in the Urban Fringe of a 
Deltaic Asian Mega-City: A Case Study in 
Bangkok.” Landscape and Urban Planning 73 
(1): 16–28.

hay, S. I., A. J. Tatem, C. A. Guerra, and R. W. 
Snow. 2006. Population at Malaria Risk in 
Africa: 2005, 2015, and 2030. London: Centre 
for Geographic Medicine, KEMRI/Welcome 
Trust Collaborative programme, University 
of Oxford.

heltberg, R., p. B. Siegel, and S. L. Jorgensen. 

2009. “Addressing human Vulnerability 
to Climate Change: Toward a ‘No-Regrets’ 

118 

WO R L D   D E V E LOpM E N T   R EpO RT   2 0 1 0

Approach.” Global Environmental Change 19 
(1): 89–99.

herrmann, S. M., A. Anyamba, and C. J. Tucker. 
2005. “Recent Trends in Vegetation Dynamics 
in the African Sahel and Their Relationship 
to Climate.” Global Environmental Change 15 
(4): 394–404.

hess, U., W. Wiseman, and T. Robertson. 2006. 
Ethiopia: Integrated Risk Financing to Protect 
Livelihoods and Foster Development. Rome: 
World Food programme.

hochrainer, S., R. Mechler, G. pflug, and A. 
Lotsch. 2008. “Investigating the Impact of 
Climate Change on the Robustness of Index-
Based Microinsurance in Malawi.” policy 
Research Working paper 4631, World Bank, 
Washington, DC.

hoeppe, p., and E. N. Gurenko. 2006. “Scientific 
and Economic Rationales for Innovative Cli-
mate Insurance Solutions.” Climate Policy 6: 
607–20.

horton, R., C. herweijer, C. Rosenzweig, J. 

Liu, V. Gornitz, and A. C. Ruane. 2008. “Sea 
Level Rise projections for Current Genera-
tion CGCMs Based on the Semi-Empirical 
Method.” Geophysical Research Letters 
35:L02715. DOI:10.1029/2007GL032486.
IDMC (Internal Displacement Monitoring 

Centre). 2008. Internal Displacement: Global 
Overview of Trends and Developments in 2008. 
Geneva: IDMC.

IEG (Independent Evaluation Group). 2008. 
Climate Change and the World Bank Group-
Phase I: An Evaluation of World Bank Win-
Win Energy Policy Reforms. Washington, DC: 
IEG Knowledge programs and Evaluation 
Capacity Development.

Ivanic, M., and W. Martin. 2008. “Implications 

of higher Global Food prices for poverty 
in Low-Income Countries.” policy Research 
Working paper 4594, World Bank, Washing-
ton, DC.

Kanaiaupuni, S. M. 2000. “Reframing the Migra-
tion Question: An Analysis of Men, Women, 
and Gender in Mexico.” Social Forces 78 (4): 
1311–47.

Kanbur, R. 2009. “Macro Crises and Targeting 

Transfers to the poor.” Cornell University, 
Ithaca, NY. 

Keim, M. E. 2008. “Building human Resilience: 

The Role of public health preparedness 
and Response as an Adaptation to Climate 
Change.” American Journal of Preventive Med-
icine 35 (5): 508–16.

Keiser, J., J. Utzinger, M. C. Castro, T. A. Smith, 

M. Tanner, and B. h. Singer. 2004. “Urban-
ization in Sub-Saharan Africa and Implica-
tions for Malaria Control.” American Journal 
of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 71 (S2): 
118–27.

Knowlton, K., G. Solomon, and M. Rotkin-

Ellman. 2009. “Fever pitch: Mosquito-Borne 
Dengue Fever Threat Spreading in The Amer-
icas.” Issue paper, Natural Resources Defense 
Council, New York (July).

Kolmannskog, V. O. 2008. Future Floods of Refu-
gees: A Comment on Climate Change, Conflict 
and Forced Migration. Oslo: Norwegian Refu-
gee Council.

Komives, K., V. Foster, J. halpern, Q. Wodon, 

and R. Abdullah. 2005. Water, Electricity, and 
the Poor: Who Benefits from Utility Subsidies? 
Washington, DC: World Bank.

Kopf, S., M. ha-Duong, and S. hallegatte. 2008. 

“Using Maps of City Analogues to Display 
and Interpret Climate Change Scenarios and 
Their Uncertainty.” Natural Hazards and 
Earth System Science 8 (4): 905–18.

Kunreuther, h., and E. Michel-Kerjan. 2007. 

“Climate Change, Insurability of Large-Scale 
Disasters and the Emerging Liability Chal-
lenge.” Working paper 12821, National Bureau 
of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

Larson, A., and F. Soto. 2008. “Decentralization 

of Natural Resource Governance Regimes.” 
Annual Review of Environment and Resources 
33: 213–39.

Laryea-Adjei, G. 2000. “Building Capacity for 

Urban Management in Ghana: Some Critical 
Considerations.” Habitat International 24 (4): 
391–402.

Laukkonen, J., p. K. Blanco, J. Lenhart, M. 

Keiner, B. Cavric, and C. Kinuthia-Njenga. 
2009. “Combining Climate Change Adapta-
tion and Mitigation Measures at the Local 
Level.” Habitat International 33 (3): 287–92.

Lempert, R. J. 2007. “Creating Constituencies for 
Long-term Radical Change.” Wagner Research 
Brief 2, New York University, New York.

Lempert, R. J., and M. T. Collins. 2007. “Man-

aging the Risk of Uncertain Threshold 
Responses: Comparison of Robust, Opti-
mum, and precautionary Approaches.” Risk 
Analysis 27 (4): 1009–26.

Lempert, R. J., and M. E. Schlesinger. 2000. 
“Robust Strategies for Abating Climate 
Change.” Climatic Change 45 (3–4): 387–401.

 

Reducing Human Vulnerability: Helping People Help Themselves 

119

Levitt, B., and J. G. March. 1988. “Organiza-

tional Learning.” Annual Review of Sociology 
14: 319–38.

Massey, D., and F. Espana. 1987. “The Social 
process of Internationl Migration.” Science 
237 (4816): 733–38.

Lewis, M. 2007. “In Nature’s Casino.” New York 

McEvoy, D., S. Lindley, and J. handley. 2006. 

Times Magazine, August 26, 2007.

Ligeti, E., J. penney, and I. Wieditz. 2007. Cities 
Preparing for Climate Change: A Study of Six 
Urban Regions. Toronto: The Clean Air part-
nership.

Lin, h. 2008. Proposal Report on Flood Haz-

ard Mapping Project in Taihu Basin. China: 
Taihu Basin Authority of Ministry of Water 
Resources.

Linnerooth-Bayer, J., and R. Mechler. 2006. 

“Insurance for Assisting Adaptation to Cli-
mate Change in Developing Countries: A 
proposed Strategy.” Climate Policy 6: 621–36.

Llanto, G. M., M. p. Geron, and J. Almario. 

2007. “Developing principles for the Regu-
lation of Microinsurance (philippine Case 
Study).” Discussion paper 2007-26, philip-
pine Institute for Development Studies, 
Makati City.

Lobell, D. B., M. Burke, C. Tebaldi, M. D. Mas-

trandrea, W. p. Falcon, and R. L. Naylor. 2008. 
“prioritizing Climate Change Adaptation 
Needs for Food Security in 2030.” Science 319 
(5863): 607–10.

Luber, G., and M. McGeehin. 2008. “Climate 

Change and Extreme heat Events.” American 
Journal of Preventive Medicine 35 (5): 429–35.

Lucas, R. E. B. 2005. International Migration 
and Economic Development: Lessons from 
Low-Income Countries: Executive Summary. 
Stockholm: Almkvist & Wiksell International, 
Expert Group on Development Issues.

———. 2006. “Migration and Economic Devel-

opment in Africa: A Review of Evidence.” 
Journal of African Economies 15 (2): 337–95.

Macchi, M. 2008. Indigenous and Traditional 

People and Climate Change: Vulnerability and 
Adaptation. Gland, Switzerland: International 
Union for Conservation of Nature.

Mahul, O., and J. Skees. 2007. “Managing Agri-
cultural Risk at the Country Level: The Case 
of Index-based Livestock Insurance in Mon-
golia.” policy Research Working paper 4325, 
World Bank, Washington, DC.

Manuamorn, O. p. 2007. “Scaling Up Microin-
surance: The Case of Weather Insurance for 
Smallholders in India.” Agriculture and Rural 
Development Discussion paper 36, World 
Bank, Washington, DC.

“Adaptation and Mitigation in Urban 
Areas: Synergies and Conflicts.” Proceedings 
of the Institution of Civil Engineers 159 (4): 
185–91.

McGranahan, G., D. Balk, and B. Anderson. 

2007. “The Rising Tide: Assessing the Risks of 
Climate Change and human Settlements in 
Low Elevation Coastal Zones.” Environment 
and Urbanization 19 (1): 17–37.

McMichael, A., D. Campbell-Lendrum, S. 

Kovats, S. Edwards, p. Wilkinson, T. Wilson, 
R. Nicholls, S. hales, F. Tanser, D. Le Sueur, 
M. Schlesinger, and N. Andronova. 2004. 
“Global Climate Change.” In Comparative 
Quantification of Health Risks: Global and 
Regional Burden of Disease Attributable to 
Selected Major Risk Factors, vol. 2, ed. M. 
Ezzati, A. D. Lopez, A. Rodgers, and C. J. L. 
Murray. Geneva: World health Organiza-
tion.

Mearns, R. 2004. “Sustaining Livelihoods on 

Mongolia’s pastoral Commons: Insights from 
a participatory poverty Assessment.” Develop-
ment and Change 35 (1): 107–39.

Mechler, R., S. hochrainer, G. pflug, K. Williges, 
and A. Lotsch. 2009. “Assessing Financial Vul-
nerability to Climate-Related Natural haz-
ards.” Background paper for the WDR 2010.

Mercy Corps. 2008. “Reducing Flood Risk 

through a Job Creation Scheme.” In Linking 
Disaster Risk Reduction and Poverty Reduc-
tion: Good Practices and Lessons Learned: 
2008, ed. Global Network of NGOs for Disas-
ter Risk Reduction. Geneva: United Nations 
Development programme and International 
Strategy for Disaster Reduction (ISDR).

Migration DRC. 2007. “Global Migrant Origin 
Database.” Development Research Centre on 
Migration, Globalisation and poverty, Univer-
sity of Sussex, Brighton. 

Millennium Ecosystem Assessment. 2005. Eco-

systems and Human Well-Being: Synthesis. 
Washington, DC: World Resources Institute.

Mills, E. 2005. “Insurance in a Climate of 
Change.” Science 309 (5737): 1040–44.

———. 2007. “Synergism between Climate 
Change Mitigation and Adaptation: Insur-
ance perspective.” Mitigation and Adaptation 
Strategies for Global Change 12: 809–42.

Milly, p. C. D., R. T. Wetherald, K. A. Dunne, 

and T. L. Delworth. 2002. “Increasing Risk of 

120 

WO R L D   D E V E LOpM E N T   R EpO RT   2 0 1 0

Great Floods in a Changing Climate.” Nature 
415 (6871): 514–17.

content&task=view&id=264&Itemid=363 
(accessed July 2009). 

Myers, N. 2002. “Environmental Refugees: A 

parry, M., O. F. Canziani, J. p. palutikof, and oth-

Growing phenomenon of the 21st Century.” 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society 
B 357 (1420): 609–13.

NRC (National Research Council of the National 

Academies). 2006. Facing Hazards and Disas-
ters. Understanding Human Dimension. Wash-
ington, DC: National Academies press.

———. 2007a. Contributions of Land Remote 

Sensing for Decisions about Food Security and 
Human Health. Washington, DC: National 
Academies press.

———. 2007b. Earth Science and Applica-

tion from Space: National Imperatives for the 
Next Decade and Beyond. Washington, DC: 
National Academies press.

Nelson, D. R., W. N. Adger, and K. Brown. 2007. 

“Adaptation to Environmental Change: 
Contributions of a Resilience Framework.” 
Annual Review of Environment and Resources 
32: 395–419.

Nelson, V., K. Meadows, T. Cannon, J. Morton, 
and A. Martin. 2002. “Uncertain prediction, 
Invisible Impacts, and the Need to Main-
stream Gender in Climate Change Adapta-
tions.” Gender and Development 10 (2): 51–59.

Nicholls, R. J., p. p. Wong, V. Burkett, C. D. 

Woodroffe, and J. hay. 2008. “Climate Change 
and Coastal Vulnerability Assessment: Sce-
narios for Integrated Assessment.” Sustain-
ability Science 3 (1): 89–102.

Nordås, R., and N. Gleditsch. 2007. “Climate 

Change and Conflict.” Political Geography 26 
(6): 627–38.

Olsson, p., C. Folke, and F. Berkes. 2004. “Adap-
tive Comanagement for Building Resilience 
in Social-Ecological Systems.” Environmental 
Management 34 (1): 75–90.

Orlove, B. S., J. h. Chiang, and M. A. Cane. 

2000. “Forecasting Andean Rainfall and Crop 
Yield from the Influence of El Niño on pleia-
des Visibility.” Nature 403 (6765): 68–71.

Ostrom, E. 1990. Governing the Commons: The 
Evolution of Institutions for Collective Action. 
New York: Cambridge University press.

pahl-Wostl, C. 2007. “Transitions toward Adap-

tive Management of Water Facing Climate 
and Global Change.” Water Resources Man-
agement 21: 49–62.

pAhO (pan American health Organization). 

2009. “Dengue.” Washington, DC, http://
new.paho.org/hq/index.php?option=com_ 

ers. 2007. “Technical Summary.” In Climate 
Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulner-
ability. Contribution of Working Group II to 
the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergov-
ernmental Panel on Climate Change, ed. M. 
parry, O. F. Canziani, J. p. palutikof, p. J. van 
der Linden, and C. E. hanson. Cambridge, 
UK: Cambridge University press.

parsons, C. R., R. Skeldon, T. L. Walmsley, and L. 
A. Winters. 2007. “Quantifying International 
Migration: A Database of Bilateral Migrant 
Stocks.” policy Research Working paper 4165, 
World Bank, Washington, DC.

pelling, M. 1997. “What Determines Vulnerabil-

ity to Floods: A Case Study in Georgetown, 
Guyana.” Environment and Urbanization 9 
(1): 203–26.

pomeroy, R. S., and M. D. pido. 1995. “Initia-
tives towards Fisheries Co-management in 
the philippines: The Case of San Miguel Bay.” 
Marine Policy 19 (3): 213–26.

portes, A., and J. Sensenbrenner. 1993. “Embed-

dedness and Immigration: Notes on the 
Social Determinants of Economic Actions.” 
American Journal of Sociology 98 (6): 13–20.
Raadgever, G. T., E. Mostert, N. Kranz, E. Inter-

wies, and J. G. Timmerman. 2008. “Assess-
ing Management Regimes in Transboundary 
River Basins: Do They Support Adaptive 
Management.” Ecology and Society 13 (1): 14.

Rahmstorf, S., A. Cazenave, J. A. Church, J. E. 

hansen, R. F. Keeling, D. E. parker, and R. C. J. 
Somerville. 2007. “Recent Climate Observa-
tions Compared to projections.” Science 316 
(5825): 709.

Ranger, N., R. Muir-Wood, and S. priya. 2009. 

“Assessing Extreme Climate hazards and 
Options for Risk Mitigation and Adaptation 
in the Developing World.” Background paper 
for the WDR 2010.

Ravallion, M. 2008. “Bailing Out the World’s 

poorest.” policy Research Working paper 
4763, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Ravallion, M., S. Chen, and p. Sangraula. 2007. 
“New Evidence on the Urbanization of pov-
erty.” policy Research Working paper 4199, 
World Bank, Washington, DC.

Repetto, R. 2008. “The Climate Crisis and the 
Adaptation Myth.” Yale School of Forestry 
and Environmental Studies Working paper 
13, Yale University, New haven, CT.

 

Reducing Human Vulnerability: Helping People Help Themselves 

121

Reuveny, R. 2007. “Climate Change Induced 
Migration and Violent Conflict.” Political 
Geography 26 (6): 656–73.

Ribot, J. C. Forthcoming. “Vulnerability Does 

Not Just Fall from the Sky: Toward Multi-
Scale pro-poor Climate policy.” In The Social 
Dimensions of Climate Change: Equity and 
Vulnerability in a Warming World, ed. R. 
Mearns and A. Norton. Washington, DC: 
World Bank.

Richmond, T. 2008. “The Current Status and 

Future potential of personalized Diagnostics: 
Streamlining a Customized process.” Biotech-
nology Annual Review 14: 411–22.

Roberts, D. 2008. “Thinking Globally, Acting 
Locally: Institutionalizing Climate Change 
at the Local Government Level in Durban, 
South Africa.” Environment and Urbanization 
20 (2): 521–37.

Robine, J.-M., S. L. K. Cheung, S. Le Roy, h. Van 
Oyen, C. Griffiths, J.-p. Michel, and F. R. herr-
mann. 2008. “Death Toll Exceeded 70,000 in 
Europe during the Summer of 2003.” Comptes 
Rendus Biologies 331 (2): 171–78.

Rogers, D., S. E. Randolph, R. W. Snow, and S. 
I. hay. 2002. “Satellite Imagery in the Study 
and Forecast of Malaria.” Nature 415 (6872): 
710–15.

Rogers, E. 1995. Diffusion of Innovations. New 

York: Free press.

Roman, A. 2008. “Curitiba, Brazil.” In Encyclo-
pedia of Earth—Environmental Information 
Coalition. Washington, DC: National Council 
for Science and the Environment. 

Satterthwaite, D. 2008. “The Social and politi-

cal Basis for Citizen Action on Urban poverty 
Reduction.” Environment and Urbanization 20 
(2): 307–18.

Satterthwaite, D., S. huq, M. pelling, A. Reid, 
and R. Lankao. 2007. Adapting to Climate 
Change in Urban Areas: The Possibilities and 
Constraints in Low and Middle Income Coun-
tries. London: International Institutte for 
Environment and Development.

Seo, J.-K. 2009. “Balanced National Development 
Strategies: The Construction of Innovation Cit-
ies in Korea.” Land Use Policy 26 (3): 649–61.
Simms, A., and h. Reid. 2006. Up in Smoke? 

Latin America and the Caribbean: The Threat 
from Climate Chnage to the Environment 
and Human Development. London: Working 
Group on Climate Change and Develop-
ment, International Institute for Environ-
ment and Development, New Economics 
Foundation.

Skees, J. R. 2001. “The Bad harvest: Crop Insur-
ance Reform has Become a Good Idea Gone 
Awry.” Regulation 24 (1): 16–21.

Sobrevila, C. 2008. The Role of Indigenous People 
in Biodiversity Conservation: The Natural but 
Often Forgotten Partners. Washington, DC: 
World Bank.

Solomon, S., D. Qin, M. Manning, R. B. Alley, T. 
Berntsen, N. L. Bindoff, Z. Chen, A. Chidthai-
song, J. M. Gregory, G. C. hegerl, M. hei-
mann, B. hewitson, B. J. hoskins, F. Joos, J. 
Jouzel, V. Kattsov, U. Lohmann, T. Matsuno, 
M. Molina, N. Nicholls, J. Overpeck, G. Raga, 
V. Ramaswamy, J. Ren, M. Rusticucci, R. 
Somerville, T. F. Stocker, p. Whetton, R. A. 
Wood, and D. Wratt. 2007. “Technical Sum-
mary.” In Climate Change 2007: The Physical 
Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group 
I to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Inter-
governmental Panel on Climate Change, ed. S. 
Solomon, D. Qin, M. Manning, Z. Chen, M. 
Marquis, K. B. Averyt, M. Tignor, and h. L. 
Miller. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univer-
sity press.

Sorensen, N., N. van hear, and p. Engberg-

pedersen. 2003. “Migration, Development 
and Conflict: State-of-the-Art Overview.” In 
The Migration-Development Nexus, ed. N. van 
hear and N. Sorensen. New York and Geneva: 
United Nations and International Organiza-
tion for Migration.

Srinivasan, A. 2004. “Local Knowledge for 

Facilitating Adaptation to Climate Change 
in Asia and the pacific: policy Implica-
tions.” Working paper 2004-002, Institute for 
Global Environmental Strategies, Kanagawa, 
Japan.

Stringer, L. C., J. C. Dyer, M. S. Reed, A. J. 

Dougill, C. Twyman, and D. Mkwambisi. 
Forthcoming. “Adaptations to Climate 
Change, Drought and Desertification: Local 
Insights to Enhance policy in Southern 
Africa.” Environmental Science and Policy. 

Swiss Re. 2007. “World Insurance in 2006: pre-

miums Came Back to Life.” Zurich: Sigma 
(April).

Tebtebba Foundation. 2008. Guide on Climate 
Change and Indigenous Peoples. Baguio City, 
the philippines: Tebtebba Foundation.

Theisen, O. M. 2008. “Blood and Soil? Resource 

Scarcity and Internal Armed Conflict Revis-
ited.” Journal of Peace Research 45 (6): 801–18.

Tol, R. S. J. 1998. “Climate Change and Insur-
ance: A Critical Appraisal.” Energy Policy 26 
(3): 257–62.

122 

WO R L D   D E V E LOpM E N T   R EpO RT   2 0 1 0

Tompkins, E. L., and W. N. Adger. 2004. “Does 
Adaptive Management of Natural Resources 
Enhance Resilience to Climate Change?” Ecol-
ogy and Society 9 (2): 10.

Tuñón, M. 2006. Internal Labour Migration in 

China. Beijing: International Labour Organi-
sation.

Twomlow, S., F. T. Mugabe, M. Mwale, R. 

Delve, D. Nanja, p. Carberry, and M. how-
den. 2008. “Building Adaptive Capac-
ity to Cope with Increasing Vulnerability 
Due to Climatic Change in Africa: A New 
Approach.” Physics and Chemistry of the 
Earth 33 (8–13): 780–87.

UNICEF (United Nations Children’s Fund). 

2008. Climate Change and Children: A Human 
Security Challenge. Florence: UNICEF.

United Nations. 2005. Trends in Total Migrant 
Stock: The 2005 Revision. New York: United 
Nations population Division, Department of 
Economic and Social Affairs.

———. 2006. The State of the World’s Refugees: 
Human Displacement in the New Millennium. 
Oxford, UK: United Nations high Commis-
sioner for Refugees.

———. 2007. Drought Risk Reduction Frame-

work and Practices: Contribution to the Imple-
mentation of the Hyogo Framework for Action. 
Geneva: United Nations International Strat-
egy for Disaster Reduction.

———. 2008a. State of the World’s Cities 2008/9. 

Harmonious Cities. London: Earthscan.

———. 2008b. World Urbanization Prospects: 

The 2007 Revision. New York: United Nations 
population Division, Department of Eco-
nomic and Social Affairs.

———. 2009. 2009 Global Assessment Report on 

Disaster Risk Reduction: Risk and Poverty in 
a Changing Climate. Geneva: United Nations 
International Strategy for Disaster Reduction.
Vakis, R. 2006. “Complementing Natural Disas-

ters Management: The Role of Social pro-
tection.” Social protection Discussion paper 
0543, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Walker, B., L. h. Gunderson, A. Kinzig, C. Folke, 

S. Carpenter, and L. Schultz. 2006. “A hand-
ful of heuristics and Some propositions for 
Understanding Resilience in Social-Ecological 
Systems.” Ecology and Society 11 (1):13.
Wang, R., and Y. E. Yaping. 2004. “Eco-city 

Development in China.” Ambio: A Journal of 
the Human Environment 33 (6): 341–42.

Ward, R. E. T, C. herweijer, N. patmore, and 

R. Muir-Wood. 2008. “The Role of Insurers 

in promoting Adaptation to the Impacts of 
Climate Change.” Geneva Papers on Risk and 
Insurance Issues and Practice 33 (1): 133–39.
WBGU (German Advisory Council on Global 
Change). 2008. Climate Change as a Security 
Risk. London: Earthscan.

Welsh Assembly Government. 2008. Heatwave 
Plan for Wales: A Framework for Preparedness 
and Response. Cardiff, UK: Welsh Assembly 
Government Department for public health 
and health professions.

White, A., and A. Martin. 2002. Who Owns the 
World’s Forests? Forest Tenure and Public For-
ests in Transition. Washington, DC: Forest 
Trends and Center for International Environ-
mental Law.

WhO (World health Organization). 2005. 

Health and Climate Change: The Now and 
How. A Policy Action Guide. Geneva: WhO.
———. 2008. Protecting Health from Climate 

Change: World Health Day 2008. Geneva: 
WhO.

Wilbanks, T. J., and R. W. Kates. 1999. “Global 
Change in Local places: how Scale Matters.” 
Climatic Change 43 (3): 601–28.

World Bank. 2005. Managing Agricultural Pro-

duction Risk: Innovations in Developing Coun-
tries. Washington, DC: World Bank.

———. 2006. Making the New Indonesia Work 

for the Poor. Washington, DC: World Bank.

———. 2008a. Climate Resilient Cities: A Primer 
on Reducing Vulnerabilities to Climate Chnage 
Impacts and Strengthening Disaster Risk Man-
agement in East Asian Cities. Washington, DC: 
World Bank.

———. 2008b. Environmental Health and Child 

Survival: Epidemiology, Economics, Experi-
ences. Washington, DC: World Bank.

———. 2008c. Project Appraisal Document: 

Regional Adaptation to the Impact of Rapid 
Glacier Retreat in the Tropical Andes. Wash-
ington, DC: World Bank.

———. 2008d. Reforming Energy Price Subsidies 
and Reinforcing Social Protection: Some Design 
Issues. Washington, DC: World Bank.

———. 2008e. The Caribbean Catastrophe Risk 
Insurance Facility: Providing Immediate Fund-
ing after Natural Disasters. Washington, DC: 
World Bank.

———. 2008f. World Development Indicators 

2008. Washington, DC: World Bank.

———. 2008g. World Development Report 2009. 
Reshaping Economic Geography. Washington, 
DC: World Bank.

 

Reducing Human Vulnerability: Helping People Help Themselves 

123

———. 2009. Development and Climate 

WRI (World Resources Institute), United 

Change: A Strategic Framework for the World 
Bank Group: Technical Report. Washington, 
DC: World Bank.

World Climate programme. 2007. Climate Ser-

vices Crucial for Early Warning of Malaria Epi-
demics. Geneva: World Climate programme.
World Economic Forum. 2008. Building Resil-
ience to Natural Disasters: A Framework for 
Private Sector Engagement. Geneva: World 
Economic Forum, World Bank, and United 
Nations International Strategy for Disaster 
Reduction.

Nations Development programme, United 
Nations Environment programme, and World 
Bank. 2008. World Resources 2008: Roots of 
Resilience: Growing the Wealth of the Poor. 
Washington, DC: WRI.

Yip, S. C. T. 2008. “planning for Eco-Cities in 

China: Visions, Approaches and Challenges.” 
paper presented at the 44th ISOCARp Con-
gress. The Netherlands.

focus B

Biodiversity and ecosystem services  
in a changing climate

Earth supports a complex web of 3 million to 10 million species of plants and animals1 and an even greater number of micro-
organisms. For the first time a single species, humankind, is in a position to preserve or destroy the very functioning of that 
web.2 In people’s daily lives only a few species appear to matter. A few dozen species provide most basic nutrition—20 percent 
of human calorie intake comes from rice,3 20 percent comes from wheat;4 a few species of cattle, poultry, and pigs supply 70 
percent of animal protein. Only among the 20 percent of animal protein from fish and shell fish is a diversity of dietary species 
found.5 Humans are estimated to appropriate a third of the Sun’s energy that is converted to plant material.6

But human well- being depends on 
a multitude of species whose complex 
interactions  within  well- functioning 
ecosystems purify water, pollinate flow-
ers,  decompose  wastes,  maintain  soil 
fertility, buffer water flows and weather 
extremes, and fulfill social and cultural 
needs, among many others (box FB.1). 
The Millennium Ecosystem Assessment 
concluded that of 24 ecosystem services 
examined,  15  are  being  degraded  or 
used  unsustainably  (table  FB.1).  The 
main drivers of degradation are land-
 use conversion, most often to agricul-
ture  or  aquaculture;  excess  nutrients; 
and climate change. Many consequences 
of degradation are focused in particular 
regions, with the poor disproportion-

ately affected because they depend most 
directly on ecosystem services.7

Threats to biodiversity and 
ecosystem services
In the past two centuries or so, human-
kind has become the driver of one of 
the major extinction events on Earth. 
Appropriating major parts of the energy 
flow through the food web and altering 
the fabric of the land cover to favor the 
species of greatest value have increased 
the  rate  of  species  extinction  100  to 
1,000  times  the  rate  before  human 
dominance  of  Earth.8  In  the  past  few 
decades people have become aware of 
their  impacts  on  biodiversity  and  the 
threats of those impacts. Most countries 

Box FB.1      What is biodiversity? What are ecosystem services?

Biodiversity is the variety of all forms 
of life, including genes, populations, 
species, and ecosystems. Biodiversity 
underpins the services that ecosystems 
provide and has value for current uses, 
possible future uses (option values), and 
intrinsic worth. 

The number of species is often used 

as an indicator of the diversity of an 
area, though it only crudely captures 
the genetic diversity and the complex-
ity of ecosystem interactions. There are 
5 million to 30 million distinct species 
on Earth; most are microorganisms and 
only about 1.75 million have been for-
mally described. Two-thirds of the diver-
sity is in the tropics; a 25 hectare plot in 
Ecuador was found to have more tree 
species than exist in all of the United 

States and Canada, along with more 
than half the number of mammal and 
bird species in those two countries.

Ecosystem services are the ecosystem 

processes or functions that have value 
to individuals or society. The Millennium 
Ecosystem Assessment described five 
major categories of ecosystem services: 
provisioning, such as the production of 
food and water; regulating, such as the 
control of climate and disease; support-
ing, such as nutrient cycles and crop 
pollination; cultural, such as spiritual and 
recreational benefits; and preserving, 
such as the maintenance of diversity.

Sources: Millennium Ecosystem Assess-
ment 2005; Kraft, Valencia, and Ackerly 
2008; Gitay and others 2002.

have biodiversity protection programs 
of varying degrees of effectiveness, and 
several international treaties and agree-
ments coordinate measures to slow or 
halt the loss of biodiversity. 

Climate change imposes an additional 
threat. Earth’s biodiversity has adjusted 
to  past  changes  in  climate—even  to 
rapid changes—through a mix of spe-
cies migration, extinctions, and oppor-
tunities for new species. But the rate of 
change that will continue over the next 
century or so, whatever the mitigation 
efforts, far exceeds past rates, other than 
catastrophic  extinctions  such  as  after 
major meteorite events. For example, the 
rates of tree species migration during the 
waxing and waning of the most recent 
ice age about 10,000 years ago were esti-
mated  to  be  about  0.3–0.5  kilometers 
a  year.  This  is  only  a  tenth  the  rate  of 
change in climate zones that will occur 
over the coming century.9 Some species 
will migrate fast enough to thrive in a 
new location, but many will not keep up, 
especially in the fragmented landscapes 
of today, and many more will not survive 
the  dramatic  reshuffling  of  ecosystem 
composition  that  will  accompany  cli-
mate change (map FB.1). Best estimates 
of  species  losses  suggest  that  about  10 
percent  of  species  will  be  condemned 
to extinction for each 1°C temperature 
rise,10 with even greater numbers at risk 
of significant decline.11

Efforts  to  mitigate  climate  change 
through land- based activities may sup-
port  the  maintenance  of  biodiversity 
and ecosystem services or threaten them 
further.  Carbon  stocks  in  and  on  the 
land can be increased through reforesta-

 

Biodiversity and ecosystem services in a changing climate 

125

Table FB.1      Assessment of the current trend in the global state of major services provided by ecosystems

Service
Provisioning services
Food

Fiber

Genetic resources
Biochemicals, natural medicines, 
pharmaceuticals
Fresh water

Regulating services
Air quality regulation
Climate regulation

Water regulation
Erosion regulation
Water purification and waste treatment
Disease regulation
Pest regulation
Pollination
Natural hazard regulation
Cultural services
Spiritual and religious values
Aesthetic values
Recreation and ecotourism
Source: Millennium Ecosystem Assessment 2005.

Subcategory

Status

Notes

Crops

Livestock

Capture fisheries

Aquaculture
Wild foods

Timber

Cotton, hemp, silk

Wood fuel

Global

Regional and local

↑
↑
↓
↑
↓
+/–
+/–
↓
↓
↓

↓

↓
↑
↓

+/–
↓
↓
+/–
↓
↓
↓

↓
↓
+/–

Substantial production increase
Substantial production increase
Declining production due to overharvest
Substantial production increase
Declining production
Forest loss in some regions, growth in others
Declining production of some fibers, growth in others
Declining production
Lost through extinction and crop genetic resource loss
Lost through extinction, overharvest

Unsustainable use for drinking, industry, and irrigation; amount of hydro 
energy unchanged, but dams increase ability to use that energy

Decline in ability of atmosphere to cleanse itself
Globally, ecosystems have been a net sink for carbon since mid-century
Preponderance of negative impacts (for example, changes in land cover 
can affect local temperature and precipitation)
Varies depending on ecosystem change and location
Increased soil degradation
Declining water quality
Varies depending on ecosystem change
Natural control degraded through pesticide use
Apparent global decline in abundance of pollinators
Loss of natural buffers (wetlands, mangroves)

Rapid decline in sacred groves and species
Decline in quantity and quality of natural lands
More areas accessible but many degraded

tion and revegetation and through such 
agricultural practices as reduced soil till-
age. These activities can create complex 
and  diverse  landscapes  supportive  of 
biodiversity. But poorly planned mitiga-
tion  actions,  such  as  clearing  forest  or 
woodland  to  produce  biofuels,  can  be 
counterproductive to both goals. Large 
dams  can  provide  multiple  benefits 
through irrigation and energy produc-
tion but also can threaten biodiversity 
through direct inundation and dramatic 
changes in downstream river flows and 
the dependent ecosystems.

What can be done?
Changes  in  priorities  and  active  and 
adaptive management will be needed 
to  maintain  biodiversity  under  a 
changing  climate.  In  some  places, 
active management will take the form 
of further improving protection from 
human  interference,  while  in  others 
conservation  may  need  to  include 
interventions in species and ecosystem 
processes that are stronger and more 
hands- on  than  today’s.  In  all  cases 
biodiversity  values  must  be  actively 
considered—in  the  face  of  climate 

change and in the context of compet-
ing uses for land or sea. 

This requires an ongoing process to 
anticipate how ecosystems will respond 
to a changing climate while interacting 
with  other  environmental  modifiers. 
Some  species  will  die  out,  others  will 
persist,  and  some  will  migrate,  form-
ing new combinations of species. The 
ability  to  anticipate  such  change  will 
always be incomplete and far from per-
fect, so any management actions must 
be within a framework that is flexible 
and adaptive.

126 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 0

Map FB.1      While many of the projected ecosystem changes are in boreal or desert areas that are not biodiversity hotspots, there are still substantial 
areas of overlap and concern

Projected ecosystem shift

Biodiversity hotspot

Significant overlap between biodiversity
hotspot and ecosystem shift region

Source: WDR team based on Myers and others (2000) and Fischlin and others (2007). 
Note: The map shows the overlap between biodiversity hotspots—regions with exceptional concentrations of endemic species undergoing exceptional loss of habitat (Conservation 
International and Myers and others 2000)—and the projected changes in terrestrial ecosystems by 2100 relative to the year 2000, as presented by the Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change in Fischlin and others (2007), figure 4.3 (a), p. 238. The changes should be taken as only indicative of the range of possible ecosystem changes and include gains or 
losses of forest cover, grassland, shrub- and woodland, herbaceous cover, and desert amelioration. 

Some species loss is inevitable, and 
some species may need to be protected 
in botanical and zoological gardens or 
in seed banks. It is essential that key spe-
cies in the delivery of ecosystem services 
are identified and, if necessary, actively 
managed.  Proactive  management  of 
land  and  the  seas  under  a  changing 
climate  is  a  fairly  new  and  ill- defined 
process. Relatively little knowledge has 
been developed on identifying realistic 
management  responses,  so  significant 
sharing of learning, best practices, and 
capacity building will be necessary.

Conservation reserves
Any extensions or modifications to the 
conservation priority areas (conservation 
reserves) need to capture altitudinal, lati-

tudinal, moisture, and soil gradients. Pro-
posals to expand or modify conservation 
reserves could lead to clashes over priori-
ties for land allocation and for resources 
within  biodiversity  management  (such 
as money for land acquisition versus that 
for active habitat manipulation). Power-
ful tools exist for selecting the optimal 
allocation of lands to achieve particular 
conservation  goals  that  could  balance 
competing demands.12

But protected areas alone are not the 
solution to climate change. The current 
reserve network has increased rapidly 
over  the  past  decade  to  cover  about  
12 percent of Earth’s land area,13 but it 
is still inadequate to conserve biodiver-
sity. Given demographic pressures and 
competing  land  uses,  protected  areas 

are not likely to grow significantly. This 
means that the lands that surround and 
connect  areas  with  high  conservation 
values and priorities (the environmen-
tal matrix), and the people who man-
age or depend on these lands will be of 
increasing  importance  for  the  fate  of 
species in a changing climate.

There will be a greater need for more 
flexible biodiversity conservation strat-
egies that take the interests of different 
social groups into account in biodiver-
sity management strategies. So far the 
principal  actors  in  creating  protected 
areas have been nongovernmental orga-
nizations and central governments. To 
ensure the flexibility needed to main-
tain biodiversity, a wide range of man-
agers, owners, and stakeholders of these 

 

Biodiversity and ecosystem services in a changing climate 

127

matrix lands and waters will need to be 
engaged in management partnerships. 
Incentives and compensation for these 
actors  may  be  required  to  maintain  a 
matrix  that  provides  refugia  and  cor-
ridors for species. Some of the options 
include  extending  payments  for  envi-
ronmental services, “habitat banking,”14 
and further exploration of “rights- based 
approaches to resources access,” as used 
in some fisheries.

Biodiversity planning and management
A plan for actively managing the viabil-
ity of ecosystems as the climate changes 
should be developed for all conserva-
tion  lands  and  waters  and  significant 
areas of habitat. Elements include:

•	 Climate-	smart	 management	 plans	
for coping with major stressors, such 
as fire, pests, and nutrient loads.

•	 Decision	procedures	and	triggers	for	
changing  management  priorities  in 
the face of climate change. For exam-
ple, if a conservation area is affected 
by  two  fires  within  a  short  period, 
making  the  reestablishment  of  the 
previous habitat and values unlikely, 
then a program to actively manage the 
transition to an alternative ecosystem 
structure should be implemented.
Integration	into	the	plans	of	the	rights,	
interests, and contributions of indig-
enous  peoples  and  others  directly 
dependent on these lands or waters.

•	

Such proactive planning is rare even 
in the developed world.15 Canada has a 
proactive management approach to cli-
mate change in the face of rapid warming 
in its northern regions.16 Other countries 
are outlining some of the core principles 
of  proactive  management:  forecasting 
changes; managing regional biodiversity, 
including conservation areas and their 
surrounding landscape; and setting pri-
orities to support decision making in the 
face of inevitable change.17 But in many 
parts  of  the  world,  basic  biodiversity 
management is still inadequate. In 1999 
the International Union for Conserva-
tion of Nature determined that less than 
a quarter of protected areas in 10 devel-

oping countries were adequately man-
aged and that more than 10 percent of 
protected areas were already thoroughly 
degraded.18

Community- based conservation
Community- based  conservation  pro-
grams  could  be  adopted  on  a  much 
larger scale. These programs attempt to 
enhance local user rights and steward-
ship  over  natural  resources,  allowing 
those nearest to natural resources, who 
already share in the costs of conserva-
tion  (such  as  wildlife  depredation  of 
crops)  to  share  in  its  benefits  as  well. 
But  such  programs  are  not  panaceas, 
and more effort needs to go into design-
ing effective programs. 

Community participation is the sine 
qua non of successful biodiversity con-
servation  in  the  developing  world,  but 
long- term success stories (such as har-
vesting sea turtle eggs in Costa Rica and 
Brazil) are rare.19 Certain elements clearly 
contribute to the success that some pro-
grams have  had  regionally,  such  as  the 
wildlife- focused  programs  in  southern 
Africa.  These  elements  include  stable 
governments, high resource value (iconic 
wildlife), strong economies that support 
export- oriented resource use (including 
tourism and safari hunting), low human 
population  densities,  good  local  gov-
ernance,  and  government  policies  that 
offer a social safety net to buffer against 
lean years. Even when these conditions 
are met, the benefits in some countries 
typically do not accrue to the poor.20

Managing marine ecosystems
Effective  land  management  also  has 
benefits  for  marine  ecosystems.  Sedi-
mentation  and  eutrophication  caused 
by  land- based  runoff  reduce  the  resil-
ience of marine ecosystems such as coral 
reefs.21 The economic value of coral reefs 
is often greater than the value of the agri-
culture on the land that affects them.22
For fisheries the main tools for man-
aging biodiversity are ecosystem- based 
fisheries  management,23  integrated 
coastal  zone  management  including 
protected  marine  areas,24  and  bind-
ing  international  cooperation  within 

the framework of the Law of the Sea.25 
Fisheries are seen as being in crisis, and 
fisheries mismanagement is blamed. But 
the fundamental requirements for fish-
eries management are known.26 Climate 
change may provide an additional impe-
tus to implement reforms, primarily by 
reducing fishing fleet overcapacity and 
fishing effort to sustainable levels.27 A 
sustainable, long- term harvesting strat-
egy  must  be  implemented—one  that 
assesses  stock  exploitation  in  relation 
to reference points that take uncertainty 
and climate change into account.28 The 
key challenge is to translate high- level 
policy goals into operational actions for 
sustainable fisheries.29

Payment for ecosystem services
Payment for ecosystem services has for 
some time been considered an efficient 
and equitable way to achieve many out-
comes related to conservation and the 
provision of ecosystem services. Exam-
ples include paying upstream land man-
agers to manage the watershed in ways 
that  protect  ecosystem  services  such 
as flows of clean water, sharing profits 
from game reserves with surrounding 
landholders whose property is damaged 
by the game, and most recently paying 
landholders to increase or maintain the 
carbon stocks on their land. Box FB.2 
provides examples of the provision of 
multiple  services  of  conservation  and 
carbon sequestration.

Experience  suggests  that,  because 
payments  are  provided  only  if  a  ser-
vice is rendered, user- financed schemes 
tend to be better tailored to local needs, 
better monitored, and better enforced 
than  similar  government- financed 
programs.30

A  significant  opportunity  for  addi-
tional  payments  for  conservation  and 
improved  land  management  may  flow 
from the scheme for Reduced Emissions 
from Deforestation and forest Degrada-
tion (REDD) under consideration by the 
United Nations Framework Convention 
on  Climate  Change.  REDD  seeks  to 
lower emissions by paying countries for 
reducing  deforestation  and  degrada-

128 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 0

Box FB.2      Payment for ecosystem and mitigation services

Two successful payment programs are 
the Moldova Soil Conservation project 
and the bird conservation and water-
shed protection program in Bolivia’s 
Los Negros Valley, both funded through 
the World Bank BioCarbon Fund. In Mol-
dova, 20,000 hectares of degraded and 
eroded state-owned and communal 
agricultural lands are being reforested, 
reducing erosion and providing for-
est products to local communities. 

The project is expected to sequester 
about 2.5 million tons of carbon dioxide 
equivalent by 2017. In Bolivia, farmers 
bordering Amboró National Park are 
paid to protect a watershed containing 
the threatened cloud forest habitat of 
11 species of migratory birds, with ben-
efits both for local biodiversity and for 
dry-season water supplies.

Source: World Bank Carbon Finance Unit. 

ments, and dams to control river flows 
all  present  threats  to  biodiversity.32 
Adaptation goals can often be achieved 
through better management of ecosys-
tems rather than through physical and 
engineering interventions; for example, 
coastal ecosystems can be more effec-
tive as buffer zones against storm surges 
than  sea  walls.  Other  options  include 
catchment and flood plain management 
to adjust downstream water flows and 
the  introduction  of  climate- resilient 
agroecosystems and dry- land pastoral-
ism to support robust livelihoods. 

Ecosystem- based  adaptation  aims 
to  increase  the  resilience  and  reduce 
the  vulnerability  of  people  to  climate 
change through the conservation, res-
toration,  and  management  of  ecosys-
tems. When integrated into an overall 
adaptation  strategy,  it  can  deliver  a 
cost- effective  contribution  to  adapta-
tion and generate societal benefits.

In  addition  to  the  direct  benefits 
for adaptation, ecosystem- based adap-
tation activities can also have indirect 
benefits  for  people,  biodiversity,  and 
mitigation.  For  example,  the  restora-
tion  of  mangrove  systems  to  provide 
shoreline protection from storm surges 

not recognized and if they do not have 
secure rights to their lands, territories, 
and  resources  (box  FB.3).  Experience 
from community- based natural resource 
management initiatives has shown that 
the involvement of local people, includ-
ing indigenous peoples, in participatory 
monitoring of natural resources can pro-
vide accurate, cost- effective, and locally 
anchored information on forest biomass 
and natural resource trends. 

Ecosystem- based adaptation
“Hard”  adaptation  measures  such  as 
coastal  defense  walls,  river  embank-

tion. These payments could be part of 
a market- based mechanism within an 
enhanced Clean Development Mecha-
nism  process,  or  they  could  be  non-
market payments from a new financial 
mechanism that does not impinge on 
the emissions compliance mechanisms. 
The challenge of REDD is in its imple-
mentation, which is discussed in more 
detail in chapter 6.

REDD could make a significant con-
tribution  to  both  the  conservation  of 
biodiversity and mitigation of climate 
change if it protects biologically diverse 
areas that have high carbon stocks and 
are at high risk of deforestation. Tech-
niques  for  identifying  such  areas  are 
available  and  could  be  used  to  guide 
the  allocation  of  financial  resources 
(map FB.2).31

To  deal  effectively  with  the  chang-
ing  impacts  and  competing  uses  of 
ecosystems  under  a  changing  climate, 
governments  will  need  to  introduce 
strong,  locally  appropriate  policies, 
measures,  and  incentives  to  change 
long- established  behaviors,  some  of 
which are already illegal. These actions 
will  run  counter  to  some  community 
preferences,  so  the  balance  between 
appropriate regulation and incentives is 
critical. REDD holds potential benefits 
for forest- dwelling indigenous and local 
communities,  but  a  number  of  condi-
tions will need to be met for these ben-
efits to be achieved. Indigenous peoples, 
for example, are unlikely to benefit from 
REDD if their identities and rights are 

Box FB.3      Excerpts from the Declaration of Indigenous 
Peoples on Climate Change

“All initiatives under Reducing Emissions 
from Deforestation and Degradation 
(REDD) must secure the recognition and 
implementation of the rights of Indig-
enous Peoples, including security of land 
tenure, recognition of land title according 
to traditional ways, uses and customary 
laws and the multiple benefits of forests 
for climate, ecosystems, and peoples 
before taking any action.” (Article 5)

“We call for adequate and direct fund-
ing in developed and developing States 
and for a fund to be created to enable 
Indigenous Peoples’ full and effective 
participation in all climate processes, 
including adaptation, mitigation, 
monitoring, and transfer of appropri-
ate technologies, in order to foster our 
empowerment, capacity building, and 

education. We strongly urge relevant 
United Nations bodies to facilitate and 
fund the participation, education, and 
capacity building of Indigenous youth 
and women to ensure engagement in 
all international and national processes 
related to climate change.” (Article 7)

“We offer to share with humanity our 
Traditional Knowledge, innovations, and 
practices relevant to climate change, 
provided our fundamental rights as 
intergenerational guardians of this 
knowledge are fully recognized and 
respected. We reiterate the urgent need 
for collective action.” (Concluding Para).
The declaration was issued during the 

Indigenous Peoples Global Summit on 
Climate Change held in Anchorage on 
April 24, 2009.

 

Biodiversity and ecosystem services in a changing climate 

129

IBRD 37135
September 2009
Focus 2.2

Map FB.2      Unprotected areas at high risk of deforestation and with high carbon stocks should be 
priority areas to benefit from a REDD mechanism.

Kalimantan Timur,
Kalimantan Timur,
INDONESIA
INDONESIA

Province boundary
International boundary

Deforestation threat class/Carbon category

Low threat / Medium carbon

Moderate threat / Medium carbon

High threat / Medium carbon

Low threat / High carbon

Moderate threat / High carbon

High threat / High carbon

Protected area

Non-forest in 2003

No data

Sources: Brown and others 1993; Harris and others 2009.
Note: A recent study for the East Kalimantan region of Indonesia used GEOMOD and a database of carbon stocks 
in Indonesia’s tropical forests to identify the best areas for REDD activities. The resulting map identifies areas with 
high deforestation threat that also have high carbon stocks. The overlay of the existing or proposed protected areas 
allows decision makers to see where to direct financial resources and focus the protection efforts to get the most 
benefits under a REDD mechanism (namely, the dark red areas—high threat/high carbon—not included within the 
boundaries of already existing protected areas).

can also increase fishery opportunities 
and sequester carbon. Ecosystem- based 
adaptation  options  are  often  more 
accessible to the rural poor, women, and 

other  vulnerable  groups  than  options 
based on infrastructure and engineer-
ing. Consistent with community- based 
approaches  to  adaptation,  ecosystem-

 based adaptation builds effectively on 
local knowledge and needs. 

Ecosystem- based  adaptation  may 
require giving priority to some ecosys-
tem  services  at  the  expense  of  others. 
Using  wetlands  for  coastal  protection 
may require emphasis on silt accumu-
lation  and  stabilization,  for  example, 
possibly  at  some  expense  to  wildlife 
and  recreation.  Slope  stabilization 
with  dense  shrubbery  is  an  effective 
ecosystem- based adaptation to increas-
ing  rainfall  intensity  under  climate 
change.  However,  in  the  dry  periods 
often  associated  with  the  increasingly 
variable rainfall patterns under climate 
change  the  slopes  may  be  exposed  to 
wildfires  that  destroy  the  shrubs  and 
lead to disastrous reversals of the adap-
tation goals. So, ecosystem- based adap-
tation  must  be  assessed  for  risk  and 
cost-effectiveness.

Notes

1. McGinley 2007.
2. Vitousek and others 1999.
3. Fitzgerald, McCouch, and Hall 2009.
4. Brown 2002.
5. WHO and FAO 2009.
6. Haberl 1997.
7. Millennium Ecosystem Assessment 2005.
8. Lawton and May 1995.
9. England  and  others  (2004)  estimated 
the average rate of glacial retreat to be 0.1 kilo-
meter a year about 8,000 years ago during the 
last ice age, which ultimately placed a con-
straint  on  how  fast  species  could  migrate 
poleward.

10. Convention  on  Biological  Diversity 

2009; Fischlin and others 2007.
11. Foden and others 2008.
12. Bode and others 2008; Joseph, Malo-
ney,  and  Possingham  2008;  McCarthy  and 
Possingham 2007.

13. UNEP-WCMC 2008.
14. This  is  a  form  of  trading  high-
 conservation- value  lands.  Some  holders 
of such lands will choose to place them in 
a  habitat  bank.  If  a  need  arises  to  damage 
similar land elsewhere, such as for highway 
easements,  the  project  proponents  must 
buy the rights to land of equivalent conser-
vation value from the bank.

15. Heller and Zavaleta 2009.
16. Welch 2005.

130 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 0

17. Hannah  and  others  2002;  Hannah, 

Midgley, and Miller 2002.

18. Dudley and Stolton 1999.
19. Campbell, Haalboom, and Trow 2007.
20. Bandyopadhyay and Tembo 2009.
21. Smith, Gilmour, and Heyward 2008.
22. Gordon 2007.
23. FAO  2003;  FAO  2005;  Stiansen  and 

others 2005.

24. Halpern 2003; Harmelin-Vivien and 

others 2008.

25. Lodge and others 2007.
26. Cunningham and Bostock 2005.
27. OECD 2008; World Bank 2008.
28. Beddington, Agnew, and Clark 2007.
29. FAO  2003;  FAO  2005;  ICES  2008a; 

ICES 2008b.

30. Wunder, Engel, and Pagiola 2008.
31. Brown  and  others  1993;  Harris  and 

others 2009.

32. This section draws upon material being 
prepared  by  the  Ad  Hoc  Technical  Expert 
Group  on  Biodiversity  and  Climate  Change 
2009 for the Convention on Biological Diver-
sity and the UN Framework Convention on 
Climate Change.

References
Bandyopadhyay, S., and G. Tembo. 2009. 

“Household Welfare and Natural 
Resource Management around National 
Parks in Zambia.” Policy Research Work-
ing Paper Series 4932, World Bank, 
Washington, DC.

Beddington, J. R., D. J. Agnew, and C. W. 
Clark. 2007. “Current Problems in the 
Management of Marine Fisheries.” Sci-
ence 316 (5832): 1713–16.

Bode, M., K. A. Wilson, T. M. Brooks, W. R. 
Turner, R. A. Mittermeier, M. F. McBride, 
E. C. Underwood, and H. P. Possingham. 
2008. “Cost-Effective Global Conserva-
tion Spending Is Robust to Taxonomic 
Group.” Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences 105 (17): 6498–501.
Brown, S., L. R. Iverson, A. Prasad, and L. 

Dawning. 1993. “Geographical Distribu-
tion of Carbon in Biomass and Soils of 
Tropical Asian Forests.” Geocarto Inter-
national 4: 45–59.

Brown, T. A. 2002. Genomes. Oxford: John 

Wiley & Sons.

Campbell, L. M., B. J. Haalboom, and J. 

Trow. 2007. “Sustainability of Commu-
nity-Based Conservation: Sea Turtle Egg 
Harvesting in Ostional (Costa Rica) Ten 

Years Later.” Environmental Conservation 
34 (2): 122–31.

Convention on Biological Diversity. 2009. 

Draft Findings of the Ad Hoc Technical 
Expert Group on Biodiversity and Climate 
Change. Montreal: Convention on Bio-
logical Diversity.

Cunningham, S., and T. Bostock. 2005. Suc-
cessful Fisheries Management. Issues, Case 
Studies and Perspectives. Delft, The Neth-
erlands: Eburon Academic Publishers.

Dudley, N., and S. Stolton. 1999. “Conver-

sion of Paper Parks to Effective Man-
agement: Developing a Target.” Paper 
presented at the Joint Workshop of 
the IUCN/WWF Forest Innovations 
Project and the World Commission on 
Protected Areas in association with the 
WWF-World Bank Alliance and the  
Forests for Life Campaign. June 14.  
Turrialba, Costa Rica.

England, J. H., N. Atkinson, A. S. Dyke,  

D. J. A. Evans, and M. Zreda. 2004. “Late 
Wisconsinan Buildup and Wastage of 
the Innuitian Ice Sheet across Southern 
Ellesmere Island, Nunavut.” Canadian 
Journal of Earth Sciences 41 (1): 39–61.

FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization). 
2003. “The Ecosystem Approach to Fish-
eries: Issues, Terminology, Principles, 
Institutional Foundations, Implementa-
tion and Outlook.” Fisheries Technical 
Paper 443, FAO, Rome.

———. 2005. Putting Into Practice the Eco-
system Approach to Fisheries. Rome: FAO.

Fischlin, A., G. F. Midgley, J. T. Price, R. 

Leemans, B. Gopal, C. Turley, M. D. A. 
Rounsevell, O. P. Dube, J. Tarazona, and 
A. A. Velichko. 2007. “Ecosystems, Their 
Properties, Goods and Services.” In Cli-
mate Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation 
and Vulnerability. Contribution of Work-
ing Group II to the Fourth Assessment 
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel 
on Climate Change, ed. M. Parry, O. F. 
Canziani, J. P. Palutikof, P. J. van der Lin-
den, and C. E. Hanson. Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge University Press.

Fitzgerald, M. A., S. R. McCouch, and  
R. D. Hall. 2009. “Not Just a Grain of 
Rice: The Quest for Quality.” Trends in 
Plant Science 14 (3): 133–39.

Foden, W., G. Mace, J.-C. Vie, A. Angulo, 

S. Butchart, L. DeVantier, H. Dublin, 
A. Gutsche, S. Stuart, and E. Turak. 

2008. “Species Susceptibility to Climate 
Change Impacts.” In The 2008 Review of 
the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species, 
ed. J.-C. Vie, C. Hilton-Taylor, and S. N. 
Stuart. Gland, Switzerland: International 
Union for Conservation of Nature.

Gitay, H., A. Suarez, R. T. Watson, and D. 
J. Dokken, eds. 2002. Climate Change 
and Biodiversity. Technical Paper of the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change, IPCC Secretariat, Geneva. 

Gordon, I. J. 2007. “Linking Land to Ocean: 

Feedbacks in the Management of Socio-
Ecological Systems in the Great Barrier 
Reef Catchments.” Hydrobiologia 591 
(1): 25–33.

Haberl, H. 1997. “Human Appropriation of 

Net Primary Production as an Environ-
mental Indicator: Implications for Sustain-
able Development.” Ambio 26 (3): 143–46.
Halpern, B. S. 2003. “The Impact of Marine 

Reserves: Do Reserves Work and Does 
Reserve Size Matter?” Ecological Applica-
tions 13 (1): S117–37.

Hannah, L., T. Lovejoy, G. Midgley, W. 

Bond, M. Bush, J. Lovett, D. Scott, and 
F. I. Woodward. 2002. “Conservation 
of Biodiversity in a Changing Climate.” 
Conservation Biology 16 (1): 264–68.
Hannah, L., G. Midgley, and D. Miller. 

2002. “Climate Change-Integrated Con-
servation Strategies.” Global Ecology and 
Biogeography 11 (6): 485–95.

Harmelin-Vivien, M., L. Le Direach, J. 
Bayle-Sempere, E. Charbonnel, J. A. 
Garcia- Charton, D. Ody, A. Perez-Ruzafa, 
O. Renones, P. Sanchez-Jerez, and C. Valle. 
2008. “Gradients of Abundance and Bio-
mass across Reserve Boundaries in Six 
Mediterranean Marine Protected Areas: 
Evidence of Fish Spillover?” Biological 
Conservation 141 (7): 1829–39.

Harris, N. L., S. Petrova, F. Stolle, and S. 

Brown. 2009. “Identifying Optimal Areas 
for REDD Intervention: East Kaliman-
tan, Indonesia, as a Case Study.” Environ-
mental Research Letters 3:035006, doi:10.
1088/1748-9326/3/3/035006.

Heller, N. E., and E. S. Zavaleta. 2009. “Bio-

diversity Management in the Face of 
Climate Change: A Review of 22 Years of 
Recommendations.” Biological Conserva-
tion 142 (1): 14–32.

ICES (International Council for the Explo-

ration of the Sea). 2008a. ICES Advice 

 

Biodiversity and ecosystem services in a changing climate 

131

Book 9: Widely Distributed and Migra-
tory Stocks. Copenhagen: ICES Advisory 
Committee.

Environmental Information Coalition, 
National Council for Science and Envi-
ronment.

———. 2008b. ICES Insight Issue No. 45. 

Copenhagen: ICES.

Joseph, L. N., R. F. Maloney, and H. P. Pos-
singham. 2008. “Optimal Allocation of 
Resources among Threatened Species: A 
Project Prioritization Protocol.” Conser-
vation Biology 23 (2): 328–38.

Kraft, N. J. B., R. Valencia, and D. D. Ack-

erly. 2008. “Functional Traits and Niche-
Based Tree Community Assembly in an 
Amazonian Forest.” Science 322 (5901): 
580–82.

Lawton, J. H., and R. M. May. 1995. Extinction 
Rates. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Lodge, M. W., D. Anderson, T. Lobach, G. 

Munro, K. Sainsbury, and A. Willock. 
2007. Recommended Best Practices for 
Regional Fisheries Management Orga-
nizations. London: Chatham House 
for the Royal Institute of International 
Affairs.

McCarthy, M. A., and H. P. Possingham. 

2007. “Active Adaptive Management for 
Conservation.” Conservation Biology 21 
(4): 956–63.

McGinley, M. 2007. Species Richness. Wash-

ington, DC: Encyclopedia of Earth—

Millennium Ecosystem Assessment. 2005. 
Ecosystems and Human Well-Being: Syn-
thesis Report. Washington, DC: World 
Resources Institute.

Myers, N., R. A. Mittermeier, C. G. Mitter-
meier, G. A. B. da Fonseca, and J. Kent. 
2000. “Biodiversity Hotspots for Conser-
vation Priorities.” Nature 403: 853–58.
OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-
operation and Development). 2008. 
Recommendation of the Council on the 
Design and Implementation of Decom-
missioning Schemes in the Fishing Sector. 
Paris: OECD.

Smith, L. D., J. P. Gilmour, and A. J. Hey-
ward. 2008. “Resilience of Coral Com-
munities on an Isolated System of Reefs 
following Catastrophic Mass-Bleaching.” 
Coral Reefs 27 (1): 197–205.

Stiansen, J. E., B. Bogstad, P. Budgell, P. 

Dalpadado, H. Gjosaeter, K. Hiis Hauge, 
R. Ingvaldsen, H. Loeng, M. Mauritzen, 
S. Mehl, G. Ottersen, M. Skogen, and 
E. K. Stenevik. 2005. Status Report on 
the Barents Sea Ecosystem 2004–2005. 
Bergen, Norway: Institute of Marine 
Research (IMR).

UNEP-WCMC ((United Nations Environ-

ment Program–World Conservation 
Monitoring Center). 2008. State of the 
World’s Protected Areas 2007: An Annual 
Review of Global Conservation Progress. 
Cambridge, UK: UNEP-WCMC.

Vitousek, P. M., H. A. Mooney, J. Lub-

chenco, and J. M. Melillo. 1999. “Human 
Domination of Earth’s Ecosystems.” Sci-
ence 277 (5325): 494–99.

Welch, D. 2005. “What Should Protected 
Area Managers Do in the Face of Cli-
mate Change?” The George Wright 
Forum 22 (1): 75–93.

WHO and FAO (World Health Organization 
and Food and Agriculture Organization). 
2009. “Global and Regional Food Con-
sumption Patterns and Trends.” In Diet, 
Nutrition and the Prevention of Chronic Dis-
eases. Geneva and Rome: WHO and FAO.

World Bank. 2008. The Sunken Billions: 

The Economic Justification for Fisheries 
Reform. Washington, DC: World Bank 
and FAO.

Wunder, S., S. Engel, and S. Pagiola. 2008. 
“Taking Stock: A Comparative Analysis 
of Payments for Environmental Services 
Programs in Developed and Developing 
Countries.” Ecological Economics 65 (4): 
834–52.

ChApTer 3

Managing Land and Water  
to Feed Nine Billion People  
and Protect Natural Systems

Climate  change  is  already  affect-

ing  the  natural  and  managed 
systems—forests, wetlands, coral 
reefs, agriculture, fisheries—that 
societies  depend  on  to  provide  food,  fuel, 
and fiber, and for many other services. It will 
depress agricultural yields in many regions, 
making it harder to meet the world’s grow-
ing food needs. It comes as the world faces 
intensified competition for land, water, bio-
diversity, fish, and other natural resources. At 
the same time, societies will be under pres-
sure to reduce the 30 percent of greenhouse 
gas  emissions  that  come  from  agriculture, 
deforestation,  land- use  change,  and  forest 
degradation. 

To  meet  the  competing  demands  and 
reduce vulnerability to climate change, soci-
eties will need to balance producing more 
from their natural resources with protect-
ing these resources. That means managing 

Key messages
Climate change will make it harder to produce enough food for the world’s growing population, 
and will alter the timing, availability, and quality of water resources. To avoid encroaching into 
already-stressed ecosystems, societies will have to almost double the existing rate of agricul-
tural productivity growth while minimizing the associated environmental damage. This requires 
dedicated efforts to deploy known but neglected practices, identify crop varieties able to 
withstand climate shocks, diversify rural livelihoods, improve management of forests, and invest 
in information systems. Countries will need to cooperate to manage shared water resources and 
fisheries and to improve food trade. Getting basic policies right matters, but new technologies 
and practices are also emerging. Financial incentives will help. Some countries are redirecting 
their agricultural subsidies to support environmental actions, and future credits for carbon stored 
in trees and soils could benefit emission reductions and conservation goals. 

water, land, forests, fisheries, and biodiver-
sity more efficiently to obtain the services 
and products societies need without further 
damaging these resources through overuse, 
pollution, or encroachment. 

Water  will  have  to  be  used  more  effi-
ciently. To do that, managers need to think 
on basin- wide scales and to devise efficient 
and flexible ways to allocate water among 
competing quantity and quality demands 
for human use (such as energy, agriculture, 
fisheries, and urban consumption) and for 
healthy  ecosystems  (such  as  forests,  wet-
lands, and oceans).

Countries  also  need  to  get  more  from 
their  agriculture.  The  rate  of  increase  in 
yields for key agricultural commodities has 
been  declining  since  the  1960s.  Countries 
will have to reverse that trend if the world is 
to meet its food needs in the face of climate 
change. Models vary, but all show the need 
for a marked increase in productivity.1 That 
increase in productivity cannot come at the 
expense of soil, water, or biodiversity as it has 
so often in the past. So countries will need 
to  accelerate  research,  enhance  extension 
services, and improve market infrastructure 
to get crops to market. But they also need 
to give farmers incentives to reduce carbon 
emissions from soil and deforestation. And 
they need to help farmers hedge against an 
uncertain  climate  by  diversifying  income 
sources and genetic traits of crops, and bet-
ter integrate biodiversity into the agricultural 
landscape.

134 

WOrL D   De VeLOpMeN T  r e pOr

T   2 0 1 0

Applying  climate- smart  practices  will 
hinge  on  managing  biodiversity  better—
integrating  natural  habitats  into  rural 
landscapes,  protecting  wetlands,  and 
maintaining the water storage provided by 
aquifers. Increasingly, countries are mak-
ing use of techniques that improve soil and 
water productivity. But these innovations 
will bear fruit only if decisions are based 
on solid intersectoral analysis and only if 
users have the right incentives—stemming 
from  policies,  institutions,  and  market 
conditions. 

Many natural resources cross borders. As 
climate change makes resources harder to 
manage, and growing populations increase 
demand, countries will need to cooperate 
more  intensively  to  manage  international 
waters, forests, and fisheries. All countries 
will  turn  more  frequently  to  the  inter-
national  agricultural  market  and  so  will 
benefit from a number of measures—from 
stock  management  to  more  competitive 
procurement  techniques  to  customs  and 
port logistics—that make food trade more 
reliable and efficient. 

Climate  change  also  puts  a  premium 
on  information  about  natural  resources. 
Information—traditional and new, inter-
national and local—will have a high payoff 
under a more variable and more uncertain 
climate,  where  the  stakes  are  higher  and 
making  decisions  is  more  complicated. 
Information  supports  resource  manage-
ment, food production, and better trade. 
If societies generate information they can 
trust about their resources and can get it 
to the people who can use it, from inter-
national river basin authorities to farmers 
in their fields, those people can make more 
informed choices.

Many of these solutions, long advocated 
in  the  natural  resource  literature,  have 
been frustratingly slow in coming to frui-
tion. But three new factors, all related to cli-
mate change, could provide new incentives. 
First, food prices are expected to increase 
as a result of more climate shocks as well 
as from growing demand. Increasing food 
prices should spur innovation to increase 
productivity. Second, it may be possible to 
extend  carbon  markets  to  pay  farmers  to 
store carbon in soil. This step would create 

incentives  to  conserve  forests  and  adopt 
more sustainable farming techniques. The 
techniques are not yet proven at the needed 
scale,  but  the  potential  is  great,  and  the 
additional benefits for agricultural produc-
tivity and poverty reduction are substan-
tial. At a high enough carbon price, global 
emission reductions from agriculture could 
equal reductions from the energy sector (see 
overview, box 8).2 Third, countries could 
change  the  way  they  support  agriculture. 
rich countries provide $258 billion annu-
ally  in  agriculture  support,3  more  than 
half of which depends only on the amount 
of  crop  produced  or  input  used.  Though 
politically  difficult,  countries  are  begin-
ning to change the terms of these subsidies 
to  encourage  implementation  of  climate-
 smart practices on a large scale.

This  chapter  first  discusses  what  can 
be  done  at  the  national  level  to  increase 
productivity  of  agriculture  and  fisheries 
while  more  effectively  protecting  natural 
resources.  It  next  discusses  what  can  be 
done  to  support  national  efforts,  focus-
ing  on  international  cooperation  and  the 
essential  role  of  information  both  at  the 
global and the local level. Then it focuses 
on how incentives might change to acceler-
ate implementation of beneficial practices 
and to help societies balance the need for 
increased  production  with  better  protec-
tion of natural resources. 

Put in place the fundamentals for 
natural resource management
An  extensive 
literature  recommends 
strengthening the policy and institutional 
conditions that influence how people man-
age  agriculture,  aquaculture,  and  healthy 
ecosystems. Several measures can increase 
productivity in all sectors, while protecting 
long- term ecological health. None of these 
approaches functions alone. All require the 
support  of  the  others  to  work  effectively, 
and any change in one can alter the whole 
system. 

Several themes recur across sectors, cli-

mates, and income groups.
•	 Innovative  decision- making  tools  allow 
users to determine the impacts of differ-
ent actions on natural resources. 

 

Managing Land and Water to Feed Nine Billion People and Protect Natural Systems 

135

•	 Research and development that produce 
new  technologies  and  adapt  them  to 
local  conditions  can  improve  resource 
management,  as  can  advisory  services 
that help users learn about the options 
available to them. 

•	 Property  rights  give  users  incentives  to 

protect or invest in their resources.

•	 Pricing  resources  in  a  way  that  reflects 
their  full  value  gives  incentives  to  use 
them efficiently. 

•	 Well- regulated markets are important for 
many agricultural and natural resource 
functions; infrastructure is also critical 
so that producers can access those mar-
kets effectively. 

•	 Strong institutions are important for set-

ting and enforcing rules.

•	 Information, at all levels, permits users 

and managers to make better choices. 

These  fundamentals  apply  to  water,  agri-
culture, and fisheries, as discussed in this 
chapter. 

To understand how these drivers affect 
the incentives of a particular community, 
consider farmers on the plains of the Oum 
er rbia river basin in Morocco. engineers 
have designed a feasible drip irrigation sys-
tem that would allow these farmers to gen-
erate  higher  revenue  from  the  water  they 
receive (by increasing yields or switching to 
higher-value crops). economists have fig-
ured out that it will be profitable. hydrolo-
gists have calculated how much water they 
can safely allocate to these farmers without 
neglecting environmental needs. Sociolo-
gists have talked to the farmers and found 
that 80 percent of them want to invest in 
this technology. Marketing specialists have 
talked to agroprocessors who want to buy 
the  new  crops.  And  the  government  is 
willing  to  pay  for  a  large  share.  But  even 
here,  getting  things  moving  is  fiendishly 
difficult. 

It is not worth investing in new, improved 
pipes between the dam and the field unless 
most farmers will install the drip irrigation 
on their fields. Yet the farmers will not put 
down a deposit on the drip systems until they 
are convinced that the new pipes will really 
be laid and the water will really flow. They 
also need information about how to use the 

new  systems.  The  irrigation  agency,  used 
to  providing  advice  to  farmers,  is  moving 
toward contracting advisory services out to 
private firms. It will have to find, contract, 
and supervise these firms—tasks that require 
a very different set of skills. And the farmers 
will need to trust these new advisors as well.
Farmers’  choices  of  crops  are  deter-
mined  in  part  by  government  price  sup-
ports for sugar and wheat, which reduce the 
incentives to switch to other crops such as 
higher-value fruits and vegetables. If inter-
national trade agreements make it easier to 
ensure a reliable market for new crops, the 
farmers might make the switch. But with-
out good roads, refrigerated transport, and 
state- of- the- art  packaging  facilities,  the 
fruit and vegetables will rot before reach-
ing their destination. 

If  the  new  advisory  services  are  good, 
farmers will learn how they can get higher 
incomes  by  switching  to  growing  fruit 
and  vegetables  for  export.  The  extension 
services  will  also  help  them  to  organize 
and  interact  with  european  buyers.  New 
infrastructure  (a  reliable  weigh  station,  a 
cold- storage facility) will make it feasible 
to  assume  the  risk  of  switching  crops.  If 
the farmers can get information they trust 
about the impacts of their actions on their 
aquifer,  they  may  determine  as  a  group 
to use water more responsibly. If the river 
basin agency has new planning tools, it can 
allocate water more effectively across differ-
ent users’ priorities, including the environ-
ment. In the long term new initiatives that 
set a price on soil carbon or change water 
allocation  may  provide  the  incentives  for 
farmers to grow crops using different soil 
management techniques. each step in the 
process is feasible, and in the long run will 
benefit every player. The challenge comes in 
coordinating all the efforts across multiple 
institutions and in persisting to see things 
through over a long time. 

Natural  resources  cannot  be  managed 
separately, especially with climate change. 
New ways are needed to put water, agricul-
ture,  forests,  and  fisheries  into  a  broader 
context with a web of related outcomes. In 
some  communities,  farmers  have  begun 
to moderate their fertilizer use to protect 
aquatic ecosystems, and fisheries managers 

136 

WOrL D   De VeLOpMeN T  r e pOr

T   2 0 1 0

are  considering  how  setting  catch  limits 
for  one  species  will  affect  others.  These 
management  tools  appear  under  a  wide 
variety  of  names:  ecosystem- based  man-
agement, integrated soil- fertility manage-
ment, adaptive management, to name a few. 
But all share key features: they coordinate 
a  broader  range  of  variables  (wider  land-
scapes, longer time frames, and learning by 
experience) than do traditional approaches. 
And they stress the need for reliable infor-
mation  about  the  managed  resource  to 
ensure that recommendations are accurate, 
site  specific,  and  adaptable  to  changing 
conditions. By increasing climate variabil-
ity, climate change will make ecosystems’ 

responses less predictable; resource manag-
ers will need to cope with that uncertainty 
with robust plans that consider the poten-
tial  outcomes  of  multiple  actions  under 
multiple conditions. 

Adaptive  management  (as  described 
in chapter 2) will need to be applied at all 
levels of resource management. Individual 
farmers  can  monitor  their  soil  to  tailor 
fertilizer  use  to  local  soil,  water,  climate, 
and  crop  conditions  without  harming 
ecosystems.  rural  communities  can  tai-
lor  their  cropping  choices  to  the  amount 
of water they can safely extract from their 
groundwater year after year, and go back to 
using the aquifer only as insurance against 

Figure 3.1      Climate change in a typical river basin will be felt across the hydrological cycle

Heavier rain increases erosion,
siltation, and landslides.

Increased temperatures
cause glacial melt. Basin
receives more rain and
less snow.

Increased demand
for hydropower.
Affects timing of water
available downstream.

Forest hydrology changed,
leading to loss of forest biodiversity.

Higher temperatures increase
evaporation from water bodies
and from soil.

Greater extremes in water availability
(lower low flows and more frequent
floods) affect supply of cooling water
for power stations.

Greater production of
biofuels increases
agricultural water demand.

Coastal cities vulnerable to floods, 
storms, and sea-level rise. Increase 
in paved surfaces accelerates 
runoff and reduces aquifer recharge.
Growing demand for resources.

Increased temperature causes
more evaporative losses,
increases crop water demand.
Growing seasons alter.
Droughts more frequent.

AQUIFER

Less frequent and heavier rainfall
reduce aquifer recharge.

Increased competition for
water concentrates pollution.

Coastal aquifers vulnerable
to salt-water intrusion.

Increased competition for
water risks drying up wetlands.
Changes in temperature, water
availability, and pollution
concentrations affect aquatic
ecosystems.

Sources: WDR team based on World Bank, forthcoming d; Bates and others 2008.

 

Managing Land and Water to Feed Nine Billion People and Protect Natural Systems 

137

drought. And policy makers can use robust 
decision- making tools to forge more resil-
ient  international  agreements  for  sharing 
resources. This chapter offers specifics on 
applying  new  tools  and  technologies  to 
manage  water,  agriculture,  and  fisheries 
and advocates a systemwide approach for 
coping with climate change across all three 
sectors. 

Produce more from water and 
protect it better

Climate change will make it harder to 
manage the world’s water

People will feel many of the effects of climate 
change  through  water.      The  entire  water 
cycle will be affected (figure 3.1). While the 
world as a whole will get wetter as warming 

speeds up the hydrological cycle, increased 
evaporation will make drought conditions 
more prevalent (map 3.1). Most places will 
experience more intense and variable pre-
cipitation, often with longer dry periods in 
between (map 3.2).4 The effects on human 
activity and natural systems will be wide-
spread. Areas that now depend on glaciers 
and  snowmelt  will  have  more  fresh  water 
initially,  but  supply  will  then  decline  over 
time.5 The shifts may be so rapid and unpre-
dictable  that  traditional  agricultural  and 
water management practices are no longer 
useful. This is already the case for the indig-
enous communities in the Cordillera Blanca 
in peru, where farmers are facing such rapid 
changes that their traditional practices are 
failing. The government and scientists are 
starting to work with them to try to find new 
solutions.6

IBRD 37087
September 2009
Map 3.1

Map 3.1      Water availability is projected to change dramatically by the middle of the 21st century in many parts of the world

Change in average annual runoff (percent)

< –30

5–15

–30– –15

15–30

–15– –5

> 30

–5–5

No data

< 2/3 models agree

Sources: Milly and others 2008; Milly, Dunne, and Vecchia 2005.
Note: The colors indicate percentage changes in annual runoff values (based on the median of 12 global climate models using the IPCC SRES A1B scenario) from 2041–2060 com-
pared with 1900–1970. The white denotes areas where less than two- thirds of the models agree on whether runoff will increase or decrease. Runoff is equal to precipitation minus 
evaporation, but the values shown here are annual averages, which could mask seasonal variability in precipitation such as an increase in both floods and droughts. 

Map 3.2      The world will experience both longer dry spells and more intense rainfall events 

a. Longer dry spells

IBRD 37133
September 2009
Map 3.2a + b

Change in consecutive dry days (number of days)
–10– –5

–20– –10

< –20

0–5

5–10

10–20

b. More intense rainfall

–5–0

> 20

< 2/3 models agree 

Change in rainfall intensity (percent change in simple daily intensity index, SDII)

< –15

0–5

–15– –10

5–10

–10– –5

10–15

–5–0

> 15

< 2/3 models agree 

Source: The World Climate Research Program CMIP3 Multi- model Database (http://www-pcmdi.llnl.gov/ipcc/about_ipcc.php). Analysis by the World Bank.
Note: The maps show the median change (based on 8 climate models using SRES A1B) in annual values in 2030–2049, compared with 1980–1999. A “dry” day is defined as one with 
precipitation less than 1millimeter whereas a “rainy” day has more than 1 millimeter. Precipitation intensity (SDII, or simple daily intensity index) is the total projected annual precipi-
tation divided by the number of “rainy” days. White areas show areas of high model disagreement (fewer than two- thirds of the models agree on the sign of change).

 

Managing Land and Water to Feed Nine Billion People and Protect Natural Systems 

139

Increasing  knowledge  about  the  world’s 
water  will  improve  management.      To 
manage water well, it is critical to know how 
much  water  is  available  in  any  basin  and 
what it is used for. This may sound straight-
forward,  but  it  is  not.  The  UN’s  World 
Water  Development  report  states:  “Few 
countries know how much water is being 
used and for what purposes, the quantity 
and  quality  of  water  that  is  available  and 
can  be  withdrawn  without  serious  envi-
ronmental  consequences,  and  how  much 
is being invested in water infrastructure.”7 
Water accounting is complex. Definitions 
and methods vary, and confusion is com-
mon. For example, the pacific Institute puts 
the Arab republic of egypt’s annual renew-
able water resources in 2007 at 86.8 cubic 

kilometers, whereas earthtrends reports it 
at 58 cubic kilometers. Both reports cite the 
same source of information. The confusion 
stems from different interpretations of the 
term use (the higher figure includes water 
reuse within egypt, while the lower figure 
does not).8 

The planet contains a fixed amount of 
water,  with  the  form  and  location  vary-
ing  over  space  and  time.9  humans  have 
little control over most of it—saltwater in 
oceans, freshwater in glaciers, water in the 
atmosphere. Most investment concentrates 
on water in rivers and lakes, but soil mois-
ture and groundwater together account for 
98 percent of the world’s available freshwa-
ter (figure 3.2).10 Many people worry about 
how  much  drinking  water  is  available, 

Figure 3.2      Freshwater in rivers makes up a very small share of the water available on the planet—and agriculture dominates water use 

Oceans
97.5%

Freshwater resources in the world

Permafrost

0.8%

Groundwater

30.1%

Vegetation

1%

Wetlands

8.5%

Atmosphere

9.5%

Freshwater

2.5%

Water abstraction by sector

(rivers, lakes, and groundwater)

Power
10–11%

Surface

and

atmosphere

0.4%

Glaciers
68.7%

Freshwater

lakes
67.4%

Consumptive use of

abstracted water by sector

Industrial and

domestic

7%

Rivers, lakes

and groundwater

Agriculture

67–68%

Domestic and
other industrial

19–20%

Evaporation from
reservoirs 3–4%

Soil moisture

12.2%

Rivers
1.6%

Agriculture

93%

Source: Shiklomanov 1999; Shiklomanov and Rodda 2003; Vassolo and Döll 2005.
Note: When humans use water, they affect the quantity, timing, or quality of water available for other users. Water for human use typically involves withdrawing water from lakes, 
rivers, or groundwater and either consuming it so that it reenters the atmospheric part of the hydrological cycle or returning it to the hydrological basin. When irrigated crops use 
water, it is a consumptive use—it becomes unavailable for use elsewhere in the basin. In contrast, releasing water from a dam to drive hydroelectric turbines is a nonconsump-
tive use because the water is available for downstream users but not necessarily at the appropriate time. Withdrawals by a city for municipal supplies are mainly nonconsump-
tive, but if the returning water is inadequately treated, the quality of water downstream is affected.

140 

WOrL D   De VeLOpMeN T  r e pOr

T   2 0 1 0

not  realizing  that  agriculture  dominates 
human  water  use.  each  day,  a  person 
drinks 2–4 liters of water but eats food that 
requires 2,000–5,000 liters of water in its 
production.11 These averages mask consid-
erable variation. In some basins, industrial 
and  urban  use  dominates,  and  more  and 
more basins will be in that situation given 
the pace of urban growth.12

Climate change will reduce the natural 
water storage of snow and glaciers, which 
will  in  turn  affect  aquifer  storage  and 
require water managers to design and oper-
ate reservoirs differently. Water managers 
will have to manage the entire water cycle. 
They can no longer afford to concentrate on 
the small share of water in rivers and lakes 
and leave groundwater and soil moisture to 
be  managed  by  landowners.  Many  basins 
will experience increased demand, reduced 
availability, and increased variability all at 
the  same  time.  Water  managers  in  those 
places will have less room to maneuver if 
their decisions are not robust to a variety of 
outcomes. Tools are available to help soci-
eties cope with these changes. They range 
from  policy  reform  to  decision-making 

protocols,  from  data  collection  technolo-
gies to new infrastructure design.

The effects of climate change on hydro-
logical patterns mean that the past can no 
longer be used as a guide for future hydro-
logical  conditions.  So,  like  other  natural 
resource  managers,  water  engineers  are 
developing new tools that consider impacts 
across a number of scales and time frames 
to help evaluate tradeoffs and make choices 
robust to an uncertain future (box 3.1).13

Climate change will make applying  
and enforcing sound water policies  
even more important 

Allocating  water  efficiently  and  limiting 
water consumption to safe levels will become 
increasingly important with climate change.    
When water is scarce, individual users can 
take too much, making water unavailable to 
others or harming ecosystems and the ser-
vices they provide. When consumption in a 
basin exceeds the amount of water available, 
users must use less, and the water must be 
shared according to some process or prin-
ciples. policy makers have two options: they 

Box 3.1      Robust decision making: Changing how water managers do business

Traditional decision making under uncer-
tainty uses probability distributions to 
rank different options for action, based 
on the envelope of risk from the past. But 
this approach is inadequate when deci-
sion makers do not know or cannot agree 
on how actions relate to consequences, 
how likely different events are, or how dif-
ferent outcomes should be evaluated. As 
chapter 2 shows, robust decision making is 
an alternative. Robust strategies are those 
that perform better than the alternatives 
across a wide range of plausible future 
circumstances. They are derived from com-
puter simulation models that do not pre-
dict the future but create large ensembles 
of plausible futures to identify candidate 
robust strategies and systematically assess 
their performance. The process does not 
choose an optimal solution; instead, it 
finds the strategy that minimizes vulner-
ability to a range of possible risks.

Southern California’s Inland Empire 

Utilities Agency has used this technique 
to respond to the effects of climate 
change on its long-term urban water 
management plan First, the agency 
derived probable regional climate pro-
jections by combining outputs from 21 
climate models. Coupled with a water 
management simulation model, hun-
dreds of scenarios explored assump-
tions about future climate change, the 
quantity and availability of groundwater, 
urban development, program costs, and 
the cost of importing water. Then the 
agency calculated the present value of 
costs of different ways to supply water 
under 200 scenarios. They rejected 
any strategy that gave costs above 
$3.75 billion over 35 years. Scenario 
discovery analysis concluded that the 
costs would be unacceptable if three 
things happened at the same time: large 

precipitation declines, large changes in 
the price of water imports, and reduc-
tions of natural percolation into the 
groundwater basin. 

The goal of the process is to reduce 

the agency’s vulnerability if those three 
things happen at the same time. The 
agency identified new management 
responses including increasing water- use 
efficiency, capturing more storm water for 
groundwater replenishment, water recy-
cling, and importing more water in wet 
years so that in dry years more groundwa-
ter can be extracted. The agency found 
that, if all these actions were undertaken, 
the costs would almost never exceed the 
threshold of $3.75 billion. 

Source: Groves and others 2008; Groves and 
Lempert 2007; Groves, Yates, and Tebaldi 
2008. 

 

Managing Land and Water to Feed Nine Billion People and Protect Natural Systems 

141

can either set and enforce fixed quantities 
for specific users, or they can use prices to 
encourage users to cut back and even trade 
among  themselves.  either  way,  designing 
and enforcing good policies require accurate 
information and strong institutions.

Quantitative allocations are most com-
mon, and it is difficult to do them well. South 
Africa  has  one  of  the  most  sophisticated 
schemes, though it is still a work in progress. 
Its 1998 National Water Act stipulates that 
water is public property and cannot be pri-
vately owned.14 All users must register and 
license their water use and pay for it, includ-
ing river or groundwater extracted at their 
own expense. Streamflow reduction activity 
is a category of water use, which means that 
owners of plantation forests must apply for 
a  license  just  like  an  irrigator  or  a  town’s 
water utility. Only plantation forestry has so 
far been categorized as a streamflow reduc-
tion activity, but rainfed agriculture or water 
harvesting techniques could follow. Count-
ing forestry as a water user makes land use 
compete  squarely  with  other  water  users. 
The only guaranteed rights to water are for 
ecological reserves and to ensure that each 
person has at least 25 liters daily for basic 
human needs.15

Water is almost always priced below its 
value,  giving  users  little  incentive  to  use 
it  efficiently.16  The  literature  is  virtually 
unanimous in calling for economic instru-
ments  to  reduce  demand.17  Charging  for 
water services (irrigation, drinking water, 
wastewater collection and treatment) can 
also recover the cost of providing the ser-
vice and maintaining infrastructure.18

The role of pricing to influence demand 
varies for different types of water use. For 
municipal water, pricing tends to be effec-
tive at reducing demand, especially when 
combined  with  user  outreach.  When  the 
price is high, many utilities and users fix 
leaks  and  use  only  what  they  need.19  But 
because  urban  consumption  accounts  on 
average for only 20 percent of water abstrac-
tions, the effects on overall use are limited 
(figure 3.2). And because municipal use is 
basically  nonconsumptive,  the  impact  of 
reduced use in cities does little to increase 
availability elsewhere in the basin.

For irrigation, a consumptive use, pric-
ing  is  more  complex.  First,  the  amount 
of water actually consumed is difficult to 
measure.  Second,  experience  shows  that 
farmers do not reduce consumption until 
the price is several multiples of the cost of 
providing the service. Yet most countries 
find  it politically  unacceptable  to  charge 
much  more  than  is  required  to  recover 
the  operational  costs.  Third,  too  steep 
an  increase  in  the  price  of  surface  water 
will encourage any farmer who can drill 
into an aquifer to switch to groundwater, 
shifting but not eliminating the problem 
of overuse.20 

In  most  countries  the  state  or  another 
owner of the water charges the city utility 
or irrigation agency for the water extracted 
from  the  river  or  aquifer.  This  is  known 
as bulk water. For a host of technical and 
political  reasons  few  countries  charge 
enough  for  bulk  water  to  affect  the  way 
resources are allocated between competing 
uses.21 Indeed, no country allocates surface 
water by price,22 although Australia is mov-
ing  toward  such  a  system.23  Although  far 
from straightforward, fixed quotas on the 
combined quantity of surface and ground-
water  allocated  to  irrigation,  or,  better, 
the  amount  of  water  actually  consumed 
(evapotranspiration), seem to be politically 
and  administratively  more  realistic  than 
pricing to limit overall consumptive use.24 

Tradable water rights could improve water 
management  in  the  long  term  but  are  not 
realistic short- term options in most develop-
ing  countries.      Tradable  rights  have  great 
potential for making water allocation more 
efficient and for compensating people who 
forgo  their  water  use.25  Formal  tradable 
water  rights  schemes  are  in  place  in  Aus-
tralia, Chile, South Africa, and the western 
United States. In Australia, evaluations indi-
cate that trading rights has helped farmers 
withstand  droughts  and  spurred  innova-
tion  and  investment  without  government 
intervention. 

But the details of the design greatly affect 
the  success  of  the  venture,  and  establish-
ing the necessary institutions is a lengthy 
process.  It  took  decades  to  develop  this 

142 

WOrL D   De VeLOpMeN T  r e pOr

T   2 0 1 0

capacity in Australia, a country with a long 
history of good governance, where custom-
ers were educated and accustomed to fol-
lowing  rules,  and  where  allocation  rules 
were broadly in place and enforced before 
the rights system was established.26 Coun-
tries that allow water trading when they do 
not have the institutional ability to enforce 
the  quotas  assigned  to  each  user  tend  to 
increase overextraction considerably (box 
3.2).

Climate  change,  which  makes  future 
water resources less predictable, complicates 
the  already  challenging  task  of  establish-
ing tradable water rights.27 even in a stable 
climate, sophisticated agencies find it dif-
ficult  to  determine  in  advance  how  much 
water  can  safely  be  allocated  to  different 
users, and how much should be set aside for 
environmental purposes.28 By not properly 
accounting for certain uses (such as planta-
tion forestry and natural vegetation) or for 
changes  in  user  behavior,  the  schemes  in 
Australia and Chile assigned rights for more 
water than was actually available. They had 
to undergo the painful process of reassign-
ing or reducing the allocations.29 properly 
regulated  markets  for  fixed  quantities  of 
water are a good long- term goal, but most 
developing countries need to take a number 

of crucial interim steps before adopting such 
a system.30

Climate change will require investing 
in new technologies and improving the 
application of existing technologies

Water storage can help with increased vari-
ability.      Storage in rivers, lakes, soil, and 
aquifers is a key aspect of any strategy to 
manage  variability—both  for  droughts 
(storing water for use in dry periods) and 
for floods (keeping storage capacity avail-
able  for  excess  flows).  Because  climate 
change  will  reduce  natural  storage  in  the 
form of ice and snow and in aquifers (by 
reducing  recharge),  many  countries  will 
need increased artificial storage. 

Water  planners  will  need  to  consider 
storage options across the entire landscape. 
Water stored in soil can be used more effi-
ciently by managing land cover, particularly 
by  improving  the  productivity  of  rain-
fed  agriculture.  Managing  groundwater, 
already  challenging,  will  be  more  impor-
tant as surface water becomes less reliable. 
Groundwater is a cushion for coping with 
unreliable public supplies and rainfall. For 
example, it supplies 60 percent of irrigated 
agriculture and 85 percent of rural drinking 

Box 3.2      The dangers of establishing a market for water rights before the institutional structures 
are in place

A review based on the Australian experi-
ence concludes that “with the benefit of 
hindsight and emerging experience, it is 
becoming clearer that . . . it is necessary 
to attend to many design issues. Water 
trading is likely to be successful unam-
biguously if and only if allocation and 
use management regimes are designed 
for trading and associated governance 
arrangements prevent over- allocation 
from occurring. Opposition to the devel-
opment of markets without attention to 
design detail is justified.”

Design concerns include accounting 

(proper assessment of the interconnected 
surface-  and groundwater, planning for 
climatic shifts to drier conditions, and 
expanded consumption by plantation 
forestry because of public subsidies), and 
institutional issues (designing separate 

rules and agencies to define entitlements, 
manage allocations, and control the use 
of water; developing accurate registers 
early in the process; allowing unused 
water to be carried over from year to year; 
developing a private brokerage industry; 
and ensuring timely flow of information 
to all parties).

Some countries have long- standing 
informal water- trading arrangements. 
The ones that work are often based on 
customary practices. Farmers in Bitit, 
Morocco, for example, have traded water 
for decades, based on rules established 
by customary practices. The system 
operates from a detailed list available 
to the entire community, which identi-
fies each shareholder and specifies the 
amount of water each is entitled to, 
expressed as hours of flow.

Schemes that allow trading in the 
absence of established and enforced 
water rights can worsen overexploita-
tion. Farmers near the city of Ta’iz, in the 
Republic of Yemen, sell their groundwater 
to tankers to supply the city. Before this 
market existed, the farmer withdrew 
only as much water from the aquifer as 
his crops needed. By increasing the price 
of a unit of water, the trading increases 
the benefits of using groundwater. And 
because the farmer’s extraction from his 
well is not controlled, there is no limit to 
the amount he can extract. As a result, 
the unregulated market accelerates the 
depletion of the aquifer.

Sources: CEDARE 2006; World Bank 2007b; 
Young and McColl, forthcoming.

 

Managing Land and Water to Feed Nine Billion People and Protect Natural Systems 

143

water in India as well as half the drinking 
water received by households in Delhi. Well 
managed, groundwater can continue to act 
as a natural buffer. But it is far from well 
managed. In arid regions across the world, 
aquifers are overexploited. Up to a quarter 
of  India’s  annual  agricultural  harvest  is 
estimated to be at risk because of ground-
water depletion.31

Improving  groundwater  management 
requires  actions  to  enhance  both  supply 
(artificial  recharge,  accelerated  natural 
recharge, barriers within aquifers to retard 
underground  flows)  and  demand.  And 
groundwater cannot be managed alone—it 
must be integrated with regulation of sur-
face water.32 Supply enhancing techniques 
are not straightforward. For example, arti-
ficial recharge is of limited use when water 
and suitable aquifer storage sites are not in 
the same places as the overstressed aquifers; 
43 percent of the funds allocated for India’s 
$6  billion  artificial  recharge  program  is 
likely to be spent recharging aquifers that 
are not overexploited.33 

Dams  will  be  an  important  part  of  the 
story of climate change and water. And they 
will need to be designed with built-in flex-
ibility  to  deal  with  potential  precipitation 
and runoff changes in their basins. Many of 
the best sites for dams are already exploited, 
yet  the  potential  for  new  dams  does  exist, 
particularly in Africa. Managed well, dams 
provide  hydropower  and  protect  against 
droughts and floods. Comprehensive analy-
ses  of  the  economic  impacts  of  dams  are 
rare, but four case studies indicate positive 
direct  economic  effects  and  large  indirect 

effects,  with  the  poor  sometimes  benefit-
ing disproportionately.34 The high Dam at 
Aswan in egypt, for example, has generated 
net annual economic benefits equivalent to 
2 percent of egypt’s gross domestic product 
(GDp).35 It has generated 8 billion kilowatt-
 hours of energy, enough to electrify all of the 
country’s towns and villages. It has allowed 
the expansion of agriculture and year- round 
navigation (stimulating investments in Nile 
cruises)  and  has  saved  the  country’s  crops 
and infrastructure from droughts and floods. 
But dams have well-known negative effects as 
well,36 and the tradeoffs need to be weighed 
carefully. Climate change puts a premium on 
identifying robust designs: where countries 
face  uncertainty  about  even  whether  their 
rainfall will increase or decrease, it can be 
cost- effective to build structures that are spe-
cifically designed to be changed in the future. 
As hydraulic systems increase in complexity, 
countries  need  solid  hydrological,  opera-
tional, economic, and financial analyses and 
capable institutions all the more (box 3.3).

Nonconventional technologies can increase 
water  availability  in  some  water- scarce 
regions.      Water supplies can be enhanced 
by desalinating seawater or brackish water 
and reusing treated wastewater. Desalina-
tion, which accounted for less than 0.5 per-
cent  of  all  water  use  in  2004,37  is  set  to 
become more widely used.

Technical  developments,  including 
energy- efficient filters, are causing desali-
nation prices to fall, and pilot schemes are 
beginning  to  power  desalination  plants 
with renewable energy.38 Depending on the 

Box 3.3      Managing water resources within the margin of error: Tunisia

Tunisia is a good example of the demands 
on water managers in countries that are 
approaching the limits of their resources. 
With only 400 cubic meters of renew-
able resources per capita, which are 
highly variable and distributed unevenly 
over time and space, Tunisia has a huge 
challenge managing its water. Yet in 
contrast to its Maghreb neighbors, it has 
withstood consecutive droughts without 
rationing water to farmers or resorting to 
supplying cities from barges. It has built 

dams with conduits to connect them and 
to transfer water between different areas 
of the country. 

As the most promising schemes were 
developed, the government built addi-
tional infrastructure in more marginal 
areas. Rivers that flowed to the sea have 
been dammed even when water demand 
in those basins is not intense. The stored 
water can be pumped across the mountain 
range into the country’s principal river 
basin. The new water both increases supply 

and dilutes the salinity in the area where 
water demand is highest. In addition, Tuni-
sia treats and reuses one- third of its urban 
wastewater for agriculture and wetlands, 
and recharges aquifers artificially. Tunisian 
water managers now face a complex set 
of decisions: they must optimize water 
quantity, timing, quality, and energy costs, 
showing the importance of human capac-
ity to manage resources so intensively.

Source: Louati 2009.

144 

WOrL D   De VeLOpMeN T  r e pOr

T   2 0 1 0

scale of the plant and the technology, desal-
inated water can be produced and delivered 
to the utility for as little as $0.50 per cubic 
meter. This remains more expensive than 
conventional  sources  when  freshwater  is 
available.39  Therefore,  desalinated  water 
usually makes sense only for the highest-
 value uses, such as urban water supply or 
tourist resorts.40 It also tends to be limited 
to coastal areas, because inland distribution 
of desalinated water adds to the costs.41

Producing more food without more water 
will not be easy, but some new approaches 
will help.      Managing water to meet future 
needs  will  also  involve  making  water  use 
more efficient, particularly in agriculture, 
which accounts for 70 percent of freshwater 
withdrawals from rivers and groundwater 
(figure 3.2).42 

There appears to be scope for increasing 
the  productivity  of  water  in  rainfed  agri-
culture, which provides livelihoods for the 
majority of the world’s poor, generates more 
than half of the gross value of the world’s 
crops,  and  accounts  for  80  percent  of  the 
world’s crop water use.43 Options, described 
in the next section, include mulching, con-
servation tillage, and similar techniques that 
retain water in the soil so that less is lost to 
evaporation and more is available to plants. 
Other options involve small- scale rainwater 
storage, sometimes called water harvesting. 
Of the various interventions to increase 
rainfed production, some (mulching, conser-
vation tillage) divert some water that would 
otherwise  evaporate  unproductively.  Oth-
ers (water harvesting, groundwater pumps) 
divert some water that would otherwise have 
been available to users downstream. When 
water is plentiful, impacts on other users are 
imperceptible, but as water becomes scarcer, 
the impacts become more important. Once 
again, comprehensive accounting for water 
and integrated planning of land and water at 
local, watershed, and regional scales can make 
these interventions productive, by ensuring 
that the tradeoffs are properly evaluated.

Irrigated agriculture is expected to pro-
duce a greater share of the world’s food in the 
future, as it is more resilient to climate change 
in all but the most water-scarce basins.44 Crop 
productivity per hectare will have to increase, 
because there is little scope for increasing the 

total area under irrigation. Indeed, irrigated 
land is expected to increase by just 9 percent 
between 2000 and 2050.45 And water produc-
tivity (in this case, agricultural output per 
unit of water allocated to irrigation) will also 
have to improve, given the increasing water 
demands  of  cities,  industries,  and  hydro-
power. New technologies have the potential 
to  increase  water  productivity  when  com-
bined with strong policies and institutions.46 
Getting more “crop per drop” involves 
a  complex  combination  of  investments 
and institutional changes. Countries from 
Armenia  to  Zambia  are  investing  in  new 
infrastructure that delivers the water effi-
ciently  from  the  reservoir  to  the  crops, 
reducing evaporative losses. however, as the 
example of the Moroccan farmers described 
earlier indicates, the investments can work 
only  if  local  institutions  deliver  the  water 
reliably,  farmers  have  a  voice  in  decision 
making,  and  they  can  get  the  advice  they 
need on how to make the most of the new 
infrastructure  or  technological  develop-
ments. New infrastructure will help water 
management only if combined with strong 
quantitative  limits  on  each  individual’s 
water consumption, covering both ground 
and surface water. Otherwise, the increased 
profitability of irrigation will tempt farmers 
to expand their cultivated area or double-  or 
triple- crop their fields, drawing ever more 
water from their wells. This is good for the 
individual farmer, certainly, but not for the 
other water users in the basin.47

Good  crop  management  can  increase 
water productivity by developing varieties 
resistant to cold so that crops can be grown 
in the winter, when less water is required.48 
Growing  crops  in  greenhouses  or  under 
shade screens also can reduce the evapora-
tive demand of open fields, though it does 
increase production costs.49 When crops die 
before they produce their yields, the water 
they  have  consumed  is  wasted.  Therefore 
more widespread adoption of drought- and 
heat-tolerant varieties will increase water as 
well as agricultural productivity.50

Well- timed  applications  of  irrigation 
water can also help. If farmers do not know 
exactly  how  much  water  is  needed,  they 
often  overirrigate  because  a  little  extra 
water  is  less  harmful  to  yields  than  too 
little  water.  By  monitoring  water  intake 

 

Managing Land and Water to Feed Nine Billion People and Protect Natural Systems 

145

and  growth  throughout  the  growing  sea-
son, farmers can deliver the exact amount 
of water that their crops need and irrigate 
only when really necessary. remote- sensing 
systems are beginning to allow farmers to 
see  the  water  needs  of  plants  with  great 
accuracy even before the plants show signs 
of stress.51 But because of the technological 
requirements, precision agriculture of this 
type  is  limited  to  a  small  number  of  the 
world’s farmers.52 

even  before  this  technology  becomes 
widely available, it is possible to apply simple 
automated systems to help poorer farmers 
increase the precision of applying irrigation 
water. The Moroccan farmers who convert 
to  drip  irrigation  under  the  government 
scheme discussed earlier will benefit from 
a  simple  technology  that  uses  a  standard 
irrigation formula adapted to local growing 
conditions.  Depending  on  the  weather  in 
the area, the system will deliver a message to 

farmers’ cell phones telling them how many 
hours they should irrigate that day. Acting 
on this information will allow them to avoid 
overirrigating.53 

Producing more in agriculture 
while protecting the environment
Climate change will push societies to 
accelerate agricultural productivity 
growth

Climate  change  will  depress  agricultural 
yields.      Climate  change  adds  several 
conflicting  pressures  to  agricultural  pro-
duction.  It  will  affect  agriculture  directly 
through higher temperatures, greater crop 
water demand, more variable rainfall, and 
extreme climate events such as floods and 
droughts.  It  will  increase  yields  in  some 
countries  but  lower  them  in  most  of  the 
developing world, reducing global average 
yields (map 3.3).

IBRD 37088
September 2009
M 3.3

Map 3.3      Climate change will depress agricultural yields in most countries by 2050 given current agricultural practices and crop varieties

Percentage change in yields between present and 2050

–50

–20

0

20

50

100

No data

Source: Müller and others 2009.
Note: The figure shows the projected percentage change in yields of 11 major crops (wheat, rice, maize, millet, field pea, sugar beet, sweet potato, soybean, groundnut, sunflower, 
and rapeseed) from 2046 to 2055, compared with 1996–2005. The values are the mean of three emission scenarios across five global climate models, assuming no CO2 fertilization 
(see note 54). Large negative yield impacts are projected in many areas that are highly dependent on agriculture.

146 

WOrL D   De VeLOpMeN T  r e pOr

T   2 0 1 0

In mid to high latitudes, local increases 
in  temperature  of  only  1–3°C,  along  with 
associated carbon fertilization54 and rainfall 
changes, may have small beneficial impacts 
on  crop  yields.55  Kazakhstan,  the  russian 
Federation, and Ukraine are all geographi-
cally positioned to benefit from these tem-
perature  increases,  but  they  may  not  be 
able  to  capitalize  fully  on  the  opportuni-
ties. Since the breakup of the Soviet Union, 
together they have removed 23 million hect-
ares of arable land from production, almost 
90 percent of which was used for grain pro-
duction.56 Although world grain yields have 
been rising on average by about 1.5 percent 
a year since 1991, yields in Kazakhstan and 
Ukraine have fallen, and russia’s yields have 
risen only slightly. If these countries are to 
take advantage of the warming temperatures 
to increase agricultural production, they will 
have to build stronger institutions and bet-
ter infrastructure.57 even if they do, extreme 
climate events may wipe out the improved 
average conditions: when the increased like-
lihood  of  extreme  climate  events  is  taken 
into consideration for russia, the years with 
food production shortfalls are projected to 
triple by the 2070s.58

In  most  developing  countries,  climate 
change  is  projected  to  have  an  adverse 
effect  on  current  agriculture.  In  low-
 latitude  regions  even  moderate  tempera-
ture increases of another 1–2°C will reduce 
yields of major cereals.59 One assessment of 
multiple studies estimates that by the 2080s 
world agricultural productivity will decline 
3  percent  under  a  high- carbon- emission 
scenario with carbon fertilization or 16 per-
cent without it.60 For the developing world, 
the decline is projected to be even larger, 
with a 9 percent decline with carbon fertil-
ization, and 21 percent without. 

An analysis of 12 food- insecure regions 
using  crop  models  and  outputs  from  20 
global climate models indicates that with-
out adaptation Asia and Africa will suffer 
particularly severe drops in yields by 2030. 
These losses will include some of the crops 
critical for regional food security, includ-
ing wheat in South Asia, rice in Southeast 
Asia, and maize in southern Africa.61 These 
projections are likely to underestimate the 

impact: models that project the effect of cli-
mate change on agriculture typically look at 
average changes and exclude the effects of 
extreme events, variability, and agricultural 
pests,  all  of  which  are  likely  to  increase. 
Climate change will also make some land 
less suitable for agriculture, particularly in 
Africa.62  One  study  projects  that  by  2080 
land with severe climate or soil constraints 
in Sub- Saharan Africa will increase by 26 
million  to  61  million  hectares.63  That  is 
9–20 percent of the region’s arable land.64 

Efforts to mitigate climate change will put 
more  pressure  on  land.      In  addition  to 
reducing yields, climate change will put pres-
sure on farmers and other land managers to 
reduce  greenhouse  gas  emissions.  In  2004 
about 14 percent of global greenhouse gas 
emissions came from agricultural practices. 
This includes nitrous oxide from fertilizers; 
methane  from  livestock,  rice  production, 
and  manure  storage;  and  carbon  dioxide 
(CO2) from burning biomass, but excludes 
CO2 emissions from soil management prac-
tices, savannah burning, and deforestation.65 
Developing regions produce the largest share 
of these greenhouse gas emissions, with Asia, 
Africa, and Latin America accounting for 80 
percent of the total.

Forestry, land use, and land- use change 
account for another 17 percent of greenhouse 
gas emissions each year, three- quarters of 
which come from tropical deforestation.66 
The  remainder  is  largely  from  draining 
and burning tropical peatland. About the 
same  amount  of  carbon  is  stored  in  the 
world’s peatlands as is stored in the Ama-
zon rainforest. Both are the equivalent of 
about 9 years of global fossil fuel emissions. 
In  equatorial  Asia  (Indonesia,  Malaysia, 
papua New Guinea), emissions from fires 
associated with peat draining and defores-
tation are comparable to those from fossil 
fuels in those countries.67 emissions related 
to livestock production are counted across 
several  emissions  categories  (agriculture, 
forestry, waste), and overall they are esti-
mated to contribute up to 18 percent of the 
global total, mostly through methane emis-
sions from the animals, manure waste, and 
clearing for pasture.68

 

Managing Land and Water to Feed Nine Billion People and Protect Natural Systems 

147

The cultivation of biofuels to mitigate 
climate change will create even more com-
petition for land. Current estimates indi-
cate that dedicated energy crop production 
takes place on only 1 percent of global ara-
ble land, but biofuel legislation in devel-
oped  and  developing  countries  supports 
expanding  production.  Global  ethanol 
production increased from 18 billion liters 
a year in 2000 to 46 billion in 2007, while 
biodiesel  production  increased  nearly 
eightfold to 8 billion liters. Land allocated 
to  biofuels  is  projected  to  increase  four-
fold by 2030, with most of the growth in 
North  America  (accounting  for  10  per-
cent  of  arable  land  in  2030)  and  europe 
(15  percent).69  projections  indicate  that 
only  0.4  percent  of  arable  land  in  Africa 
and  about  3  percent  in  Asia  and  Latin 
America will be dedicated to biofuel pro-
duction by 2030.70 Under some scenarios 
for mitigating climate change, projections 
beyond  2030  suggest  that  land  allocated 
to  producing  biofuels  by  2100  will  grow 
to  more  than  2  billion  hectares—a  huge 
figure given that current cropland covers 
“only” 1.6 billion hectares. These scenar-
ios project that most of the land for such 
large- scale biofuel production will origi-
nate  from  conversion  of  natural  forests 
and pastureland.71

If  demand  increases  rapidly,  biofuels 
will be a significant factor in agricultural 
markets,  increasing  commodity  prices. 
Much  of  the  current  demand  for  biofuel 
crops is spurred by government targets and 
subsidies and by high oil prices. Without 
artificial  support  the  competitiveness  of 
biofuels is still poor, with the exception of 
Brazil’s sugarcane ethanol. Nor is it clear 
how much biofuels reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions because of the fossil fuels used 
during production and the emissions from 
land  clearing.  Despite  the  potential  that 
biofuels have to decrease greenhouse gas 
emissions,  the  actual  net  carbon  savings 
of  current- generation  biofuels  is  under 
debate,  when  production  processes  and 
associated  land-use  changes  are  factored 
in to the calculations. In addition, demand 
for land for biofuels already competes with 
biodiversity  conservation.  As  a  result,  it 

is  important  to  establish  guidelines  for 
expansion of biofuels so that other envi-
ronmental goals are not squeezed out (box 
3.4). Comprehensive life- cycle accounting 
for biofuels—which includes their contri-
bution  to  emission  reductions  as  well  as 
their  water  and  fertilizer  use—may  slow 
the pace of conversion.

Second- generation biofuels now under 
development, such as algae, jatropha, sweet 
sorghum, and willows, could reduce com-
petition  with  agricultural  land  for  food 
crops by using less land or marginal land, 
although  some  of  these  developments 
could still lead to the loss of pasture land 
and grassland ecosystems. perennial crops 
with deeper root systems, such as switch-
grass, can better combat soil and nutrient 
erosion, require fewer nutrient inputs, and 
sequester higher rates of carbon than cur-
rent biofuel feedstocks.72 But their water 
needs may prohibit their sustainable pro-
duction in arid regions. More research is 
needed  to  improve  the  productivity  and 
emission  reduction  potential  of  future 
generations of biofuels.

Growing  populations,  more  carnivorous 
palates,  and  climate  change  will  require 
large  increases  in  agricultural  productiv-
ity.      The  amount  of  land  needed  to  feed 
the world in 2050 will depend significantly 
on  how  much  meat  people  eat.  Meat  is  a 
resource- intensive way for humans to con-
sume protein, because it requires land for 
pasture and grain feed. The resource impli-
cations vary with the type of meat and how 
it is produced. producing 1 kg of beef can 
take as much as 15,000 liters of water if it 
is  produced  in  industrial  feedlots  in  the 
United  States  (figure  3.3).73,74  But  exten-
sive beef production in Africa requires only 
146–300 liters per kilogram depending on 
the weather.75 per kilogram, beef produc-
tion is also greenhouse- gas intensive, even 
compared  with  other  meat  production, 
emitting  16  kilograms  of  CO2 equivalent 
(CO2e)  for  every  kilogram  of  meat  pro-
duced (figure 3.4).76

Despite  the  resource  implications, 
demand for meat is expected to increase as 
population and incomes grow. eating more 

148 

WOrL D   De VeLOpMeN T  r e pOr

T   2 0 1 0

Box 3.4      Palm oil, emission reductions, and avoided deforestation

Palm oil plantations represent the conver-
gence of many current land- use issues. 
Palm oil is a high- yielding crop with food 
and biofuel uses, and its cultivation cre-
ates opportunities for smallholders. But 
it infringes on tropical forests and their 
many benefits, including greenhouse 
gas mitigation. Cultivation of palm oil 
has tripled since 1961 to cover 13 million 
hectares, with most of the expansion in 
Indonesia and Malaysia and more than 
half on recently deforested lands. Recent 
announcements for new palm oil conces-
sions in the Brazilian Amazon, Papua New 
Guinea, and Madagascar raise concerns 
that the trend is likely to continue. 

Smallholders currently manage 35 to 

40 percent of the land under palm oil 

cultivation in Indonesia and Malaysia, pro-
viding a profitable diversification in liveli-
hoods. However, harvested palm nuts must 
be delivered to mills for processing within 
24 hours of harvesting, so holdings tend to 
cluster around mills. Thus a high propor-
tion of the area around mills is converted 
to palm oil, either as large tract commercial 
plantations or densely clustered smallhold-
ings. Certain landscape design practices, 
such as the creation of agroforestry belts 
to smooth the transition between palm oil 
plantations and forest patches, can help 
make the plantation landscape less inimi-
cal to biodiversity while providing further 
diversification for smallholders. 

The mitigation value of biodie-
sel derived from palm oil is also 

Emission reductions from biodiesel derived from palm oil differ greatly according to the 
previous land use on the palm oil plantation site.

Emission reduction per ton of biofuel (tCO2)

5.0

2.5

0.0

–2.5

–5.0

–7.5

–10.0

–12.5

Grassland/arable

Rubber plantation

Forest

Forest on peat

Prior land use

Source: Henson 2008.

questionable. Detailed life- cycle analysis 
shows that the net reduction in carbon 
emissions depends on the land cover 
existing before the palm oil plantation 
(figure). Significant emission reductions 
derive from plantations developed 
on previous grasslands and cropland, 
whereas net emissions will increase 
greatly if peatland forests are cleared for 
producing palm oil. 

The expansion of the carbon market to 

include REDD (Reduced Emissions from 
Deforestation and forest Degradation) is 
an important tool to balance the relative 
values of palm oil production and defor-
estation on one hand, and forest protec-
tion on the other. This balance will be 
critical to ensure biodiversity protection 
and emission reduction.

Recent studies show that convert-

ing land to palm oil production may be 
between six to ten times more profitable 
than maintaining the land and receiving 
payments for carbon credits through 
REDD, should this mechanism be limited 
to the voluntary market. If REDD credits 
are given the same price as carbon cred-
its traded in compliance markets, the 
profitability of land conservation would 
increase dramatically, perhaps even 
exceeding profits from palm oil, making 
agricultural conversion less attractive. 
Therefore, done right, REDD could realisti-
cally reduce deforestation and thereby 
contribute to a global mitigation effort. 

Sources: Butler, Koh, and Ghazoul, forth-
coming; Henson 2008; Koh, Levang, and 
Ghazoul, forthcoming; Koh and Wilcove 
2009; Venter and others 2009.

meat  will  be  beneficial  for  poor  consum-
ers who need the protein and micronutri-
ents.77 But by 2050 the production of beef, 
poultry,  pork,  and  milk  is  expected  to  at 
least double from 2000 levels to respond to 
the demand of larger, wealthier, and more 
urban populations.78

The world will have to meet the grow-
ing demand for food, fiber, and biofuel in 
a  changing  climate  that  reduces  yields—
while  at  the  same  time  conserving  eco-
systems  that  store  carbon  and  provide 

other  essential  services.  Obtaining  more 
land  suitable  for  agricultural  production 
is  unlikely.  Studies  indicate  that  globally 
the  amount  of  land  suitable  for  agricul-
ture will remain the same in 2080 as it is 
today,79 because increases in suitable land 
in the higher latitudes will be largely offset 
by losses in the lower latitudes. 

Therefore agriculture productivity (tons 
per hectare) will need to increase. Models 
vary  but  one  study  indicates  that  annual 
increases of 1.8 percent a year will be needed 

 

Managing Land and Water to Feed Nine Billion People and Protect Natural Systems 

149

Figure 3.3      Meat is much more water intensive than major crops
(liters of water per kilogram of product)

15,500

4,800

3,900

3,300

Beef

Pork

Chicken

Rice

2,800

1,800

1,300

900
Sorghum Soybean Wheat Milk Maize

1,000

900
Potato

Source: Waterfootprint (https://www.waterfootprint.org), accessed May 15, 2009; Gleick 2008.
Note: Figure shows liters of water needed to produce one kilogram of product (or one liter for milk). Water use for beef production 
only characterizes intensive production systems.

up to 2055—almost twice the 1 percent a 
year that would be needed under business as 
usual (figure 3.5).80 This means that yields 
will have to more than double over 50 years. 
Many of the world’s breadbaskets, such as 
North  America,  are  approaching  maxi-
mum feasible yields for major cereals,81 so 
a  significant  portion  of  this  yield  growth 
will need to occur in developing countries. 
This means not just an acceleration of yield 
growth but a reversal of recent slowing: the 
yield growth rate for all cereals in develop-
ing  countries  slipped  from  3.9  percent  a 
year between 1961 and 1990 to 1.4 percent 
a year between 1990 and 2007.82

Climate change will require highly 
productive and diverse agricultural 
landscapes 

Productivity  gains  must  not  come  at  the 
expense  of  soil,  water,  and  biodiversity.    
Intensive agriculture often damages natu-
ral systems. highly productive agriculture, 
such as is practiced in much of the devel-
oped world, is usually based on farms that 
specialize in a particular crop or animal and 
on the intensive use of agrochemicals. This 
kind of farming can damage water quality 
and quantity. Fertilizer runoff has increased 
the  number  of  low- oxygen  “dead  zones” 
in  coastal  oceans  exponentially  since  the 
1960s: they now cover about 245,000 square 
kilometers, mostly in coastal waters of the 
developed world (map 3.4).83 Intensive irri-

gation often causes salt to build up in soils, 
reducing fertility and limiting food produc-
tion. Salinization currently affects between 
20 million and 30 million of the world’s 260 
million hectares of irrigated land.84

Less  environmentally  deleterious  agri-
cultural  intensification  is  essential,  par-
ticularly  considering  the  environmental 
problems associated with further extensi-
fication of agriculture. Without increased 
crop and livestock yields per hectare, pres-
sure on land resources will accelerate as crop 
and pasture areas expand under extensive 
production.  Since  the  middle  of  the  20th 
century,  680  million  hectares,  or  20  per-
cent of the world’s grazing lands, have been 

Figure 3.4      Intensive beef production is a heavy producer of greenhouse gas emissions

Food item

(1 kg)

Emissions
(kg CO2e)

Driving distance equivalent (km)

1.2

4.0

Potato

Wheat

Chicken

Pork

Beef

0.24

0.80

4.60

6.40

16.00

22.7

31.6

79.1

Source: Williams, Audsley, and Sandars 2006. 
Note: The figure shows CO2 equivalent emissions in kilograms resulting from the production (in an industrial coun-
try) of 1 kilogram of a specific product. The driving distance equivalent conveys the number of kilometers one must 
drive in a gasoline- powered car averaging 11.5 kilometers a liter to produce the given amount of CO2e emissions. 
For example, producing 1 kilogram of beef and driving 79.1 kilometers both result in 16 kilograms of emissions. 

150 

WOrL D   De VeLOpMeN T  r e pOr

T   2 0 1 0

Figure 3.5   Agricultural productivity will have to increase even more rapidly because of climate 
change

Agricultural productivity index (2005 = 100)
300

Need without climate change
Need with climate change
Past observations

250

200

150

100

50

0
1960

1980

2000

2020

2040

2060

Year

Source: Lotze- Campen and others 2009.
Note: The figure shows the required annual growth in an agricultural productivity index under two scenarios. In 
this index, 100 indicates productivity in 2005. The projections include all major food and feed crops. The green 
line represents a scenario without climate change of global population increasing to 9 billion in 2055; total 
calorie consumption per capita and the dietary share of animal calories increasing in proportion to rising per 
capita income from economic growth; further trade liberalization (doubling the share of agricultural trade in total 
production over the next 50 years); cropland continuing to grow at historical rates of 0.8 percent a year; and no 
climate change impacts. The orange line represents a scenario of climate change impacts and associated soci-
etal responses (IPCC SRES A2): no CO2 fertilization, and agricultural trade reduced to 1995 levels (about 7 percent 
of total production) on the assumption that climate change-related price volatility triggers protectionism and 
that mitigation policy curbs the expansion of cropland (because of forest conservation activities) and increases 
demand for bioenergy (reaching 100 EJ [1018 joules] globally in 2055).

degraded.85 Converting land for agriculture 
has already significantly reduced the area of 
many ecosystems (figure 3.6).

The  Green  revolution  illustrates  both 
the immense benefits from increasing agri-
cultural  productivity  and  the  shortcom-
ings when technology is not supported by 
appropriate  policies  and  investments  to 
protect  natural  resources.  New  technol-
ogy, coupled with investments in irrigation 
and rural infrastructure, drove a doubling 
of cereal production in Asia between 1970 
and 1995. The agricultural growth and the 
associated decline in food prices during this 
time led to a near doubling of real per cap-
ita income, and the number of poor people 
fell  from  about  60  percent  of  the  popula-
tion to 30 percent, even as the population 
increased 60 percent.86 Latin America also 
experienced significant gains. But in Africa, 
poor  infrastructure,  high  transport  costs, 
low  investment  in  irrigation,  and  pric-
ing and marketing policies that penalized 
farmers  all  impeded  adoption  of  the  new 
technologies.87  Despite  its  overall  success, 

IBRD 37089_F3.4
Map 3.4
September 2009

Map 3.4      Intensive agriculture in the developed world has contributed to the proliferation of dead zones

Dead zones

Source: Diaz and Rosenberg 2008.
Note: In the developed world intensive agriculture has often come at high environmental cost, including runoff of excess fertilizers leading to dead zones in coastal areas. Dead 
zones are defined as extreme hypoxic zones, that is, areas where oxygen concentrations are lower than 0.5 milliliters of oxygen per liter of water. These conditions normally lead 
to mass mortality of sea organisms, although in some of these zones organisms have been found that can survive at oxygen levels of 0.1 milliliter per liter of water.

 

Managing Land and Water to Feed Nine Billion People and Protect Natural Systems 

151

the Green revolution in many parts of Asia 
was accompanied by environmental dam-
ages  stemming  from  overuse  of  fertilizer, 
pesticides, and water. perverse subsidies and 
pricing and trade policies that encouraged 
monoculture of rice and wheat and heavy 
use of inputs contributed to these environ-
mental problems.88

Climate- resilient farming requires diverse 
income  sources,  production  choices,  and 
genetic  material.      Climate  change  will 
create a less predictable world. Crops will 
fail  more  often.  One  way  to  buffer  the 
uncertainty is to diversify on all levels (box 
3.5). The first type of diversification relates 
to sources of income, including some out-
side of agriculture.89 As farms get smaller 
and input prices increase, farmers will do 
this anyway. Indeed, in much of Asia small-
holders and landless workers typically earn 
more than half their total household income 
from nonagricultural sources.90

A second type of diversification involves 
increasing the types of production on the 
farm.  The  market  opportunities  for  crop 
diversification  are  expanding  in  many 
intensively farmed areas as a result of more 
open export markets and buoyant national 
demand  in  rapidly  growing  economies, 
especially in Asia and Latin America.91 In 
these regions farmers may be able to diver-
sify  into  livestock,  horticulture,  and  spe-
cialized  agricultural  production.92  These 
activities  typically  give  high  returns  per 
unit of land and are labor intensive, which 
makes them suitable to small farms.

The third type of diversification involves 
increasing  the  genetic  variability  within 
individual  crop  varieties.  Most  high-
 yielding varieties in use on highly produc-
tive farms were bred on the assumption that 
the climate varied within a stable envelope; 
the breeders aimed for seed to be increas-
ingly homogenous. In a changing climate, 
however,  farmers  can  no  longer  rely  on  a 
handful of varieties that work under a nar-
row set of environmental conditions. Farm-
ers will need each batch of seeds to contain 
genetic material able to deal with a variety 
of  climatic  conditions.  each  year,  some 
plants  flourish  whatever  the  climate  that 
year.  Over  a  number  of  years  the  average 

Figure 3.6      Ecosystems have already been extensively converted for agriculture 

Mediterranean forests,
woodlands, and scrub

Temperate forest,
steppe, and woodland

Temperate broadleaf
and mixed forests

Tropical and subtropical
dry broadleaf forests

Flooded grasslands
and savannas
Tropical and subtropical
grasslands, savannas,
and shrublands
Tropical and subtropical
coniferous forests

Deserts

Montane grasslands
and shrublands

Tropical and subtropical
moist broadleaf forests

Temperate
coniferous forests

Boreal
forests

Tundra

Conversion of 
original biomes
Loss by 1950
Loss between
1950 and 1990
Projected loss
by 2050

–10

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

Potential area converted (%)

Source: Millennium Ecosystem Assessment 2005. 
Note: The projections are based on four scenarios of how the world will approach ecosystem services and 
include assumptions about ecosystem management, trade liberalization, technology, and the treatment of 
public goods.

yields will be higher from diverse seeds than 
from uniform seeds, even though yields in a 
“normal” year may be lower.

experiments  using  standard  cultiva-
tion practices indicate that under increased 
CO2  concentrations  and  higher  tempera-
tures  (reflecting  projections  of  the  Inter-
governmental  panel  on  Climate  Change 
for 2050) older varieties of wheat or barley 
may grow faster and have an advantage over 
more  modern  varieties  introduced  in  the 
late 20th century.93 Furthermore, the wild 
relatives  of  today’s  crops  contain  genetic 
material that may be useful to make com-
mercial crops more adaptable to changing 
conditions.  Increased  temperatures  and 
CO2 levels have a greater positive effect on 

152 

WOrL D   De VeLOpMeN T  r e pOr

T   2 0 1 0

Box 3.5      Product and market diversification: An economic and ecological alternative for marginal 
farmers in the tropics

Tropical areas face great challenges: the 
persistent poverty of rural populations, 
including indigenous peoples; the deg-
radation of natural resources; the loss of 
biodiversity; and the consequences of 
climate change. The volatility of prices 
for tropical products on the international 
markets also affects local economies. 
Many farmers around the world have their 
own survival mechanisms, but efforts 
to improve livelihoods and address the 
anticipated impacts from climate change 
will require innovative institutions and 
creative methods for income generation 
and security. 

One strategy that shows great potential 
for climate- smart development is agricul-
tural and agroforestry product diversifica-
tion. This strategy allows farmers to feed 
themselves and maintain a flow of prod-
ucts to sell or barter at the local market 
despite droughts, pests, or low prices on 
international markets.

Consider small coffee farms in Mexico. 
In 2001 and 2002 a dramatic drop in the 
international price of coffee pushed cof-
fee prices in Mexico below production 
costs. To rescue farmers, the Veracruz 
state government raised the price of cof-
fee produced in the area by establishing 

the “designation of origin of Veracruz” 
and by providing subsidies only to farm-
ers cultivating high- quality coffee in areas 
more than 600 meters above sea level. 
Because this policy would hurt thousands 
of producers living in the low- quality 
production area below 600 meters, the 
government invited the Veracruzana 
University to find alternatives to coffee 
monoculture.

The diversification of productive low-

land coffee lands found financial sup-
port through the UN Common Fund for 
Commodities, with the sponsorship and 
supervision of the International Coffee 
Organization. It started in two municipali-
ties with a pilot group of 1,500 farmers, 
living in remote communities with 25–100 
households. 

Many of the farmers had traditionally 
produced coffee in a multicrop system, 
providing the opportunity to test in each 
plot different configurations of alterna-
tive woody and herbaceous species of 
economic and cultural value: Spanish 
cedar and Honduras mahogany trees (for 
wood and furniture), the Panama rubber 
tree, cinnamon, guava (as food and phy-
tomedicine), jatropha (for food and bio-
fuel), allspice, cocoa, maize, vanilla, chile, 

passion fruit, alongside coffee. All trees, 
herbs, and produce were locally familiar, 
except the cinnamon tree. There is a 
potentially large market for cinnamon, 
which is usually imported. The farmers 
are now learning which practices and 
configurations hold the best production 
potential in this innovative diversified 
system. 

A cooperative company pooled differ-
ent agricultural products in groups with 
similar market values but with different 
exposures to climate, pests, and mar-
ket risks. Early results indicate that this 
bundling seems to work well, improving 
livelihoods and increasing the resilience 
of the communities. The company has 
been able to sell all product types, several 
of them at a better price than before the 
project started. And in the first two years 
the project introduced a million native 
timber trees.

Locals report that the practices have 

reduced erosion and improved soils, ben-
efiting the surrounding ecosystem while 
buffering against potential future flood-
ing associated with climate change.

Source: Contributed by Arturo Gomez- Pompa. 

some weeds than on their cultivated rela-
tives.94  The  genetic  material  of  the  weeds 
could therefore be used to enhance culti-
vars of commercial crops to produce more 
resilient varieties.95 

Productive  landscapes  can  integrate  bio-
diversity.      While  protected  areas  may  be 
the cornerstones of conservation, they will 
never be enough to conserve biodiversity in 
the face of climate change (see focus B on 
biodiversity). The world’s reserve network 
roughly quadrupled between 1970 and 2007 
to cover about 12 percent of earth’s land,96 
but even that is inadequate to conserve bio-
diversity. To adequately represent the conti-
nent’s species in reserves, while capturing a 
large proportion of their geographic ranges, 
Africa would have to protect an additional 
10 percent of its land, almost twice its cur-

rent  protection.97  Geographically  fixed 
and often isolated by habitat destruction, 
reserves are ill- equipped to accommodate 
species range shifts due to climate change. 
One  study  of  protected  areas  in  South 
Africa, Mexico, and Western europe esti-
mates  that  between  6  and  20  percent  of 
species  may  be  lost  by  2050.98  Moreover, 
existing land reserves remain under threat 
given  future  economic  pressures  and  fre-
quently weak regulatory and enforcement 
systems. In 1999 the International Union 
for the Conservation of Nature determined 
that less than a quarter of protected areas 
in 10 developing countries were adequately 
managed and that more than 10 percent of 
protected  areas  were  already  thoroughly 
degraded.99 At least 75 percent of protected 
forest areas surveyed in Africa lacked long-
 term  funding,  even  though  international 

 

Managing Land and Water to Feed Nine Billion People and Protect Natural Systems 

153

donors  were  involved  in  94  percent  of 
them.100 

A landscape- scale approach to land use 
can encourage greater biodiversity outside 
protected areas, which is essential to allow 
for  ecosystem  shifts,  species  dispersal  and 
the  promotion  of  ecosystem  services.  The 
field of ecoagriculture holds promise.101 The 
idea is to improve the farmland’s productiv-
ity and simultaneously conserve biodiversity 
and improve environmental conditions on 
surrounding  lands.  Through  the  methods 
of ecoagriculture, farmers can increase their 
agricultural output and reduce their costs, 
reduce  agricultural  pollution,  and  create 
habitat for biodiversity (figure 3.7).

effective policies to conserve biodiversity 
give farmers strong incentives to minimize 
conversion  of  natural  areas  to  farmland 
and to protect or even expand high quality 
habitat on their land. Other options include 
incentives  to  develop  ecological  networks 
and corridors between protected areas and 
other habitats. Studies in North America and 
europe show that lands withdrawn from con-
ventional agricultural production (set- asides) 
unequivocally increase biodiversity.102

Agriculture practices that enhance bio-
diversity often have many co- benefits, such 
as reducing vulnerability to natural disas-
ters, enhancing farm income and produc-
tivity,  and  providing  resilience  to  climate 
change.  During  hurricane  Mitch  in  1998 

farms  using  ecoagricultural  practices  suf-
fered  58  percent,  70  percent,  and  99  per-
cent less damage in honduras, Nicaragua, 
and  Guatemala,  respectively,  than  farms 
using conventional techniques.103 In Costa 
rica, vegetative windbreaks and fence rows 
boosted farmers’ income from pasture and 
coffee while also increasing bird diversity.104 
In  Zambia  the  use  of  leguminous  trees105 
and  herbaceous  cover  crops  in  improved 
fallow  practices  increased  soil  fertility, 
suppressed weeds, and controlled erosion, 
thereby  almost  trebling  annual  net  farm 
incomes.106  Bee  pollination  is  more  effec-
tive  when  agricultural  fields  are  closer  to 
natural or seminatural habitat,107 a finding 
that matters because 87 of the world’s 107 
leading food crops depend on animal pol-
linators.108 Shade- grown coffee systems can 
protect  crops  from  extreme  temperature 
and drought.109

In Costa rica, Nicaragua, and Colombia 
silvopastoral  systems  that  integrate  trees 
with  pastureland  are  improving  the  sus-
tainability of cattle production and diver-
sifying and increasing farmers’ incomes.110 
Such systems will be particularly useful as 
a climate- change adaptation, because trees 
retain their foliage in most droughts, pro-
viding fodder and shade and thus stabilizing 
milk and meat production. They also can 
improve  water  quality.  Agricultural  pro-
duction and revenues can go together with 

Figure 3.7      Computer simulation of integrated land use in Colombia.

Source: Photograph by Walter Galindo, from the files of Fundación CIPAV (Centro para Investigación en Sistemas Sostenibles de 
Producción Agropecuaria), Colombia. The photograph represents the Finca “La Sirena,” in the Cordillera Central, Valle del Cauca. 
Arango 2003.
Note: The first photo is the real landscape. The second figure is computer generated and shows what the area would look like if 
farm productivity were increased by using ecoagricultural principles. The increased productivity would reduce grazing pressure 
on hillsides, protecting watersheds, sequester carbon through afforestation, and increase habitat for biodiversity between fields.

154 

WOrL D   De VeLOpMeN T  r e pOr

T   2 0 1 0

biodiversity conservation. Indeed, in many 
cases intact ecosystems generate more rev-
enues than converted ones. In Madagascar 
managing a 2.2 million hectare forest over 
15  years  cost  $97  million,  when  account-
ing for the forgone economic benefits that 
would have occurred if the land had been 
converted to agriculture. But the benefits of 
the well- managed forest (half of which come 
from watershed protection and reduced soil 
erosion) were valued between $150 million 
and $180 million over the same period.111

Decades  of  development  experience 
show how difficult it is in practice to pro-
tect habitats for biodiversity. New schemes 
are however emerging to give landowners 
strong  financial  incentives  to  stop  land 
conversion. These include ways to generate 
revenues from the services that ecosystems 
provide to society (see focus B), conserva-
tion easements (which pay farmers to take 
sensitive  land  out  of  production),112  and 
tradable development rights.113

Climate change will require faster 
adoption of technologies and approaches 
that increase productivity, cope with 
climate change, and reduce emissions

Several  options  will  need  to  be  pursued 
simultaneously  to  increase  productivity.    
Agricultural  research  and  extension  has 
been underfunded in the past decade. The 
share  of  official  development  assistance 
for agriculture dropped from 17 percent 
in  1980  to  4  percent  in  2007,114  despite 
estimates  that  rates  of  return  to  invest-
ment in agricultural research and exten-
sion  are  high  (30–50  percent).115  public 
expenditures  on  agricultural  research 
and  development  (r&D)  in  low-  and 
middle- income countries have increased 
slowly  since  1980,  from  $6  billion  in 
1981  to  $10  billion  in  2000  (measured 
in  2005  purchasing  power  dollars),  and 
private investments remain a small share 
(6 percent) of agricultural r&D in those 
countries.116 Those trends will have to be 
reversed if societies are to meet their food 
needs. 

The  recently  concluded  Integrated 
Assessment  of  Agricultural  Knowledge, 
Science,  and  Technology  for  Development 

(IAASTD)  showed  that  successful  agricul-
tural development under climate change will 
involve a combination of existing and new 
approaches.117 First, countries can build on 
the traditional knowledge of farmers. Such 
knowledge  embodies  a  wealth  of  location-
 specific  adaptation  and  risk  management 
options  that  can  be  applied  more  widely. 
Second,  policies  that  change  the  relative 
prices that farmers face have great poten-
tial to encourage practices that will help 
the  world  adapt  to  climate  change  (by 
increasing  productivity)  and  mitigate  it 
(by reducing agricultural emissions). 

Third,  new  or  unconventional  farming 
practices can increase productivity and reduce 
carbon  emissions.  Farmers  are  beginning 
to adopt “conservation agriculture,” which 
includes minimum tillage (where seeds are 
sowed with minimum soil disturbance and 
residue coverage on the soil surface is at least 
30 percent), crop residue retention, and crop 
rotations. These tillage methods can increase 
yields,118 control soil erosion and runoff,119 
increase water and nutrient-use efficiency,120 
reduce production costs, and in many cases 
sequester carbon.121

In 2008, 100 million hectares, or about 
6.3  percent  of  global  arable  land,  were 
farmed with minimum tillage—about dou-
ble the amount in 2001.122 Most takeup has 
been  in  developed  countries,  because  the 
technique  has  heavy  equipment  require-
ments and has not been modified for con-
ditions  in  Asia  and  Africa.123  Minimum 
tillage  also  makes  the  control  of  weeds, 
pests, and diseases more complex, requir-
ing better management.124 

Nevertheless,  in  the  rice- wheat  farm-
ing system of the Indo- Gangetic plain of 
India,  farmers  adopted  zero- tillage  on 
1.6 million hectares in 2005.125 In 2007–08 
an estimated 20–25  percent of the wheat 
in two Indian states alone (haryana and 
punjab)  was  cultivated  under  minimum 
tillage, corresponding to 1.26 million hect-
ares.126  Yields  increased  by  5–7  percent, 
and costs came down by $52 a hectare.127 
About 45 percent of Brazilian cropland is 
farmed  using  these  practices.128  The  use 
of  minimum  tillage  will  probably  con-
tinue  to  grow,  particularly  if  the  tech-
nique  becomes  eligible  for  payments  for 

 

Managing Land and Water to Feed Nine Billion People and Protect Natural Systems 

155

soil carbon sequestration in a compliance 
carbon market. 

Biotechnology could provide a transfor-
mational approach to addressing the tradeoffs 
between land and water stress and agricul-
tural productivity, because it could improve 
crop productivity, increase crop adaptation 
to climatic stresses such as drought and heat, 
mitigate  greenhouse  gas  emissions,  reduce 
pesticide  and  herbicide  applications,  and 
modify plants for better biofuel feedstocks 
(box 3.6). There is, however, little likelihood 
of genetic modification affecting water pro-
ductivity in the short term.129

Climate- smart 

farming  practices 
improve  rural  livelihoods  while  mitigat-
ing and adapting to climate change. New 
crop  varieties,  extended  crop  rotations 
(notably for perennial crops), reduced use 

of fallow land, conservation tillage, cover 
crops, and biochar can all increase carbon 
storage (box 3.7). Draining rice paddies at 
least once during the growing season and 
applying rice straw waste to the soil in the 
off- season could reduce methane emissions 
by 30 percent.130 Methane emissions from 
livestock can also be cut by using higher-
 quality feeds, more precise feeding strate-
gies,  and  improved  grazing  practices.131 
Better  pasture  management  alone  could 
achieve about 30 percent of the greenhouse 
gas  abatement  potential  from  agriculture 
(1.3 gigatons of CO2e a year by 2030 over 
3 billion hectares globally).132

As  countries  intensify  agricultural  pro-
duction, the environmental impacts of soil 
fertility  practices  will  come  to  the  fore.133 
The developed world and many places in Asia 

Box 3.6      Biotech crops could help farmers adapt to climate change

Conventional selection and plant breed-
ing have produced modern varieties and 
major productivity gains. In the future a 
combination of plant breeding and selec-
tion of preferred traits through genetic 
techniques (genetic modification, or GM) 
is likely to contribute most to producing 
crops better adapted to pests, droughts, 
and other environmental stresses accom-
panying climate change.

A number of crops with genetically 

modified traits have been broadly com-
mercialized in the last 12 years. In 2007 
an estimated 114 million hectares were 
planted with transgenic crop varieties, 
mostly with insect- resistant or herbicide-
 tolerant traits. More than 90 percent of 
this acreage was planted in only four 
countries (Argentina, Brazil, Canada, and 
the United States). These technologies 
will significantly reduce environmental 
pollution, increase crop productivity, 
cut production costs, and reduce nitrous 
oxide emissions. To date successful breed-
ing programs have produced crop variet-
ies, including cassava and maize, that 
resist a number of pests and diseases, and 
herbicide- tolerant varieties of soybean, 
rapeseed, cotton, and maize are available. 
Farmers using insect- resistant GM crops 
have reduced the amount of pesticides 
they use and the number of active ingre-
dients in the herbicides they apply.

Genes affecting crop yield directly 

and those associated with adaptation to 
various types of stress have been identi-
fied and are being evaluated in the field. 
New varieties could improve the way 
crops cope with unreliable water sup-
plies and potentially improve how they 
convert water. Breeding plants that can 
survive longer periods of drought will be 
even more critical in adapting to climate 
change. Initial experiments and field test-
ing with GM crops suggest that progress 
may be possible without interfering with 
yields during nondrought periods, a 
problematic tradeoff for drought- tolerant 
varieties developed through conventional 
breeding. Drought- tolerant maize is 
nearing commercialization in the United 
States and is under development for Afri-
can and Asian conditions. 

Nevertheless, GM crops are con-

troversial, and public acceptance and 
safety must be addressed. The public is 
concerned about the ethics of deliber-
ately altering genetic material as well as 
about potential risks to food safety and 
the environment, and ethical concerns. 
After more than 10 years of experience, 
there has been no documented case of 
negative human health impacts from GM 
food crops, yet popular acceptance is still 
limited. Environmental risks include the 
possibility of GM plants cross- pollinating 

with wild relatives, creating aggressive 
weeds with higher disease resistance and 
the rapid evolution of new pest biotypes 
adapted to GM plants. However, scientific 
evidence and 10 years of commercial use 
show that safeguards, when appropri-
ate, can prevent the development of 
resistance in the targeted pests and the 
environmental harm from commercial 
cultivation of transgenic crops, such as 
gene flow to wild relatives. Crop biodi-
versity may decrease if a small number of 
GM cultivars displace traditional cultivars, 
but this risk also exists with convention-
ally bred crop varieties. Impacts on bio-
diversity can be reduced by introducing 
several varieties of a GM crop, as in India, 
where there are more than 110 varieties of 
Bt (Bacillus thuringiensis) cotton. Although 
the track record with GM crops is good, 
establishing science- based biosafety reg-
ulatory systems is essential so that risks 
and benefits can be evaluated on a case-
 by- case basis, comparing the potential 
risks with alternative technologies and 
taking into account the specific trait and 
the agroecological context for using it. 

Source: Benbrook 2001; FAO 2005; Gruere, 
Mehta- Bhatt, and Sengupta 2008; James 
2000; James 2007; James 2008; Normile 
2006; Phipps and Park 2002; Rosegrant, 
Cline, and Valmonte- Santos 2007; World 
Bank 2007c.

156 

WOrL D   De VeLOpMeN T  r e pOr

T   2 0 1 0

Box 3.7      Biochar could sequester carbon and increase yields on a vast scale

Scientists investigating some unusually 
fertile soils in the Amazon basin found 
that the soil was altered by ancient 
charcoal- making processes. The indig-
enous people burned wet biomass (crop 
residues and manure) at low tempera-
tures in the almost complete absence of 
oxygen. The product was a charcoal- type 
solid with a very high carbon content, 
called biochar. Scientists have repro-
duced this process in modern industrial 
settings in several countries. 

Biochar appears to be highly stable 

in soil. Studies on the technical and 
economic viability of the technique are 
continuing, with some results indicat-
ing that biochar may lock carbon into 
the soil for hundreds or even thousands 

of years, while others suggest that in 
some soils the benefits are far less. Nev-
ertheless, biochar can sequester carbon 
that would otherwise be released into 
the atmosphere through burning or 
decomposition. 

So biochar could have great carbon 
mitigation potential. To give an idea of 
scale, in the United States waste bio-
mass from forestry and agriculture, plus 
biomass that could be grown on land 
that is currently idle, would provide 
enough material for the United States 
to sequester 30 percent of its fossil fuel 
emissions using this technique. Biochar 
can also increases soil fertility. It binds to 
nutrients and could thus help regener-
ate degraded lands as well as reduce 

the need for artificial fertilizers and thus 
the pollution of rivers and streams. The 
potential is there. But there are two chal-
lenges: to demonstrate the chemical 
properties and to develop mechanisms 
for application on a large scale.

Research is needed in a number of 

areas, including methodologies to mea-
sure biochar’s potential for long- term 
carbon sequestration; environmental 
risk assessment; biochar’s behavior in 
different soil types; economic viability; 
and the potential benefits in developing 
countries.

Sources: Lehmann 2007a; Lehmann 2007b; 
Sohi and others 2009; Wardle, Nilsson, and 
Zackrisson 2008; Wolf 2008.

and Latin America may reduce fertilizer use 
to reduce both greenhouse gas emissions and 
the nutrient runoff that harms aquatic eco-
systems. Changing the rate and timing of fer-
tilizer applications reduces the emissions of 
nitrous oxide from soil microbes. Controlled-
 release nitrogen134 improves efficiency (yield 
per unit of nitrogen), but so far it has proved 
too expensive for many farmers in develop-
ing  countries.135  New  biological  inhibitors 
that  reduce  the  volatilization  of  nitrogen 
could achieve many of the same goals more 
cheaply. They are likely to be popular with 
farmers because they involve no extra farm 
labor  and  little  change  in  management.136 
If producers and farmers have incentives to 
apply  new  fertilizer  technology  and  to  use 
fertilizers efficiently, many countries could 
maintain agricultural growth even as they 
reduce emissions and water pollution. 

In  Sub- Saharan  Africa,  by  contrast, 
natural  soil  fertility  is  low,  and  coun-
tries  cannot  avoid  using  more  inorganic 
fertilizer.  Integrated  adaptive  manage-
ment programs with site- specific testing 
and  monitoring  can  reduce  the  risk  of 
overfertilizing.  But  such  programs  are 
still  rare  in  most  developing  countries 
because there has not been enough public 
investment in the research, extension, and 

information services necessary for effec-
tive implementation—a recurring theme 
of this chapter.

part of achieving the necessary increase 
in agricultural productivity in the develop-
ing world, sound fertilizer policy includes 
measures to make fertilizers affordable to 
the  poor.137  It  also  includes  broader  pro-
grams,  such  as  the  Farm  Inputs  promo-
tion  program  in  Kenya  that  works  with 
local companies and subsidiaries of inter-
national seed companies to improve agri-
cultural inputs (by formulating fertilizers 
using locally available minerals, providing 
improved  seed  varieties,  and  distributing 
fertilizer  in  rural  areas)  and  to  promote 
sound  agronomic  practices  (correct  fer-
tilizer  placement,  soil  management,  and 
effective weed and pest control).

Produce more and protect better in 
fisheries and aquaculture
Marine ecosystems will have to cope with 
stresses as least as great as those on land 
The  oceans  have  absorbed  about  half  the 
anthropogenic  emissions  released  since 
1800,138  and  more  than  80  percent  of  the 
heat  of  global  warming.139  The  result  is  a 
warming, acidifying ocean, changing at an 
unprecedented pace with impacts across the 

 

Managing Land and Water to Feed Nine Billion People and Protect Natural Systems 

157

aquatic realm (see focus A on the science of 
climate change).140 

Ecosystem- based  management  can  help 
coordinate an effective response to fisheries 
in  crisis.    even  without  climate  change, 
between 25 and 30 percent of marine fish 
stocks  are  overexploited,  depleted,  or 
recovering  from  depletion—and  are  thus 
yielding less than their maximum poten-
tial.  About  50  percent  of  stocks  are  fully 
exploited and producing catches at or close 
to their maximum sustainable limits, with 
no room for further expansion. The pro-
portion  of  underexploited  or  moderately 
exploited stocks declined from 40 percent 
in the mid- 1970s to 20 percent in 2007.141 
It may be possible to get more value from 
the fish caught—for example, by reducing 
the fish caught unintentionally, estimated 
at  one- quarter  of  the  world  fish  catch.142 
It is likely that the maximum potential of 
fisheries  in  the  world’s  oceans  has  been 
reached, and only more sustainable prac-
tices can maintain the productivity of the 
sector.143

ecosystem- based  management,  which 
considers an entire ecosystem rather than 
a particular species or site and recognizes 
humans  as  integral  elements  in  the  sys-
tem, can effectively protect the structure, 
functioning,  and  key  processes  of  coastal 
and marine ecosystems.144 policies include 
coastal management, area- based manage-
ment,  marine  protected  areas,  limits  on 
fishing  effort  and  gear,  licensing,  zoning, 
and  coastal  law  enforcement.  Managing 
marine ecosystems effectively also involves 
managing activities on land to minimize the 
eutrophication episodes that stress marine 
ecosystems,  such  as  coral  reefs,  in  many 
parts of the world.145 The economic value 
of coral reefs can be many times that of the 
agriculture that caused the problems.146

The developing world already has some 
success stories. A program at Danajon Bank 
reef  in  the  central  philippines  has  begun 
increasing fish biomass over the historical 
level.147 Indeed, some developing countries 
implement  ecosystem- based  management 
more  effectively  than  many  developed 
countries.148 

Climate  change  will  create  new  pres-
sures—an expected increase in food prices, 
increased demand for fish protein, and the 
need  to  protect  marine  ecosystems—that 
could prompt governments to implement 
long-advocated  reforms.  These  include 
reducing catch to sustainable levels, and get-
ting rid of perverse subsidies, which fuel the 
overcapacity of fishing fleets.149 The annual 
number of newly built fishing vessels is less 
than 10 percent of the level in the late 1980s, 
but overcapacity is still a problem.150 The 
global cost of poor governance of marine 
capture fisheries is an estimated $50 billion 
a year.151 rights- based catch shares can pro-
vide individual and community incentives 
for sustainable harvests. These schemes can 
grant rights to various forms of dedicated 
access,  including  community- based  fish-
ing,  as  well  as  impose  individual  fishing 
quotas.152

Aquaculture will help meet growing 
demand for food
Fish  and  shellfish  currently  supply  about 
8 percent of the world animal protein con-
sumed.153 With the world population grow-
ing  by  about  78  million  people  a  year,154 
fish and shellfish production must grow by 
about 2.2 million metric tons every year to 
maintain current consumption of 29 kilo-
grams  per  person  each  year.155  If  capture 
fish stocks fail to recover, only aquaculture 
will be able to fill the future demand.156

Aquaculture  contributed  46  percent  of 
the world’s fish food supply in 2006,157 with 
average annual growth (7 percent) outpac-
ing population growth over the last decades. 
productivity  has  increased  by  an  order  of 
magnitude for some species, driving down 
prices  and  expanding  product  markets.158 
Developing  countries,  mostly  in  the  Asia-
 pacific region, dominate production. Of the 
fish eaten in China, 90 percent comes from 
aquaculture.159

Demand  for  fish  from  aquaculture  is 
projected to increase (figure 3.8), but cli-
mate change will affect aquaculture opera-
tions worldwide. rising seas, more severe 
storms, and saltwater intrusion in the main 
river deltas of the tropics will damage aqua-
culture, which is based on species with lim-
ited saline tolerance, such as catfish in the 

158 

WOrL D   De VeLOpMeN T  r e pOr

T   2 0 1 0

Figure 3.8      Demand for fish from aquaculture will increase, particularly in Asia and Africa

Million tons
35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

Aquaculture production in 2003
Aquaculture demand in 2020

China

Asia and Pacific

Europe

Latin America and

the Caribbean

North
America

Africa

Source: De Silva and Soto 2009.

Mekong Delta. higher water temperatures 
in temperate zones may exceed the optimal 
temperature range of cultivated organisms. 
And as temperatures rise, diseases affecting 
aquaculture are expected to increase both 
in incidence and impact.160

Aquaculture  is  expected  to  grow  at  a 
rate of 4.5 percent a year between 2010 and 
2030.161 But sustainable growth for the sec-
tor entails overcoming two major obstacles. 
First  is  the  extensive  use  of  fish  proteins 
and oils as fishmeal, which keeps the pres-
sure on capture fisheries.162 The growth in 
aquaculture  will  have  to  come  from  spe-
cies  not  dependent  on  feed  derived  from 
fishmeal; today, 40 percent of aquaculture 
depends  on  industrial  feeds,  much  from 
marine and coastal ecosystems, which are 
already  stressed.163  plant- based  aquacul-
ture feeds (such as oil- seed- based feed) are 
promising,164  and  some  operations  have 
completely  replaced  fishmeal  with  plant-
 based feeds in the diets of herbivorous and 
omnivorous  fish,  without  compromis-
ing  growth  or  yields.165  The  emphasis  on 
cultivating  herbivorous  and  omnivorous 
species—currently about 7 percent of total 
production—makes  sense  for  resource 
efficiency.166  For  example,  production  of 
one  kilogram  of  salmon,  marine  finfish, 
or shrimp in aquaculture systems is highly 
resource- intensive,  requiring  between 
2.5–5 kilograms of wild fish as feed for one 
kilogram of food produced.167

Second, aquaculture can cause environ-
mental problems. Coastal aquaculture has 
been responsible for 20 to 50 percent of the 
loss  of  mangroves  worldwide;168  further 
losses compromise climate resiliency of the 
ecosystems and make coastal populations 
more vulnerable to tropical storms. Aqua-
culture also can result in the discharge of 
wastes into marine ecosystems that in some 
areas  contributes  to  eutrophication.  New 
effluent management techniques—such as 
recirculation of water,169 better calibration 
of feed, and integrated and polyculturing in 
which complementary organisms are raised 
together to reduce wastes170—can lessen the 
environmental impacts. So can appropriate 
aquaculture development in underexploited 
bodies of water, such as rice paddies, irriga-
tion canals, and seasonal ponds. Integrated 
agriculture- aquaculture schemes promote 
recycling of nutrients, so that wastes from 
aquaculture  can  become  an  input  (fertil-
izer) for agriculture and vice- versa, thereby 
optimizing resource use and reducing pol-
lution.171  These  systems  have  diversified 
income  and  provided  protein  for  house-
holds in many parts of Asia, Latin America, 
and Sub- Saharan Africa.172

Building flexible international 
agreements
Managing natural resources in order to cope 
with climate change entails better interna-
tional collaboration. It also demands more 
reliable  international  food  trade  so  that 
countries  are  better  placed  to  cope  with 
climate  shocks  and  reduced  agricultural 
potential.

Countries that share watercourses will 
need to agree on how to manage them
About  one- fifth  of  the  world’s  renewable 
freshwater resources cross or form interna-
tional borders, and in some regions, partic-
ularly in developing countries, the share is 
far higher. however, only 1 percent of such 
waters is covered by any kind of treaty.173 
Moreover,  few  of  the  existing  treaties  on 
international  watercourses  encompass  all 
the countries touching the watercourse in 
question.174  The  United  Nations  Conven-
tion  on  the  Law  of  the  Non- Navigational 

 

Managing Land and Water to Feed Nine Billion People and Protect Natural Systems 

159

Uses of International Watercourses, which 
was adopted by the UN General Assembly 
in 1997, has yet to command sufficient rati-
fications to enter into force.175

Cooperation among riparian countries is 
essential to address water challenges caused 
by climate change. Such cooperation can be 
achieved only through inclusive agreements 
that make all the riparian countries respon-
sible for the joint management and sharing 
of  the  watercourse  and  that  are  designed 
to address increased variability from both 
droughts and floods. Typically water agree-
ments are based on allocating fixed quanti-
ties of water to each party; climate change 
makes this concept problematic. Allocations 
based on percentages of flow volume would 
better address variability. even better would 
be a “benefit-  sharing” approach, where the 
focus is not on water volumes but on the eco-
nomic, social, political, and environmental 
values derived from water use.176

Countries will need to work together to 
better manage fisheries
Fish is the most international of food com-
modities. One- third of global fish produc-
tion  is  traded  internationally,  the  highest 
ratio  for  any  primary  commodity.177  As 
their fish stocks have declined, european, 
North American, and many Asian nations 
have  begun  importing  more  fish  from 
developing  countries.178  This  increased 
demand,  combined  with  the  overcapital-
ization of some fishing fleets (the european 
fleet is 40 percent larger than the fish stocks 
can accommodate), is spreading the deple-
tion  of  marine  resources  to  the  southern 
Mediterranean,  West  Africa,  and  South 
America.  And  despite  the  multibillion 
dollar- a- year international trade in fisher-
ies, developing countries receive relatively 
little in fees from foreign fishing fleets oper-
ating in their waters. even in the rich tuna 
fishery of the western pacific, small island 
developing states receive only about 4 per-
cent  of  the  value  of  the  tuna  taken.179  By 
modifying the distribution of fish stocks, 
changing  food  webs,  and  disrupting  the 
physiology  of  already  stressed  fish  spe-
cies, climate change will only make things 
worse.180  Fleets  facing  further  declines  in 
stocks may venture even farther afield, and 

new  agreements  on  resource  sharing  will 
need to be negotiated. 

To  facilitate  adaptation  and  regulate 
fishery  rights,  it  is  important  to  develop 
international  resource  management 
regimes, both legal and institutional, and 
associated monitoring systems. Such agree-
ments might be facilitated by strengthening 
regional  fisheries  management  organiza-
tions.181  The  Benguela  Current’s  Large 
Marine ecosystem programme is a prom-
ising development. running along the west 
coast of Angola, Namibia, and South Africa, 
the Benguela ecosystem is one of the most 
highly  productive  in  the  world,  support-
ing  a  reservoir  of  biodiversity  including 
fish,  seabirds,  and  sea  mammals.  Within 
the  ecosystem  there  is  already  evidence 
that climate change is shifting the ranges 
of some key commercial species poleward 
from the tropics.182 This shift compounds 
existing  stresses  from  overfishing,  dia-
mond mining, and oil and gas extraction. 
Angola, Namibia, and South Africa estab-
lished the Benguela Current Commission 
in 2006, the first such institute created for 
a large marine ecosystem. The three coun-
tries committed to integrated management 
of the fishery in order to adapt to climate 
change.183

More reliable trade in agricultural 
commodities will help countries 
experiencing unexpected weather 
extremes 
even  if  farmers,  businesses,  governments, 
and water managers dramatically increase 
the  productivity  of  land  and  water,  some 
parts  of  the  world  will  not  have  enough 
water  to  always  grow  all  of  their  food. 
Deciding  how  much  food  to  import  and 
how much to grow domestically has impli-
cations  for  agricultural  productivity  and 
water management (box 3.8). Seeking food 
self- sufficiency when resource endowments 
and  growth  potential  are  inadequate  will 
impose heavy economic and environmental 
costs. 

Many countries already import a large 
share of their food—most Arab countries 
import at least half of the food calories they 
consume—and  increasingly  harsh  condi-
tions mean that all countries need to prepare 

160 

WOrL D   De VeLOpMeN T  r e pOr

T   2 0 1 0

Box 3.8      Policy makers in Morocco face stark tradeoffs on cereal imports 

in rainfed areas, or any combination in 
between (orange line). In other words, a 
robust response to climate change could 
require Morocco to implement technical 
improvements between 100 percent and 
140 percent faster than it would have 

had to without climate change. Reduc-
ing net imports could only be achieved 
if Morocco made much higher efficiency 
gains domestically.

Source: World Bank, forthcoming a.

Achieving cereal self- sufficiency without increasing water use in Morocco 

Technological progress in irrigation efficiency (annual % change)
4.5

No climate change–50% of
cereals produced domestically
With climate change–50% of
cereals produced domestically
With climate change–60% of
cereals produced domestically

Morocco, with severe water constraints 
and a growing population, imports half 
its cereals. Even without climate change, 
if it wishes to maintain cereal imports at 
no more than 50 percent of demand with-
out increasing water use, Morocco would 
have to make technical improvements to 
achieve a combination of two options: 
either 2 percent more output per unit of 
water allocated to irrigated cereals or 1 
percent more output per unit of land in 
rainfed areas (blue line in figure). 

Adding in the effects of higher temper-
atures and reduced precipitation makes 
the task more challenging: technological 
progress will need to be 22–33 percent 
faster than without climate change 
(depending on the policy instruments 
selected) (green line in figure). But if the 
country wants more protection against 
domestic climate shocks to agriculture 
and against market price shocks and 
decides to increase the share of its con-
sumption produced domestically from 50 
percent to 60 percent, it has to increase 
water efficiency every year by 4 percent 
in irrigated agriculture, or by 2.2 percent 

4.0

3.5

3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

1.2

1.4

1.6

1.8

2.0

2.2

2.4

Technological progress in rainfed yields (annual % change)

for  failure  of  domestic  crops.184  Climate 
change  will  make  today’s  arid  countries 
drier, compounding the increased demand 
from  growing  income  and  populations. 
Therefore, more people will live in regions 
that  consistently  import  a  large  share  of 
their  food  every  year.  In  addition,  more 
people will live in countries that experience 
shocks to domestic agriculture, as climate 
change increases the likelihood and sever-
ity of extreme climate events. Several global 
scenarios project a 10–40 percent increase 
in net imports by developing countries as 
a result of climate change.185 Trade in cere-
als is projected to more than double in vol-
ume by 2050, and trade in meat products to 
more than quadruple.186 And most of the 
increased dependence on food imports will 
come in developing countries.187

As the sharp rise of food prices in 2008 
illustrated, the global food market is vola-
tile. Why did the prices spike? First, grain 
markets are thin: only 18 percent of world 
wheat  and  6  percent  of  world  rice  are 

exported. The rest is consumed where it is 
grown.188 And only a few countries export 
grain  (map  3.5).  In  thin  markets,  small 
shifts in either supply or demand can make 
a big difference in price. Second, per capita 
global food stocks were at one of the lowest 
levels on record. Third, as the market for 
biofuel increased, some farmers shifted out 
of  food  production,  contributing  signifi-
cantly to increases in world food prices.

When  countries  do  not  trust  interna-
tional markets, they respond to price hikes 
in ways that can make things worse. In 2008 
many countries restricted exports or con-
trolled prices to try to minimize the effects 
of higher prices on their own populations, 
including  Argentina,  India,  Kazakhstan, 
pakistan,  russia,  Ukraine,  and  Vietnam. 
India  banned  exports  of  rice  and  pulses, 
and Argentina raised export taxes on beef, 
maize, soybeans, and wheat.189

export bans or high export tariffs make 
the international market smaller and more 
volatile. For example, export restrictions on 

 

Managing Land and Water to Feed Nine Billion People and Protect Natural Systems 

161

Map 3.5      World grain trade depends on exports from a few countries

55.555.5
56.956.9

27.327.3
1.11.1

4.84.8
0.10.1

7.97.9
102.2
102.2

17.617.6
0.70.7

19.719.7
27.727.7

Amount of cereals
(million tons)

Exported

Imported

30.730.7
4.34.3

7.927.92
11.011.0

7.67.6
33.933.9

22.122.1
1.81.8

52.752.7
12.212.2

20.220.2
13.613.6

1.21.2
19.419.4

Source: FAO 2009c.
Note: Annual exports and imports are based on the average over four years (2002–2006).

rice in India affect Bangladeshi consumers 
adversely  and  dampen  the  incentives  for 
rice farmers in India to invest in agricul-
ture, a long- term driver of growth. In addi-
tion, export bans stimulate the formation 
of  cartels,  undermine  trust  in  trade,  and 
encourage  protectionism.  Domestic  price 
controls  can  also  backfire  by  diverting 
resources from those who need them most 
and by reducing incentives for farmers to 
produce more food.

Countries can take measures to improve 
access to markets 
Countries  can  take  unilateral  action  to 
improve their access to international food 
markets, a particularly important step for 
small countries whose actions do not affect 
the market but that nonetheless import a 
large share of their food. One of the sim-
plest ways is to improve procurement meth-
ods.  Sophisticated  measures  for  issuing 
tenders to import food, such as electronic 
tendering and bidding and advanced credit 
and hedging products, could all help gov-
ernments get a better deal. Another option 
would be to relax national laws that prohibit 

multinational  procurement  so  that  small 
countries can group together for economies 
of scale.190

A  third  measure  is  active  management 
of  stocks.  Countries  need  robust  national 
stockpiling  and  the  latest  instruments  in 
risk  hedging,  combining  small  physical 
stockpiles with virtual stockpiles purchased 
through futures and options. Models indi-
cate  that  futures  and  options  could  have 
saved  egypt  between  5  and  24  percent  of 
the roughly $2.7 billion it spent purchasing 
wheat between November 2007 and October 
2008,  when  prices  were  soaring.191  Global 
collective action in managing stocks would 
also  help  prevent  extreme  price  spikes.  A 
small  physical  food  reserve  could  allow  a 
smooth  response  to  food  emergencies.  An 
international coordinated global food reserve 
could reduce pressures to achieve grain self-
 sufficiency. And an innovative virtual reserve 
could prevent market price spikes and keep 
prices closer to levels suggested by long- run 
market  fundamentals  without  putting  the 
coordinated global reserves at risk.192

Weatherproofing  transport  services  is 
also critical to ensure year- round access to 

162 

WOrL D   De VeLOpMeN T  r e pOr

T   2 0 1 0

markets, particularly in countries such as 
ethiopia, with high variability in regional 
rainfall. Increased investments in improv-
ing  logistics  in  the  supply  chain—roads, 
ports,  customs  facilities,  wholesale  mar-
kets,  weighbridges,  and  warehouses—
would help get more food to consumers at a 
lower price. But institutional infrastructure 
is also needed. Transparency, predictability, 
and honesty in customs and warehousing 
are as important as the facilities.

Importing countries can also invest in 
various parts of the supply chain in pro-
ducing countries. It may also be possible, 
and  indeed  less  risky,  to  focus  on  sup-
ply  chain  infrastructure  or  agricultural 
research and development in the produc-
ing countries.

International rules to regulate trade will 
remain an important part of the picture
The  World  Trade  Organization’s  Doha 
Development Agenda sought to eliminate 
trade barriers and improve market access 
for developing countries. But negotiations 
were  suspended  in  2008.  One  study  con-
cludes  there  would  be  a  potential  loss  of 
at least $1.1 trillion in world trade if world 
leaders fail to conclude the Doha round.193 
Completing this agreement would be a key 
first step in improving international food 
trade. Key measures include pulling down 
effective tariff rates and reducing agricul-
tural subsidies and protection by developed 
countries.194

Reliable information is 
fundamental for good natural 
resource management

Investments in weather and climate 
services pay for themselves many times 
over, yet these services are sorely lacking 
in the developing world 
Typically the ratio of the economic benefits 
to the costs of national meteorological ser-
vices is in the range of 5–10 to 1,195 and a 
2006 estimate suggests it could be 69 to 1 in 
China.196 Weather and climate services can 
ameliorate the impacts of extreme events to 
some degree (see chapters 2 and 7). Accord-
ing  to  the  United  Nations  International 
Strategy  for  Disaster  reduction,  advance 

flood warnings can reduce flood damage by 
up to 35 percent.197 Much of the develop-
ing world, particularly in Africa, urgently 
needs  better  monitoring  and  forecasting 
systems for both weather and hydrological 
change (map 3.6). According to the World 
Meteorological  Organization,  Africa  has 
only one weather station per 26,000 square 
kilometers—one- eighth the recommended 
minimum.198  Data  rescue  and  archiving 
will also be important because long records 
of high- quality data are necessary to fully 
understand  climate  variability.  Many  of 
the world’s climate datasets contain digital 
data back to the 1940s, but only a few have 
digital archives of all available data before 
then.199

Better forecasts would improve  
decision making 
In Bangladesh the forecasts for precipita-
tion extend only to one to three days; lon-
ger forecasts would allow farmers time to 
modify planting, harvesting, and fertilizer 
applications,  especially  in  rainfed  crop-
ping  areas  where  food  crises  can  last  for 
many months. There have been significant 
improvements  in  seasonal  climate  fore-
casts  (how  precipitation  and  temperature 
over the course of a few months will vary 
from the norm), particularly in the trop-
ics  and  in  areas  affected  by  the  el  Niño 
Southern Oscillation (eNSO).200 The onset 
of monsoon rainfall in Indonesia and the 
philippines and the number of rainy days 
in a season in parts of Africa, Brazil, India, 
and Southeast Asia can now be predicted 
with greater precision.201 eNSO- based sea-
sonal  forecasts  in  South  America,  South 
Asia,  and  Africa  have  good  potential  for 
improving  agricultural  production  and 
food security.202 For example, in Zimbabwe 
subsistence farmers increased yields (rang-
ing from 17 percent in good rainfall years to 
3 percent in poor rainfall years) when they 
used seasonal forecasts to modify the tim-
ing or variety of the crops planted.203

New remote- sensing and monitoring 
technologies hold great promise for 
sustainability
One reason that policy makers have found 
it so difficult to curb the overexploitation of 

 

Managing Land and Water to Feed Nine Billion People and Protect Natural Systems 

163

Map 3.6      Developed countries have more data collection points and longer time series of water monitoring data 

Map 3.6
September 2009

Coverage period
(in years)
0–25
26–50
51–75
76–100
>100

Source: Dataset for global distribution and time series coverage was provided by the Global Runoff Data Center.
Note: The map shows the discharge monitoring stations that provide information on river runoff.

land and water and their related ecosystems 
is that neither the managers nor the users 
of the resources have accurate and timely 
information. They don’t know how much of 
the resource is present, how much is being 
used, or how their actions will affect quan-
tities in the future. But new remote- sensing 
technologies are beginning to fill some of 
that gap, informing decisions about more 
efficient  allocations  of  water  and  helping 
with enforcement of water limits. 

One of the most promising applications 
of  remote  sensing  measures  water’s  pro-
ductivity.204  When  thermal  images  from 
satellites are combined with field data on 
crop types and linked to maps from geo-
graphic information systems, scientists can 
measure  yields  on  any  geographic  scale 
(the farm, the basin, or the country). That 
allows water managers to make better deci-
sions about water allocations and to target 
advisory services to the farmers with low-
est water productivity. It also guides impor-
tant  investment  decisions—say,  between 
increasing  the  productivity  of  rainfed  or 
irrigated agriculture. And it can help man-
agers measure the actual results of invest-

ments in irrigation water- saving techniques, 
difficult in the past (figure 3.9). 

Until  recently,  measuring  groundwa-
ter consumption was difficult and expen-
sive  in  all  countries,  and  it  simply  was 
not  done  in  many  developing  countries. 
Taking  inventories  of  hundreds  of  thou-
sands of private wells and installing and 
reading  meters  was  too  costly.  But  new 
remote- sensing  technology  can  measure 
total evaporation and transpiration from 
a  geographic  area.  If  the  surface  water 
applied to that area through precipitation 
and  surface-water  irrigation  deliveries  is 
known, the net consumption of ground-
water can be imputed.205 Various countries 
are experimenting with using information 
from new remote- sensing technologies to 
enforce  groundwater  limits,  including 
those Moroccan farmers who are consider-
ing converting to drip irrigation (discussed 
at the beginning of the chapter). Options 
for enforcement include pumps that shut 
off automatically when the farmer exceeds 
the evapotranspiration limit and systems 
that  simultaneously  send  text  messages 
to  farmers’  cell  phones,  warning  them 

164 

WOrL D   De VeLOpMeN T  r e pOr

T   2 0 1 0

Figure 3.9      Remote- sensing techniques are used in the vineyards of Worcester (West Cape, 
South Africa) to gauge water productivity

Liters of
water per

liter of
wine

150

300

450

600

Source: Water Watch, www.waterwatch.nl (accessed May 1, 2009).
Note: Farmers whose fields are red are using one-fourth as much water per liter of wine than those whose 
fields are shown in blue. In addition to gauging water productivity, governments can also use these techniques 
to target the activities of advisory and enforcement services.

they are about to exceed their allocation 
of  groundwater,  and  alert  inspectors  to 
monitor those particular farms.206

Digital maps created from remote- sensing 
information  will  help  resource  managers 
at many levels.      Using information from 
remote  sensing  to  create  digital  maps  of 
all of Africa’s soils will be very useful for 
sustainable  land  management.  Current 
soil  maps  are  10–30  years  old  and  gener-
ally not digitized, making them inadequate 
to inform policies to address soil fertility 
and erosion. An international consortium 
is using the latest technologies to prepare 
a  digitized  global  map,  starting  with  the 
African  continent.207  Satellite  imagery 
and new applications now allow scientists 
to measure streamflow, soil moisture and 
water  storage  (lakes,  reservoirs,  aquifers, 
snow, and ice) and to forecast floods. They 
also make it possible to show crop yields, 
crop stress, CO2 uptake, species composi-
tion  and  richness,  land  cover  and  land-
 cover change (such as deforestation), and 

primary productivity. They can even map 
the spread of individual invasive plant spe-
cies.208  The  scales  vary,  as  does  the  tim-
ing  of  updates.  But  rapid  advances  allow 
managers to measure with a precision and 
regularity undreamed of only a few years 
ago. Depending on the satellite and weather 
conditions, the data can be available daily 
or even every 15 minutes. 

Research and development will be necessary 
to take full advantage of these new informa-
tion technologies.      There is great scope for 
applying new technologies and information 
systems to manage natural resource issues 
associated with climate change. Investments 
in satellite data for natural resource man-
agement can pay off in the long run. But the 
potential is far from being met, especially in 
the poorest countries. A study in the Nether-
lands concluded that additional investments 
in  satellite  observations  for  water  quality 
management (eutrophication, algal blooms, 
turbidity), including the capital costs of the 
satellite, has a 75 percent probability of pro-
ducing  financial  benefits.209 r esearch  and 
development of these tools and their appli-
cation in developing countries are thus ripe 
for public and private investment.210

More reliable information can 
empower communities and change the 
governance of natural resources 
Natural  resource  management  often 
requires  governments  to  set  and  enforce 
laws, limits, or prices. political and socio-
economic  pressures  make  this  very  diffi-
cult,  especially  where  formal  institutions 
are weak. But when resource users have the 
right information about the impacts of their 
actions, they can bypass governments and 
work together to reduce overexploitation, 
often increasing their revenues. Making a 
strong economic case for reform can help, 
as  in  a  recent  study  that  highlighted  the 
global cost of poor governance in marine 
capture fisheries.211

India  offers  several  examples  of  bet-
ter information resulting in more efficient 
agricultural production and welfare gains. 
In the state of Madhya pradesh a subsidiary 
of Indian Tobacco Company (ITC) devel-
oped a system called eChoupals to lower its 

 

Managing Land and Water to Feed Nine Billion People and Protect Natural Systems 

165

procurement cost and improve the quality 
of soybeans that it received from farmers. 
The eChoupals are village Internet kiosks 
run  by  local  entrepreneurs  who  provide 
price  information  on  soybean  futures  to 
farmers and enable them to sell their pro-
duce directly to ITC, bypassing the middle-
men and wholesale market yards (mandis). 
Through the eChoupals ITC spends less per 
ton of produce, and farmers immediately 
know the price they will receive, reducing 
waste and inefficiency. The payback period 
for the initial capital cost of developing the 
kiosks is about four to six years.212

A project sponsored by the UN’s Food 
and  Agriculture  Organization  in  Andhra 
pradesh,  India,  has  dramatically  reduced 
the  overexploitation  of  aquifers.  It  used 
low- tech and low- cost approaches to enable 
communities  to  assess  the  state  of  their 
own resources. rather than use expensive 
equipment and specialist hydrogeologists, 
the project brought in sociologists and psy-
chologists  to  assess  how  best  to  motivate 
the villagers to cut current water consump-
tion. It created “barefoot hydrogeologists,” 
to teach local people about the aquifer that 
sustained  their  livelihoods  (figure  3.10). 
These non-specialist, often illiterate, farm-
ers are generating such good data that they 
even sell it to the government hydrogeologi-
cal services. Through this project, aware-
ness of the impacts of their actions, social 
regulation,  and  information  about  new 
crop  varieties  and  techniques  led  the  vil-
lagers to agree to change crops and adopt 
practices to reduce evaporative losses.

With almost 1 million farmers, the proj-
ect  is  entirely  self- regulating,  and  there 
are no financial incentives or penalties for 
noncompliance. participating villages have 
reduced  withdrawals,  while  withdraw-
als  from  neighboring  villages  continue  to 
increase. For an undertaking of this scale, 
the cost is remarkably low—$2,000 a year 
for  each  of  the  65  villages.213  It  has  great 
potential for replication, but principally in 
the hard- rock aquifers that empty and refill 
quickly and that do not have vast lower layers 
common in other geological formations.214
These initiatives to encourage users to 
reduce overexploitation of natural resources 
can  reduce  dependence  on  overstretched 

government agencies and overcome broader 
governance issues. They can also be tools for 
governments, working with communities, 
to change user behavior. The hai basin, the 
most  water- scarce  in  China,  is  extremely 
important  for  agriculture.  Together  with 
two  neighboring  basins,  it  produces  half 
of  China’s  wheat.  Water  resources  in  the 
hai basin are polluted, wetland ecosystems 
threatened, and groundwater severely over-
exploited. every year the basin uses 25 per-
cent more groundwater than it receives as 
precipitation.215

In  this  same  basin,  the  Chinese  gov-
ernment worked with 300,000 farmers to 
innovate  in  water  management.  This  ini-
tiative  focused  on  reducing  overall  water 
consumption  rather  than  simply  increas-
ing water productivity. It combined invest-
ments  in  irrigation  infrastructure  with 
advisory  services  to  help  optimize  soil 
water.  It  limited  the  use  of  aquifer  water. 
It  introduced  new  institutional  arrange-
ments, such as transferring responsibility 
for managing irrigation services to groups 
of farmers and improving cost- recovery for 
surface water irrigation. And it used the lat-
est  monitoring  techniques,  by  measuring 
water productivity and groundwater con-
sumption at the plot level with satellite data, 
combined with more traditional agronomic 
services. The monitoring provides real- time 

Figure 3.10      In Andhra Pradesh, India, farmers 
generate their own hydrological data, using very 
simple devices and tools, to regulate withdrawals 
from aquifers

Source: Bank staff.
Note: Armed with information, each farmer sets his or her 
own limit for how much water to safely extract each growing 
season. Technical assistance helps them get higher returns 
for the water they use by managing soil water better, switch-
ing crops, and adopting different crop varieties.

166 

WOrL D   De VeLOpMeN T  r e pOr

T   2 0 1 0

information to policy makers and farmers 
so that they can adjust their practices, and 
detect noncompliance.216

The results have been impressive. Farm-
ers increased their incomes while reducing 
water consumption by switching to higher-
 value crops. Cash crop production tripled, 
farm  incomes  increased  up  to  fivefold  in 
many  areas,  and  agricultural  production 
per  unit  of  water  consumed  increased 
60–80 percent. Total water use in the area 
fell by 17 percent, with the rate of ground-
water depletion at 0.02 meters a year, com-
pared with 0.41 meters a year outside the 
project areas. 

In  summary,  technologies  and  tools 
exist or are being developed to help farm-
ers  and  other  resource  managers  manage 
water, land, farms, and fisheries. In an ideal 
world the right people would have access to 
these technologies and tools. But they will 
be effective only with the right policies and 
infrastructure.  This  ideal  world  is  repre-
sented pictorially in figures 3.11 and 3.12. 
Many of the steps toward this ideal world 

have frustrated societies for decades in the 
past.  But  circumstances  are  changing  in 
ways that might accelerate progress.

Pricing carbon, food, and energy 
could be the springboard 
This chapter suggests many new approaches 
to help developing countries cope with the 
additional  stress  that  climate  change  will 
put  on  efforts  to  manage  land  and  water 
resources  well.  It  emphasizes  repeatedly 
that  new  technologies  and  new  invest-
ments will bear fruit only in a context of 
strong institutions and sensible policies—
when  the  “fundamentals”  are  right.  Yet 
the fundamentals are not right in many of 
the world’s poorest countries. And getting 
them  right—building  strong  institutions, 
changing  subsidy  regimes,  changing  the 
way valuable commodities are allocated—
is a long- term process even in the best of 
circumstances. 

To  compound  the  problems,  many  of 
the  responses  this  chapter  proposes  to 
help  countries  improve  land  and  water 

Figure 3.11      An ideal climate- smart agricultural landscape of the future would enable farmers to use new technologies and techniques to maximize 
yields and allow land managers to protect natural systems, with natural habitats integrated into agriculturally productive landscapes 

Rangeland
with hardy varieties of livestock

Physical monitoring systems
• measure available water
• provide flood and other natural
  disaster warnings

Traditional communities
self regulate groundwater and grazing
in response to carbon credit
incentives: farmers use soil and water
conservation techniques; plant natural
windbreaks; establish buffer zones
and fallow land to provide habitats for
biodiversity
Conveyance
to direct stormwater to recharge aquifers

Research station
finds new ways to adapt crops and
management techniques to new
climatic conditions
Conservation tillage and
intercropping
used to grow rain-fed crops
Biochar made from crop residue
sequesters carbon and fertilizes the soil

Pump accesses groundwater for dry
years and automatically shuts off when
safe extraction is exceeded

Planned reserves
to allow species movement in response
to climate change

Source: WDR team.

Remote sensing systems
• measure species movement
• monitor safe extraction of water
• provide early warning for floods,
  droughts and landslides
• detect deforestation

Original forest ecosystem
• investors receive income based on
  carbon stored in soil and biomass
• indigenous communities receive
  income for verifying that deforestation
  is avoided and biodiversity preserved
• planned reserves to allow species
  movement in response to changing
  climate
Farmer receives SMS messages from
remote sensing system with alerts
about excess water consumption, 
crop water stress, etc.
Tea plantation
pays forest conservation fund for
pollination and soil preservation 
services provided by the forest
Private and public advisory services
help farmers adopt new agronomic
developments
Skilled employees
store, process and pack products
for direct contracts with markets
Carbon credits encourage farmers
to intersperse crops with trees
that provide habitat biodiversity
Water monitors
measure soil moisture

Commercial

forestry

Drip irrigation

 

Managing Land and Water to Feed Nine Billion People and Protect Natural Systems 

167

Figure 3.12      An ideal climate- smart landscape of the future would use flexible technology to buffer against climate shocks through natural 
infrastructure, built infrastructure, and market mechanisms

Dam
• provides energy, irrigation, and
  drought and flood protection
• re-engineered to cope with 
  extreme rainfall and minimize 
  environmental damage

Upgraded port and customs facility
to facilitate international trade

Power station
carbon captured and stored
underground

Bio-engineered trees
sequester carbon in former 
wasteland
Modern crop varieties
adapted to climate change stress

Coastal agriculture
with irrigation from coastal 
aquifers protected from saline 
intrusion

Desalination plant
• uses renewable energy
• provides water to city and 
  coastal agriculture

Regulated fishery
ensures catch is at sustainable 
levels

City
built away from the flood plain
• distributed energy system
  including renewables
• planned for low-carbon transport
• buildings use low environmental-
  impact materials
• road materials and drainage
  designed for increased
  temperatures and severe storms

Bonded warehouse
for grain stocks to buffer price 
shocks in international grain market

Wastewater treatment plant
treated water
• injected into aquifer to protect
  against saline intrusion
• piped to coastal wetlands to
  counteract excess abstraction
• used for irrigation upstream

Wetlands
preserved to sequester
carbon, provide habitat, and
purify water
Mangroves protected:
• in response to incentives
  from carbon credits
• to provide ecosystem services,
  including fish nursery and storm
  protection

Source: WDR team.

Fish farms

Flood protection barrier

Fish farms

management in the face of climate change 
require farmers, many of them among the 
world’s poorest, to change their practices. 
It  also  requires  people  operating  beyond 
the law (illegal loggers, illegal miners) and 
wealthy, influential people (including prop-
erty developers) to stop practices that have 
brought them extreme profits. This chapter 
is proposing accelerating actions that have 
at best seen slow progress in the past few 
decades. Is it realistic to expect change on a 
sufficient scale to really tackle the challenge 
climate change confronts us with?

Three new factors might provide the stim-
ulus for change and overcome some of the 
barriers that have hampered these improve-
ments  in  the  past.  First,  climate  change  is 
expected  to  increase  the  price  of  energy, 
water, and land and thus of food and other 
agricultural commodities. That will increase 
the  pace  of  innovation  and  accelerate  the 
adoption of practices that increase produc-
tivity. Of course higher prices will also make 
it more profitable to overexploit resources or 

encroach on natural habitats. Second, a car-
bon price applied to carbon in the landscape, 
may encourage landowners to conserve natu-
ral resources. If implementation difficulties 
could be overcome, this would buy down the 
risk to farmers of adopting new practices. It 
might also give landowners the right incen-
tives to protect natural systems. Third, if the 
world’s  $258  billion  a  year  in  agricultural 
subsidies  were  even  partially  redirected  to 
carbon sequestration and biodiversity conser-
vation, it would demonstrate the techniques 
and approaches outlined in this chapter on 
the necessary scale. 

Rising energy, water, and agricultural 
prices could spur innovation and 
investment in increasing productivity 
A combination of factors will drive up food 
prices in the next few decades. They include 
increased demand for food from growing 
and  increasingly  rich  populations.  They 
also include increased production of bio-
fuels, which could result in competition for 

168 

WOrL D   De VeLOpMeN T  r e pOr

T   2 0 1 0

agricultural land and water. Furthermore, 
it will become more difficult to grow food 
because of climate change. And as chapter 4 
shows, climate change policies are likely to 
drive up energy prices.217

higher  electricity  prices  mean  higher 
water prices when water is pumped. In those 
cases, efficient water allocation mechanisms 
will become more important, as will efforts 
to reduce leaks from any poorly maintained 
water transfer and distribution networks. 
higher energy prices also increase the cost 
to  the  government  of  subsidizing  water 
services. This could increase incentives for 
long- needed reform of water management 
policies  and  investments.218  And  because 
fertilizers are a petroleum-based product, 
higher oil prices will encourage more judi-
cious use.

Figure 3.13      Global cereal prices are expected to 
increase 50 to 100 percent by 2050

Cereal price increase without CO2
fertilization (percentage change)
400

350

300

250

200

150

100

50

0

2020
2050
2080

A2a

B2a

Scenario

Source: Parry and others 2004.
Note: The IPCC SRES A2 family of emission scenarios 
describes a world where population continues to grow, and 
the trends of per capita income growth and technological 
change vary between regions and are slower than in other 
story lines. The B2 scenario family describes a world where 
global population grows at a rate lower than in A2, economic 
development is intermediate, and technological change is 
moderate.

Food  prices  are  expected  to  be  higher 
and more volatile in the long run. Modeling 
for the IAASTD projected that maize, rice, 
soybean, and wheat prices will increase by 
60–97 percent between 2000 and 2050 under 
business as usual, and prices for beef, pork, 
and poultry, by 31–39 percent.219 Other sim-
ulations of the world food system also show 
that  climate- induced  shortfalls  of  cereals 
increase food prices.220 In most estimates, 
cereal prices are projected to increase, even 
if farmers adapt.221 By 2080 different scenar-
ios project that world food prices will have 
increased by around 7–20 percent with CO2 
fertilization and by around 40–350 percent 
without (figure 3.13).222

poor people, who spend up to 80 percent 
of  their  money  on  food,  probably  will  be 
hardest hit by the higher food prices. The 
higher prices associated with climate change 
risk reversing progress in food security in 
several  low- income  countries.  Although 
scenario results differ, nearly all agree that 
climate change will put more people at risk 
of hunger in poorer nations, with the largest 
increases in South Asia and Africa.223

Like  energy  prices,  high  food  prices 
have  profound  effects  on  the  potential 
adjustments  in  land  and  water  use  stem-
ming from climate change. Investments in 
agriculture, land, and water become more 
profitable for farmers as well as the public 
and  private  sectors.  private  agricultural 
companies, international aid donors, inter-
national development banks, and national 
governments can see and act on the higher 
international prices fairly quickly. But the 
transmission of increases in international 
food  prices  to  farmers  is  imperfect,  as 
shown in the 2007–08 food price crisis. For 
example, farmers in most of Sub- Saharan 
Africa  saw  higher  food  prices  only  after 
some  lag,  and  the  transmission  of  higher 
prices was slower and less complete than in 
most of Asia and Latin America.224

The  better  the  quality  of  rural  infra-
structure,  the  more  farmers  benefit  from 
higher  international  prices.  high  food 
prices  can  spur  land  conversion  to  crops 
and  livestock,  with  negative  impacts  on 
ecosystems. But they can also induce sig-
nificant  new  investments  in  agricultural 
research, irrigation development, and rural 

 

Managing Land and Water to Feed Nine Billion People and Protect Natural Systems 

169

infrastructure to intensify production. The 
simultaneous rise in energy and food prices 
will also make some big investments prof-
itable again, including large multipurpose 
dams  for  power  and  irrigation.  It  will  be 
important to channel the incentives from 
high  food  prices  into  innovative  invest-
ments and policy reforms to boost agricul-
tural productivity while making land and 
water use sustainable.

An international price that paid for 
avoiding emissions and sequestering 
carbon in agriculture could encourage 
better protection of natural systems 
Under  the  Clean  Development  Mecha-
nism  of  the  Kyoto  protocol,  agricultural 
soil  carbon  sequestration  projects  in  the 
developing world are not eligible for selling 
carbon credits to investors in the developed 
world. If they were, incentives for farmers 
and other land users would change funda-
mentally. Carbon markets that cover green-
house  gases  from  agricultural  and  other 
land-management  practices  could  be  one 
of the most important mechanisms to drive 
sustainable development in a world affected 
by climate change. The potential is huge: 
one source estimates 4.6 gigatons of CO2 or 
more a year by 2030, which is more than 
half of the potential from forestry (7.8 giga-
tons of CO2 a year).225 At $100 a ton of CO2e, 
potential emission reductions from agricul-
ture are on par with those from energy (see 
overview, box 8). Models show that pricing 
carbon in agriculture and land-use change 
would help prevent the conversion of intact 
ecosystems  (“unmanaged  land”  in  figure 
3.14) to meet rising demand for biofuel.

Although the mechanisms for conserv-
ing soil carbon through a carbon price are 
not yet developed, the potential to reduce 
emissions  from  agriculture  is  large.  even 
in  Africa,  where  relatively  carbon- poor 
drylands make up 44 percent of the con-
tinent,  the  possibility  for  agricultural 
carbon sequestration is great.226 The pro-
jected mean agricultural mitigation poten-
tial across the continent is 100 million to 
400 million metric tons of CO2e a year by 
2030.227 With a relatively low price of $10 
a  metric  ton  in  2030,  this  financial  flow 
would be comparable to the annual official 

development assistance to Africa.228 A study 
of  African  pastoralists  shows  that  even 
modest improvements in natural resource 
management  could  produce  additional 
carbon sequestration of 0.50 metric ton of 
carbon  a  year  per  hectare.  A  price  of  $10 
per metric ton of CO2 would increase their 
incomes by 14 percent.229

Carbon  sequestration  in  agriculture 
would be a relatively inexpensive and effi-
cient  response  to  climate  change.  The 
abatement  cost  in  agriculture  in  2030  is 
estimated  to  be  almost  an  order  of  mag-
nitude lower than that in the forestry sec-
tor ($1.8 per metric ton of CO2 equivalent 
compared with $13.5 per metric ton of CO2 
equivalent).230 One reason for this is that 
many agricultural techniques that improve 
carbon sequestration also increase agricul-
tural yields and revenues.

So, the techniques for storing more car-
bon in soil already exist, but they are not 
being adopted. The list of causes is long—
inadequate  knowledge  of  management 
techniques appropriate to tropical and sub-
tropical soils, weak extension infrastructure 
to deliver the available innovations, lack of 
property  rights  to  encourage  investments 
with  long- term  payoffs  but  short- term 
costs, inappropriate fertilizer taxation poli-
cies, and poor transport infrastructure. 

The world community could take four 
practical steps to expand the carbon mar-
ket. First, rather than attempt to monitor 
detailed emissions and uptakes in each field, 
the people involved in the carbon markets 
(local and international) need to agree on a 
simplified  actuarial-based accounting sys-
tem that monitors the activities of farmers 
and conservatively estimates the associated 
carbon  sequestration.231  It  would  not  be 
cost- effective or feasible to measure carbon 
sequestration  across  multiple,  dispersed 
smallholder parcels in the developing world. 
Moreover, the approach is transparent and 
would allow the farmer to know up front 
what the payments and penalties would be 
for various activities. 

The processes by which soils take up or 
emit carbon are complex. They vary from 
place  to  place  (even  within  a  field)  and 
depend  on  soil  properties,  climate,  farm-
ing  system,  and  land- use  history.  Further, 

170 

WOrL D   De VeLOpMeN T  r e pOr

T   2 0 1 0

Figure 3.14      A carbon tax applied to emissions from agriculture and land- use change would encourage protection of natural resources.

a. Share of global land area if carbon tax applied to emissions

from both energy and land-use change

b. Share of global land area if carbon

tax applied only to energy

Share of total (%)
Urban land

100

Desert

Other unmanaged land

Unmanaged forests

80

60

Managed forests

40

Grassland

Unmanaged pasture

20

Pasture

Crops

0
1990

Share of total (%)
Urban land

100

Desert

Other unmanaged land

Unmanaged forests

Managed forests

Grassland

Unmanaged pasture

80

60

40

20

Bioenergy crops

Pasture

Bioenergy crops

Crops

2005

2020

2035

2050

2065

2080

2095

0
1990

2005

2020

2035

2050

2065

2080

2095

Year

Year

Source: Wise and others 2009.
Note: Projections based on the MiniCAM Global Integrated Assessment Model. Both scenarios represent a path to achieve a CO2 concentration of 450 ppm by 2095. In figure 
3.14a, a price is put on carbon emissions from fossil fuels, industry, and land- use change. In figure 3.14b, the same price is applied but only to fossil- fuel and industry emissions. 
When a price is not applied to terrestrial emissions, growers are likely to encroach into natural habitats, mainly in response to the demand for biofuels.

annual changes are usually small relative to 
existing stocks. And the sequestration pla-
teaus quickly. Carbon accumulation in soil 
saturates after about 15–30 years, depend-
ing  on  the  type  of  agriculture,  and  few 
emission reductions would occur after that 
time.232  Furthermore,  no- till  agriculture 
in heavy clay soils can result in releases of 
nitrous oxide—a powerful greenhouse gas. 
These emissions would more than outweigh 
the carbon storage benefits of adopting the 
new techniques over the first five years. No-
till may therefore not be a good greenhouse 
gas emission reduction technique in some 
soils.233 But it is possible, based on existing 
data and modeling, to broadly estimate car-
bon sequestration per agricultural practice 
for agroecological and climatic zones. More-
over, cost- effective techniques for measuring 
soil carbon in the field (using lasers, ground-
 penetrating radar, and gamma ray spectros-
copy) now allow for faster measurement of 
carbon  sequestration  and  the  updating  of 
model estimates at smaller spatial scales.234 

In the meantime, programs could use con-
servative  estimates  of  sequestration  across 
soil types and focus on regions where there is 
more certainty about soil carbon stocks and 
flows (such as the more productive agricul-
tural areas). Moreover, no carbon sequestra-
tion technique (such as conservation tillage) 
is a panacea in every cropping system and 
across every soil type.

A model for such a system may be the 
Conservation reserve program adminis-
tered by the U.S. Department of Agricul-
ture on nearly 14 million hectares of land 
since 1986.235 This voluntary program was 
initially established to reduce soil erosion, 
with  landowners  and  agricultural  pro-
ducers entering contracts to retire highly 
erodible  and  environmentally  sensitive 
cropland and pasture from production for 
10–15 years in return for payments. Over 
time the program expanded its objective to 
include the conservation of wildlife habi-
tat  and  water  quality,  and  the  payments 
are based on an aggregate environmental 

 

Managing Land and Water to Feed Nine Billion People and Protect Natural Systems 

171

Benefits  Index  of  the  parcel  and  of  the 
specific activity (such as riparian buffers 
and shelterbelts). The actual environmen-
tal benefits of each parcel are not directly 
measured  but  rather  estimated  based  on 
activities,  and  a  similar  activity- based 
system could apply to agricultural carbon 
sequestration.236

The second practical step involves devel-
oping  “aggregators”—typically  private 
or  nongovernmental  organizations  that 
reduce transaction costs of the activities by 
integrating them over multiple smallholder 
farmers,  forest  dwellers,  and  pastoralists. 
Without them the market will tend to favor 
large  reforestation  projects,  because  the 
land of the average individual smallholder 
farmer  in  the  developing  world  cannot 
sequester  very  large  amounts.  Scaling  up 
spatially will also reduce concerns related 
to  the  uncertainty  and  impermanence  of 
the  carbon  stock.  Adopting  an  actuarial 
approach,  pooling  across  a  portfolio  of 
projects,  and  applying  conservative  esti-
mates could make soil carbon sequestration 
fully equivalent to CO2 reductions in other 
sectors.237

Third,  the  up- front  costs  for  carbon-
 sequestering  management  practices  must 
be  addressed.  Adopting  new  practices  is 
risky, especially for poor farmers.238 Car-
bon finance is typically delivered only after 
the farmers have actually reduced emissions 
(as in pilot projects in Kenya described in 
box 3.9). But the promise of future carbon 
finance can be used to make up-front pay-
ments to buy down farmers’ risks either as 
collateral for loans, or by having investors 
make some of the payments up front.

Fourth,  farmers  need  to  know  about 
their options. This will involve better agri-
cultural advisory services in the develop-
ing world. Agricultural extension services 
are  good  investments:  the  average  rate  of 
return globally is 85 percent.239 Companies 
or organizations that can measure or verify 
results will also be required. 

The  Chicago  Climate  exchange,  one 
subset  of  the  voluntary  market,  shows 
the  possible  benefits  of  trading  the  car-
bon sequestration from landscape- related 
activities.240  It  allows  emitters  to  receive 
carbon credits for continuous conservation 
tillage, grassland planting, and rangeland 

management.  For  agricultural  carbon 
trading, the exchange requires that mem-
bers place 20 percent of all earned offsets in 
a reserve to insure against possible future 
reversals. The exchange shows that simpli-
fied  rules  and  modern  monitoring  tech-
niques  can  overcome  technical  barriers. 
however,  some  critics  claim  that  “addi-
tionality” has not been fully assessed: the 
net emission reductions may not be greater 
than they would have been in the absence 
of a market.

In the near term the voluntary market 
incubates  methods  for  agricultural  and 
landscape- level sequestration. But for these 
measures to really expand in this direction, 
the market for them will need to be linked 
to  the  future  global  compliance  market. 
The economies of scale that landscape- level 
sequestration promises will be more readily 
accessed if there are no divisions separating 
sequestration in agriculture and forestry.

Because carbon sequestration activities 
tend to have a positive impact on soil and 
water management as well as on yields,241 
the  most  important  aspect  of  carbon 
finance applied to soil management may be 
to serve as a “lever” to execute the sustain-
able  agricultural  practices  that  also  have 
many  other  benefits.  From  1945  to  1990 
soil degradation in Africa reduced agricul-
tural productivity by an estimated 25 per-
cent.242 And about 86 percent of the land in 
Sub- Saharan Africa is moisture- stressed.243 
effective carbon finance mechanisms would 
help reduce the rate of land degradation. A 
soil compliance carbon market holds great 
potential for helping to achieve the neces-
sary balance between intensifying produc-
tivity,  protecting  natural  resources,  and 
simultaneously helping rural development 
in some of the world’s poorest communi-
ties. Such a market is not yet ready. Techni-
cal issues regarding verification, scale, and 
time frame remain to be solved. The United 
Nations  Framework  Convention  on  Cli-
mate Change proposes a phased approach 
starting with capacity building and finan-
cial support. The first phase would demon-
strate techniques, monitoring approaches, 
and financing mechanisms. In the second 
phase  soil  carbon  techniques  would  be 
incorporated into the broader compliance 
carbon market.244

172 

WOrL D   De VeLOpMeN T  r e pOr

T   2 0 1 0

Box 3.9    Pilot projects for agricultural carbon finance in Kenya

Preliminary results from two pilot proj-
ects in western Kenya indicate that 
smallholder agriculture can be inte-
grated into carbon finance. One involves 
mixed cropping systems across 86,000 
hectares, using a registered association 
of 80,000 farmers as the aggregator. 
Another smaller coffee project encom-
passes 7,200 hectares thus far, and a 
9,000-member farmer cooperative 
serves as the aggregator. The average 
size of landholdings for both projects is 
small (about 0.3 hectare).

The amount of carbon sequestration is 
estimated to be 516,000 tons and 30,000 
tons of CO2e a year, respectively, 

The sequestration activities include 

reduced tillage, cover crops, residue 
management, mulching, composting, 
green manure, more targeted applica-
tion of fertilizers, reduced biomass burn-
ing, and agroforestry. The projects use 
activity-based monitoring. The estimates 
of carbon sequestration over 20 years are 
derived from a model known as RothC. 
The World Bank BioCarbon Fund is pur-
chasing the carbon credits based on a 
price per ton mutually agreed on by the 
fund and the project developers, VI Agro-
forestry and Swedish Cooperative Centre 
and ECOM Agroindustrial Group. Of the 
total revenues that the communities 

receive, 80 percent will go to the com-
munity and 20 percent to monitoring and 
project development.

Two lessons are emerging. First, a good 
aggregator is essential, especially one that 
can also advise on agricultural practices. 
Second, the method for monitoring must 
be simple and accessible and transparent 
to the farmer. In these cases, the farmer 
can easily consult a table to determine the 
exact payment he or she will receive for 
each activity, a system that encourages 
participation.

Sources: Kaonga and Coleman 2008; 
Woelcke and Tennigkeit 2009.

Redirecting agricultural subsidies 
could be an important mechanism 
for achieving climate- smart land and 
water management 
The member countries of the Organisation 
for economic Co- operation and Develop-
ment provide $258 billion every year in sup-
port to their farmers, which amounts to 23 
percent of farm earnings.245 Of this support 
60 percent is based on the quantity of a spe-
cific commodity produced and on variable 
inputs with no constraints attached to their 
use—only 2 percent is for noncommodity 
services  (such  as  creating  buffer  strips  to 
protect waterways, preserving hedgerows, 
or protecting endangered species). 

The  political  imperatives  of  climate 
change offer an opportunity to reform those 
subsidy  schemes,  to  focus  them  more  on 
climate  change mitigation and adaptation 
measures  that  would  also  benefit  domes-
tic  soil,  water,  and  biodiversity  resources 
as  well  as  increase  farm  productivity.  In 
addition to these direct benefits, allocating 
resources on that scale would also demon-
strate  whether  these  climate- smart  tech-
niques can be applied on a large scale in the 
developing world and attract entrepreneur-
ial ingenuity and energy to find new ways of 
solving the technical and monitoring prob-
lems that will arise.

The  european  Union  has  already 
reformed its Common Agricultural policy 

so  that  any  income  support  to  farmers  is 
contingent on their meeting good environ-
mental and agricultural standards, and any 
rural  development  support  goes  to  mea-
sures that improve competitiveness, man-
age the environment and the land, improve 
the quality of life, and increase diversifica-
tion. Through the rural development sup-
port category, farmers can be compensated 
if they provide environmental services that 
go  beyond  the  mandatory  standards.246 
This  reform  is  a  promising  initiative  to 
jump- start climate-  and farmer- smart agri-
cultural and natural resource policies, and 
the european Union could serve as a test-
bed for mechanisms that could be applied 
for sustainable land and water management 
in the developing world.

To  cope  with  the  effects  of  climate 
change on natural resources and simulta-
neously  reduce  emissions  of  greenhouse 
gases, societies need to produce more from 
land and water and protect their resources 
better.  To  produce  more,  they  need  to 
increase  investment  in  agriculture  and 
water management, particularly in devel-
oping countries. For agriculture that means 
investing in roads and research and devel-
opment as well as adopting better policies 
and institutions. For water, it means using 
new decision- making tools and better data, 

 

Managing Land and Water to Feed Nine Billion People and Protect Natural Systems 

173

strengthening policies and institutions, and 
investing  in  infrastructure.  The  expected 
increase  in  prices  of  agricultural  produc-
tion  will  give  farmers  and  other  resource 
users an incentive to innovate and invest. 
But  the  increased  profitability  will  also 
increase incentives to overexploit resources. 
protection needs the same increase in effort 
as production. 

A  number  of  tools,  techniques,  and 
approaches exist that can help users protect 
natural  resources  better.  But  users  often 
do  not  have  the  right  incentives  to  apply 
them. There are disparities in space and in 
time. What is best for a farmer is not best 
for the whole landscape or watershed. What 
is optimal over a short time period is not 
optimal over decades. Doing things differ-
ently also involves asking poor farmers and 
rural dwellers to take risks they may not be 
willing to take. 

Governments  and  public  organizations 
can take three types of actions to make the 
incentives for resource users more climate-
 smart. First, they can provide information 
so that people can make informed choices 
and  can  enforce  cooperative  agreements. 
This  can  be  high- tech  information.  It  can 
also be information that communities them-
selves gather. Second, they can set a price for 
retaining or storing carbon in the soil. Done 
right,  this  will  reduce  the  risks  to  farm-
ers  of  adopting  new  practices.  It  will  also 
help resource users consider a longer time 
horizon in their decisions. Third, they can 
redirect agricultural subsidies, particularly 
in  rich  countries,  so  that  they  encourage 
climate- smart rural development practices. 
These subsidies can be transformed to show 

how the new techniques can be adopted on 
a large scale, and they can be used to make 
individual actions fit better with the needs 
of the landscape as a whole. Finally, they can 
attract the ingenuity and creativity needed 
to achieve the delicate balancing act of feed-
ing the world of nine billion people, reducing 
greenhouse  gas  emissions,  and  protecting 
the natural resource base.

Notes

1. See for example Lotze- Campen and others 

2009.

2. IpCC 2007b.
3. OeCD 2008.
4. Burke and Brown 2008; Burke, Brown, and 

Christidis 2006.

5. Milly and others 2008; Barnett, Adam, and 

Lettenmaier 2005.

6. de la Torre, Fajnzylber, and Nash 2008.
7. World Water Assessment programme 2009.
8. perry and others, forthcoming.
9. World Water Assessment programme 2009.
10. World Bank, forthcoming d.
11. World Bank, forthcoming d.
12. Molden 2007.
13. Milly and others 2008; ritchie 2008; Young 

and McColl 2005.

14. As the public trustee of the nation’s water 
resources, the national government, acting through 
the minister of water affairs, must ensure that water 
is protected, used, developed, conserved, managed, 
and controlled in a sustainable and equitable man-
ner, for the benefit of all persons and in accordance 
with its constitutional mandate. Salman M. A. Sal-
man, World Bank Staff, personal communication, 
July 2009. 

15. Dye and Versfeld 2007.
16. Bates and others 2008.
17. Molle and Berkoff 2007.
18. Molle and Berkoff 2007; OeCD 2009.

“Our globe is facing environmental problems due to human behavior—cutting 

down trees, air pollution, use of plastics cannot be reused or recycled, chemical 
hazards in agriculture. . . . Tree planting would reduce CO2.”

—Netpakaikarn Netwong, Thailand, age 14

174 

WOrL D   De VeLOpMeN T  r e pOr

T   2 0 1 0

19. Olmstead, hanemann, and Stavins 2007.
20. Molle and Berkoff 2007.
21. Asad and others 1999.
22. Bosworth and others 2002.
23. See  Murray  Darling  Basin  Agreement 
Schedule  e,  http://www.mdbc.gov.au/about/the_
mdbc_agreement.

24. Molle and Berkoff 2007.
25. rosegrant and Binswanger 1994.
26. World Bank 2007b.
27. Bates and others 2008; Molden 2007.
28. Young and McColl 2005.
29. http://www.environment.gov.au/water/mdb/ 

overallocation.html (accessed May 7, 2009).

30. Molden 2007.
31. World Bank, forthcoming b.
32. World Bank, forthcoming b.
33. World Bank, forthcoming b.
34. Bhatia and others 2008.
35. Strzepek and others 2004.
36. World  Commission  on  Dams  2000.  For 
discussion  of  the  impacts  of  the  high  Dam  at 
Aswan on soil fertility and coastlines in the Nile 
Delta, see ritchie 2008.

37. World Water Assessment programme 2009.
38. Danfoss Group Global. http://www.danfoss 
.com/Solutions/reverse+Osmosis/Case+stories 
.htm (accessed May 9, 2009).

39. FAO 2004b.
40. Desalination is also viable for high- value 
agriculture  in  some  parts  of  the  world,  such  as 
Spain. Gobierno de españa 2009.

41. World Water Assessment programme 2009.
42. Molden 2007.
43. Molden 2007.
44. Molden 2007.
45. rosegrant, Cai, and Cline 2002.
46. For  example,  see  the  reference  to  the 
Indian  Financial  Express  on  December  1  2008, 
cited in perry and others, forthcoming.

47. De Fraiture and perry 2007; Molden 2007; 

Ward and pulido- Velazquez 2008.

48. perry and others, forthcoming.
49. Moller and others 2004; perry and others, 

forthcoming.

50. perry and others, forthcoming.
51. www.fieldlook.com (accessed May 5, 2009).
52. perry and others, forthcoming.
53. World Bank, forthcoming c.
54. Carbon  dioxide  (CO2)  is  an  input  in 
photosynthesis, the process by which plants use 
sunlight to produce carbohydrates. Thus, higher 
CO2 concentrations will have a positive effect on 
many  crops,  enhancing  biomass  accumulation 
and final yield. In addition, higher CO2 concen-
trations  reduce  plant  stomatal  openings—the 
pores through which plants transpire, or release 
water—and thus reduce water loss. The so- called 
C3 crops, such as rice, wheat, soybeans, legumes, 

as  well  as  trees,  should  benefit  more  than  the 
C4  crops,  such  as  maize,  millet,  and  sorghum. 
however,  recent  field  experiments  indicate  that 
past  laboratory  tests  have  overstated  the  posi-
tive  effect.  For  example,  one  study  indicates 
that at CO2 concentrations of 550 parts per mil-
lion, yield increases amounted to 13 percent for 
wheat, not 31 percent; 14 percent for soybeans, 
not 32 percent; and 0 percent, not 18 percent, for 
C4 crops. Cline 2007. For this reason, the graph-
ics in this chapter show only yields without CO2 
fertilization.

55. easterling and others 2007.
56. eBrD and FAO 2008.
57. Fay, Block, and ebinger 2010.
58. A  food  production  shortfall  is  a  situa-
tion in which the weather makes annual poten-
tial production of the most important crops in 
an  administrative  region  less  than  50  percent 
of  the  region’s  average  production  level  during 
1961–1990.  The  greater  likelihood  of  shortfalls 
occurring  in  more  than  one  region  in  a  given 
year may reduce the potential for exports from 
other  regions  to  compensate  for  food  produc-
tion  deficiencies,  thus  leading  to  food  security 
concerns. Alcamo and others 2007.
59. easterling and others 2007.
60. Cline  2007.  The  high- emission  scenario  is 
the IpCC’s SreS A2 scenario, which, over a range 
of  models,  leads  to  a  mean  temperature  increase 
of 3.13°C from 2080 to 2099 relative to 1980–99. 
Meehl and others 2007.

61. Lobell and others 2008.
62. Schmidhuber and Tubiello 2007.
63. Based on five climate models and the high-
 emission  SreS  A2  scenario.  Fischer  and  others 
2005.

64. Calculation based on FAO 2009c.
65. IpCC 2007a.
66. emissions come from converting unman-
aged land to agriculture, and from soil erosion. 

67. van der Werf and others 2008.
68. Steinfeld and others 2006.
69. This 18 percent sums the estimated contri-
bution of livestock production to emissions across 
several  categories,  such  as  land  use,  land- use 
change, and forestry, to get the total contribution 
of  livestock.  It  comprises  livestock  greenhouse 
gas emissions from land- use change (36 percent); 
manure  management  (31  percent);  direct  emis-
sion  by  animals  (25  percent);  feed  production 
(7 percent); and processing and transport (1 per-
cent). Steinfeld and others 2006.

70. IeA 2006. This estimate assumes that cur-
rent  trade  restrictions  are  maintained.  If  those 
restrictions change, particularly those that restrict 
imports  of  biofuels  into  the  United  States,  there 
could be a large regional shift in production.

71. Gurgel, reilly, and paltsev 2008.

 

Managing Land and Water to Feed Nine Billion People and Protect Natural Systems 

175

72. NrC  2007;  Tilman,  hill,  and  Lehman 

2006.

73. Beckett and Oltjen 1993.
74. hoekstra  and  Chapagain  2007.  pimen-
tel and others (2004) give an estimate of 43,000 
liters per kilogram of beef.

75. peden, Tadesse, and Mammo 2004. In this 
system  one  head  of  cattle  consumes  25  liters  of 
water a day over a two- year period to produce 125 
kilograms of dressed weight and consumes crop 
residues  for  which  no  additional  water  input  is 
required.

76. Williams,  Audsley,  and  Sandars  2006. 
Moreover,  some  sources  give  higher  emission 
estimates  for  meat  production—up  to  30  kilo-
gram  of  CO2e  per  kilogram  of  beef  produced, 
for  example  (Carlsson- Kanyama  and  Gonzales 
2009).

77. randolph  and  others  2007;  rivera  and 

others 2003.

78. Delgado and others 1999; rosegrant and 
others  2001;  rosegrant,  Fernandez,  and  Sinha 
2009; Thornton 2009; World Bank 2008e.

79. One  study  projects  that  total “good”  and 
“prime”  agricultural  land  available  will  remain 
virtually  unchanged  at  2.6  billion  and  2  billion 
hectares, respectively, in 2080 compared with the 
average during 1961–1990 (based on the hadley 
Centre hadCM3 climate model and assuming the 
very high emission scenario, SreS A1F1). Fischer, 
Shah, and van Velthuizen 2002; parry and others 
2004. 

80. Lotze- Campen and others 2009.
81. Cassman 1999; Cassman and others 2003.
82. Calculated from FAO 2009c.
83. Diaz and rosenberg 2008.
84. Schoups and others 2005.
85. Delgado and others 1999. 
86. hazell 2003.
87. hazell 2003; rosegrant and hazell 2000.
88. pingali and rosegrant 2001.
89. reardon and others 1998. 
90. rosegrant and hazell 2000. 
91. rosegrant and hazell 2000.
92. One form of specialized agricultural prod-
ucts  is  known  as  functional  foods.  These  are 
products  in  food  or  drink  form  that  influence 
functions in the body and thereby offer benefits 
for  health,  well- being,  or  performance  beyond 
their regular nutritional value. examples include 
antioxidant foods, such as guarana and açaí berry, 
vitamin  A- rich  golden  rice  and  orange- fleshed 
sweet  potato,  margarine  fortified  with  plant  ste-
rols  to  improve  cholesterol  levels,  and  eggs  with 
increased  omega- 3  fatty  acids  for  heart  health. 
Kotilainen and others 2006.

93. Ziska 2008.
94. T. Christopher, “Can Weeds help Solve the 

Climate Crisis?” New York Times, June 29, 2008.

95. Ziska and McClung 2008.
96. UNep- WCMC  2008.  In  the  oceans  the 
share of total area under protection is even more 
paltry.  Approximately  2.58  million  square  kilo-
meters,  or  0.65  percent  of  the  world’s  oceans 
and 1.6 percent of the total marine area within 
exclusive economic Zones, are marine protected 
areas. Laffoley 2008.

97. Gaston and others 2008.
98. hannah and others 2007.
99. Dudley and Stolton 1999.
100. Struhsaker, Struhsaker, and Siex 2005.
101. Scherr and McNeely 2008; McNeely and 

Scherr 2003.

102. van Buskirk and Willi 2004.
103. McNeely and Scherr 2008.
104. Chan and Daily 2008.
105. Leguminous  trees  contain  symbiotic 
bacterial  nodules  that  fix  atmospheric  nitro-
gen thereby enhancing the nutrients load in the 
plants and in the soil.

106. McNeely and Scherr 2003.
107. ricketts and others 2008.
108. Klein and others 2007.
119. Lin, perfecto, and Vandermeer 2008.
110. World Bank 2008a.
111. World Bank 2008a.
112. Of the $6 billion spent annually on land 
trusts and conservation easements, a third is in 
the developing world. Scherr and McNeely 2008.
113. A  typical  system  of  zoning  for  conser-
vation  allows  development  in  some  areas  and 
limits it in conservation areas. Tradable develop-
ment rights are an alternative to pure zoning that 
allows for substitutability between areas in meet-
ing conservation goals and provides incentives for 
compliance. Some landowners agree to limits on 
development—that is, restrictions on their prop-
erty rights—in return for payments. For instance, 
a government law may prescribe that 20 percent 
of each private property be maintained as natural 
forest. Landowners would be permitted to defor-
est beyond the 20 percent threshold only if they 
purchase from other landowners who keep more 
than 20 percent of their property forested and sell 
the  development  rights  of  this “surplus”  forest, 
which is irreversibly placed under forest reserve 
status. Chomitz 2004.

114. World Bank 2008c.
115. Alston and others 2000; World Bank 2007c.
116. Beintema and Stads 2008.
117. IAASTD 2009.
118. Blaise, Majumdar, and Tekale 2005; Gov-
aerts, Sayre, and Deckers 2005; Kosgei and others 
2007; Su and others 2007.

119. Thierfelder, Amezquita, and Stahr 2005; 

Zhang and others 2007.

120. Franzluebbers 2002.
121. Govaerts and others 2009.

176 

WOrL D   De VeLOpMeN T  r e pOr

T   2 0 1 0

122. Derpsch and Friedrich 2009.
123. Derpsch 2007; hobbs, Sayre, and Gupta 

2008.

124. World Bank 2005.
125. Derpsch  and  Friedrich  2009;  erenstein 

and Laxmi 2008.

126. erenstein 2009.
127. erenstein and others 2008. 
128. de la Torre, Fajnzylber, and Nash 2008.
129. passioura 2006.
130. Yan and others 2009.
131. Thornton 2009.
132. Smith and others 2009.
133. Doraiswamy and others 2007; perez and 

others 2007; Singh 2005.

134. Such as the deep placement of urea bri-

quettes or supergranules.

135. Singh 2005.
136. Singh 2005.
137. poulton, Kydd, and Dorward 2006; Dor-

ward and others 2004; pender and Mertz 2006.

138. hofmann and Schellnhuber 2009; Sabine 

and others 2004.

139. hansen and others 2005.
140. FAO 2009e.
141. FAO 2009e.
142. Delgado and others 2003.
143. FAO 2009e.
144. Arkema, Abramson, and Dewsbury 2006.
145. Smith, Gilmour, and heyward 2008.
146. Gordon 2007.
147. Armada, White, and Christie 2009.
148. pitcher and others 2009.
149. OeCD 2008; World Bank 2008d.
150. FAO 2009e.
151. World Bank 2008d.
152. Costello,  Gaines,  and  Lynham  2008; 

hardin 1968; hilborn 2007a; hilborn 2007b.

153. FAO  2009c.  Fish  and  seafood  include 
both marine and freshwater fish and invertebrates. 
Total animal protein includes the former, plus all 
terrestrial meat, milk, and other animal products. 
The data are for 2003. 

154. United Nations 2009.
155. FAO 2009c (2003 data).
156. FAO 2009e.
157. FAO 2009e.
158. World Bank 2006.
159. De Silva and Soto 2009.
160. De Silva and Soto 2009.
161. FAO 2004a.
162. Gyllenhammar and hakanson 2005.
163. Deutsch and others 2007.
164. Gatlin and others 2007.
165. Tacon, hasan, and Subasinghe 2006.
166. Tacon, hasan, and Subasinghe 2006.
167. Naylor and others 2000.
168. primavera 1997.
169. Tal and others 2009.

170. Naylor and others 2000.
171. FAO 2001; Lightfoot 1990.
172. Delgado and others 2003.
173. FAO 2009b.
174. For  example,  China  and  Nepal  are  not 
parties to an agreement between Bangladesh and 
India for the water of the Ganges basin and receive 
no allocation.

175. Salman 2007.
176. Qaddumi 2008.
177. Kurien 2005.
178. FAO 2009e.
179. Duda and Sherman 2002.
180. FAO 2009d; Sundby and Nakken 2008.
181. Lodge 2007.
182. BCLMe programme 2007.
183. GeF 2009.
184. World Bank 2009.
185. Fischer and others 2005.
186. rosegrant, Fernandez, and Sinha 2009.
187. easterling and others 2007.
188. FAO 2008.
189. Mitchell  2008.  Climate  shocks  have  led 
to  restrictive  domestic  food  trade  policies  and 
exacerbated  price  increases  in  the  past  as  well; 
for examples, see Battisti and Naylor 2009.

190. World Bank 2009.
191. World Bank 2009.
192. von Braun and others 2008.
193. Bouet and Laborde 2008.
194. Other  issues  need  a  case- by- case  assess-
ment, such as exemptions from tariff cuts on spe-
cial  products,  as  sought  by  developing  countries 
for products specified as important for food secu-
rity,  livelihood  security,  and  rural  development. 
World Bank 2007c.

195. WMO 2000.
196. Xiaofeng 2007.
197. United Nations 2004.
198. “Africa’s  Weather  Stations  Need  ‘Major 
effort,’”  Science  and  Development  Network. 
www.SciDev.net, November 7, 2006. 

199. WMO 2007.
200. Barnston and others 2005; Mason 2008.
201. Moron  and  others,  forthcoming;  Moron, 
robertson, and Boer 2009; Moron, robertson, and 
Ward 2006; Moron, robertson, and Ward 2007.

202. Sivakumar and hansen 2007.
203. patt, Suarez, and Gwata 2005.
204. Bastiaanssen 1998; Menenti 2000.
205. WaterWatch, www.waterwatch.nl (accessed 

May 9, 2009).

206. Bastiaansen,  W.,  WaterWatch,  personal 

communication, May 2009.

207. http://www.globalsoilmap.net/ (accessed 

May 15, 2009).

208. Bindlish, Crow, and Jackson 2009; Frap-

part and others 2006; Turner and others 2003. 

209. Bouma, van der Woerd, and Kulik 2009.

 

Managing Land and Water to Feed Nine Billion People and Protect Natural Systems 

177

210. UNeSCO 2007.
211. World Bank 2008d.
212. Kumar 2004.
213. World Bank 2007a.
214. World Bank, forthcoming b.
215. World Bank 2008b.
216. World Bank 2008b.
217. Mitchell 2008.
218. Zilberman and others 2008.
219. rosegrant, Fernandez, and Sinha 2009.
220. parry and others 1999; parry, rosenzweig, 
and Livermore 2005; rosenzweig and others 2001.

221. rosenzweig and others 2001.
222. parry and others 2004.
223. Fischer and others 2005; parry and others 
1999;  parry  and  others  2004;  parry  2007;  parry, 
rosenzweig,  and  Livermore  2005;  Schmidhuber 
and Tubiello 2007.

224. Dawe  2008;  robles  and  Torero,  forth-

coming; Simler 2009.

225. McKinsey & Company 2009.
226. perez and others 2007.
227. Smith and others 2009.
228. The official development assistance flow 
to Africa from 1996 to 2004 was about $1.30 bil-
lion a year: World Bank 2007c.
229. perez and others 2007.
230. McKinsey & Company 2009.
231. The sequestration benefits of those activi-
ties  would  be  regularly  updated  based  on  the 
state- of- the- art  measurement  and  model- based 
approaches.

232. West and post 2002.
233. rochette and others 2008. 
234. Johnston and others 2004.
235. Sullivan and others 2004.
236. In  the  Conservation  reserve  program, 
however,  landowners  bid  on  the  payments  and 
the government accepts or rejects the bids, which 
is quite different than a carbon emissions trad-
ing market.

237. McKinsey & Company 2009.
238. Tschakert 2004.
239. Alston and others 2000.
240. Chicago  Climate  exchange,  http://www 
.chicagoclimatex.com/index.jsf (accessed Febru-
ary 10, 2009).

241. Lal 2005.
242. UNep 1990.
243. Swift and Shepherd 2007.
244. FAO 2009a.
245. OeCD 2008.
246. http://ec.europa.eu/agriculture/capreform/
infosheets/crocom_en.pdf (accessed May 12, 2009).

References
Alcamo, J., N. Dronin, M. endejan, G. Golubev, 

and A. Kirilenko. 2007. “A New Assessment 

of Climate Change Impacts on Food produc-
tion Shortfalls and Water Availability in rus-
sia.” Global Environmental Change 17 (3–4): 
429–44.

Alston, J. M., C. Chan- Kang, M. C. Marra, p. G. 

pardey, and T. Wyatt. 2000. A Meta- Analysis of 
Rates of Return to Agricultural R&D: Ex Pede 
Herculem? Washington, DC: International 
Food policy research Institute.

Arango, h. 2003. Planificación Predial Partici-

pativa, Fundación Centro para la Investi-
gación en Sistemas Sostenibles de Producción 
Agropecuaria. Cali, Colombia: Fundación 
CIpAV, Ingeniero Agrícola.

Arkema, K. K., S. C. Abramson, and B. M. 

Dewsbury. 2006. “Marine ecosystem- Based 
Management: From Characterization to 
Implementation.” Ecology and the Environ-
ment 4 (10): 525–32.

Armada, N., A. T. White, and p. Christie. 2009. 
“Managing Fisheries resources in Danajon 
Bank, Bohol, philippines: An ecosystem-
 Based Approach.” Coastal Management 307 
(3–4): 308–30.

Asad, M., L. G. Azevedo, K. e. Kemper, and L. 
D. Simpson. 1999. “Management of Water 
resources: Bulk Water pricing in Brazil.” 
Technical paper 432, World Bank, Washing-
ton, DC.

Barnett, T. p., J. C. Adam, and D. p. Letten-

maier. 2005. “potential Impacts of a Warming 
Climate on Water Availability in Snow-
 dominated regions.” Nature 438: 303–09.
Barnston, A. G., A. Kumar, L. Goddard, and 

M. p. hoerling. 2005. “Improving Seasonal 
prediction practices through Attribution of 
Climate Variability.” Bulletin of the American 
Meteorological Society 86 (1): 59–72.

Bastiaanssen, W. G. M. 1998. Remote Sensing in 
Water Resources Management: The State of the 
Art. Colombo: International Water Manage-
ment Institute.

Bates, B., Z. W. Kundzewicz, S. Wu, and J. palu-

tikof. 2008. “Climate Change and Water.” 
Technical paper, Intergovernmental panel on 
Climate Change, Geneva:.

Battisti, D. S., and r. L. Naylor. 2009. “histori-

cal Warnings of Future Food Insecurity with 
Unprecedented Seasonal heat.” Science 323 
(5911): 240–44.

BCLMe programme. 2007. “The Changing State 

of the Benguela Current Large Marine eco-
system.” paper presented at the expert Work-
shop on Climate Change and Variability and 
Impacts Thereof in the BCLMe region, May 
15. Kirstenbosch research Centre, Cape Town.

178 

WOrL D   De VeLOpMeN T  r e pOr

T   2 0 1 0

Beckett, J. L., and J. W. Oltjen. 1993. “estimation 

of the Water requirement for Beef produc-
tion in the United States.” Journal of Animal 
Science 7 (4): 818–26.

Beintema, N. M., and G.- J. Stads. 2008. “Mea-

suring Agricultural research Investments: A 
revised Global picture.” Agricultural Science 
and Technology Indicators Background Note, 
International Food policy research Institute, 
Washington, DC.

Benbrook, C. 2001. “Do GM Crops Mean Less 

pesticide Use?” Pesticide Outlook 12 (5): 204–07.

Bhatia, r., r. Cestti, M. Scatasta, and r. p. S. 
Malik. 2008. Indirect Economic Impacts of 
Dams: Case Studies from India, Egypt and Bra-
zil. New Delhi: Academic Foundation.

Bindlish, r., W. T. Crow, and T. J. Jackson. 2009. 
“role of passive Microwave remote Sensing 
in Improving Flood Forecasts.” IEEE Geosci-
ence and Remote Sensing Letters 6 (1): 112–16.
Blaise, D., G. Majumdar, and K. U. Tekale. 2005. 

“On- Farm evaluation of Fertilizer Application 
and Conservation Tillage on productivity of 
Cotton and pigeonpea Strip Intercropping on 
rainfed Vertisols of Central India.” Soil and 
Tillage Research 84 (1): 108–17.

Bosworth, B., G. Cornish, C. perry, and F. van 
Steenbergen. 2002. Water Charging in Irri-
gated Agriculture: Lessons from the Literature. 
Wallingford, UK: hr Wallingford Ltd.

Bouët, A., and D. Laborde. 2008. “The Cost of a 
Non- Doha.” Briefing note, International Food 
policy research Institute, Washington, DC.

Bouma, J. A., h. J. van der Woerd, and O. J. 

Kulik. 2009. “Assessing the Value of Informa-
tion for Water Quality Management in the 
North Sea.” Journal of Environmental Manage-
ment 90 (2): 1280–88.

Burke, e. J., and S. J. Brown. 2008. “evaluat-

ing Uncertainties in the projection of Future 
Drought.” Journal of Hydrometeorology 9 (2): 
292–99.

Burke, e. J., S. J. Brown, and N. Christidis. 2006. 

“Modeling the recent evolution of Global 
Drought and projections for the 21st Century 
with the hadley Centre Climate Model.” Jour-
nal of Hydrometeorology 7: 1113–25.

Butler, r. A., L. p. Koh, and J. Ghazoul. Forth-

coming. “reDD in the red: palm Oil Could 
Undermine Carbon payment Schemes.” Con-
servation Letters. 

Carlsson- Kanyama, A., and A. D. Gonzales. 2009. 

“potential Contributions of Food Consump-
tion patterns to Climate Change.” American 
Journal of Clinical Nutrition 89 (5):1704S–09S.
Cassman, K. G. 1999. “ecological Intensification 
of Cereal production Systems: Yield potential, 

Soil Quality, and precision Agriculture.” Pro-
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
96 (11): 5952–59.

Cassman, K. G., A. Dobermann, D. T. Walters, and 
h. Yang. 2003. “Meeting Cereal Demand While 
protecting Natural resources and Improving 
environmental Quality.” Annual Review of Envi-
ronment and Resources 28: 315–58.

CeDAre (Center for environment and Devel-

opment in the Arab region and europe). 
2006. Water Conflicts and Conflict Manage-
ment Mechanisms in the Middle East and 
North Africa Region. Cairo: CeDAre.

Chan, K. M. A., and G. C. Daily. 2008. “The 

payoff of Conservation Investments in Tropi-
cal Countryside.” Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences 105 (49): 19342–47.
Chomitz, K. M. 2004. “Transferable Devel-

opment rights and Forest protection: An 
exploratory Analysis.” International Regional 
Science Review 27 (3): 348–73.

Cline, W. r. 2007. Global Warming and Agricul-
ture: Impact Estimates by Country. Washing-
ton, DC: Center for Global Development and 
peterson Institute for International economics.

Costello, C., S. D. Gaines, and J. Lynham. 2008. 

“Can Catch Shares prevent Fisheries Col-
lapse?” Science 321 (5896): 1678–81.

Dawe, D. 2008. “have recent Increases in Inter-

national Cereal prices Been Transmitted to 
Domestic economies? The experience in 
Seven Large Asian Countries.” Agricultural 
Development economics Division Working 
paper 08- 03, Food and Agriculture Organiza-
tion, rome.

De Fraiture, C., and C. perry. 2007. “Why Is 

Agricultural Water Demand Unresponsive at 
Low price ranges?” In Irrigation Water Pric-
ing: The Gap between Theory and Practice, ed. 
F. Molle and J. Berkoff. Oxfordshire, UK: CAB 
International.

de la Torre, A., p. Fajnzylber, and J. Nash. 2008. 

Low Carbon, High Growth: Latin American 
Responses to Climate Change. Washington, 
DC: World Bank.

De Silva, S., and D. Soto. 2009. “Climate Change 

and Aquaculture: potential Impacts, Adapta-
tion and Mitigation.” Technical paper 530, 
Food and Agriculture Organization, rome.
Delgado, C. L., M. W. rosegrant, h. Steinfeld, 

S. ehui, and C. Courbois. 1999. “Livestock to 
2020: The Next Food revolution.” Food, Agri-
culture, and environment Discussion paper 
28, International Food policy research Insti-
tute, Washington, DC.

Delgado, C. L., N. Wada, M. rosegrant, S. Meijer, 
and M. Ahmed. 2003. Outlook for Fish to 2020: 

 

Managing Land and Water to Feed Nine Billion People and Protect Natural Systems 

179

Meeting Global Demand. Washington, DC: 
International Food policy research Institute.
Derpsch, r. 2007. “No- Tillage and Conserva-

tion Agriculture: A progress report.” In No- 
Till Farming Systems, ed. T. Goddard, M. A. 
Zoebisch, Y. T. Gan, W. elli, A. Watson, and S. 
Sombatpanit. Bangkok: World Association of 
Soil and Water Conservation.

Derpsch, r., and T. Friedrich. 2009. “Global 

Overview of Conservation Agriculture Adop-
tion.” In Lead Papers 4th World Congress on 
Conservation Agriculture. New Delhi: World 
Congress on Conservation Agriculture.

Deutsch, L., S. Graslund, C. Folke, M. Troell, 
M. huitric, N. Kautsky, and L. Lebel. 2007. 
“Feeding Aquaculture Growth through Glo-
balization: exploitation of Marine ecosystems 
for Fishmeal.” Global Environmental Change 
17 (2): 238–49.

Diaz, r. J., and r. rosenberg. 2008. “Spreading 

Dead Zones and Consequences for Marine 
ecosystems.” Science 321 (5891): 926–29.

Doraiswamy, p., G. McCarty, e. hunt, r. Yost, 
M. Doumbia, and A. Franzluebbers. 2007. 
“Modeling Soil Carbon Sequestration in 
Agricultural Lands of Mali.” Agricultural Sys-
tems 94 (1): 63–74.

Dorward, A., S. Fan, J. Kydd, h. Lofgren, J. Mor-
rison, C. poulton, N. rao, L. Smith, h. Tchale, 
S. Thorat, I. Urey, and p. Wobst. 2004. “Institu-
tions and policies for pro- poor Agricultural 
Growth.” Development Policy Review 22 (6): 611–22.

Duda, A. M., and K. Sherman. 2002. “A New 
Imperative for Improving Management of 
Large Marine ecosystems.” Ocean and Coastal 
Management 45: 797–833.

Dudley, N., and S. Stolton. 1999. Conversion of 

“Paper Parks” to Effective Management: Devel-
oping a Target. Gland, Switzerland: report 
to the WWF- World Bank Alliance from the 
International Union for the Conservation of 
Nature and WWF, Forest Innovation project. 

Dye, p., and D. Versfeld. 2007. “Managing the 

hydrological Impacts of South African plan-
tation Forests: An Overview.” Forest Ecology 
and Management 251 (1–2): 121–28.

easterling, W., p. Aggarwal, p. Batima, K. Brander, 

L. erda, M. howden, A. Kirilenko, J. Morton, 
J.- F. Soussana, J. Schmidhuber, and F. Tubiello. 
2007. “Food, Fibre and Forest products.” In 
Climate Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation and 
Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group 
II to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Inter-
governmental Panel on Climate Change, ed. M. 
parry, O. F. Canziani, J. p. palutikof, p. J. van der 
Linden, and C. e. hanson. Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge University press.

eBrD (european Bank for reconstruction and 
Development) and FAO (Food and Agricul-
ture Organization). 2008. “Fighting Food 
Inflation through Sustainable Investment.” 
eBrD and FAO, London.

erenstein, O. 2009. “Adoption and Impact of 
Conservation Agriculture Based resource 
Conserving Technologies in South Asia.” In 
Lead Papers, 4th World Congress on Conser-
vation Agriculture, February 4–7, 2009, New 
Delhi, India. New Delhi: WCCA.

erenstein, O., U. Farooq, r. K. Malik, and M. 

Sharif. 2008. “On- Farm Impacts of Zero Till-
age Wheat in South Asia’s rice- Wheat Sys-
tems.” Field Crops Research 105 (3): 240–52.
erenstein, O., and V. Laxmi. 2008. “Zero Till-

age Impacts in India’s rice- Wheat Systems: A 
review.” Soil and Tillage Research 100 (1- 2): 
1–14.

FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization). 

2001. “Integrated Agriculture- Aquaculture.” 
Fisheries Technical paper 407, rome.

———. 2004a. The State of World Fisheries and 

Aquaculture 2004. rome: FAO.

———. 2004b. “Water Desalination For Agri-
cultural Applications.” Land and Water Dis-
cussion paper 5, FAO, rome.

———- . 2005. Agricultural Biodiversity in FAO. 

rome: FAO. 

———. 2008. Food Outlook: Global Market 

Analysis. rome: FAO.

———. 2009a. “Anchoring Agriculture within 
a Copenhagen Agreement: A policy Brief for 
UNFCCC parties by FAO.” FAO, rome.

———. 2009b. “Aquastat.” FAO, rome. 
———. 2009c. “FAOSTAT.” FAO, rome. 
———. 2009d. “Fisheries and Aquaculture in a 

Changing Climate.” FAO, rome.

———. 2009e. The State of World Fisheries and 

Aquaculture 2008. rome: FAO.

Fay, M., r. I. Block, and J. ebinger, ed. 2010. 
Adapting to Climate Change in Europe and 
Central Asia. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Fischer, G., M. Shah, F. Tubiello, and h. T. Van 
Velthuizen. 2005. “Socio- economic and Cli-
mate Change Impacts on Agriculture: An 
Integrated Assessment, 1990–2080.” Philo-
sophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: 
Biological Sciences 360: 2067–83.

Fischer, G., M. Shah, and h. van Velthuizen. 2002. 

“Climate Change and Agricultural Vulnerabil-
ity.” paper presented at the World Summit on 
Sustainable Development, Johannesburg.

Franzluebbers, A. J. 2002. “Water Infiltration 

and Soil Structure related to Organic Matter 

180 

WOrL D   De VeLOpMeN T  r e pOr

T   2 0 1 0

and Its Stratification with Depth.” Soil and 
Tillage Research 66: 197–205.

Frappart, F., K. D. Minh, J. L’hermitte, A. 

Cazenave, G. ramillien, T. Le Toan, and N. 
Mognard- Campbell. 2006. “Water Volume 
Change in the Lower Mekong from Satellite 
Altimetry and Imagery Data.” Geophysical 
Journal International 167 (2): 570–84.

Gaston, K. J., S. F. Jackson, L. Cantu- Salazar, 
and G. Cruz- pinon. 2008. “The ecological 
performance of protected Areas.” Annual 
Review of Ecology, Evolution, and Systematics 
39: 93–113.

Climate Change projections for regional 
Water Management planning.” Water 
Resources Research 44 (12): 1–16.

Gruere, G. p., p. Mehta- Bhatt, and D. Sengupta. 

2008. “Bt Cotton and Farmer Suicides in 
India: reviewing the evidence.” Discus-
sion paper 00808, International Food policy 
research Institute, Washington, DC.

Gurgel, A. C., J. M. reilly, and S. paltsev. 2008. 
Potential Land Use Implications of a Global 
Biofuels Industry. Cambridge, MA: Massachu-
setts Institute of Technology Joint program 
on the Science and policy of Global Change.

Gatlin, D. M., F. T. Barrows, p. Brown, K. 

Gyllenhammar, A., and L. hakanson. 2005. 

Dabrowski, T. G. Gaylord, r. W. hardy, e. 
herman, G. hu, A. Krogdahl, r. Nelson, 
K. Overturf, M. rust, W. Sealey, D. Skon-
berg, e. J. Souza, D. Stone, r. Wilson, and e. 
Wurtele. 2007. “expanding the Utilization 
of Sustainable plant products in Aquafeeds: 
A review.” Aquaculture Research 38 (6): 
551–79.

Gleick, p. 2008. The World’s Water 2008–2009: 
The Biennial Report on Freshwater Resources. 
Washington, DC: Island press.

GeF (Global environment Facility). 2009. From 

Ridge to Reef: Water, Environment, and Com-
munity Security: GEF Action on Transbound-
ary Water Resources. Washington, DC: GeF.

Gobierno de españa. 2009. La Desalinización en 
España. Madrid: Ministerio de Medio Ambi-
ente y Medio rural y Marino.

Gordon, I. J. 2007. “Linking Land to Ocean: 

Feedbacks in the Management of Socio-
 ecological Systems in the Great Barrier reef 
Catchments.” Hydrobiologia 591 (1): 25–33.

Govaerts, B., K. Sayre, and J. Deckers. 2005. “Sta-
ble high Yields With Zero Tillage and perma-
nent Bed planting?” Field Crops Research 94: 
33–42.

Govaerts, B., N. Verhulst, A. Castellanos-

 Navarrete, K. D. Sayre, J. Dixon, and L. Den-
dooven. 2009. “Conservation Agriculture and 
Soil Carbon Sequestration: Between Myth 
and Farmer reality.” Critical Reviews in Plant 
Sciences 28 (3): 97–122.

Groves, D. G., M. Davis, r. Wilkinson, and r. 

Lempert. 2008. “planning for Climate Change 
in the Inland empire: Southern California.” 
Water Resources Impact 10 (4): 14–17.

Groves, D. G., and r. J. Lempert. 2007. “A New 

Analytic Method for Finding policy- relevant 
Scenarios.” Global Environmental Change 17 
(1): 73–85.

Groves, D. G., D. Yates, and C. Tebaldi. 2008. 

“Developing and Applying Uncertain Global 

“environmental Consequence Analyses of 
Fish Farm emissions related to Different 
Scales and exemplified by Data from the 
Baltic: A review.” Marine Environmental 
Research 60: 211–43.

hannah, L., G. Midgley, S. Andelman, M. 

Araujo, G. hughes, e. Martinez- Meyer, r. 
pearson, and p. Williams. 2007. “protected 
Areas Needs in a Changing Climate.” Frontiers 
in Ecology and Evolution 5 (3): 131–38.

hansen, J., L. Nazarenko, r. ruedy, M. Sato, J. 

Willis, A. Del Genio, D. Koch, A. Lacis, K. Lo, 
S. Menon, T. Novakov, J. perlwitz, G. russell, 
G. A. Schmidt, and N. Tausnev. 2005. “earth’s 
energy Imbalance: Confirmation and Impli-
cations.” Science 308 (5727): 1431–35.

hardin, G. 1968. “The Tragedy of the Com-

mons.” Science 162 (3859): 1243–48.

hazell, p. B. r. 2003. “The Green revolution: 
Curse or Blessing?” In Oxford Encyclopedia 
of Economic History, ed. J. Mokyr. New York: 
Oxford University press.

henson, I. e. 2008. “The Carbon Cost of palm 
Oil production in Malaysia.” The Planter 84: 
445–64.

hilborn, r. 2007a. “Defining Success in Fisher-

ies and Conflicts in Objectives.” Marine Policy 
31 (2): 153–58.

———. 2007b. “Moving to Sustainability by 

Learning from Successful Fisheries.” Ambio 36 
(4): 296–303.

hobbs, p. r., K. Sayre, and r. Gupta. 2008. “The 
role of Conservation Agriculture in Sustain-
able Agriculture.” Philosophical Transactions of 
the Royal Society 363 (1491): 543–55.

hoekstra, A. Y., and A. K. Chapagain. 2007. 

“Water Footprints of Nations: Water Use by 
people as a Function of Their Consumption 
pattern.” Water Resources Management 21 (1): 
35–48.

hofmann, M., and h.- J. Schellnhuber. 2009. 
“Oceanic Acidification Affects Marine Car-

 

Managing Land and Water to Feed Nine Billion People and Protect Natural Systems 

181

bon pump and Triggers extended Marine 
Oxygen holes.” Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences 106 (9): 3017–22.

IAASTD (International Assessment of Agricul-
tural Knowledge, Science and Technology for 
Development). 2009. Summary for Decision 
Makers of the Global Report. Washington, DC: 
IAASTD.

IeA (International energy Agency). 2006. World 

Energy Outlook 2006. paris: IeA.

Koh, L. p., and D. S. Wilcove. 2009. “Is Oil palm 
Agriculture really Destroying Tropical Biodi-
versity.” Conservation Letters 1 (2): 60–64.

Kosgei, J. r., G. p. W. Jewitt, V. M. Kongo, and S. 

A. Lorentz. 2007. “The Influence Of Tillage 
on Field Scale Water Fluxes and Maize Yields 
in Semi- Arid environments: A Case Study of 
potshini Catchment, South Africa.” Physics 
and Chemistry of the Earth , Parts A/B/C 32 
(15–18): 1117–26.

IpCC (Intergovernmental panel on Climate 

Kotilainen, L., r. rajalahti, C. ragasa, and 

Change). 2007a. Climate Change 2007: Syn-
thesis Report. Contribution of Working Groups 
I, II and II to the Fourth Assessment Report 
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change. Geneva: IppC.

———. 2007b. “Summary for policymakers.” In 

Climate Change 2007: Mitigation. Contribu-
tion of Working Group III to the Fourth Assess-
ment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change, ed. B. Metz, O. r. Davidson, 
p. r. Bosch, r. Dave, and L. A. Meyer. Cam-
bridge, UK: Cambridge University press.

James, C. 2000. Global Review of Commercialized 

Transgenic Crops. Ithaca, NY: International 
Service for the Acquisition of Agri- Biotech 
Applications.

———. 2007. Global Status of Commercialized 

Biotech/GM Crops: 2007. Ithaca, NY: Inter-
national Service for the Acquisition of Agri-
 Biotech Applications.

———. 2008. Global Status of Commercialized 

Biotech/GM Crops: 2008. Ithaca, NY: Inter-
national Service for the Acquisition of Agri-
 Biotech Applications.

Johnston, C. A., p. Groffman, D. D. Breshears, 

Z. G. Cardon, W. Currie, W. emanuel, J. 
Gaudinski, r. B. Jackson, K. Lajtha, K. Nadel-
hoffer, D. Nelson, W. Macpost, G. retallack, 
and L. Wielopolski. 2004. “Carbon Cycling in 
Soil.” Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment 
2 (10): 522–28.

e. pehu. 2006. “health enhancing Foods: 
Opportunities for Strengthening the Sector in 
Developing Countries.” Agriculture and rural 
Development Discussion paper 30, World 
Bank, Washington, DC.

Kumar, r. 2004. “eChoupals: A Study on the 
Financial Sustainability of Village Internet 
Centers in rural Madhya pradesh.” Informa-
tion Technologies and International Develop-
ment 2 (1): 45–73.

Kurien, J. 2005. “International Fish Trade and 

Food Security: Issues and perspectives.” paper 
presented at the 31st Annual Conference of 
the International Association of Aquatic and 
Marine Science Libraries, rome.

Laffoley, D. d’A. 2008. “Towards Networks of 
Marine protected Areas: The MpA plan of 
Action for IUCN’s World Commission on 
protected Areas.” International Union for 
Conservation of Nature, World Commission 
on protected Areas, Gland, Switzerland.

Lal, r. 2005. “enhancing Crop Yields in the 

Developing Countries through restoration of 
the Soil Organic Carbon pool in Agricultural 
Lands.” Land Degradation and Development 
17 (2): 197–209.

Lehmann, J. 2007a. “A handful of Carbon.” 

Nature 447: 143–44.

———. 2007b. “Bio- energy in the Black.” Fron-

tiers in Ecology and the Environment 5 (7): 
381–87.

Kaonga, M. L., and K. Coleman. 2008. “Mod-

Lightfoot, C. 1990. “Integration of Aquaculture 

eling Soil Organic Carbon Turnover in 
Improved Fallows in eastern Zambia Using 
the rothC- 26.3 Model.” Forest Ecology and 
Management 256 (5): 1160–66.

Klein, A. M., B. e. Vaissiere, J. h. Cane, I. Steffan-
 Dewenter, S. A. Cunningham, C. Kremen, and 
T. Tscharntke. 2007. “Importance of pollina-
tors in Changing Landscapes for World Crops.” 
Proceedings of the Royal Society 274 (1608): 
303–13.

Koh, L. p., p. Levang, and J. Ghazoul. Forthcom-

ing. “Designer Landscapes for Sustainable 
Biofuels.” Trends in Ecology and Evolution. 

and Agriculture: A route Towards Sustainable 
Farming Systems.” Naga: The ICLARM Quar-
terly 13 (1): 9–12.

Lin, B. B., I. perfecto, and J. Vandermeer. 2008. 
“Synergies between Agricultural Intensifica-
tion and Climate Change Could Create Sur-
prising Vulnerabilities for Crops.” BioScience 
58 (9): 847–54.

Lobell, D. B., M. Burke, C. Tebaldi, M. D. Mas-

trandrea, W. p. Falcon, and r. L. Naylor. 2008. 
“prioritizing Climate Change Adaptation 
Needs for Food Security in 2030.” Science 319 
(5863): 607–10.

182 

WOrL D   De VeLOpMeN T  r e pOr

T   2 0 1 0

Lodge, M. W. 2007. “Managing International 
Fisheries: Improving Fisheries Governance 
by Strengthening regional Fisheries Man-
agement Organizations.” Chatham house 
energy, environment and Development 
programme Briefing paper eeDp Bp 07/01, 
London.

Lotze- Campen, h., A. popp, J. p. Dietrich, and 

M. Krause. 2009. “Competition for Land 
between Food, Bioenergy and Conservation.” 
Background note for the WDr 2010.

Louati, Mohamed el hedi. “Tunisia’s experi-
ence in Water resource Mobilization and 
Management.” Background note for the 
WDr 2010.

Mason, S. J. 2008. “‘Flowering Walnuts in the 

Wood’ and Other Bases for Seasonal Climate 
Forecasting.” In Seasonal Forecasts, Climatic 
Change and Human Health: Health and Cli-
mate. ed. M. C. Thomson, r. Garcia- herrera, 
and M. Beniston. Amsterdam: Springer Neth-
erlands.

McKinsey & Company. 2009. Pathways to a 

Low- Carbon Economy: Version 2 of the Global 
Greenhouse Gas Abatement Cost Curve. Wash-
ington, DC: McKinsey & Company.

McNeely, J. A., and S. J. Scherr. 2003. Ecoagricul-
ture: Strategies to Feed the World and Save Bio-
diversity. Washington, DC: Island press.
Meehl, G. A., T. F. Stocker, W. D. Collins, p. 

Friedlingstein, A. T. Gaye, J. M. Gregory, A. 
Kitoh, r. Knutti, J. M. Murphy, A. Noda, 
S. C. B. raper, I. G. Watterson, A. J. Weaver, 
and Z.- C. Zhao. 2007. “Global Climate pro-
jections.” In Climate Change 2007: The Physi-
cal Science Basis. Contribution of Working 
Group I to the Fourth Assessment Report of the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 
ed. S. Solomon, D. Qin, M. Manning, Z. 
Chen, M. Marquis, K. B. Averyt, M. Tignor, 
and h. L. Miller. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University press.

Menenti, M. 2000. “evaporation.” In Remote 

Sensing in Hydrology and Water Management, 
ed. G. A. Schultz and e. T. engman. Berlin: 
Springer- Verlag.

Millennium ecosystem Assessment. 2005. Eco-
systems and Human Well- Being: Biodiversity 
Synthesis. Washington, DC: World resources 
Institute.

Milly, p. C. D., J. Betancourt, M. Falkenmark, r. 

M. hirsch, Z. W. Kundzewicz, D. p. Letten-
maier, and r. J. Stouffer. 2008. “Stationarity Is 
Dead: Whither Water Management?” Science 
319 (5863): 573–74.

Milly, p. C. D., K. A. Dunne, and A. V. Vecchia. 
2005. “Global pattern of Trends in Stream-
flow and Water Availability in a Changing 
Climate.” Nature 438 (17): 347–50.

Mitchell, D. 2008. “A Note on rising Food 

prices.” policy research Working paper 4682, 
World Bank, Washington, DC.

Molden, D. 2007. Water for Food, Water for Life: 
A Comprehensive Assessment of Water Manage-
ment in Agriculture. London: earthscan and 
International Water Management Institute.

Molle, F., and J. Berkoff. 2007. Irrigation Water 

Pricing: The Gap between Theory and Practice. 
Wallingford, UK: CAB International.

Moller, M., J. Tanny, Y. Li, and S. Cohen. 2004. 
“Measuring and predicting evapotranspira-
tion in an Insect- proof Screenhouse.” Agricul-
tural and Forest Meteorology 127 (12): 35–51.
Moron, V., A. Lucero, F. hilario, B. Lyon, A. W. 

robertson, and D. DeWitt. Forthcoming. 
“Spatio- Temporal Variability and predict-
ability of Summer Monsoon Onset over the 
philippines.” Climate Dynamics. 

Moron, V., A. W. robertson, and r. Boer. 2009. 
“Spatial Coherence and Seasonal predictabil-
ity of Monsoon Onset over Indonesia.” Jour-
nal of Climate 22 (3): 840–50.

Moron, V., A. W. robertson, and M. N. Ward. 

2006. “Seasonal predictability and Spatial 
Coherence of rainfall Characteristics in the 
Tropical Setting of Senegal.” Monthly Weather 
Review 134 (11): 3248–62.

———. 2007. “Spatial Coherence of Tropical 

rainfall at regional Scale.” Journal of Climate 
20 (21): 5244–63.

Müller, C., A. Bondeau, A. popp, K. Waha, and 
M. Fader. 2009. “Climate Change Impacts on 
Agricultural Yields.” Background note for the 
WDr 2010.

NrC (National research Council). 2007. Water 

Implications of Biofuels Production in the 
United States. Washington, DC: National 
Academies press.

Naylor, r. L., r. J. Goldburg, J. h. primavera, N. 
Kautsky, M. C. M. Beveridge, J. Clay, C. Folke, 
J. Lubchenco, h. Mooney, and M. Troell. 
2000. “effects of Aquaculture on World Fish 
Supplies.” Nature 405 (6790): 1017–24.

Normile, D. 2006. “Agricultural research: Con-
sortium Aims to Supercharge rice photosyn-
thesis.” Science 313 (5786): 423.

OeCD (Organisation for economic Co- 

operation and Development). 2008. Agricul-
tural Policies in OECD Countries: At a Glance 
2008. paris: OeCD.

 

Managing Land and Water to Feed Nine Billion People and Protect Natural Systems 

183

———. 2009. Managing Water for All: An 

OECD Perspective on Pricing and Financing. 
paris: OeCD.

Olmstead, S., W. M. hanemann, and r. N. 

Stavins. 2007. “Water Demand under Alterna-
tive price Structures.” Working paper 13573, 
National Bureau of economic research, 
Cambridge, MA.

parry, M. 2007. “The Implications of Climate 
Change for Crop Yields, Global Food Sup-
ply and risk of hunger.” SAT e-Journal 4 (1), 
Open Access e-Journal, International Crops 
research Institute for the Semi- Arid Tropics 
(ICrISAT). http://www.icrisat.org/Journal/
Specialproject/sp14.pdf.

perez, C., C. roncoli, C. Neely, and J. Steiner. 
2007. “Can Carbon Sequestration Markets 
Benefit Low- Income producers in Semi- Arid 
Africa? potentials and Challenges.” Agricul-
tural Systems 94 (1): 2–12.

perry, C., p. Steduto, r. G. Allen, and C. M. Burt. 

Forthcoming. “Increasing productivity in 
Irrigated Agriculture: Agronomic Constraints 
and hydrological realities.” Agricultural 
Water Management. 

phipps, r., and J. park. 2002. “environmen-

tal Benefits of Genetically Modified Crops: 
Global and european perspectives on Their 
Ability to reduce pesticide Use.” Journal of 
Animal and Feed Science 11: 1–18.

parry, M., C. rosenzweig, A. Iglesias, G. Fischer, 

pimentel, D., B. Berger, D. Filiberto, M. Newton, 

and M. Livermore. 1999. “Climate Change 
and World Food Security: A New Assess-
ment.” Global Environmental Change 9 (S1): 
S51–S67.

parry, M., C. rosenzweig, A. Iglesias, M. Liver-

more, and G. Fischer. 2004. “effects of Climate 
Change on Global Food production under 
SreS emissions and Socio- economic Sce-
narios.” Global Environmental Change 14 (1): 
53–67.

parry, M., C. rosenzweig, and M. Livermore. 

2005. “Climate Change, Global Food Supply 
and risk of hunger.” Philosophical Trans-
actions of the Royal Society B 360 (1463): 
2125–38.

passioura, J. 2006. “Increasing Crop productiv-
ity When Water Is Scarce: From Breeding to 
Field Management.” Agricultural Water Man-
agement 80 (1- 3): 176–96.

patt, A. G., p. Suarez, and C. Gwata. 2005. 

“effects of Seasonal Climate Forecasts and 
participatory Workshops among Subsis-
tence Farmers in Zimbabwe.” Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences 102 (35): 
12623–28.

peden, D., G. Tadesse, and M. Mammo. 2004. 
“Improving the Water productivity of Live-
stock: An Opportunity for poverty reduc-
tion.” paper presented at the Integrated Water 
and Land Management research and Capac-
ity Building priorities for ethiopia Confer-
ence. Addis Ababa.

pender, J., and O. Mertz. 2006. “Soil Fertility 

Depletion Sub- Saharan Africa: What Is the 
role of Organic Agriculture.” In Global Devel-
opment or Organic Agriculture: Challenges and 
Prospects, ed. N. halberg, h. F. Alroe, M. T. 
Knudsen, and e. S. Kristensen. Wallingford, 
UK: CAB International.

B. Wolfe, e. Karabinakis, S. Clark, e. poon, 
e. Abbett, and S. Nandagopal. 2004. “Water 
resources: Agricultural and environmental 
Issues.” BioScience 54 (10): 909–18.

pingali, p. L., and M. W. rosegrant. 2001. “Inten-

sive Food Systems in Asia: Can the Degrada-
tion problems Be reversed?” In Tradeoffs or 
Synergies? Agricultural Intensification, Economic 
Development and the Environment, ed. D. r. 
Lee and C. B. Barrett. Wallingford, UK: CAB 
International.

pitcher, T., D. Kalikoski, K. Short, D. Varkey, and 
G. pramod. 2009. “An evaluation of progress 
in Implementing ecosystem- Based Manage-
ment of Fisheries in 33 Countries.” Marine 
Policy 33 (2): 223–32.

poulton, C., J. Kydd, and A. Dorward. 2006. 
“Increasing Fertilizer Use in Africa: What 
have We Learned?” Discussion paper 25, 
World Bank, Washington, DC.

primavera, J. h. 1997. “Socio- economic Impacts 
of Shrimp Culture.” Aquaculture Research 28: 
815–27.

Qaddumi, h. 2008. “practical Approaches 

to Transboundary Water Benefit Sharing.” 
Working paper 292, Overseas Development 
Institute, London.

randolph, T. F., e. Schelling, D. Grace, C. F. 

Nicholson, J. L. Leroy, D. C. Cole, M. W. Dem-
ment, A. Omore, J. Zinsstag, and M. ruel. 
2007. “Invited review: role of Livestock in 
human Nutrition and health for poverty 
reduction in Developing Countries.” Journal 
of Animal Science 85 (11): 2788–2800.

reardon, T., K. Stamoulis, M. e. Cruz, A. Bal-
isacan, J. Berdugue, and K. Savadogo. 1998. 
“Diversification of household Incomes into 
Nonfarm Sources: patterns, Determinants 
and effects.” paper presented at the IFprI/

184 

WOrL D   De VeLOpMeN T  r e pOr

T   2 0 1 0

World Bank Conference on Strategies for 
Stimulating Growth of the rural Nonfarm 
economy in Developing Countries, Airlie 
house, Virginia.

ricketts, T. h., J. regetz, I. Steffan- Dewenter, 

S. A. Cunningham, C. Kremen, A. Bogdanski, 
B. Gemmill- herren, S. S. Greenleaf, A. M. 
Klein, M. M. Mayfield, L. A. Morandin, A. 
Ochieng, and B. F. Viana. 2008. “Landscape 
effects on Crop pollination Services: Are 
There General patterns?” Ecology Letters 
11(5):499–515.

ritchie, J. e. 2008. “Land- Ocean Interactions: 

human, Freshwater, Coastal and Ocean 
Interactions under Changing environments.” 
paper presented at the hydrology expert 
Facility Workshop: hydrologic Analysis to 
Inform Bank policies and projects: Bridging 
the Gap, November 24, Washington, DC.
rivera, J. A., C. hotz, T. Gonzalez- Cossio, L. 

Neufeld, and A. Garcia- Guerra. 2003. “The 
effect of Micronutrient Deficiencies on 
Child Growth: A review of results from 
Community- Based Supplementation Trials.” 
Journal of Nutrition 133 (11): 4010S–20S.

robles, M., and M. Torero. Forthcoming. 

“Understanding the Impact of high Food 
prices in Latin America.” Economia. 

rochette, p., D. A. Angers, M. h. Chantigny, and 
N. Bertrand. 2008. “Nitrous Oxide emissions 
respond Differently to No- Till in a Loam 
and a heavy Clay Soil.” Soil Science Society of 
America Journal 72: 1363–69.

rosegrant, M. W., and h. Binswanger. 1994. 

“Markets in Tradable Water rights: potential 
for efficiency Gains in Developing Country 
Water resource Allocation.” World Develop-
ment 22 (11): 1613–25.

rosegrant, M. W., X. Cai, and S. Cline. 2002. 

World Water and Food to 2025: Dealing with 
Scarcity. Washington, DC: International Food 
policy research Institute.

rosegrant, M. W., S. A. Cline, and r. A. 

Valmonte- Santos. 2007. “Global Water and 
Food Security: emerging Issues.” In Proceed-
ings of the International Conference on Water 
for Irrigated Agriculture and the Environment: 
Finding a Flow for All, ed. A. G. Brown. Can-
berra: ATSe Crawford Fund.

rosegrant, M. W., M. Fernandez, and A. Sinha. 

2009. “Looking into the Future for Agricul-
ture and KST.” In IAASTD Global Report, ed. 
B. McIntyre, h. r. herren, J. Wakhungu, and 
r. T. Watson. Washington, DC: Island press.

rosegrant, M. W., and p. B. r. hazell. 2000. 

Transforming the Rural Asian Economy: The 

Unfinished Revolution. New York: Oxford 
University press.

rosegrant, M. W., M. paisner, S. Meijer, and 
J. Witcover. 2001. Global Food Projections 
to 2020: Emerging Trends and Alternative 
Futures. Washington, DC: International Food 
policy research Institute.

rosenzweig, C., A. Iglesias, X. Yang, p. r. 

epstein, and e. Chivian. 2001. “Climate 
Change and extreme Weather events: Impli-
cations for Food production, plant Diseases 
and pests.” Global Change and Human Health 
2 (2): 90–104.

Sabine, C. L., r. A. Feely, N. Gruber, r. M. Key, 

K. Lee, J. L. Bullister, r. Wanninkhof, C. S. 
Wong, D. W. r. Wallace, B. Tilbrook, F. J. Mil-
lero, T.- h. peng, A. Kozyr, T. Ono, and A. F. 
rios. 2004. “The Oceanic Sink for Anthropo-
genic CO2.” Science 305: 367–71.

Salman, S. M. A. 2007. “The United Nations 
Watercourses Convention Ten Years Later: 
Why has Its entry into Force proven Diffi-
cult?” Water International 32 (1): 1–15.

Scherr, S. J., and J. A. McNeely. 2008. “Biodiversity 

Conservation and Agricultural Sustainability: 
Towards a New paradigm of ecoagriculture 
Landscapes.” Philosophical Transactions of the 
Royal Society B 363: 477–94.

Schmidhuber, J., and F. N. Tubiello. 2007. 
“Global Food Security under Climate 
Change.” Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences 104 (50): 19703–08.

Schoups, G., J. W. hopmans, C. A. Young, J. 

A. Vrugt, W. W. Wallender, K. K. Tanji, and 
S. panday. 2005. “Sustainability of Irrigated 
Agriculture in the San Joaquin Valley, Califor-
nia.” Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences 102 (43): 15352–56.

Shiklomanov, I. A. 1999. World Water Resources: 

An Appraisal for the 21st Century. paris: 
UNeSCO International hydrological pro-
gramme.

Shiklomanov, I. A., and J. C. rodda. 2003. World 

Water Resources at the Beginning of the 21st 
Century. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univer-
sity press.

Simler, K. r. 2009. “The Impact of higher Food 

prices on poverty in Uganda.” World Bank, 
Washington, DC. 

Singh, U. 2005. “Integrated Nitrogen Fertiliza-

tion for Intensive and Sustainable Agriculture.” 
Journal of Crop Improvement 15 (2): 259–88.
Sivakumar, M. V. K., and J. hansen, ed. 2007. 

Climate Prediction and Agriculture: Advances 
and Challenges. New York: Springer.

 

Managing Land and Water to Feed Nine Billion People and Protect Natural Systems 

185

Smith, L. D., J. p. Gilmour, and A. J. heyward. 
2008. “resilience of Coral Communities on 
an Isolated System of reefs Following Cata-
strophic Mass- bleaching.” Coral Reefs 27 (1): 
197–205.

Smith, p., D. Martino, Z. Cai, D. Gwary, h. 

h. Janzen, p. Kumar, B. McCarl, S. Ogle, F. 
O’Mara, C. rice, r. J. Scholes, O. Sirotenko, M. 
howden, T. McAllister, G. pan, V. romanen-
kov, U. Schneider, S. Towprayoon, M. Watten-
bach, and J. U. Smith. 2009. “Greenhouse Gas 
Mitigation in Agriculture.” Philosophical Trans-
actions of the Royal Society B 363: 789–813.
Sohi, S., e. Lopez- Capel, e. Krull, and r. Bol. 
2009. Biochar, Climate Change, and Soil: A 
Review to Guide Future Research. Australia: 
CSIrO Land and Water Science report 05/09.
Steinfeld, h., p. Gerber, T. Wassenaar, V. Castel, M. 
rosales, and C. De haan. 2006. Livestock’s Long 
Shadow: Environmental Issues and Options. 
rome: Food and Agriculture Organization.

Struhsaker, T. T., p. J. Struhsaker, and K. S. Siex. 
2005. “Conserving Africa’s rain Forests: prob-
lems in protected Areas and possible Solu-
tions.” Biological Conservation 123 (1): 45–54.

Strzepek, K., G. Yohe, r. S. J. Tol, and M. W. 

rosegrant. 2004. “Determining the Insurance 
Value of the high Aswan Dam for the egyp-
tian economy.” International Food policy 
research Institute, Washington, DC.

Su, Z., J. Zhang, W. Wu, D. Cai, J. Lv, G. Jiang, J. 
huang, J. Gao, r. hartmann, and D. Gabriels. 
2007. “effects of Conservation Tillage practices 
on Winter Wheat Water- Use efficiency and 
Crop Yield on The Loess plateau, China.” Agri-
cultural Water Management 87 (3): 307–14.

Sullivan, p., D. hellerstein, L. hansen, r. Johan-

sson, S. Koenig, r. Lubowski, W. McBride, 
D. McGranahan, M. roberts, S. Vogel, and 
S. Bucholtz. 2004. The Conservation Reserve 
Program: Economic Implications for Rural 
America. Washington, DC: United States 
Department of Agriculture.

Sundby, S., and O. Nakken. 2008. “Spatial Shifts 

in Spawning habitats of Arcto- Norwegian 
Cod related to Multidecadal Climate Oscil-
lations and Climate Change.” ICES Journal of 
Marine Sciences 65 (6): 953–62.

Swift, M. J., and K. D. Shepherd, ed. 2007. Sav-
ing Africa’s Soils: Science and Technology for 
Improved Soil Management in Africa. Nairobi: 
World Agroforestry Centre. 

Tacon, A. G. J., M. r. hasan, and r. p. Subasinghe. 
2006. “Use of Fishery resources as Feed Inputs 
for Aquaculture Development: Trends and pol-
icy.” FAO Fisheries Circular 1018, rome.

Tal, Y., h. Schreier, K. r. Sowers, J. D. Stubble-
field, A. r. place, and Y. Zohar. 2009. “envi-
ronmentally Sustainable Land- Based Marine 
Aquaculture.” Aquaculture 286 (1–2): 28–35.

Thierfelder, C., e. Amezquita, and K. Stahr. 

2005. “effects of Intensifying Organic Manur-
ing and Tillage practices on penetration 
resistance and Infiltration rate.” Soil and 
Tillage Research 82 (2): 211–26.

Thornton, p. 2009. “The Inter-Linkage between 

rapid Growth in Livestock production, Cli-
mate Change, and the Impacts on Water 
resources, Land Use, and reforestation.” 
Background paper for the WDr 2010.
Tilman, D., J. hill, and C. Lehman. 2006. 

“Carbon- Negative Biofuels from Low- Input 
high- Diversity Grassland Biomass.” Science 
314: 1598–1600.

Tschakert, p. 2004. “The Costs of Soil Carbon 

Sequestration: An economic Analysis for 
Small- Scale Farming Systems in Senegal.” 
Agricultural Systems 81: 227–53.

Turner, W., S. Spector, N. Gardiner, M. Flad-
eland, e. Sterling, and M. Steininger. 2003. 
“remote Sensing for Biodiversity Science and 
Conservation.” Trends in Ecology and Evolu-
tion 18 (6): 306–14.

UNep (United Nations environment pro-

gramme). 1990. Global Assessment of Soil Deg-
radation. New York: UNep.

UNep- WCMC (World Conservation Moni-
toring Centre). 2008. State of the World’s 
Protected Areas 2007: An Annual Review of 
Global Conservation Progress. Cambridge, UK: 
UNep- WCMC.

UNeSCO. 2007. “A Global perspective On 

research And Development.” Institute for 
Statistics Fact Sheet 5, UNeSCO, Montreal.
United Nations. 2004. Guidelines for Reducing 

Flood Losses. Geneva: United Nations Depart-
ment of economic and Social Affairs, United 
Nations International Strategy for Disaster 
reduction, and the National Oceanic and 
Atmosphere Administration.

———. 2009. World Population Prospects: The 
2008 Revision. New York: UN Department of 
economic and Social Affairs.

Van Buskirk, J., and Y. Willi. 2004. “enhancement 

of Farmland Biodiversity within Set- Aside 
Land.” Conservation Biology 18 (4): 987–94.

van der Werf, G. r., J. Dempewolf, S. N. Trigg, 
J. T. randerson, p. S. Kasibhatla, L. Giglio, D. 
Murdiyarso, W. peters, D. C. Morton, G. J. 
Collatz, A. J. Dolman, and r. S. DeFries. 2008. 
“Climate regulation of Fire emissions and 
Deforestation in equatorial Asia.” Proceedings 

186 

WOrL D   De VeLOpMeN T  r e pOr

T   2 0 1 0

of the National Academy of Sciences 105 (51): 
20350–55.

World Bank. 2005. Agriculture Investment Sour-

cebook. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Vassolo, S., and p. Döll. 2005. “Global- Scale 

Gridded estimates of Thermoelectric 
power and Manufacturing Water Use.” 
Water Resources Research 41: W04010–
doi:10.1029/2004Wr003360.

Venter, O., e. Meijaard, h. possingham, r. Den-
nis, D. Sheil, S. Wich, L. hovani, and K. Wil-
son. 2009. “Carbon payments as a Safeguard 
for Threatened Tropical Mammals.” Conser-
vation Letters 2: 123–29.

von Braun, J., A. Ahmed, K. Asenso- Okyere, 
S. Fan, A. Gulati, J. hoddinott, r. pandya-
 Lorch, M. W. rosegrant, M. ruel, M. Torero, 
T. van rheenen, and K. von Grebmer. 2008. 
“high Food prices: The What, Who, and how 
of proposed policy Actions.” policy brief, 
International Food policy research Institute, 
Washington, DC.

Ward, F. A., and M. pulido- Velazquez. 2008. 

“Water Conservation in Irrigation Can 
Increase Water Use.” Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences 105 (47):18215–20.

Wardle, D. A., M-C. Nilsson, and O. Zackrisson. 
2008. “Fire-derived Charcoal Causes Loss of 
Forest humus.” Science 320 (5876): 629–29.

West, p. O., and W. M. post. 2002. “Soil Organic 

Carbon Sequestration rates by Tillage and 
Crop rotation: A Global Data Analysis.” 
Soil Science Society of America Journal 66: 
1930–46.

Williams, A. G., e. Audsley, and D. L. Sandars. 

2006. Determining the Environmental Burdens 
and Resource Use in the Production of Agricul-
tural and Horticultural Commodities. London: 
Department for environmental Food and 
rural Affairs.

Wise, M. A., K. V. Calvin, A. M. Thomson, L. e. 
Clarke, B. Bond- Lamberty, r. D. Sands, S. J. 
Smith, A. C. Janetos, and J. A. edmonds. 2009. 
“Implications of Limiting CO2 Concentra-
tions for Land Use and energy.” Science 324 
(5931): 1183–86.

Woelcke, J., and T. Tennigkeit. 2009. “harvesting 

Agricultural Carbon in Kenya.” Rural 21 43 
(1): 26–27.

Wolf, D. 2008. “Biochar as a Soil Amendment: 

A review of the environmental Implica-
tions.” Swansea University School of the 
environment and Society, http://www.
orgprints.org/13268/01/Biochar_as_a_soil_
amendment_- _a_review.pdf (accessed July 
15, 2009). 

———. 2006. Aquaculture: Changing the Face of 
the Waters: Meeting the Promise and Challenge 
of Sustainable Aquaculture. Washington, DC: 
World Bank.

———. 2007a. “India Groundwater AAA Mid-

 term review” (internal document), World 
Bank, Washington, DC.

———. 2007b. Making the Most of Scarcity: 

Accountability for Better Water Management 
Results in the Middle East and North Africa. 
Washington, DC: World Bank.

———. 2007c. World Development Report 2008. 
Agriculture for Development. Washington, DC: 
World Bank.

———. 2008a. Biodiversity, Climate Change and 

Adaptation: Nature- Based Solutions from the 
World Bank Portfolio. Washington, DC: World 
Bank.

———. 2008b. China Water AAA: Addressing 

Water Scarcity. Washington, DC: World Bank.

———. 2008c. Framework Document for a 

Global Food Crisis Response Program. Wash-
ington, DC: World Bank.

———. 2008d. The Sunken Billions. The Eco-

nomic Justification for Fisheries Reform. Wash-
ington, DC: World Bank and FAO.

———. 2008e. World Development Report 2009. 
Reshaping Economic Geography. Washington, 
DC: World Bank.

———. 2009. Improving Food Security in Arab 

Countries. Washington, DC: World Bank.

———. Forthcoming a. Agriculture and Climate 

Change in Morocco. Washington, DC: World 
Bank.

———. Forthcoming b. Deep Wells and Pru-

dence: Towards Pragmatic Action for Address-
ing Groundwater Overexploitation in India. 
Washington, DC: World Bank.

———. Forthcoming c. Projet de Modernisa-
tion de l’Agriculture Irriguee Dans le Bassin 
de l’Oum Er Rbia. Mission d’Évaluation Aide 
Memoire. Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. Forthcoming d. Water and Climate 

Change: Understanding the Risks and Making 
Climate- Smart Investment Decisions. Wash-
ington, DC: World Bank.

World Commission on Dams. 2000. Dams and 
Development: A New Framework for Decision 
Making. London and Sterling, VA: earthscan.

WMO (World Meteorological Organiza-

tion). 2000. “Fifth WMO Long- term plan 

 

Managing Land and Water to Feed Nine Billion People and Protect Natural Systems 

187

2000- 2009: Summary for Decision Makers.” 
Geneva: WMO.

———. 2007. Climate Information for Adapta-
tion and Development Needs. Geneva: WMO.

World Water Assessment programme. 2009. 

The United Nations World Water Development 
Report 3: Water in a Changing World. paris 
and London: UNeSCO and earthscan.

Xiaofeng, X. 2007. Report on Surveying and 
Evaluating Benefits of China’s Meteorologi-
cal Service. Beijing: China Meteorological 
Administration.

Yan, X., h. Akiyama, K. Yagi, and h. Akimoto. 
2009. “Global estimations of the Inventory 
and Mitigation potential of Methane emis-
sions from rice Cultivation Conducted Using 
the 2006 Intergovernmental panel on Climate 
Change Guidelines.” Global Biogeochemical 
Cycles 23: 1–15.

Young, M., and J. McColl. 2005. “Defining Trad-

able Water entitlements and Allocations: A 
robust System.” Canadian Water Resources 
Journal 30 (1): 65–72.

———. Forthcoming. “A robust Framework 

for the Allocation of Water in an ever Chang-
ing World.” In h. Bjornlund, ed., Incentives 
and Instruments for Sustainable Irrigation. 
Southampton: WIT press.

Zhang, G. S., K. Y. Chan, A. Oates, D. p. heenan, 
and G. B. huang. 2007. “relationship between 
Soil Structure and runoff/Soil Loss After 24 
Years of Conservation Tillage.” Soil and Till-
age Research 92: 122–28.

Zilberman, D., T. Sproul, D. rajagopal, S. Sex-
ton, and p. hellegers. 2008. “rising energy 
prices and the economics of Water in Agri-
culture.” Water Policy 10: 11–21.

Ziska, L. h. 2008. “Three- year Field evaluation 
of early and Late 20th Century Spring Wheat 
Cultivars to projected Increases in Atmo-
spheric Carbon Dioxide.” Field Crop Research 
108 (1): 54–59.

Ziska, L. h., and A. McClung. 2008. “Differential 
response of Cultivated and Weedy (red) rice 
to recent and projected Increases in Atmo-
spheric Carbon Dioxide.” Agronomy Journal 
100 (5): 1259–63.

ChApTer 4

Energizing Development without 
Compromising the Climate

With  the  global  economy 

set  to  quadruple  by  mid­
century,  energy­ related 
carbon dioxide (CO2) emis­
sions would, on current trends, more than 
double,  putting  the  world  onto  a  poten­
tially catastrophic trajectory that could lead 
to  temperatures  more  than  5°C  warmer 
than in preindustrial times. That trajectory 
is  not  inevitable.  With  concerted  global 
action to adopt the right policies and low­
 carbon  technologies,  the  means  exist  to 
shift to a more sustainable trajectory that 
limits warming to close to 2°C. In the pro­
cess,  there  is  an  opportunity  to  produce 
enormous benefits for economic and social 
development through energy savings, bet­
ter public health, enhanced energy security, 
and job creation. 

Such a sustainable energy path requires 
immediate action by all countries to become 
much more energy efficient and achieve sig­
nificantly lower carbon intensity. The path 

Key messages
Solving the climate change problem requires immediate action in all countries and a fundamen-
tal transformation of energy systems—significant improvement in energy efficiency, a dramatic 
shift toward renewable energy and possibly nuclear power, and widespread use of advanced 
technologies to capture and store carbon emissions. Developed countries must lead the way and 
drastically cut their own emissions by as much as 80 percent by 2050, bring new technologies to 
market, and help finance developing countries’ transition onto clean energy paths. But it is also 
in developing countries’ interests to act now to avoid locking into high-carbon infrastructure. 
Many changes—such as removing distortionary price signals and increasing energy efficiency—
are good both for development and the environment. 

requires a dramatic shift in the energy mix 
from fossil fuels to renewable energy and pos­
sibly nuclear power, along with widespread 
use  of  carbon  capture  and  storage  (CCS). 
This, in turn, requires major cost reductions 
in  and  widespread  diffusion  of  renewable 
energy technologies, safeguards for contain­
ment of nuclear waste and weapons prolif­
eration, and breakthroughs in technologies 
from batteries to carbon capture and storage. 
And  it  also  requires  fundamental  shifts  in 
economic development and lifestyles. If even 
one of these requirements is not met, keep­
ing temperature increases close to 2°C above 
preindustrial levels may be impossible. 

In order to limit warming to 2°C, global 
emissions would have to peak no later than 
2020  and  then  decline  by  50–80  percent 
from  today’s  levels  by  2050,  with  further 
reductions continuing to 2100 and beyond. 
Delaying actions by 10 years would make 
it impossible to reach this goal. The inertia 
in energy capital stocks means that invest­
ments  over  the  next  decade  will  largely 
determine  emissions  through  2050  and 
beyond. Delays would lock the world into 
high­ carbon infrastructure, later requiring 
costly retrofitting and premature scrapping 
of existing capital stocks. 

Governments should not use the current 
financial crisis as an excuse to delay climate 
change actions. The future climate crisis is 
likely to be far more damaging to the world 
economy.  The  economic  downturn  may 
delay business­ as­ usual growth in emissions 
by a few years, but it is unlikely to funda­
mentally  change  that  path  over  the  long 

190 

WOrL D   De VeLOpMeN T  r e pOr

T   2 0 1 0

term. Instead, the downturn offers oppor­
tunities  for  governments  to  direct  stimu­
lus  investment  toward  efficient  and  clean 
energy to meet the twin goals of revitalizing 
economic  growth  and  mitigating  climate 
change (box 4.1). 

Governments can adopt climate­ smart 
domestic  policies  now  to  deploy  existing 
low­ carbon technologies while a global cli­
mate deal is negotiated. energy efficiency 
is  the  largest  and  lowest­ cost  source  of 
emission  reductions  and  is  fully  justified 
by development benefits and future energy 
savings. The potential is huge on both the 
energy supply side (as in the burning of coal, 
oil, and gas and the production, transmis­
sion, and distribution of electricity) and on 
the demand side (use of energy in buildings, 
transport, and manufacturing). But the fact 
that so much efficiency potential remains 
untapped suggests that it is not easily real­
ized. Achieving significant energy savings 
requires price increases and the removal of 
fossil­ fuel subsidies as well as a concerted 
strategy to tackle market failures and non­
market barriers with effective regulations, 
financial incentives, institutional reforms, 
and financing mechanisms. 

The second­ largest source of potential 
emission  reductions  comes  from  use  of 

Box 4.1      The financial crisis offers an opportunity for 
efficient and clean energy

The financial crisis brings both chal-
lenges and opportunities to clean 
energy. Sharply falling fossil- fuel 
prices discourage energy conserva-
tion and make renewable energy 
less competitive. The weak macro-
economic environment and tight 
credit have led to lower demand and 
declining investment, and renew-
able energy is hard hit because of its 
capital- intensive nature (renewable 
energy is characterized by high up- 
front capital costs but low operating 
and fuel costs). By the final quarter 
of 2008 clean energy investments 
dropped by more than half from their 
peak at the end of 2007.a 

Yet the financial crisis should 

not be an excuse to delay climate-

 change action, for it offers oppor-
tunities to shift to a low- carbon 
economy (see chapter 1). First, 
stimulus investments in energy effi-
ciency, renewable energy, and mass 
transit can create jobs and build an 
economy’s productive capacity.b 
Second, falling energy prices provide 
a unique opportunity to implement 
programs to eliminate fossil- fuel 
subsidies in emerging economies 
and adopt fuel taxes in advanced 
economies in ways that are politi-
cally and socially acceptable. 

Sources: WDR team based on
a. World Economic Forum 2009. 
b. Bowen and others 2009.

low­  to zero­ emission fuels for power gen­
eration—particularly  renewable  energy. 
Many of these technologies are commer­
cially  available  today,  have  benefits  for 
development, and can be deployed much 
more widely under the right policy frame­
works. Scaling them up requires putting a 
price  on  carbon  and  providing  financial 
incentives to deploy low­ carbon technol­
ogies.  Large­ scale  deployment  will  help 
reduce  their  costs  and  make  them  more 
competitive.

But these win­ wins, good for both devel­
opment and climate change, are simply not 
enough  to  stay  on  a  2°C  trajectory.  Not­
 yet­ proven  advanced  technologies,  such 
as carbon capture and storage, are needed 
urgently and on a large scale. Accelerating 
their widespread availability and use will 
require greatly enhanced research, develop­
ment, and demonstration as well as tech­
nology sharing and transfer.

An economywide, market­ based mech­
anism,  such  as  a  carbon  cap­ and­ trade 
program  or  a  carbon  tax  (see  chapter  6), 
is  essential  to  unleash  robust  private  sec­
tor investment and innovation to achieve 
deep  emission  cuts  at  least  cost.  Within 
governments,  coordinated  and  integrated 
approaches  are  needed  to  achieve  low­
 carbon  economies  while  minimizing  the 
risks of social and economic disruptions.

Developed countries must take the lead 
in committing to deep emission cuts, pric­
ing carbon, and developing advanced tech­
nologies. That is the surest way to trigger 
development  of  the  needed  technologies 
and ensure their availability at a competi­
tive price. But unless developing countries 
also start transforming their energy systems 
as they grow, limiting warming to close to 
2°C above preindustrial levels will not be 
achievable.  That  transformation  requires 
transfers of substantial financial resources 
and  low­ carbon  technologies  from  devel­
oped to developing countries. 

energy  mitigation  paths,  and  the  mix 
of  policies  and  technologies  necessary  to 
reach them, differ among high­ , middle­, 
and  low­ income  countries,  depending 
on  their  economic  structures,  resource 
endowments, and institutional and techni­
cal capabilities. A dozen high­  and middle­

 

Energizing Development without Compromising the Climate 

191

 income countries account for two­ thirds of 
global energy­ related emissions, and their 
emission reductions are essential to avoid 
dangerous  climate  change.  This  chapter 
analyzes  the  mitigation  paths  and  chal­
lenges facing some of these countries. It also 
presents a portfolio of policy instruments 
and clean energy technologies that can be 
used to follow the 2°C trajectory.

Balancing competing objectives
energy policies have to balance four com­
peting  objectives—sustain  economic 
growth,  increase  energy  access  for  the 
world’s poor, enhance energy security, and 
improve  the  environment—tall  orders. 
Fossil­ fuel combustion produces around 70 
percent of greenhouse gas emissions1 and is 
the primary source of harmful local air pol­
lution. Many win­ win options can mitigate 
climate change and abate local air pollution 
through  reducing  fossil­ fuel  combustion 
(box 4.2). Other options present tradeoffs 
that need to be weighed. For example, sul­
fates emitted when coal is burned damage 
human health and cause acid rain, but they 
also  have  local  cooling  effects  that  offset 
warming.

Developing countries need reliable and 
affordable  energy  to  grow  and  to  extend 
service  to  the  1.6  billion  people  without 
electricity and the 2.6 billion without clean 
cooking fuels. Increasing access to electric­
ity services and clean cooking fuels in many 
low­ income developing countries, particu­
larly in South Asia and Sub­ Saharan Africa, 
would add less than 2 percent to global CO2 
emissions.2 replacing traditional biomass 
fuels  used  for  cooking  and  heating  with 
modern  energy  supplies  can  also  reduce 
emissions of black carbon—an important 
contributor to global warming3—improve 
the  health  of  women  and  children  other­
wise  exposed  to  high  levels  of  indoor  air 
pollution  from  traditional  biomass,  and 
reduce deforestation and land degradation 
(see chapter 7, box 7.10).4

energy  supplies  also  face  adaptation 
challenges.  rising  temperatures  are  likely 
to increase demand for cooling and reduce 
demand  for  heating.5  higher  demand  for 
cooling  strains  electricity  systems,  as  in 
the  european  heat  wave  of  2007.  Climate 

extremes  accounted  for  13  percent  of  the 
variation  in  energy  productivity  in  devel­
oping  countries  in  2005.6  Unreliable  or 
changing  precipitation  patterns  affect  the 
reliability  of  hydropower.  And  droughts 
and  heat  waves  that  affect  the  availability 
and temperature of water hamper thermal 
and nuclear energy production,7 because the 
plants require substantial quantities of water 
for cooling—as in the case of power short­
ages in France during the 2007 heat wave. 

The  challenge  then  is  to  provide  reli­
able  and  affordable  energy  services  for 
economic growth and prosperity without 
compromising  the  climate.  Low­ income 
countries now account for only 3 percent of 
global energy demand and energy­ related 
emissions. While their energy demand will 
increase  with  rising  income,  their  emis­
sions are projected to remain a small share 
of  global  emissions  in  2050.  But  middle­
 income  countries,  many  with  expanding 
economies and a large share of heavy indus­
try, face huge energy needs. And developed 
countries  demand  enormous  amounts  of 
energy to maintain their current lifestyles. 
Low­ carbon energy choices can substan­
tially improve energy security by reducing 
price volatility or exposure to disruptions 
in  energy  supplies.8  energy  efficiency 
can  reduce  energy  demand,  and  renew­
able energy diversifies the energy mix and 
reduces exposure to fuel price shocks.9 

But coal, the most carbon­ intensive fos­
sil fuel, is abundant near many high­ growth 
areas  and  provides  low­ cost  and  secure 
energy supplies. recent oil price swings and 
uncertainty about gas supplies are leading 
to increased interest in new coal­ fired power 
plants  in  many  countries  (developed  and 
developing). reducing reliance on oil and 
gas  imports  by  turning  to  coal­ to­ liquid 
and  coal­ to­ gas  production  would  sub­
stantially  increase  CO2  emissions.  Global 
coal  consumption  has  grown  faster  than 
consumption of any other fuel since 2000, 
presenting a formidable dilemma between 
economic growth, energy security, and cli­
mate change. 

Faced with such challenges and compet­
ing  objectives,  the  market  alone  will  not 
deliver  efficient  and  clean  energy  in  the 
time  and  at  the  scale  required  to  prevent 

192 

WOrL D   De VeLOpMeN T  r e pOr

T   2 0 1 0

Box 4.2      Efficient and clean energy can be good for development

Valuing the co- benefits of energy effi-
ciency and clean energy for develop-
ment—more energy savings, less local air 
pollution, greater energy security, more 
employment in local industry, and greater 
competitiveness from higher productiv-
ity—can justify part of the mitigation cost 
and increase the appeal of green policies. 
Energy savings could offset a significant 
share of mitigation costs.a The actions 
needed for the 450 parts per million (ppm) 
CO2e concentrations associated with 
keeping warming at 2°C could reduce 
local air pollution (sulfur dioxide and 
nitrogen oxides) by 20–35 percent com-
pared with business as usual in 2030.b In 

2006 the renewable energy industry cre-
ated 2.3 million jobs worldwide (directly 
or indirectly), and energy efficiency 
added 8 million jobs in the United States.c 
The energy- efficiency and technology-
 innovation programs in California over 
the past 35 years have actually increased 
gross state product.d 

Many countries, both developed and 
developing, are setting targets and poli-
cies for clean energy technologies (see 
table). Many of these initiatives are driven 
by domestic development benefits, 
but they can also reduce CO2 emissions 
substantially. The Chinese government’s 
target of a 20 percent reduction in energy 

intensity from 2005 to 2010 would reduce 
annual CO2 emissions by 1.5 billion tons 
by 2010, the most aggressive emission 
reduction target in the world, five times 
the 300- million- ton reduction of the 
European Union’s Kyoto commitment and 
eight times the 175- million- ton reduc-
tion of the California emission reduction 
target.e 

Sources: 
a. IEA 2008b; McKinsey & Company 2009a.
b. IEA 2008c.
c. EESI 2008; 
d. Roland- Holst 2008.
e. Lin 2007.

Many countries have national plans or proposals for energy and climate change 

Country
European Union

United States

Canada
Australia
China

Climate change

20 percent emission reduction from 1990 to 
2020 (30 percent if other countries commit to 
substantial reductions); 80 percent reduction 
from 1990 to 2050 
Emission reduction to 1990 levels by 2020; 80 
percent reduction from 1990 to 2050 

20 percent reduction from 2006 to 2020
15 percent reduction from 2000 to 2020
National Climate Change Plan and White 
Paper for Policies and Actions for Climate 
Change, a leading group on energy 
conservation and emission reduction 
established, chaired by the prime minister

Renewable energy
20 percent of primary 
energy mix by 2020

Energy efficiency 

Transport

20 percent energy 
savings from the 
reference case by 2020

10 percent transport 
fuel from biofuel by 2020

25 percent of electricity 
by 2025

15 percent of primary 
energy by 2020

20 percent reduction in 
energy intensity from 
2005 to 2010

Increase fuel economy 
standard to 35 miles a 
gallon by 2016

35 miles a gallon fuel 
economy standard 
already achieved; plan 
to be the world leader 
in electric vehicles; and 
mass construction of 
subways under way 
Urban transport policy: 
increase investment in 
public transport 

Plan to be the world 
leader in electric 
vehicles; and expand 
bus rapid transit
Increase investment in 
public transport

India

South Africa

Mexico

Brazil

National Action Plan on Climate Change: per 
capita emissions not to exceed developed 
countries’, an advisory council on climate 
change created, chaired by the prime minister
Long- term mitigation scenario: emissions 
peak in 2020 to 2025, plateau for a decade, 
and then decline in absolute terms

23 gigawatts of 
renewable capacity 
by 2012 

10 gigawatts of energy 
savings by 2012

4 percent of the power 
mix by 2013

12 percent energy-
 efficiency improvement 
by 2015

8 percent of the power 
mix by 2012

Efficiency standards, 
cogeneration

50 percent emission reduction from 2002 to 
2050; national strategy on climate change: 
intersecretariat commission on climate 
change set up for coordination 
National plan on climate change: reducing 
deforestation 70 percent by 2018

Sources: Government of China 2008; Government of India 2008; Government of Mexico 2008; Brazil Interministerial Committee on Climate Change 2008; Pew Center 2008a; 
Pew Center 2008b; Project Catalyst 2009.
Note: Some of the above goals represent formal commitments, while others are still under discussion.

10 percent of the power 
mix by 2030

103 terawatt hours of 
energy savings by 2030

World leader in ethanol 
production

 

Energizing Development without Compromising the Climate 

193

dangerous climate change. pollution needs 
to be priced. Achieving the needed progress 
in  energy  efficiency  requires  price  incen­
tives, regulations, and institutional reforms. 
And the risks and scale of the investments 
in unproven technologies call for substan­
tial public support. 

Breaking the high- carbon habit
Carbon  emissions  from  energy  are  deter­
mined by the combination of total energy 
consumption  and  its  carbon  intensity 
(defined  as  the  units  of  CO2  produced  by 
a  unit  of  energy  consumed).  energy  con­
sumption increases with income and popu­
lation but with sizable variation depending 
on economic structure (manufacturing and 
mining are more energy intensive than agri­
culture and services), climate (which affects 
the need for heating or cooling), and policies 
(countries  with  higher  energy  prices  and 
more stringent regulations are more energy 
efficient). Similarly, the carbon intensity of 
energy varies depending on domestic energy 
resources (whether a country is rich in coal 
or  hydro  potential)  and  policies.  So  the 
policy levers for a low­ carbon growth path 
include reducing energy intensity (defined 
as  energy  consumed  per  dollar  of  gross 
domestic  product,  or  GDp)  by  increasing 
energy efficiency and shifting to low­ energy­
 consuming lifestyles—and reducing carbon 
intensity of energy by shifting to low­ carbon 
fuels such as renewable energy.

A doubling of energy consumption since 
the  1970s  combined  with  near­ constant 
carbon intensity has resulted in a doubling 
of emissions (figure 4.1). energy intensity 
has  improved  but  far  too  little  to  offset 
the tripling in world income. And carbon 
intensity has remained relatively constant 
as  achievements  in  producing  cleaner 
energy have been largely offset by a massive 
increase in the use of fossil fuels. Fossil fuels 
dominate global energy supplies, account­
ing for more than 80 percent of the primary 
energy mix (figure 4.2).10 

Developed countries are responsible for 
about two­ thirds of the cumulative energy­
 related CO2 now in the atmosphere.11 They 
also  consume  five  times  more  energy  per 
capita,  on  average,  than  developing  coun­
tries.  But  developing  countries  already 

Figure 4.1    The story behind doubling emissions: improvements in energy and carbon intensity 
have not been enough to offset rising energy demand boosted by rising incomes

Index 1970 = 1
3.0
2.8
2.6
2.4
2.2
2.0
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4

1970

Income
(GDP, PPP)

Energy (primary
energy supply)

CO2 emissions

Carbon intensity
(CO2/energy)

Energy intensity
(energy/GDP, PPP)

1975

1980

1985

Year

1990

1995

2000

Source: IPCC 2007.
Note: GDP is valued using purchasing power parity (PPP) dollars.

account  for  52  percent  of  annual  energy­
 related  emissions,  and  their  energy  con­
sumption is increasing rapidly—90 percent 
of the projected increases in global energy 
consumption,  coal  use,  and  energy­ related 
CO2  emissions  over  the  next  20  years  will 
likely be in developing countries.12 projec­
tions suggest that because such a large share 
of global population is in developing coun­
tries,  they  will  use  70  percent  more  total 

Figure 4.2    Primary energy mix 1850–2006. From 1850 to 1950 energy consumption grew  
1.5 percent a year, driven mainly by coal. From 1950 to 2006 it grew 2.7 percent a year,  
driven mainly by oil and natural gas.

Exajoules
500
450
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
1850

Nuclear
Hydropower and
other renewables
Gas
Oil
Coal
Biomass

1875

1900

1925

1950

1975

2000

2006

Year

Source: WDR team, based on data from Grübler 2008 (data for 1850–2000) and IEA 2008c (data in 2006). 
Note: To ensure consistency of the two data sets, the substitution equivalent method is used to convert hydro-
power to primary energy equivalent—assuming the amount of energy to generate an equal amount of electric-
ity in conventional thermal power plants with an average generating efficiency of 38.6 percent.

194 

WOrL D   De VeLOpMeN T  r e pOr

T   2 0 1 0

energy annually than developed countries 
by 2030, even though their energy use per 
capita will remain low (figure 4.3).

Globally,  power  is  the  largest  single 
source of greenhouse gas emissions (26 per­
cent),  followed  by  industry  (19  percent), 
transport  (13  percent),  and  buildings 
(8 percent),13 with land­use change, agricul­
ture, and waste accounting for the balance 
(figure  4.4).  The  picture  varies,  however, 
across income groups. high­income coun­
try emissions are dominated by power and 
transport, while land­use change and agri­
culture are the leading emission sources in 
low­ income  countries.  In  middle­ income 
countries,  power,  industry,  and  land­use 
change  are  the  largest  contributors—but 
with  land­ use  change  emissions  concen­
trated in a handful of countries (Brazil and 
Indonesia account for half the global land­

Figure 4.3    Despite low energy consumption and 
emissions per capita, developing countries will 
dominate much of the future growth in total energy 
consumption and CO2 emissions

a. Per capita energy consumption

Toe/person

7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

1980

2006
Year

2030

b. Total energy consumption

Toe (millions)
12,000
10,000
8,000
6,000
4,000
2,000

0

1980

2006
Year

2030

OECD countries
Non-OECD countries

Source: WDR team, based on data from IEA 2008c.
Note: Toe = tons of oil equivalent

 use  change  emissions).  power  will  most 
likely  continue  to  be  the  largest  source, 
but emissions are expected to rise faster in 
transport and industry.

As major centers of production and con­
centrations of people, the world’s cities now 
consume  more  than  two­ thirds  of  global 
energy and produce more than 70 percent 
of CO2 emissions. The next 20 years will see 
unprecedented urban growth—from 3 bil­
lion people to 5 billion, mostly in the devel­
oping world.14 From now to 2050 building 
stocks will likely double,15 with most new 
construction in developing countries. If cit­
ies grow through sprawl rather than densi­
fication, demand for travel will increase in 
ways not easily served by public transport. 
Car  ownership  rates  increase  rapidly 
with  rising  incomes.  On  current  trends 
2.3 billion cars will be added between 2005 
and 2050, more than 80 percent of them in 
developing countries.16 But if the right poli­
cies are in place, increased rates of owner­
ship do not have to translate into similar 
increases in car use (figure 4.5).17 Because 
car  use  drives  energy  demand  and  emis­
sions from transport, pricing policies (such 
as  road  pricing  and  high  parking  fees), 
public transport infrastructure, and urban 
form can make a big difference. 

Developing  countries  can  learn  from 
europe  and  developed  Asia  to  decouple 
car  ownership  from  car  use.  european 
and  Japanese  drivers  travel  30–60  percent 
fewer vehicle kilometers than drivers in the 
United States with comparable incomes and 
car ownership. hong Kong, China, has one­
 third  the  car  ownership  of  New  York,  the 
American city with the lowest ratio of cars 
per capita.18 how? Through a combination of 
high urban density, high fuel taxes and road­
 pricing policies, and well­ established public 
transport infrastructure. Similarly, europe 
has four times the public transport routes 
per 1,000 persons as the United States.19 But 
in many developing countries, public trans­
port  has  not  kept  up  with  urban  growth, 
so the move to individual car ownership is 
causing chronic and increasing problems of 
congestion.

Transport  infrastructure  also  affects 
settlement patterns, with a high volume of 
roads  facilitating  low­ density  settlements 

 

Energizing Development without Compromising the Climate 

195

Figure 4.4    Greenhouse gas emissions by sector: world and high- , middle- , and low- income countries

a. World

Waste and wastewater

3%

Power
26%

Land-use
change and

forestry

17%

Transportation

13%

Residential and

commercial buildings

8%

Agriculture

14%

Industry

19%

b. High-income countries

c. Middle-income countries

d. Low-income countries

Others
14%

Others
18%

Agriculture

8%

Industry

15%

Power
26%

Land-use
change and

forestry

23%

Power
36%

Transportation

23%

Agriculture

14%

Transportation

7%

Industry

16%

Power

5%

Transportation

4%

Industry

7%

Others
14%

Land-use change

and forestry

50%

Agriculture

20%

Source: WDR team, based on data from Barker and others 2007 (figure 4a) and WRI 2008 (figures 4b, c, and d).
Note: The sectoral share of global emissions in figure 4.4a is for 2004. The sectoral share of emissions in high- , middle- , and low- income countries in figures 4.4b, 4.4c, and 4.4d 
are based on emissions from the energy and agriculture sectors in 2005 and from land- use changes and forestry in 2000. The size of each pie represents contributions of green-
house gas emissions, including emissions from land- use changes, from high- , middle- , and low- income countries; the respective shares are 35, 58, and 7 percent. Looking only 
at CO2 emissions from energy, the respective shares are 49, 49, and 2 percent. In Figure 4.4a, emissions from electricity consumption in buildings are included with those in the 
power sector. Figure 4.4b does not include emissions from land-use change and forestry, because they were negligible in high-income countries.

and an urban form that mass transit systems 
cannot easily serve. Low­ density settlements 
then make it more difficult to adopt energy­
 efficient district heating for buildings.20

Where the world needs to go: 
Transformation to a sustainable 
energy future
Achieving sustainable and equitable growth 
and  prosperity  requires  that  high­ income 
countries  significantly  reduce  their  emis­
sions—and their emissions per capita (blue 

arrows  in  figure  4.6).  It  also  depends  on 
developing countries avoiding the carbon­
 intensive path followed by developed coun­
tries such as Australia or the United States, 
taking  instead  a  low­ carbon  growth  path 
(orange arrow). It thus requires fundamen­
tal changes in lifestyles for developed coun­
tries and a leapfrogging to new development 
models for developing countries.

Achieving these goals requires reconcil­
ing what is adequate to prevent dangerous 
climate  change  with  what  is  technically 

196 

WOrL D   De VeLOpMeN T  r e pOr

T   2 0 1 0

Figure 4.5    Car ownership increases with income, but pricing, public transport, urban planning, and urban 
density can contain car use

Passenger cars/1,000 people

a. Car ownership and income, 2000

600

500

400

300

200

100

Ethiopia

0

4.5

5.5

India

Vehicle-km/capita (thousands)
16

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

Germany
France

United Kingdom

United States

Japan
Denmark

Russian Federation
South
Africa

China

Brazil

Mexico

6.5
Log GDP per capita (PPP 2000 international $)

7.5

8.5

b. Car use and income, 1970–2005

Singapore

Hong Kong,
China
10.5

9.5

United States (cars and
household light trucks)
Germany
France
Japan

10

15

20
30
GDP per capita (2000 $, thousands)

25

35

40

Sources: Schipper 2007; World Bank 2009c.
Note: In figure 4.5b, data are from West Germany through 1992 and for all of unified Germany from 1993 onward. Notice the simi-
larity in rates of car ownership among, the United States, Japan, France, and Germany (panel a) but the large variation in distance 
traveled (panel b).

achievable  at  acceptable  costs.  Limiting 
warming to not much more than 2°C above 
preindustrial  temperatures  means  that 
global emissions must peak no later than 
2020, then decline by 50–80 percent from 
current levels by 2050, with perhaps even 
negative emissions required toward 2100.21 
This  is  an  ambitious  undertaking:  only 
about half of the energy models reviewed 
find it feasible (figure 4.7), and even then 
most  require  all  countries  to  start  taking 
action immediately.

More  specifically,  staying  close  to  a 
2°C  warming  requires  greenhouse  gas 

concentrations in the atmosphere to stabi­
lize at no more than 450 parts per million 
(ppm)  CO2  equivalent  (CO2e).22  Current 
greenhouse gas concentrations are already 
at  387  ppm  CO2e  and  are  rising  at  about 
2  ppm  a  year.23  Thus,  there  is  little  room 
for emissions to grow if warming is to sta­
bilize  around  2°C.  Most  models  assume 
that achieving 450 ppm CO2e will require 
overshooting  that  concentration  for  a  few 
decades and then coming back to 450 ppm 
CO2e toward the end of the century (table 
4.1). Faster reductions of short­ lived green­
house gas emissions, such as methane and 

 

Energizing Development without Compromising the Climate 

197

Figure 4.6    Where the world needs to go: Energy- related CO2 emissions per capita

CO2 emissions per capita (metric tons)
25

20

15

10

5

China

0

0

United States

Australia

Russian
Federation

United Kingdom

Korea,
Rep. of

Malaysia

Japan

Greece

Mexico

Ireland

France

India

Brazil

5,000

10,000

15,000

20,000

25,000

30,000

35,000

40,000

45,000

GDP per capita (PPP, constant 2005 international $)

Source: Adapted from NRC 2008, based on data from World Bank 2008e. 
Note: Emissions and GDP per capita are from 1980 to 2005.

Figure 4.7    Only half the energy models find it possible to achieve the emission reductions necessary to stay close to 450 ppm CO2e (2°C) 

550 ppm CO2e (3°C)

650 ppm CO2e (4–5°C)

CO2 emissions change in 2050 relative to 2000 (%)
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
–20
–40
–60
–80
–100
–120

Full

Delay

Not to exceed

Full

Delay

Not to exceed

450 ppm CO2e (2°C)

ETSAP-TIAM
FUND
GTEM
IMAGE
IMAGE-BECS
MERGE Optimistic
MERGE Pessimistic
MESSAGE
MESSAGE-NOBECS
MiniCAM-Base
MiniCAM-Lo Tech
POLES
SGM
WITCH

Emissions in year 2000 

Zero emissions

Full

Delay

Overshoot

Source: Clarke and others, forthcoming.
Note: Each dot represents the emissions reduction that a particular model associates with a concentration target—450, 550, 650 parts per million (ppm) of CO2 equivalent (CO2e)—
in 2050. The number of dots in each column signals how many of the 14 models and model variants were able to find a pathway that would lead to a given concentration outcome. 
“Overshoot” describes a mitigation path that allows concentrations to exceed their goal before dropping back to their goal by 2100, while “not to exceed” implies the concentra-
tion is not to be exceeded at any time. “Full” refers to full participation by all countries, so that emission reductions are achieved wherever and whenever they are most cost-
 effective. “Delay” means high- income countries start abating in 2012, Brazil, China, India, and the Russian Federation start abating in 2030, and the rest of the world in 2050.

198 

WOrL D   De VeLOpMeN T  r e pOr

T   2 0 1 0

Table 4.1    What it would take to achieve the 450 ppm CO2e concentration needed to keep warming close to 2°C—an illustrative scenario

Not- to- exceed

1) Immediate participation by all regions
2) 70% dramatic emissions reductions by 2020
3) Substantial transformation of the energy system by 2020, including the 
construction of 500 new nuclear reactors, and the capture of 20 billion 
tons of CO2

4) Carbon price of $100/tCO2 globally in 2020
5) Tax on land- use emissions beginning in 2020

n
o
i
t
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
p
e
t
a
i
d
e
m
m

 

I

n
o
i
t
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
p
d
e
y
a
l
e
D

 

Overshoot
1) Immediate participation by all regions
2) Construction of 126 new nuclear reactors and the capture of nearly a 

billion tons of CO2 in 2020

3) Negative global emissions by the end of the century, and thus 

requires broad deployment of biomass-based CCS

4) Carbon prices escalate to $775/tCO2 in 2095
5) Possible without a tax on land- use emissions, but would result in 
a tripling of carbon taxes and a substantial increase in the cost of 
meeting the target.

1) Dramatic emissions reductions for non-Annex I (developing countries) 

at the time of their participation

2) Negative emissions in Annex I (high-income) countries by 2050 and 

negative global emissions by the end of the century, and thus requires 
broad deployment of biomass-based CCS

3) Carbon prices begin at $50/tCO2, and rise to $2,000/tCO2
4) Results in significant carbon leakage, because crop production is 
outsourced to non participating regions resulting in a substantial 
increase in land- use change emissions in those regions

Source: Clarke and others, forthcoming.
Note: Maintaining emissions at 450 ppm CO2e or less at all times is almost impossible to attain. If concentrations are allowed to exceed 450 ppm CO2e before 2100, keeping 
warming close to 2°C still poses tremendous challenges, as the right- hand column outlines. Annex I countries are the OECD and transition economies committed to reducing 
emissions under the Kyoto Protocol. The non-Annex I countries did not take on any commitment to reduce emissions.

black carbon, could reduce the overshoot but 
not avoid it.24 In addition, 450 ppm CO2e tra­
jectories rely on biomass­ based carbon cap­
ture and storage25 for negative emissions.26 
But given the competition for land and water 
for food production and carbon storage (see 
chapter 3), sustainable biomass supplies will 
be an issue.27 Limiting warming to 2°C will 
thus  require  fundamental  changes  in  the 
global energy mix (box 4.3 and box 4.4; see 
endnote 28 for model details).28

The mitigation costs of achieving 450 
ppm  CO2e  are  estimated  at  0.3–0.9  per­
cent of global GDp in 2030, assuming that 
all mitigation actions occur whenever and 
wherever they are cheapest (figure 4.8).29 
This estimate compares to total expendi­
tures  in  the  energy  sector  of  7.5  percent 
of  GDp  today.  Moreover,  the  costs  of 
inaction—from  the  damages  caused  by 
greater  warming—may  well  exceed  this 
mitigation cost (see chapter 1 for a discus­
sion of the cost­ benefit analysis of climate 
policy).

Achieving  450  ppm  CO2e  requires  the 
adoption  of  technologies  with  marginal 
costs of $35 to $100 a ton of CO2 in 2030, 
for a global annual mitigation investment 
of $425 billion to $1 trillion in 2030 (table 

4.2).30 Future energy savings would eventu­
ally offset a substantial share of the up­ front 
investment.31 But much of this investment 
is needed within the next 10 years in finan­
cially  constrained  developing  countries. 
And  removing  obstacles  to  reform  and 
directing capital to low­ carbon investments 
where  and  when  they  are  needed  will  be 
challenging.

A  less  challenging  option  would  be  to 
aim for a higher concentration—for exam­
ple,  550  ppm  CO2e.  That  concentration 
is  associated  with  a  50­percent  chance  of 
warming exceeding 3°C, and a higher risk 
of damages from climate change impacts, 
but it allows a little more time for emissions 
to  peak  (2030).  emissions  would  need  to 
fall back to today’s levels by 2050 and con­
tinue to fall substantially thereafter. Miti­
gation costs of 550 ppm CO2e are somewhat 
lower, at 0.2–0.7 percent of global GDp in 
2030 (figure 4.8a), and require adoption of 
technologies with marginal costs up to $25 
to $75 a ton of CO2 in 2030 (figure 4.8b), 
for average annual additional investments 
of some $220 billion a year over the next 
20  years.32  Achieving  this  more  modest 
goal would still require far­ reaching policy 
reforms. 

 

Energizing Development without Compromising the Climate 

199

Action—immediate and global
Delaying  global  actions  for  more  than  10 
years makes stabilization at 450 ppm CO2e 
impossible.33  There  is  little  flexibility  on 
the time when emissions peak. To achieve 
450 ppm CO2e, global energy­ related CO2 
emissions will need to peak at 28–32 giga­
tons  in  2020  from  26  gigatons  in  2005, 
and then fall to 12–15 gigatons by 2050.34 
This trajectory requires a 2–3 percent cut 
in emissions each year from 2020 onward. 
If  emissions  increase  for  10  years  beyond 
2020, emissions would have to be reduced 
4–5 percent a year. In contrast, emissions 
increased  3  percent  a  year  from  2000  to 
2006, so most countries are on their way to 
a high­ carbon path, with total global CO2 
emissions  outpacing  the  worst­ case  sce­
nario projected by the Intergovernmental 
panel on Climate Change (IpCC).35

New  additions  of  power  plants,  build­
ings,  roads,  and  railroads  over  the  next 
decade will lock in technology and largely 
determine  emissions  through  2050  and 
beyond. Why? Because the energy capital 
stock has a long life—it can take decades 
to  turn  over  power  plants,  a  century  to 
turn over urban infrastructure.36 Delaying 
action would substantially increase future 
mitigation  costs,  effectively  locking  the 
world into carbon­ intensive infrastructure 
for decades to come. even existing low­ cost 
clean energy technologies will take decades 
to  fully  penetrate  the  energy  sector.  And 
given the long lead times for new technol­
ogy development, deploying advanced tech­
nologies on a large scale beginning in 2030 
requires aggressive action today. 

Delaying  action  would,  in  addition, 
lead to costly retrofitting and early retire­
ment  of  energy  infrastructure.  Building 
to current standards and then retrofitting 
existing capacity, whether power plants or 
buildings,  would  be  far  more  costly  than 
building  new,  efficient,  and  low­ carbon 
infrastructure in the first place. The same is 
true for the forced early retirement of inef­
ficient energy capital. energy savings often 
justify the higher up­ front investments in 
new capital, but they are less likely to cover 
premature  replacement  of  capital  stock. 
even a high CO2 price may be insufficient 
to change this picture.37

Figure 4.8    Estimates of global mitigation costs and carbon prices for 450 and 550 ppm CO2e 
(2°C and 3°C) in 2030 from five models

% GDP
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0

$/t CO2
120

100

80

60

40

20

0

a. Global mitigation costs

0.78

0.77

0.58

0.56

0.90

0.70

0.33

0.18

MiniCAM

POLES

IMAGE

MESSAGE

REMINDa

Energy-climate model

b. Carbon prices

100

86

92

71

34

24

50

49

38

MiniCAM

POLES

IMAGE

MESSAGE

REMINDa

Energy-climate model

550 parts per million

450 parts per million

Sources: WDR team, based on data from Knopf and others, forthcoming; Rao and others 2008; Calvin and oth-
ers, forthcoming. 
Note: This graphic compares mitigation costs and carbon prices from five global energy- climate models—
MiniCAM, IMAGE, MESSAGE, POLES, and REMIND (see note 28 for model assumptions and methodology). 
MiniCAM, POLES, IMAGE, and MESSAGE report abatement costs for the transformation of energy systems 
relative to the baseline as a percent of GDP in 2030, where GDP is exogenous. 
a. The mitigation costs from REMIND are given as macroeconomic costs expressed in GDP losses in 2030 rela-
tive to baseline, where GDP is endogenous.

Table 4.2    Investment needs to limit warming to 2°C (450 ppm CO2e) in 2030
(constant 2005$ billion)

McKinsey

MESSAGE

REMIND

IEA
846
565

Region
Global
Developing countries
North America
European Union
China
India
Sources: IEA 2008b; Knopf and others, forthcoming and additional data provided by B. Knopf; Riahi, Grübler, 
and Nakic´enovic´ 2007; IIASA 2009 and additional data provided by V. Krey; McKinsey & Company 2009a with 
further data breakdown provided by McKinsey (J. Dinkel). 

1013
563
175
129
263
75

571
264
112
92
49
43

424
384

200 

WOrL D   De VeLOpMeN T  r e pOr

T   2 0 1 0

Box 4.3    A 450 ppm CO2e (2°C warmer) world requires a fundamental change in the global  
energy system

For this Report the team examined five 
global energy- climate models that dif-
fer in methodology, assumptions about 
baseline, technology status, learning rates, 
costs, and inclusion of greenhouse gases 
(in addition to CO2). Attainability of a 450 
ppm CO2e trajectory is dependent on the 
characteristics of the baseline. Some inte-
grated assessment models can not reach 
a 450 ppm CO2e trajectory from a fossil-
 fuel- intensive and high- energy- growth 
baseline. 

A number of models can achieve 450 
ppm CO2e at moderate costs, but each 
follows different emissions pathways and 
energy mitigation strategies.a Different 
emission pathways present a tradeoff 
between emission reductions in the 
short to medium term (2005–2050) and 
the long term (2050–2100). A modest 
emission reduction before 2050 requires 
dramatically deeper emission cuts over 
the long term through widespread use 
of biomass- based carbon capture and 
storage.b These differences in model 
methodologies and assumptions also 
result in varying investment needs in the 
short term (2030), as shown in table 4.2. 
The models also vary significantly on the 
energy mix from now to 2050 (see the 
figure on the facing page), although the 
stark conclusion does not vary. The policy 

implication is that a mix of technology 
options that varies by country and over 
time is needed—the least- cost strategies 
all rely on a broad portfolio of energy 
technologies.

Global energy mix for 450 ppm CO2e
The 450 ppm CO2e trajectory requires a 
global energy revolution—large reduc-
tions in total energy demand and major 
changes in the energy mix. To achieve 
this, global climate- energy models call for 
aggressive energy- efficiency measures 
that dramatically reduce global energy 
demand from around 900 exajoules by 
2050 under a business- as- usual scenario to 
650–750 exajoules—a 17–28 percent cut. 

Most models project that fossil fuels 
would need to drop from 80 percent of 
energy supply today to 50–60 percent by 
2050. The future use of fossil fuels (particu-
larly coal and gas) in a carbon- constrained 
world depends on widespread use of 
carbon capture and storage (CCS), which 
would have to be installed in 80–90 per-
cent of coal plants by 2050, assuming that 
capture- and- storage technology becomes 
technically and economically feasible for 
large- scale applications in the next decade 
or two (table below).c

This significant reduction in fossil-
 fuel use would need to be offset by 

The energy mix to achieve 450 ppm CO2e can vary, but we must make use of all options

Current 
energy mix

Energy mix in 2050 

Global 

Global 

United 
States 

European 

Union 

China 

India 

Energy type
2–3
Coal without CCS
3–26
Coal with CCS 
18–19
Oil
5–9
Gas without CCS
3–8
Gas with CCS
9–11
Nuclear
16–30
Biomass without CCS 
2–12
Biomass with CCS
5–19
Non-biomass renewables
66–68
Total (exajoules a year) 
Sources: WDR team, based on data from Riahi, Grübler, and Nakic´enovic´ 2007; IIASA 2009; Calvin and others, 
forthcoming; IEA 2008b.

% of total
0–1
1–12
20–26
20–21
6–21
8–10
10–18
1–7
7–12
87–121

3–5
0–25
18–20
9–13
1–29
8–12
9–14
1–12
10–13
130–139

0–2
2–9
11–23
20–22
7–31
10–11
10–11
3–9
7–12
70–80

26
0
34
21
0
6
10
0
3
493

665–775

1–2
1–13
16–21
19–21
8–16

8

12–21
2–8
8- 14

Cutting energy- related emissions in half by 
2050 requires deep decarbonization of the 
power sector

Estimated % of carbon that 
must be removed by sector, 

2005–2050

MiniCAM

IEA
–71
– 41
–30
– 21
– 50

Sector
Power
Building
Transport
Industry
Total
Sources: WDR team based on data from IEA 2008b; 
Calvin and others, forthcoming.

–87
–50
+47
–71
–50

renewables and nuclear energy. The 
largest increase would be in renew-
able energy, which would jump from 
13 percent today (mainly traditional 
biomass fuel and hydropower) to around 
30–40 percent by 2050, dominated 
by modern biomass with and without 
carbon capture and storage, with the 
remainder from solar, wind, hydropower, 
and geothermal (see the figure). Nuclear 
would also need a boost—from 5 percent 
today to around 8–15 percent by 2050.d 
The magnitude of the required effort 

is substantial: it amounts to an additional 
17,000 wind turbines (producing 4 mega-
watts each), 215 million square meters 
of solar photovoltaic panels, 80 concen-
trated solar power plants (producing 
250 megawatts each), and 32 nuclear 
plants (producing 1,000 megawatts 
each) per year over the next 40 years 
compared to the baseline.e The power 
sector would need to be virtually decar-
bonized, followed by the industrial and 
building sectors (table above).

Sources: 
a. Knopf and others, forthcoming; Rao and 
others 2008.
b. Riahi, Grübler, and Nakic´enovic´ 2007; 
IIASA 2009.
c. IEA 2008b; Calvin and others, forthcom-
ing; Riahi, Grübler, and Nakic´enovic´ 2007; 
IIASA 2009; van Vuuren and others, forth-
coming; Weyant and others 2009.
d. IEA 2008b; Calvin and others, forthcom-
ing; Riahi, Grübler, and Nakic´enovic´ 2007; 
IIASA 2009; van Vuuren and others, forth-
coming. 
e. IEA 2008b.

(continued)

 

Energizing Development without Compromising the Climate 

201

450 ppm CO2e requires a fundamental change in the global primary energy mix

Exajoules
1,400

MESSAGE
B2 Baseline

1,200

1,000

800

600

400

200

Exajoules
1,400

MESSAGE
B2 450ppm CO2e

1,200

1,000

800

600

400

200

0
2000

Exajoules
1,400

2020

2040

Year

2060

2080

2100

0
2000

Exajoules
1,400

2020

2040

Year

2060

2080

2100

MiniCAM
Baseline

1,200

1,000

800

600

400

200

0
2000

Exajoules
1,400

2020

2040

Year

2060

2080

2100

REMIND
Baseline

1,200

1,000

800

600

400

200

1,200

1,000

800

600

400

200

0

MiniCAM
450ppm CO2e

2000

2020

2040

Exajoules
1,400

REMIND
B2 450ppm CO2e

1,200

1,000

800

600

400

200

2060

2080

2100

Year

0
2000

Exajoules
1,400

2020

2040

Year

2060

2080

2100

0
2000

Exajoules
1,400

2020

2040

Year

2060

2080

2100

1,200

1,000

800

600

400

200

0
2000

IMAGE
Baseline

2020

2040

Year

2060

2080

2100

1,200

1,000

800

600

400

200

0
2000

IMAGE
450ppm CO2e

2020

2040

Year

2060

2080

2100

Nuclear

Biomass

Non-biomass renewables

Gas

Oil

Coal

with carbon capture and storage

202 

WOrL D   De VeLOpMeN T  r e pOr

T   2 0 1 0

Box 4.4    Regional energy mix for 450 ppm CO2e (to limit warming to 2°C)
It is important for national policy makers 
to understand the implications of a 450 
ppm CO2e trajectory for their energy sys-
tems. Most integrated assessment models 
follow a “least- cost” approach, where 
emission reductions occur wherever and 
whenever they are cheapest in all sec-
tors and in all countries.a But the country 
in which mitigation measures are taken 
is not necessarily the one that bears the 
costs (see chapter 6). It is not the purpose 
of this chapter to advocate any particular 
approach to burden sharing or to allocate 
emission reductions among countries; 
that is a matter for negotiation.

capacity. But doubling the share of natu-
ral gas in the European primary energy 
mix from 24 percent today to 50 percent 
by 2050, assumed by some 450 ppm CO2e 
scenarios, may pose energy security risks, 
particularly given the recent disruption of 
gas supplies to Europe. The 450 ppm CO2e 
scenario requires an additional annual 
investment of $110 billion to $175 billion 
for the United States (0.8–1 percent of 
GDP) and $90 billion to $130 billion for the 
European Union (0.6–0.9 percent of GDP) 
in 2030 (see table 4.2). 

achieve 450 ppm CO2e (see the lower 
table of box 4.3). Renewable energy could 
meet up to 40 percent of total energy 
demand in 2050. Several scenarios have 
extremely ambitious nuclear programs, in 
which China would build nuclear power 
plants three times faster than France ever 
achieved, and nuclear capacity in 2050 
would reach seven times France’s current 
nuclear capacity. Given China’s limited gas 
reserves, increasing the percentage of gas 
in the primary energy mix from the cur-
rent 2.5 percent to 40 percent by 2050, as 
assumed by some models, is problematic. 

The United States, the European Union, 
and China now account for nearly 60 per-
cent of the world’s total emissions. India 
currently contributes only 4 percent of 
global emissions despite representing 18 
percent of the world’s population, but its 
share is projected to increase to 12 per-
cent by 2050 in the absence of mitigation 
policy. So, these countries’ contributions 
to global emission reductions will be 
essential to stabilize the climate.

United States and European Union
Energy efficiency could reduce total 
energy demand in developed countries 
by 20 percent in 2050 relative to business 
as usual. This would require an annual 
decline in energy intensity of 1.5–2 per-
cent over the next four decades, continu-
ing the current trend of the past two 
decades. To achieve 450 ppm CO2e the 
United States and the European Union 
would need to cut oil consumption sig-
nificantly by 2050, a substantial challenge 
because they now consume almost half 
of global oil production. They would also 
need to dramatically reduce coal use—a 
daunting task for the United States, the 
world’s second- largest coal producer and 
consumer—and widely deploy carbon 
capture and storage.

The United States and the European 

Union have the resources to realize these 
measures and overcome the challenges. 
Both have abundant renewable energy 
potential. Some models project that 
carbon capture and storage would have 
to be installed for 80–90 percent of coal 
and gas plants and 40 percent of biomass 
plants in the United States by 2050 (see 
lower table of box 4.3). This is potentially 
feasible given the estimated CO2 storage 

China 
Significantly reducing emissions below 
current levels is a formidable goal for 
China, the world’s largest coal producer 
and consumer. China, relies on coal to 
meet 70 percent of its commercial energy 
needs (compared with 24 percent in the 
United States and 16 percent in Europe). 
To meet 450 ppm CO2e, total primary 
energy demand would have to be 20–30 
percent below the projected business-
 as- usual level by 2050. Energy intensity 
would have to decline by 3.1 percent a 
year over the next four decades. 

Impressively, Chinese GDP quadrupled 

from 1980 to 2000 while energy con-
sumption only doubled. After 2000, 
however, the trend reversed, even though 
energy intensity continues to fall within 
industrial subsectors. The main reason: a 
sharp rise in the share of heavy industry, 
driven by strong demand from domestic 
and export production.b China produces 
35 percent of the world’s steel, 50 percent 
of its cement, and 28 percent of its alu-
minum. This development stage, when 
energy- intensive industries dominate the 
economy, presents great challenges to 
decoupling emissions from growth.

China has increased the average effi-
ciency of coal- fired power plants by 15 
percent over the last decade to an aver-
age of 34 percent.A policy that requires 
closing small- scale coal- fired power 
plants and substituting large- scale effi-
cient ones over the last two years reduces 
annual CO2 emissions by 60 million tons. 
A majority of new coal- fired plants are 
equipped with state- of- the- art supercriti-
cal and ultrasupercritical technologies.c
Despite these advances, China would 

still have to reduce the share of coal in 
the primary energy mix dramatically to 

Given the large domestic reserves, 

coal will likely remain an important 
energy source in China for decades. 
Carbon capture and storage is essential 
for China’s economic growth in a carbon-
constrained world. Some 450 ppm CO2e 
scenarios project that carbon capture and 
storage would have to be installed for 
85–95 percent of coal plants in China by 
2050—more than can be accommodated 
by the current projections of economi-
cally available CO2 storage capacity of 
3 gigatons a year within 100 kilometers 
of the emission sources. But further site 
assessment, technology breakthrough, 
and future carbon pricing could change 
this situation. The 450 ppm CO2e scenario 
requires an additional annual investment 
for China of $30 billion to $260 billion 
(0.5–2.6 percent of GDP) by 2030.

India and other developing countries
India faces tremendous challenges in 
substantially altering its emissions path 
given its limited potential for alternative 
energy resources and for carbon storage 
sites. Like China, India heavily relies on 
coal (which accounts for 53 percent of its 
commercial energy demand). Achieving 
450 ppm CO2e would require a veritable 
energy revolution in India. Total primary 
energy demand would have to decline 
relative to the business- as- usual projec-
tions by around 15–20 percent by 2050 
and energy intensity by 2.5 percent a year 
from now to 2050, doubling the efforts of 
the past decade. A large potential exists, 
however, for improving energy efficiency 
and reducing the 29 percent losses in 
transmission and distribution, to a level 
closer to the world average of 9 percent. 
And while the efficiency of coal- fired 
power plants in India has improved in 

(continued)

 

Energizing Development without Compromising the Climate 

203

recent years, the average efficiency is still 
low at 29 percent, and nearly all the coal-
 fired plants are subcritical.

As in China, coal’s share in India’s 

primary energy mix would have to be 
reduced dramatically to achieve 450 
ppm CO2e. The potential for hydropower 
(150 gigawatts) and onshore wind power 
(65 gigawatts) is large in absolute terms 
but small in relation to future energy 
needs (12 percent in the power mix by 
2050 in the 450 ppm CO2e scenario). Con-
siderable untapped possibilities exist for 
importing natural gas and hydropower 
from neighboring countries, but difficul-
ties remain in establishing transbound-
ary energy trade agreements. For solar 
to play a large role, costs would have to 
come down significantly. Some models 
suggest that India would need to rely on 
biomass to supply 30 percent of its pri-
mary energy by 2050 under the 450 ppm 
CO2e scenario. But this may exceed India’s 
sustainable biomass potential because 
biomass production competes with agri-
culture and forests for land and water.
India has limited economically avail-
able carbon storage sites, with a total 
storage capacity of less than 5 gigatons 
of CO2, enough to store only three years 
of carbon if 90 percent of coal plants 
were equipped with carbon capture and 

storage by 2050, as some 450 ppm CO2e 
scenarios project. Additional site assess-
ments and technology breakthroughs 
could change this. The 450 ppm CO2e 
scenario requires an additional annual 
investment of $40 billion to $75 billion for 
India (1.2–2.2 percent of GDP) in 2030.

Sub- Saharan Africa (excluding South 
Africa) contributes 1.5 percent of global 
annual energy- related CO2 emissions 
today, an amount projected to grow 
to only 2–3 percent by 2050. Providing 
basic modern energy services to the 
poor should be the top priority and will 
only slightly increase global greenhouse 
gas emissions. But a global clean energy 
revolution is relevant to the low- income 
countries, which may be able to leapfrog 
to the next generation of technologies. 
Clean energy can play a large role in 
increasing access to energy, and pursuing 
energy efficiency is a cost- effective short-
 term solution to power outages.

According to climate- energy models, 
under the 450 ppm CO2e scenarios, most 
developing countries would need to boost 
their production of renewable energy. 
Africa, Latin America, and Asia could con-
tribute by switching to modern biomass. 
And Latin America and Africa have sub-
stantial untapped hydropower, although 
the amount could be affected by a less 

reliable hydrological cycle resulting from 
climate change. These countries would 
also need a major boost in natural gas.

Sources: Calvin and others, forthcoming; 
Chikkatur 2008; Dahowski and others 2009; 
de la Torre, Fajnzylber, and Nash 2008; 
Dooley and others 2006; German Advisory 
Council on Global Change 2008; Govern-
ment of India Planning Commission 2006; 
Holloway and others 2008; IEA 2008b; IEA 
2008c; IIASA 2009; Lin and others 2006; 
McKinsey & Company 2009a; Riahi, Grübler, 
and Nakic´enovic´ 2007; Wang and Watson 
2009; Weber and others 2008; World Bank 
2008c; Zhang 2008.
a. They are based on an integrated global 
carbon market and do not consider any 
explicit burden sharing between countries. 
In reality, this is unlikely. Burden sharing is 
discussed in chapter 1, and the implication 
of delayed participation by non- Annex I 
countries is discussed in chapter 6. We also 
reviewed models from developing countries 
(China and India), but no public information 
is available for 450 ppm CO2e scenarios.
b. Lin and others 2006. Production of exports 
accounted for around one- third of China’s 
emissions in 2005 (Weber and others 2008). 
c. Supercritical and ultrasupercritical 
plants use higher steam temperatures and 
pressures to achieve higher efficiency of 
38–40 percent and 40–42 percent respec-
tively, compared with large subcritical 
power plants with an average efficiency of 
35–38 percent. 

To  avoid  such  lock­ ins,  the  scale  and 
rate of urbanization present an unrivaled 
opportunity,  particularly  for  developing 
countries, to make major decisions today 
about building low­ carbon cities with com­
pact urban designs, good public transport, 
efficient buildings, and clean vehicles. 

One beneficial feature of the inertia in 
energy  infrastructure  is  that  introduc­
ing efficient low­ carbon technologies into 
new  infrastructure  offers  an  opportunity 
to lock in a low­ carbon path. Developing 
countries will install at least half the long­
 lived  energy  capital  stocks  built  between 
now and 2020.38 For example, half of Chi­
na’s building stock in 2015 will have been 
built between 2000 and 2015.39 There are 
fewer opportunities in developed countries, 
where  residential  buildings  tend  to  have 
slow  retirements—60  percent  of  France’s 
expected residential building stock in 2050 
has already been built. This fact constrains 

the potential for reductions in heating and 
cooling  demand,  which  requires  retrofit­
ting and replacing building shells. But there 
are abundant opportunities over the next 
decade in both developed and developing 
countries to build new power plants with 
clean energy technologies, thereby avoiding 
further lock in to carbon­ intensive fuels.

For  the  reasons  outlined  in  the  Bali 
Action  plan,  which  is  shaping  the  current 
negotiations  under  the  United  Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change, 
developed countries must take the lead in 
cutting emissions (see chapter 5). But devel­
oped countries alone could not put the world 
onto a 2°C trajectory, even if they were able 
to  reduce  their  emissions  to  zero  (figure 
4.9). By 2050, 8 billion of the world’s 9 bil­
lion  people  will  live  in  today’s  developing 
countries, producing 70 percent of projected 
global emissions.40 Developed countries can, 
however,  provide  financial  assistance  and 

204 

WOrL D   De VeLOpMeN T  r e pOr

T   2 0 1 0

Figure 4.9    Global actions are essential to limit 
warming to 2°C (450 ppm) or 3°C (550 ppm). Developed 
countries alone could not put the world onto a 2°C or 
3°C trajectory, even if they were to reduce emissions 
to zero by 2050.

low­ carbon technology transfers to develop­
ing countries, while pursuing advanced low­
 carbon technologies and demonstrating that 
low­ carbon growth is feasible (table 4.3).

Annual CO2 emissions by 2050 (Gt/yr)
70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

OECD

Non-OECD

World

Reference
scenario

550 ppm
policy
scenario

World

450 ppm
policy
scenario

Sources: Adapted from IEA 2008b; Calvin and others, forthcom-
ing.
Note: If energy- related emissions from developed countries 
(orange) were to reduce to zero, emissions from developing 
countries (green) under business as usual would still exceed 
global emission levels required to achieve 550 ppm CO2e and 
450 ppm CO2e scenarios (blue) by 2050.

Table 4.3    Different country circumstances require tailored approaches 

Countries
Low- income countries

Middle- income countries

High- income countries

Source: WDR team.

Low- carbon technologies and policies
Expand energy access through grid and off- grid options
Deploy energy efficiency and renewable energy whenever they 
are the least cost
Remove fossil- fuel subsidies
Adopt cost- recovery pricing
Leapfrog to distributed generation, where grid infrastructure does 
not exist
Scale up energy efficiency and renewable energy
Integrate urban and transport approaches to low  carbon use
Remove fossil- fuel subsidies
Adopt cost- recovery pricing including local externalities
Conduct research, development, and demonstration in new 
technologies
Undertake deep emission cuts at home
Put a price on carbon: cap- and- trade or carbon tax
Remove fossil- fuel subsidies
Increase research, development, and demonstration in new 
technologies
Change high- energy- consuming lifestyle
Provide financing and low- carbon technologies to developing 
countries

Acting on all technical and policy fronts
What fundamental changes need to be made 
in  the  energy  system  to  narrow  the  gap 
between where the world is headed and where 
it needs to go? The answer lies in a portfo­
lio  of  efficient  and  clean  energy  technolo­
gies to reduce energy intensity and shift to 
low­ carbon fuels. On current trends, global 
energy­ related CO2 emissions will increase 
from 26 gigatons in 2005 to 43–62 gigatons 
by  2050.41  But  a  450 ppm  CO 2e  trajectory 
requires that energy emissions be reduced 
to 12–15 gigatons, a 28–48 gigaton mitiga­
tion gap by 2050 (figure 4.10). Models rely on 
four technologies to close this gap—energy 
efficiency  (the  largest  wedge),  followed  by 
renewable energy, carbon capture and stor­
age, and nuclear.42

A  portfolio  of  these  technologies  is 
needed to achieve the deep emission cuts 
required by the 450 ppm CO2e trajectory 
at least cost, because each has physical and 
economic constraints, although these vary 
by country. energy efficiency faces barriers 
and  market  failures.  Wind,  hydropower, 
and  geothermal  power  are  limited  by  the 
availability of suitable sites; biomass is con­
strained by competition for land and water 
from food and forests (see chapter 3); and 
solar is still costly (box 4.5). Nuclear power 
raises  concerns  about  weapons  prolifera­
tion, waste management, and reactor safety. 
Carbon  capture  and  storage  technologies 
for power plants are not yet commercially 
proven, have high costs, and may be limited 
by the availability of storage sites in some 
countries. 

Sensitivity analysis incorporating these 
technology  constraints  suggests  that  450 
ppm CO2e is not achievable without large­
 scale  deployment  of  energy  efficiency, 
renewable energy, and carbon capture and 
storage;43  and  that  reducing  the  role  of 
nuclear would require substantial increases 
of fossil­ based carbon capture and storage 
and  renewables.44  Critical  uncertainties 
include the availability of carbon capture 
and storage and the development of second­
 generation  biofuels.  With  today’s  known 

Box 4.5    Renewable energy technologies have huge potential but face constraints

Biomass
Modern biomass as fuel for power, heat, 
and transport has the highest mitigation 
potential of all renewable sources.a It 
comes from agriculture and forest resi-
dues as well as from energy crops. The 
biggest challenge in using biomass resi-
dues is a long- term reliable supply deliv-
ered to the power plant at reasonable 
costs; the key problems are logistical con-
straints and the costs of fuel collection. 
Energy crops, if not managed properly, 
compete with food production and may 
have undesirable impacts on food prices 
(see chapter 3). Biomass production is 
also sensitive to the physical impacts of a 
changing climate.

Projections of the future role of bio-

mass are probably overestimated, given 
the limits to the sustainable biomass 
supply, unless breakthrough technolo-
gies substantially increase productivity. 
Climate- energy models project that bio-
mass use could increase nearly fourfold 
to around 150–200 exajoules, almost a 
quarter of world primary energy in 2050.b 
However, the maximum sustainable 
technical potential of biomass resources 
(both residues and energy crops) without 
disruption of food and forest resources 
ranges from 80–170 exajoules a year by 
2050,c and only part of this is realistically 
and economically feasible. In addition, 
some climate models rely on biomass-
 based carbon capture and storage, an 
unproven technology, to achieve nega-
tive emissions and to buy some time dur-
ing the first half of the century.d 

Some liquid biofuels such as corn-

 based ethanol, mainly for transport, may 
aggravate rather than ameliorate carbon 
emissions on a life- cycle basis. Second-
 generation biofuels, based on ligno-
 cellulosic feedstocks—such as straw, 
bagasse, vegetative grass, and wood—
hold the promise of sustainable produc-
tion that is high- yielding and emits low 
levels of greenhouse gas, but they are still 
in the R&D stage.

Solar
Solar power, the most abundant energy 
source on Earth, is the fastest- growing 
renewable energy industry. Solar power 
has two major technologies—solar 
photovoltaic systems and concentrated 
solar power. Solar photovoltaic systems 
convert solar energy directly into elec-
tricity. Concentrated solar power uses 
mirrors to focus sunlight on a transfer 

fluid that generates steam to drive a 
conventional turbine. Concentrated solar 
power is much cheaper and offers the 
greatest potential to produce base- load, 
large- scale power to replace fossil power 
plants. But this technology requires water 
to cool the turbine—a constraint in the 
desert, where solar plants tend to be 
installed. So expansion is limited by geog-
raphy (because concentrated solar power 
can only use direct beam sunlight) as well 
as by the lack of transmission infrastruc-
ture and large financing requirements. 
Solar photovoltaics are less location-
 sensitive, quicker to build, and suitable 
for both distributed generation and 
off- grid applications. Solar water heaters 
can substantially reduce the use of gas 
or electricity to heat water in buildings. 
China dominates the global market of 
solar water heaters, producing more than 
60 percent of global capacity. 

At current costs, concentrated solar 

would become cost competitive with coal 
at a price of $60 to $90 a ton of CO2.e But 
with learning and economies of scale, con-
centrated solar power could become cost 
competitive with coal in less than 10 years, 
and the global installed capacity could rise 
to 45–50 gigawatts by 2020.f Similarly, solar 
photovoltaics have a learning rate of 15–20 
percent cost reduction with each doubling 
of installed capacity.g Because global 
capacity is still small, potential cost reduc-
tions through learning are substantial. 

Wind, hydro, and geothermal 
Wind, hydro, and geothermal power are all 
limited by resources and suitable sites. Wind 
power has grown at 25 percent a year over 
the past five years, with installed capacity of 
120 gigawatts in 2008. In Europe more wind 
power was installed in 2008 than any other 
type of electricity- generating technol-
ogy. But climate change could affect wind 
resources, with higher wind speeds but 
more variable wind patterns.h 

Hydropower is the leading renewable 

source of electricity worldwide, accounting 
for 16 percent of global power. Its potential 
is limited by availability of suitable sites 
(global economically exploitable potential 
of 6 million gigawatt- hours a year),i large 
capital requirements, long lead times to 
develop, concerns over social and envi-
ronmental impacts, and climate variability 
(notably water resources). More than 90 
percent of the unexploited economically 
feasible potential is in developing coun-
tries, primarily in Sub-Saharan Africa, South 

and East Asia, and Latin America.j Africa 
exploits only 8 percent of its hydropower 
potential. 

For many countries in Africa and South 

Asia, regional hydropower trade could 
provide the least- cost energy supply with 
zero carbon emissions. But the lack of 
political will and trust and concerns about 
energy security constrain such trade. And 
greater climate variability will affect the 
hydrological cycle. Drought or glacial 
melting could make hydropower supplies 
unreliable in some regions. Nevertheless, 
after two decades of stagnation, hydro-
power is expanding, particularly in Asia. 
But the current financial crisis makes it 
more difficult to raise financing to meet 
the large capital requirements. 

Geothermal can provide power, heat-
ing, and cooling. It meets 26 percent of 
Iceland’s electricity needs and 87 percent 
of its building heating demand. But this 
power source requires major financial 
commitments in up- front geological 
investigations and expensive drilling of 
geothermal wells. 

Smart grids and meters
With two- way digital communications 
between power plants and users, smart 
grids can balance supply and demand 
in real time, smooth demand peaks, and 
make consumers active participants in 
the production and consumption of elec-
tricity. As the share of generation from 
variable renewable resources such as 
wind and solar increases, a smart grid can 
better handle fluctuations in power.k It 
can allow electric vehicles to store power 
when needed or to sell it back to the grid. 
Smart meters can communicate with 
customers, who can then reduce costs by 
changing appliances or times of use. 
Sources:
a. IEA 2008b.
b. IEA 2008b; Riahi, Grübler, and Nakic´enovic´ 
2007; IIASA 2009; Knopf and others, forth-
coming.
c. German Advisory Council on Global 
Change 2008; Rokityanskiy and others 2006; 
Wise and others 2009.
d. Riahi, Grübler, and Nakic´enovic´ 2007; 
IIASA 2009.
e. IEA 2008b; Yates, Heller, and Yeung 2009.
f. Yates, Heller, and Yeung 2009.
g. Neij 2007. 
h. Pryor, Barthelmie, and Kjellstrom 2005.
i. IEA 2008b.
j. World Bank 2008b.
k. Worldwatch Institute 2009.

206 

WOrL D   De VeLOpMeN T  r e pOr

T   2 0 1 0

technologies, there is limited room for flex­
ibility in the technology portfolio. 

historically,  however,  innovation  and 
technology  breakthroughs  have  reduced 
the  costs  of  overcoming  formidable  tech­
nical  barriers,  given  effective  and  timely 
policy  action—a  key  challenge  facing 
the  world  today.  Acid  rain  and  strato­
spheric  ozone  depletion  are  two  of  many 

examples demonstrating that estimates of 
environmental  protection  costs  based  on 
technology  extant  before  regulation  are 
dramatically overstated.45

Climate­ smart development policies need 
to be tailored to the maturity of each technol­
ogy and the national context and can acceler­
ate the development and deployment of these 
technologies (figure 4.11 and table 4.4).

Figure 4.10    The emissions gap between where the world is headed and where it needs to go is huge, but a 
portfolio of clean energy technologies can help the world stay at 450 ppm CO2e (2°C)

a. CO2 emissions from the energy sector: wedge analysis for IEA Blue Scenario (450 ppm CO2e) 

60

50

40

30

20

10

0
2000

Existing technologies with
aggressive domestic policies

Demand-side energy
efficiency (38%)
Fuel switching (7%)
Nuclear (6%)
Non-biomass
renewables (15%)
Biomass (8%)
Fossil CCS (19%)
Electric and fuel cell
vehicles (8%)

Advanced technologies and
innovations with international
climate policies and R&D

Annual emissions (Gt CO2)
70

We are heading to 6°C: baseline annual emissions = 62 Gt

We want to go to 2°C: 450 ppm emissions = 14 Gt

2020

2035

2050

Year

b. CO2 emissions from the energy sector: wedge analysis for MESSAGE B2 (450 ppm CO2e) 

Annual emissions (Gt CO2)
70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0
2000

Demand-side energy
efficiency (26%)
Fuel switching (7%)
Nuclear (12%)
Non-biomass
renewables (6%)
Biomass (18%)
Fossil CCS (33%)

2020

2035

2050

Year

Sources: WDR team, based on data from Riahi, Grübler, and Nakic´enovic´ 2007; IIASA 2009; IEA 2008b. 
Note: Fuel switching is changing from coal to gas. Non-biomass renewables include solar, wind, hydropower, and geothermal. 
Fossil CCS is fossil fuels with carbon capture and storage. While the exact mitigation potential of each wedge may vary under dif-
ferent models depending on the baseline, the overall conclusions remain the same. 

 

Energizing Development without Compromising the Climate 

207

Figure 4.11    The goal is to push low- carbon technologies from unproven concept to widespread deployment and to higher emission reductions

CO2 emission reduction potential (Gt/year)
8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

CCS power
generation

CCS industry

Building

energy efficiency

Transport

energy efficiency

Industry

energy efficiency

2nd generation

biofuel

Fuel-cell vehicles

Plug-in and

electric vehicles

Nuclear

Fuel switching

coal to gas

Wind

Solar photovoltaic

Concentrated
solar power

Integrated gasification

combined cycle

Unproven

scientific concept

Technically

viable

Commercially

available

Stage of development

Geothermal

Financially

viable

Hydro

Widespread
deployment

Source: WDR team, based on data from World Bank 2008a and IEA 2008a (mitigation potential from IEA Blue Scenario in 2050).
Note: See table 4.4 for detailed definitions of technology development stage. A given technology group can be progressing through different stages at the same time but in dif-
ferent country settings and at different scales. Wind, for example, is already cost competitive with gas- fired power plants in most of the United States (Wiser and Bolinger 2008). 
But in China and India wind may be economically but not financially viable against coal- fired power plants. So for clean technologies to be adopted in more places and at larger 
scales, they must move from the top to bottom in table 4.4.

Table 4.4      Policy instruments tailored to the maturity of technologies

Maturity level
Technically 
viable

Status

The basic science is proven and tested in the 
lab or on a limited scale. Some technical and 
cost barriers remain.

Commercially 
available and 
economically 
viable

Financially viable

The technology is available from commercial 
vendors. Projected costs are well understood. 
Technology is economically viable, justified 
by country’s development benefits. But it 
cannot yet compete against fossil fuels 
without subsidy and/or internalization of local 
externality. 
Technology is financially viable for project 
investors—cost competitive with fossil 
fuels, or has high financial returns and short 
payback period for demand options.

Widespread

Technology is being adopted widely through 
market operation. 

Source: WDR team.

Issues to address to move  

to next stage

Development and 
demonstration to prove 
operational viability at 
scale and to minimize costs. 
Internalize global externalities.

Leveling the playing field 
between clean energy and 
fossil fuels.

Market failures and barriers 
hamper accelerating adoption 
through the market.

Policy support

Technology development policies:
Substantial public and private R&D, and 
large- scale demonstration.
Internalize global externalities through 
carbon tax or cap- and- trade.
Technology transfer.
Domestic policies to provide a level 
playing field: 
Remove fossil- fuel subsidies and 
internalize local externalities.
Provide financial incentives for clean 
energy technologies.

Regulations, with financial incentives to 
remove market failures and barriers.
Support for delivery mechanisms and 
financing programs to expand adoption.
Consumer education. 

208 

WOrL D   De VeLOpMeN T  r e pOr

T   2 0 1 0

Energy efficiency.      In  the  short  term  the 
largest  and  cheapest  source  of  emission 
reductions is increased energy efficiency on 
both the supply and demand side in power, 
industry,  buildings,  and  transport.  Well­
 established  technologies  offer  near­ term 
reductions in greenhouse gas emissions by 
capturing methane emissions46 from coal 
mines,  municipal  solid  wastes,  and  gas 
flaring and by reducing black carbon emis­
sions from traditional biomass fuels. These 
technologies  can  also  enhance  coal  mine 
safety and improve public health by reduc­
ing air pollution.47 Many energy­ efficiency 
measures are financially viable for investors 
but are not fully realized. realizing these 
low­ cost savings requires regulations such 
as  efficiency  standards  and  codes—com­
bined  with  financial  incentives,  institu­
tional reforms, financing mechanisms, and 
consumer  education—to  correct  market 
failures and barriers. 

Existing  supply- side  low- carbon  technolo-
gies.    In the short to medium term, low­  or 
zero­ emission fuels for the power sector—
renewable  energy  and  nuclear  power—
are  commercially  available  and  could  be 
deployed much more widely under the right 
policy  and  regulatory  frameworks.  Smart 
and robust grids can enhance the reliabil­
ity  of  electric  networks  and  minimize  the 
downside of relying on variable renewable 
energy and distributed generation (see box 
4.5).  Fuel  switching  from  coal  to  natu­
ral  gas  also  has  great  mitigation  potential 
but increases energy security risks for gas­
 importing countries. Most renewable energy 
technologies  are  economically  viable  but 
not yet financially viable, so some form of 
subsidy (to internalize the externalities) is 
needed to make them cost competitive with 
fossil fuels. Adopting these technologies on a 
larger scale will require that fossil­ fuel prices 
reflect the full cost of production and exter­
nalities,  plus  financial  incentives  to  adopt 
low­ carbon technologies.

Advanced technologies.      While  commer­
cially available technologies can provide a 
substantial share of the abatement needed 
in  the  short  to  medium  term,48  limiting 
warming  to  2°C  requires  developing  and 

deploying advanced technologies (carbon 
capture and storage in power and industry, 
second­ generation  biofuels,  and  electric 
vehicles) at unprecedented scale and speed 
(box 4.6). policies that put an adequate price 
on carbon are essential, as are international 
efforts to transfer low­ carbon technologies 
to developing countries. Given the long lead 
time for technology development and the 
early  emission  peaking  date  required  to 
limit temperature increases to 2°C, govern­
ments need to ramp up research, develop­
ment,  and  demonstration  efforts  now  to 
accelerate the innovation and deployment 
of advanced technologies. Developed coun­
tries will need to take the lead in making 
these technologies a reality.

An integrated systems approach is needed 
to ensure compatible policies for sector­wide  
and  economywide  emission  reductions. 
Market­ based  mechanisms,  such  as  a  car­
bon cap­ and­ trade system or a carbon tax 
(see chapter 6), encourage the private sector 
to invest in least­ cost, low­ carbon technolo­
gies to achieve deep emission cuts. 

Integrated  urban  and 

transport 
approaches  combine  urban  planning, 
public  transport,  energy­ efficient  build­
ings,  distributed  generation  from  renew­
able sources, and clean vehicles (box 4.7). 
Latin  America’s  pioneering  experiences 
with  rapid  bus  transit—dedicated  bus 
lanes, prepayment of bus fares, and efficient 
intermodal connections—are examples of 
a broader urban transformation.49 Modal 
shifts  to  mass  transit  have  large  develop­
ment co­ benefits of time savings in traffic, 
less  congestion,  and  better  public  health 
from reduced local air pollution.

Changing  behaviors  and  lifestyles  to 
achieve  low­ carbon  societies  will  take  a 
concerted  educational  effort  over  many 
years. But by reducing travel, heating, cool­
ing, and appliance use and by shifting to 
mass transit, lifestyle changes could reduce 
annual CO2 emissions by 3.5–5.0 gigatons 
by 2030—8 percent of the reduction needed 
(see chapter 8).50

Governments do not have to wait for a 
global climate deal—they can adopt domes­
tic efficient and clean energy policies now, 
justified by development and financial co­ 
benefits. Such domestic win­ win measures 

 

Energizing Development without Compromising the Climate 

209

Box 4.6    Advanced technologies

Carbon capture and storage (CCS) could 
reduce emissions from fossil fuels by 
85–95 percent and is critical in sustain-
ing an important role for fossil fuels in 
a carbon- constrained world. It involves 
three main steps: 
•	 CO2 capture from large stationary 

sources, such as power plants or other 
industrial processes, before or after 
combustion.

•	 Transport	to	storage	sites	by	pipelines.
•	 Storage	through	injection	of	CO2 into 

geological sites, including: depleted oil 
and gas fields to enhance oil and gas 
recovery, coal beds to enhance coal 
bed methane recovery, deep saline for-
mations, and oceans. 
Currently, CCS is competitive with con-

ventional coal only at a price of $50 to $90 
a ton of CO2.a Still at the R&D stage, it is 
technologically immature. The number 
of economically available geological 
sites close to carbon emission sources 
varies widely from country to country. 
Early opportunities to lower costs are 
at depleted oil fields and enhanced oil 
recovery sites, but storage in deep saline 
aquifers would also be required for deep 

emission cuts. CCS also significantly 
reduces efficiency of power plants and 
has the potential for leakage. 

The near- term priority should be spur-
ring large- scale demonstration projects 
to reduce costs and improve reliability. 
Four large- scale commercial CCS dem-
onstration projects are in operation—in 
Sleipner (Norway); Weyburn (Canada-
 United States); Salah (Algeria); and Snoh-
vit (Norway)—mostly from gas or coal 
gasification. Together these projects cap-
ture 4 million tons of CO2 per year. A 450 
ppm CO2e trajectory requires 30 large-
 scale demonstration plants by 2020.b 
Capturing CO2 from low- efficiency power 
plants is not economically viable, so new 
power plants should be built with highly 
efficient technologies for retrofitting with 
CCS later. Legal and regulatory frame-
works must be established for CO2 injec-
tion and to address long- term liabilities. 
The European Union has adopted a direc-
tive on the geological storage of CO2, and 
the United States has proposed CCS rules. 
Detailed assessments of potential carbon 
storage sites are also needed, particularly 
in developing countries. Without a mas-
sive international effort, resolving the 

entire chain of technical, legal, institu-
tional, financial, and environmental issues 
could require a decade or more before 
applications go to scale. 

Plug- in hybrids offer a potential near-
 term option as a means of transition to 
full electric vehicles.c They combine bat-
teries with smaller internal combustion 
engines, which allow them to travel part-
 time on electricity provided by the grid 
through recharging at night. When run-
ning on electricity generated from renew-
able energy, they emit 65 percent less CO2 
than a gasoline- powered car.d However, 
they increase electricity consumption, 
and the net emission reductions depend 
on the electricity source. Significant 
improvements and cost reductions in 
energy storage technology are required. 
Electric vehicles are solely battery-
 powered, but they require much greater 
battery capacity than plug- in hybrids and 
are more expensive. 

Sources:
a. IEA 2008b.
b. IEA 2008b.
c. IEA 2008b.
d. NRDC 2007.

can go a long way to close the mitigation 
gap,51 but they must be supplemented with 
international climate agreements to bridge 
the remaining gap.

Realizing the savings from  
energy efficiency 
Globally  an  additional  dollar  invested  in 
energy efficiency avoids more than two dol­
lars in investment on the supply side, and 
the  payoffs  are  even  higher  in  developing 
countries.52 So energy efficiency (negawatts) 
should be considered on a par with tradi­
tional supply­ side measures (megawatts) in 
energy resource planning. energy efficiency 
reduces energy bills for consumers, increases 
the competitiveness of industries, and cre­
ates  jobs.  energy  efficiency  is  essential  for 
the 2°C trajectory, because it buys time by 
delaying the need to build additional capac­
ity while advanced clean energy technologies 
are being developed and brought to market. 

Buildings  consume  nearly  40  percent 
of the world’s final energy,53 about half for 
heating  space  and  water,  and  the  rest  for 
running electric appliances, including light­
ing,  air  conditioning,  and  refrigeration.54 
Opportunities to improve energy efficiency 
lie in the building envelope (roof, walls, win­
dows, doors, and insulation), in space and 
water heating, and in appliances. Buildings 
present one of the most cost­ effective mitiga­
tion options, with more than 90 percent of 
potential mitigation achievable with a CO2 
price of less than $20 a ton.55 Studies find 
that existing energy­ efficiency technologies 
can cost­ effectively save 30 to 40 percent of 
energy use in new buildings, when evaluated 
on a life­ cycle basis.56

While  most  of  these  studies  are  based 
on high­ income country data, the potential 
for energy­ efficiency savings in developing 
countries  can  be  larger  because  of  the  low 
baseline.  For  example,  the  current  space­

210 

WOrL D   De VeLOpMeN T  r e pOr

T   2 0 1 0

Box 4.7    The role for urban policy in achieving mitigation and development co- benefits

Urbanization is often cited as a major 
driver of global emissions growtha but 
is better understood as a major driver 
of development.b It is therefore a crucial 
nexus of climate and development policy 
making. Most emissions occur in cities 
precisely because that is where most 
production and consumption occur. And 
the high concentration of population and 
economic activity in cities can actually 
increase efficiency—if the right policies 
are in place. A number of factors call for 
an urban climate agenda.

First, denser cities are more energy and 

emission efficient (for example, in the 
transport sector; see the figure below), 
and local policies are essential for encour-
aging densification.c Second, the strong 
and persistent influence of infrastructure 
on long- term residential and commercial 
citing decisions reduces the respon-
siveness of emissions to price signals. 
Complementary regulation and land- use 
planning are therefore needed. Third, the 
interdependence of the systems that con-
stitute the urban form—roads and public 
transit lines; water, wastewater, and 

power services; and residential, commer-
cial, and industrial buildings—and that 
are not easily changed once the initial 
patterns are set, increases the urgency of 
designing low- emissions cities in rapidly 
urbanizing countries.

As discussed in chapter 8, cities have 

already become a source of political 
momentum and will advance mitigation 
actions on the international stage even as 
they pursue their own initiatives at home. 
Contrary to a general presumption that 
local decision making focuses on local 
issues, more than 900 U.S. cities have 
signed on to meet or exceed Kyoto Pro-
tocol targets to reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions,d while the C40 Cities Climate 
Leadership Group that aims to promote 
action to combat climate change includes 
major cities on all continents.e

Cities have the unique ability to 

respond to a global issue like climate 
change at a tangible local level. Many 
cities have legislated to limit the use 
of plastic bags, disposable cups, or 
bottled water. These initiatives may be 
important for social messaging, but their 

environmental impact has so far been 
minimal. Deeper, higher- impact efforts—
such as congestion charging, green build-
ing incentives, support for urban design 
requiring less automobile dependence, 
and incorporation of carbon pricing in 
land taxes and development rights—will 
ultimately require a more comprehen-
sive cultural momentum to overcome 
entrenched (or aspirational) high- carbon 
lifestyle preferences. Fortunately, many 
city-led measures needed for mitigation 
have benefits for adaptation to climate 
change, which will reduce trade offs.

Sources: WDR team. 
a. Dodman 2009.
b. World Bank 2008f.
c. World Bank 2009b.
d. U.S. Conference of Mayors Climate 
Change Protection Agreement.
e. See http://www.c40cities.org/. In addition, 
the United Cities and Local Governments 
and International Council for Local Environ-
mental Initiatives have a joint resolution 
requesting a greater voice for cities in the 
UNFCCC negotiating process.

Emissions from transport are much lower in denser cities

Individual emissions from transport (kg per capita)
700

600

500

400

300

200

100

0

0

Marseilles

Atlanta

Johannesburg

Kuala Lumpur

Frankfurt

Harare
Los

Angeles

Paris

Cape Town
Curitiba
Berlin

Mexico City

Cairo

São Paulo

Singapore

Tokyo

50

Santiago
100

Delhi

Shanghai
Bogotá

Seoul

150

200

250

Density (people per hectare)

Mumbai

300

350

Source: World Bank 2009b.
Note: The figure does not correct for income because a regression of transport emissions on density and income reveals that density, not income, is a key factor. Data 
are for 1995.

 

Energizing Development without Compromising the Climate 

211

 heating technology used in Chinese build­
ings consumes 50 to 100 percent more energy 
than that used in Western europe. Making 
buildings  in  China  more  energy  efficient 
would add 10 percent to construction costs 
but  would  save  more  than  50  percent  on 
energy costs.57 Technology innovations such 
as advanced building materials can further 
increase  the  potential  energy  savings  (see 
chapter 7). Integrated zero­ emission building 
designs, combining energy­ efficiency mea­
sures with on­ site power and heat from solar 
and biomass, are technically and economi­
cally feasible—and the costs are falling.58

Manufacturing  accounts  for  one­ third 
of global energy use, and the potential for 
energy  savings  in  industry  is  particularly 
large  in  developing  countries.  Key  oppor­
tunities include improving the efficiency of 
energy­ intensive equipment such as motors 
and boilers and of energy­ intensive indus­
tries such as iron, steel, cement, chemicals, 
and petrochemicals. One of the most cost­
 effective  measures  is  combined  heat  and 
power. existing technologies and best prac­
tices could reduce energy consumption in the 
industrial sector by 20–25 percent, helping 
reduce  carbon  footprints  without  sacrific­
ing growth.59 In Mexico cogeneration in the 
refineries  of  pemex,  the  large  state­ owned 
petroleum  company,  could  provide  more 
than  6  percent  of  the  country’s  installed 
power capacity at a negative mitigation cost 
(meaning that the sale of previously wasted 
electricity and heat would generate sufficient 
revenue  to  more  than  offset  the  required 
investments).60

Improving  vehicle  fuel  efficiency,  for 
example by shifting to hybrid cars, is the most 
cost­ effective means of cutting emissions in 
the transport sector in the near to medium 
term.  Improving  power­ train  systems  (for 
example, by downsizing conventional inter­
nal combustion engines) and making other 
design changes, such as lower vehicle weight, 
optimized  transmissions,  and  start­ stop 
systems with regenerative braking, can also 
improve fuel efficiency.

In  addition,  smart  urban  planning—
denser, more spatially compact, and with 
mixed­ use urban design that allows growth 
near  city  centers  and  transit  corridors  to 
prevent  urban  sprawl—can  substantially 

reduce energy demand and CO2 emissions. 
It  reduces  the  vehicle  kilometers  traveled 
and makes it possible to rely on district and 
integrated energy systems for heating.61 In 
Mexico, for example, dense urban develop­
ment is expected to reduce total emissions 
by 117 million tons of CO2e from 2009 to 
2030, with additional social and environ­
mental benefits.62

Market and nonmarket barriers  
and failures
The  large  untapped  potential  for  greater 
energy  efficiency  demonstrates  that  low­
 cost energy savings are not easy. Small­ scale, 
fragmented  energy­ efficiency  measures, 
involving  multiple  stakeholders  and  tens 
of  millions  of  individual  decision  mak­
ers, are fundamentally more complex than 
large­ scale,  supply­ side  options.  energy­
 efficiency investments need cash up front, 
but future savings are less tangible, making 
such investment risky compared with asset­
 based  energy­ supply  deals.  Many  market 
failures  and  barriers,  as  well  as  nonmar­
ket barriers, to energy efficiency exist and 
tackling them requires policies and inter­
ventions  that  entail  additional  costs  (box 
4.8). Another concern is the rebound effect: 
acquiring efficient equipment lowers energy 
bills, so consumers tend to increase energy 
consumption, eroding some of the energy 
reductions. But empirically the rebound is 
small to moderate, with long­ run effects of 
10–30 percent for personal transport and 
space heating and cooling,63 and these can 
be mitigated with price signals.

Price should reflect true cost
Many  countries  channel  public  subsidies, 
implicit and explicit, to fossil fuels, distorting 
investment decisions for clean energy. energy 
subsidies in the  20 highest­ subsidizing devel­
oping  countries  are  estimated  at  around 
$310  billion  a  year,  or  around  0.7  percent 
of world GDp in 2007.64 The lion’s share of 
the subsidies artificially lowers the prices of 
fossil fuels, providing disincentives to save 
energy and making clean energy less attrac­
tive financially.65 

removing  fossil­ fuel  subsidies  would 
reduce energy demand, encourage the sup­
ply of clean energy, and lower CO2 emissions. 

212 

WOrL D   De VeLOpMeN T  r e pOr

T   2 0 1 0

Box 4.8    Energy efficiency faces many market and nonmarket barriers and failures

•	 Low or underpriced energy. Low energy 

prices undermine incentives to save 
energy.

•	 Regulatory failures. Consumers who 

receive unmetered heat lack the incen-
tive to adjust temperatures, and utility 
rate- setting can reward inefficiency.

•	 A lack of institutional champion and weak 
institutional capacity. Energy- efficiency 
measures are fragmented. Without an 
institutional champion to coordinate 
and promote energy efficiency, it 
becomes nobody’s priority. Moreover, 
there are few energy- efficiency service 
providers, and their capacity will not be 
established overnight. 

•	 Absent or misplaced incentives. Utilities 
make a profit by generating and selling 
more electricity, not by saving energy. 

For most consumers, the cost of energy 
is small relative to other expenditures. 
Because tenants typically pay energy 
bills, landlords have little or no incen-
tive to spend on efficient appliances or 
insulation.

•	 Consumer preferences. Consumer deci-
sions to purchase vehicles are usually 
based on size, speed, and appearance 
rather than on efficiency. 

•	 Higher up- front costs. Many efficient 
products have higher up- front costs. 
Individual consumers usually demand 
very short payback times and are unwill-
ing to pay higher up- front costs. Prefer-
ences aside, low- income customers may 
not be able to afford efficient products.
•	 Financing barriers and high transaction 
costs. Many energy- efficiency projects 

have difficulty obtaining financing. 
Financial institutions usually are not 
familiar with or interested in energy 
efficiency, because of the small size of 
the deal, high transaction costs, and 
high perceived risks. Many energy ser-
vice companies lack collateral. 

•	 Products unavailable. Some efficient 

equipment is readily available in high-  
and middle- income countries but not 
in low- income countries, where high 
import tariffs reduce affordability. 
•	 Limited awareness and information. 

Consumers have limited information on 
energy- efficiency costs, benefits, and 
technologies. Firms are unwilling to pay 
for energy audits that would inform 
them of potential savings.

Source: WDR team.

Ample  evidence  shows  that  higher  energy 
prices induce substantially lower demand.66 
If europe had followed the U.S. policy of low 
fuel  taxes,  its  fuel  consumption  would  be 
twice as large as it is now.67 removing fossil­
 fuel subsidies in power and industry could 
reduce global CO2 emissions by as much as 6 
percent a year and add to global GDp.68

But  removing  those  subsidies  is  no 
simple  matter—it  requires  strong  politi­
cal will. Fuel subsidies are often justified as 
protecting poor people, even though most 
of the subsidies go to better­ off consumers. 
As chapters 1 and 2 discuss, effective social 
protection targeted at low­ income groups, 
in  conjunction  with  the  phased  removal 
of  fossil­ fuel  subsidies,  can  make  reform 
politically viable and socially acceptable. It 
is also important to increase transparency 
in  the  energy  sector  by  requiring  service 
companies  to  share  key  information,  so 
that the governments and other stakehold­
ers can make better­ informed decisions and 
assessments about removing subsidies. 

energy prices should reflect the cost of 
production and incorporate local and global 
environmental externalities. Urban air pol­
lution from fossil­ fuel combustion increases 
health  risks  and  causes  premature  deaths. 
Lower­ respiratory disease resulting from air 
pollution is a top cause of mortality in low­

 income countries and a leading contributor 
to the global burden of disease.69 A 15 per­
cent greenhouse gas reduction below busi­
ness as usual by 2020 in China would result 
in 125,000–185,000 fewer premature deaths 
annually from pollution emitted by power 
generation and household energy use.70 pric­
ing local air pollution can be very effective in 
reducing the related health costs. 

pricing  carbon,  through  a  carbon  tax 
or cap­ and­ trade system (see chapter 6), is 
fundamental to scaling up advanced clean 
energy technologies and leveling the playing 
field with fossil fuels.71 It provides incentives 
and  reduces  risks  for  private  investments 
and innovations in efficient and clean energy 
technologies on a large scale (see chapter 7).72 
Developed countries should take the lead in 
pricing carbon. Legitimate concerns include 
protecting the poor from high energy prices 
and  compensating  the  losing  industries, 
particularly in developing countries. Social 
safety  nets  and  nondistortionary  income 
support, possibly from revenues generated 
by  the  carbon  tax  or  permit  auction,  can 
help (see chapters 1 and 2).

Pricing policy alone is not enough; 
energy- efficiency policies are also critical 
Carbon­ pricing policies alone will not be 
enough to ensure large­ scale development 

 

Energizing Development without Compromising the Climate 

213

and  deployment  of  energy  efficiency  and 
low­ carbon technologies (box 4.9). energy 
efficiency faces distinct barriers in different 
sectors. For power, where a small number of 
decision makers determine whether energy­
 efficiency measures are adopted, financial 
incentives  are  likely  to  be  effective.  For 
transport, buildings, and industry—where 
adoption  is  a  function  of  the  preferences 
of, and requires action by, many decentral­
ized  individuals—energy  demand  is  less 
responsive to price signals, and regulations 
tend to be more effective. A suite of policy 
instruments can replicate proven successes 
in removing barriers to energy efficiency.

Regulations.      economywide  energy­
 intensity targets, appliance standards, build­
ing  codes,  industry  performance  targets 
(energy  consumption  per  unit  of  output), 
and fuel­ efficiency standards are among the 
most cost­ effective measures. More than 35 
countries  have  national  energy­ efficiency 
targets.  France  and  the  United  Kingdom 
have gone a step further in energy­ efficiency 
obligations by mandating that energy com­
panies meet energy­ saving quotas. In Japan 
energy­ efficiency  performance  standards 
require utilities to achieve electricity sav­
ings equal to a set percentage of their base­
line sales or load.73 Brazil, China, and India 
have  energy­ efficiency  laws,  but  as  in  all 
contexts, effectiveness depends on enforce­
ment. Other options include the mandatory 
phasing out of incandescent lights.

Complying  with  efficiency  standards 
can  avoid  or  postpone  adding  new  power 
plant capacity and reduce consumer prices. 
And industrial energy performance targets 
can spur innovation and increase competi­
tiveness.  For  new  buildings  in  europe  the 
cumulative  energy  savings  from  building 
codes  is  about  60  percent  over  those  built 
before  the  first  oil  shock  in  the  1970s.74 
refrigerator  efficiency  standards  in  the 
United  States  have  saved  150  gigawatts  in 
peak power demand over the past 30 years, 
more than the installed capacity of the entire 
U.S. nuclear program.75 efficiency standards 
and labeling programs cost about 1.5 cents a 
kilowatt­ hour, much cheaper than any elec­
tricity supply option.76 The average price of 
refrigerators in America has fallen by more 

Box 4.9    Carbon pricing alone is not enough 

Carbon pricing alone cannot guaran-
tee large- scale deployment of efficient 
and clean energy, because it cannot 
fully overcome the market failures 
and nonmarket barriers to the inno-
vation and diffusion of low- carbon 
technologies.a 

First, price addresses only one of 
many barriers. Others, such as a lack 
of institutional capacity and financ-
ing, block the provision of energy-
 saving services. 

Second, while the price elasticity of 
energy demand is high over the long 
term, it is generally quite inelastic in 
the short term, because people have 
few short-run options for reducing 
their transport needs and household 
energy use in response to fuel price 
changes. Automobile fuel prices have 
an historical short- term elasticity 
ranging from only –0.2 to –0.4,b with 
a much smaller response of –0.03 to 
–0.08 in recent years,c but a long-

 term elasticity ranging between –0.6 
and –1.1. 

Third, the low price elasticity of 
adoptiing many energy- efficiency 
measures may also be a result of high 
opportunity costs in rapidly growing 
developing countries like China. A 
return of 20  percent for an efficiency 
measure is attractive, but investors 
may not invest in efficiency if other 
investments with equivalent risks 
have higher returns. 

So, strong pricing policies are 
important but not enough. They 
need to be combined with regula-
tions to correct market failures, 
remove market and nonmarket bar-
riers, and foster clean technology 
development. 

Sources:
a. ETAAC 2008.
b. Chamon, Mauro, and Okawa 2008.
c. Hughes, Knittel, and Sperling 2008.

than half since the 1970s, even as their effi­
ciency has increased by three­ quarters.77

Financial  incentives.      In  many  develop­
ing countries weak enforcement of regula­
tions is a concern. regulations need to be 
supplemented with financial incentives for 
consumers and producers. Low­ income con­
sumers are most sensitive to the higher up­ 
front  costs  of  efficient  products.  Financial 
incentives to offset these up­ front costs, such 
as  consumer  rebates  and  energy­ efficient 
mortgages,78 can change consumer behavior, 
increase affordability, and overcome barriers 
to market entry by new, efficient producers. 
In addition, regulations are also vulnerable 
to  rebound  effects,  so  pricing  policies  are 
needed  to  discourage  consumption.  Fuel 
taxes  have  proved  one  of  the  most  cost­
 effective  ways  to  reduce  transport  energy 
demand, along with congestion charges and 
insurance or tax levies on vehicles based on 
kilometers traveled, and higher taxes on light 
trucks and sports utility vehicles (table 4.5).
Utility  demand­ side  management  has 
produced large energy savings. Key to success 
is decoupling utility profits from electricity 

214 

WOrL D   De VeLOpMeN T  r e pOr

T   2 0 1 0

sales to give utilities incentives to save. regu­
lators forecast demand and allow utilities to 
charge a price that would recoup their costs 
and earn a fixed return based on that fore­
cast. If demand turns out to be lower than 
expected, the regulator lets prices rise so that 
the utility can make the mandated profit; if it 
is higher, the regulator cuts prices to return 
the excess to customers (box 4.10).

Institutional  reform.      An  institutional 
champion,  such  as  a  dedicated  energy­
 efficiency agency, is essential to coordinate 
multiple  stakeholders  and  promote  and 
manage energy­ efficiency programs. More 

than 50 countries, developed and developing, 
have a national energy­ efficiency agency. It 
can be a government agency with a focus on 
clean energy or energy efficiency (the most 
common), such as the Department of Alter­
native energy Development and efficiency 
in Thailand, or an independent corporation 
or authority, such as the Korea energy Man­
agement Corporation. To achieve successful 
results, they require adequate resources, the 
ability to engage multiple stakeholders, inde­
pendence in decision making, and credible 
monitoring of results.79

energy  service  companies  (eSCOs) 
provide energy­ efficiency services such as 

Table 4.5      Policy interventions for energy efficiency, renewable energy, and transport

Energy efficiency and demand- side 
management interventions

Renewable energy interventions

Removal of fossil- fuel subsidies
Tax (fuel or carbon tax)
Quantitative limits (cap- and- trade)

Economywide energy- efficiency targets
Energy- efficiency obligations
Appliance standards
Building codes
Industry energy- performance targets
Fuel economy standards

Mandatory purchase, open and fair 
grid access
Renewable portfolio standards
Low- carbon fuel standards
Technology standards
Interconnection regulations

Feed- in tariff, net metering
Green certificates
Real- time pricing
Tax credits
Capital subsidies

Barriers addressed
Environmental externalities not included  
in the price
Regressive or demand- augmenting 
distortions from subsidies for fossil fuels
Lack of legal framework for renewable 
independent power producers
Lack of transmission access by renewable 
energy
Lack of incentives and misplaced incentives 
to save
Supply- driven mentality 
Unclear interconnection requirements
High capital costs
Unfavorable pricing rules
Lack of incentives for utilities and 
consumers to save

Policy area
Economywide

Regulations

Financial incentives

Institutional 
arrangements

Financing 
mechanisms

Tax credits
Capital subsidies
Profits decoupled from sales
Consumer rebates
Time- of- use tariffs
Fuel taxes
Congestion tolls
Taxes based on engine size
Insurance or tax levies on vehicle miles 
traveled
Taxes on light trucks, SUVs
Utility
Dedicated energy- efficiency agencies
Independent corporation or authority
Energy service companies (ESCOs)
Loan financing and partial loan guarantees
ESCOs
Utility energy- efficiency, demand- side 
management program, including system 
benefit fund

Promotion and 
education

Source: WDR team.

Labeling
Installing meters
Consumer education

Utility
Independent power producers 

Too many decentralized players 

System benefit fund
Risk management and long- term 
financing
Concessional loans

Education about renewable energy 
benefits

High capital cost, and mismatch with  
short- term loans
ESCOs’ lack of collateral and small deal size
Perceived high risks
High transaction costs
Lack of experience and knowledge
Lack of information and awareness
Loss of amenities

 

Energizing Development without Compromising the Climate 

215

Box 4.10    California’s energy- efficiency and renewable energy programs

A U.S. leader in energy efficiency, Califor-
nia has kept its electricity consumption 
per capita flat for the past 30 years, sub-
stantially below the U.S. national average 
(figure, panel a). Appliance standards 
and building codes, along with finan-
cial incentives for utility demand- side 
management programs, are estimated 
to be responsible for one- quarter of the 
difference (figure, panel b). California 
decoupled utility profits from sales in 
1982 and recently went a step further 
with “decoupling- plus”—utilities earn 
additional money if they meet or exceed 
savings goals. 

The state’s energy- efficiency program 

has an annual budget of $800 million, 
collected from tariff surcharges on elec-
tricity and used for utility procurements, 
demand- side management, and research 
and development. The average cost of 
the program is about 3 cents per kilowatt-
 hour, far lower than the cost of supply 
(figure, panel c). To promote renewable 
energy, the state is implementing renew-
able portfolio standards to increase renew-
able energy’s share in power generation to 
20 percent by 2010.

In June 2005 California became the first 

U.S. state to issue an executive order on 
climate change, setting a target for reduc-
ing greenhouse gas emissions to the 2000 
level by 2010, to the 1990 level by 2020, 
and to 80 percent below the 1990 level by 
2050. Energy efficiency is projected to con-
tribute about 50 percent of this reduction.

Sources: California Energy Commission 
2007a; Rosenfeld 2007; Rogers, Messenger, 
and Bender 2005; Sudarshan and Sweeney, 
forthcoming.

California’s electricity consumption per capita has remained flat over the past 30 years, thanks 
largely to utility demand- side management and efficiency standards. The cost of energy 
efficiency is much lower than that of electricity supply

a. Electricity sales per capita

kWh/person
14,000

12,000

10,000

8,000

6,000

4,000

2,000

0
1960

GWh
45,000
40,000
35,000
30,000
25,000
20,000
15,000
10,000
5,000
0
1975

United States

2005 differences
 = 5,300 kWh/yr
 = $165/capita

California

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

Year

b. Annual energy savings from efficiency programs and standards

~15% of annual electricity use in California in 2003

Utility efficiency

programs at a cost of
~1% of electric bill

Building standards

Appliance standards

1979

1983

1987

1991

1995

1999

2003

Year

c. Comparison of California energy efficiency (EE) program costs to supply generation costs
$/kWh

0.18
0.16
0.14
0.12
0.10
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0

Demand options

Supply options

0.167

0.118

0.054

0.029

Average cost of EE
programs for 2000–04

Base load
generation

Shoulder
generation

Peak

generation

216 

WOrL D   De VeLOpMeN T  r e pOr

T   2 0 1 0

energy  auditing,  recommend  energy  sav­
ing measures, and provide financing to cli­
ents; they also serve as project aggregators. 
Most eSCOs have had difficulty in obtain­
ing  adequate  financing  from  commercial 
banks because of their weak balance sheets 
and  the  perceived  higher  risks  of  loans 
dependent  on  revenues  from  energy  sav­
ings. policies, financing, and technical sup­
port from governments and international 
development banks can strengthen eSCOs 
and mainstream their business model. In 
China, for example, after a decade of capac­
ity building supported by the World Bank, 
the eSCO industry grew from three com­
panies in 1997 to more than 400, with $1 
billion in energy performance contracts in 
2007.80

Financing  mechanisms.      Developing  and 
operating  energy­ efficiency  services  for 
investment in energy efficiency are primarily 
institutional issues. Lack of domestic capital 
is rarely a problem, but inadequate organi­
zational and institutional systems for devel­
oping projects and accessing funds can be 
barriers to finance. The three main financing 
mechanisms  for  energy­ efficiency  projects 
are  eSCOs,  utility  demand­ management 
programs,  and  loan  financing  and  partial 
loan  guarantee  schemes  operating  within 

Box 4.11    World Bank Group experience with financing 
energy efficiency 

The World Bank and the Interna-
tional Finance Corporation (IFC) have 
financed a series of energy- efficiency 
financial intermediary projects, 
mostly in Eastern Europe and East 
Asia. The IFC pioneered the use of 
a guarantee mechanism through 
selected domestic banks with the 
Hungary Energy Efficiency Guarantee 
Fund. A Global Environment Facil-
ity grant of $17 million was used to 
guarantee $93 million worth of loans 
for energy- efficient investments. No 
guarantee has been called, giving 
local banks confidence in and famil-
iarity with energy- efficiency lending. 

One of the key lessons of the 
experience is the importance of 

technical assistance, particularly at 
the beginning, to raise awareness of 
energy efficiency, to provide training 
and advisory services to the banks 
in developing financial mechanisms, 
and to build the capacity of project 
developers. While in Bulgaria the 
transaction cost of institutional 
capacity building for both financial 
institutions and energy service 
companies—from project concept to 
financial closure—has been around 
10 percent of total project costs at the 
beginning, it is expected to decline to 
around 5–6 percent later on.

Sources: WDR team; Taylor and others 
2008.

commercial banks, as specialized agencies, 
or as revolving funds.81

Lending  through  local  commercial 
banks offers the best prospect for program 
sustainability and maximum impact. Inter­
national  financial  institutions  have  sup­
ported partial­ risk­ guarantee programs to 
mitigate the risks of energy­ efficiency proj­
ects for commercial banks, increasing the 
banks’ confidence in jump­ starting energy­
 efficiency financing (box 4.11). Dedicated 
revolving  funds  are  another  common 
approach, particularly in countries where 
investing in energy efficiency is in the early 
stages and banks are not ready to provide 
financing.82 This approach is transitional, 
and sustainability is a major issue.

Utility  demand­ side  management  is 
usually  funded  through  a  system  benefit 
fund  (financed  by  a  tariff  surcharge  on 
kilowatt­ hours to all electricity customers), 
which is more sustainable than government 
budgets. Administered by either utilities or 
dedicated  energy­ efficiency  agencies,  the 
funds cover incremental costs of switching 
to renewable energy from fossil fuels, con­
sumer rebates, concessional loans, research 
and development, consumer education, and 
low­ income consumer assistance. 

Public procurement.      Mass procurement of 
energy­ efficient  products  can  substantially 
reduce  costs,  attract  larger  contracts  and 
bank lending, and lower transaction costs. In 
Uganda and Vietnam the bulk procurement 
of  1  million  compact  fluorescent  lamps  in 
each country substantially reduced the cost 
of the lamps and improved product quality 
through  technical  specifications  and  war­
ranty; once installed, they cut peak demand 
by  30  megawatts.83  public  procurement 
through government agencies, usually one of 
the biggest energy consumers in an economy, 
can  reduce  costs  and  demonstrate  govern­
ment’s  commitment  and  to  leadership  in 
energy efficiency. But mandates, incentives, 
and procurement and budgeting rules have 
to be in place.84

Consumer  education.      Consumer  educa­
tion can promote lifestyle changes and more 
informed choices—examples include energy­
 efficiency labeling and increased use of elec­

 

Energizing Development without Compromising the Climate 

217

tricity  and  heat  meters,  particularly  smart 
meters. Consumer awareness campaigns are 
most  effective  in  conjunction  with  regula­
tions and financial incentives. Based on expe­
rience in the public health field, interventions 
to change behaviors need to occur at multiple 
levels—policy, physical environment (design 
of walkable cities and green buildings), socio­
cultural (media communications), interper­
sonal (face­ to­ face contacts), and individual 
(see chapter 8).85

Scaling up existing low- carbon 
technologies
renewable energy could contribute around 
50 percent to the power mix by 2050.86 With 
costs  of  renewable  energy  declining  over 

the  past  two  decades,  wind,  geothermal, 
and hydro power are already or nearly cost­
 competitive with fossil fuels.87 Solar is still 
costly, but costs are expected to decline rap­
idly along the learning curve over the next 
few years (box 4.12). With rising fossil­ fuel 
prices, the cost gap is closing. Biomass, geo­
thermal power, and hydropower can pro­
vide base­ load power, but solar and wind 
are intermittent.

A large share of intermittent resources 
in the grid system may affect reliability, but 
this can be addressed in a variety of ways—
through  hydropower  or  pumped  storage, 
load  management,  energy  storage  facili­
ties, interconnection with other countries, 
and smart grids.88 Smart grids can enhance 

Box 4.12    Difficulties in comparing energy technology costs: A matter of assumptions

Comparing costs of different energy tech-
nologies is a tricky business. A frequently 
used approach for comparing electricity 
generation technologies is based on costs 
per kilowatt- hour (kWh). A levelized- cost 
method is commonly used to compare 
the life- cycle economic costs of energy 
alternatives that deliver the same energy 
services. First, capital costs are calculated 
using a simple capital recovery factor 
method.a This method divides the capital 
cost into an equal payment series—an 
annualized capital cost—over the lifetime 
of the equipment. Then the annualized 
capital costs are added to the annual oper-
ation and maintenance (O&M) costs and 
the fuel costs to obtain the levelized costs. 
So capital costs, O&M costs, fuel costs, the 
discount rate, and a capacity factor are key 
determinants of levelized costs. 

In reality, costs are time and site spe-

cific. The costs of renewable energy 
are closely linked to local resources 
and sites. Wind costs, for example, vary 
widely depending on site- specific wind 
resources. Labor costs and construction 
time are also key factors, particularly for 
fossil- fuel and nuclear plants. Chinese 
coal- fired power plants, for example, 
cost about one- third to one- half of the 
international prices for similar plants. The 
long lead time to construct nuclear power 
plants contributes to the high costs in the 
United States. 

Second, sensible integrated com-

parative assessment of different energy 

technologies compares all the economic 
attributes along the primary fuel cycle 
for a unit of energy benefits. Comparing 
renewable energy costs with fossil fuel 
and nuclear should take into account the 
different services they provide (base-
 load or intermittent energy). On the one 
hand, solar and wind energy produce 
variable outputs, although outputs can 
be enhanced in various ways, usually at 
an additional cost. On the other hand, 
solar and wind energy technologies can 
typically be licensed and built in much 
less time than large- scale fossil or nuclear 
plants. 

Third, externalities such as environ-

mental costs and portfolio diversification 
values should be incorporated when 
comparing fossil- fuel costs and clean 
energy costs. A carbon price will make 
a big difference in pushing up the costs 
of fossil fuels. Fossil- fuel price volatility 
creates additional negative externali-
ties. Increasing fuel prices by 20 percent 
increases the costs of generation by 
16 percent for gas and 6 percent for coal, 
while leaving renewable energy practi-
cally untouched. Adding renewable 
energy sources provides portfolio diver-
sification value because it hedges against 
the volatility of fossil fuel prices and sup-
plies. Including this portfolio diversifica-
tion value in the evaulation of renewables 
increases their attractiveness.b

When dealing with new technologies, 

the potential for cost reduction should 

also be factored in. Dynamic analysis of 
future costs of new technologies depends 
on the assumptions made about the 
learning rate—the cost reductions associ-
ated with a doubling of capacity. The cost 
of wind energy has dropped nearly 80 
percent over the past 20 years. Technol-
ogy breakthroughs and economies of 
scale can lead to more rapid cost reduc-
tions, a phenomenon some experts now 
expect will lead to dramatic near- term 
reductions in solar cell prices.c

In financial analysis, differences in insti-

tutional context (whether public or private 
financing) and government policies (taxes 
and regulations) are often the deciding 
factors. Differences in financing costs are 
particularly important for the most capital-
 intensive technologies like wind, solar, and 
nuclear. A California study shows that the 
cost of a wind power plant varies much 
more than the cost of a gas combined 
cycle plant, with different financing terms 
for private (“merchant”), investor-owned, 
and publicly owned utilities.d

Sources:
a. The capital recovery factor =  
[i(1+i)n]/[(1+i)n – 1] where i is the discount 
rate and n is the lifetime or period of capital 
recovery of the systems. 
b. World Economic Forum 2009.
c. Deutsche Bank Advisors 2008 (projected 
photovoltaic cost reductions).
d. California Energy Commission 2007b.

218 

WOrL D   De VeLOpMeN T  r e pOr

T   2 0 1 0

reliability  of  electricity  networks  when 
incorporating  variable  renewable  energy 
and distributed generation. high­ voltage, 
direct­ current  lines  can  make  long­ range 
transmission possible with low line losses, 
which  reduces  the  common  problem  of 
renewable energy sources located far from 
consumption  centers.  And  further  cost 
reduction and performance improvement 
of energy storage will be needed for large­
 scale deployment of solar and wind power 
and electric vehicles. So, while the required 
magnitude of renewable energy is vast, the 
transformation is achievable. For example, 
wind  already  accounts  for  20  percent  of 
Danish power production (box 4.13).

Renewable energy policies: financial 
incentives and regulations 
Transparent, competitive, and stable pricing 
through  long­ term  power  purchase  agree­
ments  has  been  most  effective  in  attract­
ing  investors  to  renewable  energy,  and  an 
enabling legal and regulatory framework can 
ensure fair and open grid access for indepen­
dent power producers. Two major manda­
tory policies for renewable power generation 
are operating worldwide: feed­ in laws that 
mandate a fixed price, and renewable port­
folio standards that mandate a set target for 
the share of renewable energy (box 4.14).89

Feed- in  laws  require  mandatory  pur­
chases of renewable energy at a fixed price. 
Feed­ in  laws  such  as  those  in  Germany, 

Spain,  Kenya,  and  South  Africa  produce 
the  highest  market  penetration  rates  in  a 
short  period.  They  are  considered  most 
desirable by investors because of their price 
certainty and administrative simplicity and 
because they are conducive to creating local 
manufacturing industries. Three methods 
are commonly used to set prices for feed­
 in  tariffs—avoided  costs  of  conventional 
power generation, costs of renewable energy 
plus reasonable returns, and average retail 
prices (net metering allows consumers to 
sell excess electricity generated from their 
homes or businesses, usually through solar 
photovoltaics, to the grid at retail market 
prices). The main risk is in setting prices 
either  too  high  or  low,  so  feed­ in  tariffs 
need periodic adjustment. 

Renewable  portfolio  standards  require 
utilities in a given region to meet a minimum 
share of power in or level of installed capacity 
from renewable energy, as in many U.S. states, 
the United Kingdom, and Indian states. The 
target is met through utilities’ own genera­
tion, power purchases from other producers, 
direct sales from third  parties to the utility’s 
customers, or purchases of tradable renewable 
energy certificates. But unless separate tech­
nology targets or tenders are in place, renew­
able portfolio standards lack price certainty 
and tend to favor established industry players 
and least­ cost technologies.90 They are also 
more complex to design and administer than 
feed­ in laws.

Box 4.13      Denmark sustains economic growth while cutting emissions

Between 1990 and 2006 Denmark’s GDP 
grew at roughly 2.3 percent a year, more 
than Europe’s average of 2 percent. Den-
mark also reduced carbon emissions by 
5 percent.

Sound policies decoupled emissions 

from growth. Denmark, along with other 
Scandinavian countries, implemented 
the world’s first carbon tax on fossil 
fuels in the early 1990s. At the same 
time Denmark also adopted a range of 
policies to promote the use of sustain-
able energy. Today around 25 percent 
of Denmark’s electricity generation and 
15 percent of its primary energy con-
sumption come from renewable energy, 

mainly wind and biomass, with a goal to 
raise the use of renewable energy to at 
least 30 percent by 2025. Membership in 
the Nordic power pool, with more than 
50 percent hydropower, provides the 
additional flexibility of exporting surplus 
wind power and importing Norwegian 
hydropower during periods of low wind 
resources. Vestas, the major Danish wind 
company, has 15,000 employees and 
accounts for a quarter of the global mar-
ket for wind turbines. In 15 years Danish 
renewable technology exports have 
soared to $10.5 billion.

In addition to its low carbon-intensity 

of energy, Denmark has the lowest 

energy intensity in Europe, a result of 
stringent building and appliance codes 
and voluntary agreements on energy 
savings in industry. Combined heat-  and 
power- based district heating networks 
provide 60 percent of the country’s win-
ter heating, with over 80 percent of it 
coming from heat previously wasted in 
electricity production.

Sources: WDR team based on WRI 2008; 
Denmark Energy Mix Fact Sheet, http://
ec.europa.eu/energy/energy_policy/doc/
factsheets/mix/mix_dk_en.pdf (accessed 
August 27, 2009).

 

Energizing Development without Compromising the Climate 

219

Box 4.14    Feed- in laws, concessions, tax credits, and renewable portfolio standards in Germany, 
China, and the United States

Developing countries account for 40 per-
cent of global renewable energy capacity. 
By 2007, 60 countries, including 23 devel-
oping countries, had renewable energy 
policies.a The three countries with the 
largest installed capacity of new renew-
able energy are Germany, China, and the 
United States. 
Germany’s feed- in law
In the early 1990s Germany had virtually 
no renewable energy industry. Today it 
has become a global renewable energy 
leader, with a multibillion- dollar industry 
and 250,000 new jobs.b The government 
passed the Electricity Feed- in Law in 1990, 
requiring utilities to purchase the electric-
ity generated from all renewable technolo-
gies at a fixed price. In 2000 the German 
Renewable Energy Act set feed- in tariffs 
for various renewable energy technologies 
for 20 years, based on their generation 
costs and generation capacity. To encour-
age cost reductions and innovation, prices 
will decline over time based on a prede-
termined formula. The law also distributed 
the incremental costs between wind 

power and conventional power among all 
utility customers in the country.c  
China’s renewable energy law and 
wind concession
China was one of the first developing 
countries to pass a renewable energy law, 
and it now has the world’s largest renew-
able energy capacity, accounting for 8 
percent of its energy and 17 percent of its 
electricity.d The law set feed- in tariffs for 
biomass power, but wind power tariffs are 
established through a concession process. 
The government introduced wind con-
cessions in 2003 to ramp up wind power 
capacity and drive down costs. The win-
ning bids for the initial rounds were below 
average costs and discouraged both wind 
developers and domestic manufacturers. 
Improvements in the concession scheme 
and provincial feed- in tariffs put China 
at no. 2 in newly installed wind capacity 
in 2008. The government’s target of 30 
gigawatts of wind by 2020 will likely be 
reached ahead of time. The domestic wind 
manufacturing industry has been boosted 
by the government’s requirement of 70 

percent local content and new technology 
transfer models to hire and acquire inter-
national design institutes. 
U.S. federal production tax credits 
and state renewable portfolio 
standards
A federal tax credit for producing 
electricity from renewable energy 
has encouraged significant capacity 
increases, but the uncertainty of its 
extension from year to year has led 
to boom- and- bust cycles in U.S. wind 
development. And twenty- five states 
now have renewable portfolio stan-
dards. As a result, wind accounted for 35 
percent of new generation capacity in 
2007, and the United States now has the 
world’s largest installed wind capacity.e 

Sources:
a. REN 21 2008. 
b. Federal Ministry for the Environment 2008.
c. Beck and Martinot 2004.
d. REN 21 2008.
e. Wiser and Bolinger 2008.

An  alternative  approach  for  achieving 
renewable energy targets is competitive ten­
dering, where power producers bid on pro­
viding a fixed quantity of renewable power, 
with  the  lowest­ price  bidder  winning  the 
contract, as is done in China and Ireland. 
Tendering  is  effective  at  reducing  costs, 
but a main risk has been that some bidders 
underbid and obligations have not always 
translated into projects on the ground. 

Several financial incentives are available 
to encourage renewable energy investments: 
reducing up­ front capital costs through sub­
sidies; reducing capital and operating costs 
through investment or production tax cred­
its; improving revenue streams with carbon 
credits;  and  providing  financial  support 
through concessional loans and guarantees. 
Output­ based incentives are generally prefer­
able to investment­ based incentives for grid­
 connected  renewable  energy.91  Investment 
incentives  per  kilowatt  of  installed  capac­
ity do not necessarily provide incentives to 

generate electricity or maintain the perfor­
mance of plants. But output incentives per 
kilowatt­ hour of power produced promote 
the  desired  outcome—generating  electric­
ity from renewable energy. Any incremental 
costs  of  renewable  energy  over  fossil  fuels 
can be passed on to consumers or financed 
through a system benefits charge, a carbon 
tax  on  fossil­ fuel  use,  or  a  dedicated  fund 
from government budgets or donors. 

Nuclear power and natural gas
Nuclear  power  is  a  significant  option  for 
mitigating climate change, but it suffers from 
four problems: higher costs than coal­ fired 
plants,92 risks of nuclear weapon prolifera­
tion, uncertainties about waste management, 
and  public  concerns  about  reactor  safety. 
Current international safeguards are inad­
equate  to  meet  the  security  challenges  of 
expanded  nuclear  deployment.93  how­
ever, the next generation of nuclear reactor 
designs offer improved safety characteristics 

220 

WOrL D   De VeLOpMeN T  r e pOr

T   2 0 1 0

and better economics than the reactors cur­
rently in operation.

Nuclear power has large requirements 
for  capital  and  highly  trained  person­
nel, with long lead times before it comes 
on  line,  thus  reducing  its  potential  for 
reducing  carbon  emissions  in  the  short 
term. planning, licensing, and construct­
ing a single nuclear plant typically takes a 
decade or more. And because of the dearth 
of orders in recent decades, the world has 
limited capacity to manufacture many of 
the critical components of nuclear plants, 
and  rebuilding  that  capacity  will  take  at 
least a decade.94

Natural gas is the least carbon­ intensive 
fossil fuel for power generation and for resi­
dential and industrial use. There is a large 
potential  to  reduce  carbon  emissions  by 
substituting natural gas for coal in the short 
term. Some 2°C scenarios project that the 
share of natural gas in the primary energy 
mix will increase from 21 percent currently 
to  27–37  percent  by  2050.95  But  the  costs 
of natural gas­ fired power depend on gas 
prices, which have been highly volatile in 
recent  years.  And,  like  oil,  more  than  70 
percent  of  the  world’s  gas  reserves  are  in 
the Middle east and eurasia. Security of gas 
supply is a concern for gas­ importing coun­
tries. So energy diversification and supply 
security  concerns  could  limit  the  share 
of natural gas in the global energy mix to 
less than indicated in some climate­ energy 
models.96

Figure 4.12    Solar photovoltaic power is getting cheaper over time, thanks to R&D and higher 
expected demand from larger scale of production 

Cost reduction by factor ($/watt)

$25

$20

$15

$10

$5

0

$25.30

Expected demand effect

43%

R&D

30%

1979 price

Plant size

Efficiency

22%

Other

$3.68

5%

Unexplained

2001 price

Source: Adapted from Nemet 2006.
Note: Cost reduction is expressed in 2002 $. Bars show the portion of the reduction in the cost of solar photo-
voltaic power, from 1979 to 2001, accounted for by different factors such as plant size (which is determined by 
expected demand) and improved efficiency (which is driven by innovation from R&D). The “other” category 
includes reductions in the price of the key input silicon (12 percent) and a number of much smaller factors 
(including reduced quantities of silicon needed for a given energy output, and lower rates of discarded prod-
ucts due to manufacturing error).

Accelerating innovation and 
advanced technologies
Accelerating  innovation  and  advanced 
technologies  requires  adequate  carbon 
pricing;  massive  investment  in  research, 
development  and  demonstration;  and 
unprecedented  global  cooperation  (see 
chapter 7). Coupling technology push (by 
increasing  research  and  development,  for 
example)  with  demand  pull  (to  increase 
economies of scale) is critical to substan­
tially reduce the cost of advanced technolo­
gies (figure 4.12).

Utility­ scale power generation technolo­
gies require policies and approaches differ­
ent from those for small­ scale technologies. 
An international Manhattan project is likely 
to be needed to develop the former, such as 
power­ plant­ based carbon capture and stor­
age, on a scale large enough to allow sub­
stantial  cost  reductions  as  the  technology 
moves  along  the  learning  curve.  Develop­
ers—utilities  or  independent  power  pro­
ducers—usually  have  sufficient  resources 
and capacity. But adequate carbon pricing 
and  investment  subsidies  are  required  to 
overcome  the  high  capital  cost  barrier.  In 
contrast, decentralized, smaller­ scale, clean 
energy technologies require that “a thousand 
flowers bloom” to address the needs of many 
small  local  players,  with  seed  and  venture 
capital and, in developing countries, busi­
ness development advisory services.

To  achieve  the  2°C  trajectory,  a  dif­
ferent  technology  path  is  required  for 
developing  countries.  energy  and  emis­
sions growth are projected to come largely 
from developing countries, but developed 
countries  attract  much  more  investment 
in clean energy technology. Traditionally, 
new  technologies  are  produced  first  in 
developed  economies,  followed  by  com­
mercial roll­outs in developing countries, 
as has been the case with wind energy.97 
But  for  emissions  to  peak  in  10  years  to 
stay on the 2°C trajectory, both developed 
and  developing  countries  would  need  to 
introduce  large­ scale  demonstrations  of 
advanced technologies now and in parallel. 
This pattern is fortunately emerging with 
the rapid advent of research and develop­
ment  in  Brazil,  China,  India,  and  a  few 
other technology leaders in the developing 
world.  The  lowest­ cost  manufacturers  of 

 

Energizing Development without Compromising the Climate 

221

solar cells, efficient lighting, and ethanol 
are all in developing countries. 

One of the major barriers facing devel­
oping countries is the high incremental cost 
of developing and demonstrating advanced 
clean energy technologies. It is essential that 
developed countries substantially increase 
financial  assistance  and  transfers  of  low­
 carbon  technologies  to  the  developing 

world through mechanisms such as a global 
technology fund. Developed countries will 
also need to take the lead in encouraging 
technological  breakthroughs  (see  chapter 
7).  The  Mediterranean  Solar  plan  is  an 
example of cooperation between developed 
and developing countries on the large­ scale 
demonstration and deployment of concen­
trated solar power (box 4.15).

Box 4.15    Concentrated solar power in the Middle East and North Africa

The Mediterranean Solar Plan would create 
20 gigawatts of concentrated solar power 
and other renewable energy capacity by 
2020 to meet energy needs in the Middle 
Eastern and North African countries and 
export power to Europe. This ambitious 
plan could bring down the costs of con-
centrated solar power enough to make it 
competitive with fossil fuels. Concentrated 
solar power on less than 1 percent of Saha-
ran desert area (see the map below) would 
meet Europe’s entire power needs. 

Financing this solar initiative will be a 
major challenge but offers an excellent 

opportunity for a partnership between 
developed and developing countries to 
scale up renewable energy for the benefit 
of both Europe and North Africa. 

First, the demand for green electric-

ity and the attractive renewable energy 
feed- in tariffs in Europe can significantly 
improve the financial viability of concen-
trated solar power. 

Second, bilateral and multilateral 

funds—such as the Global Environment 
Facility, Clean Technology Fund, and 
carbon financing—would be required 
for investment subsidies, concessional 

Global direct normal solar radiation (kilowatt- hours a square meter a day)

financing, and revenue enhancement to 
cover the incremental costs of concen-
trated solar power, particularly for the 
portion meeting demand in domestic 
markets in the Middle East and North 
Africa. 

Third, a successful program also calls 

IBRD 37091
September 2009
M 4.1

for policy actions by the region’s govern-
ments, creating an enabling environment 
for renewable energy and removing sub-
sidies to fossil fuels. 

Source: WDR team.

Annual mean global direct solar irradiance
(kilowatt–hours per square meter per day)

1   

   2    

   3    

   4     

  5     

  6      

 7 

    

 8 

    

 9

Necessary for
concentrated
solar technology

Source: United Nations Environmental Program, Solar and Wind Energy Resource Assessment, http://swera.unep.net/index.php?id=metainfo&rowid=277&metaid=386 
(accessed July 21, 2009).

222 

WOrL D   De VeLOpMeN T  r e pOr

T   2 0 1 0

Policies have to be integrated
policy instruments need to be coordinated 
and integrated to complement each other 
and reduce conflicts. A reduction of emis­
sions  in  transport,  for  example,  requires 
integration of a three­ legged approach. In 
the order of difficulty, they are transform­
ing vehicles (fuel efficient, plug­ in hybrid, 
and electric cars), transforming fuels (eth­
anol  from  sugarcane,  second  generation 
biofuels,  and  hydrogen),  and  transform­
ing  mobility  (urban  planning  and  mass 
transit).98  Biofuel  policies  need  to  coor­
dinate energy and transport policies with 
agriculture, forestry, and land­ use policies 
to  manage  the  competing  demands  for 
water and land (see chapter 3). If energy 
crops take land away from agriculture in 
poor nations, the “medicine” of the req­
uisite interventions might be worse than 
the “disease” in the sense that mitigation 
might  increase  vulnerability  to  climate 
impacts.99  Large­ scale  deployment  of 
plug­ in hybrid and electric vehicles would 
substantially  increase  power  demand, 
threatening  the  anticipated  lower  emis­
sions from the technology unless the grid 
is supplied with an increased share of low­
 carbon energy sources. policies to encour­
age  renewable  energy,  if  not  designed 
properly, can discourage efficient heat pro­
duction for combined heat and power. 

policies,  strategies,  and  institutional 
arrangements  also  have  to  be  aligned 
across  sectors.  Cross­ sectoral  initiatives 
are usually difficult to implement, because 
of fragmented institutional arrangements 
and weak incentives. Finding a champion 
is critical for moving the agenda forward; 
for  example,  local  governments  can  be  a 
good entry point for emission reductions in 
cities, particularly for buildings and modal 

shifts in transport. It is also important to 
align  policies  and  strategies  in  national, 
provincial,  and  local  governments  (see 
chapter 8). 

In  conclusion  low­ carbon  technology 
and  policy  solutions  can  put  the  world 
onto  a  2°C  trajectory,  but  a  fundamental 
transformation  is  needed  to  decarbonize 
the energy sector. This requires immediate 
action,  and  global  cooperation  and  com­
mitment  from  developed  and  developing 
countries. There are win­ win policies that 
governments can adopt now, including reg­
ulatory and institutional reforms, financial 
incentives,  and  financing  mechanisms  to 
scale up existing low­ carbon technologies, 
particularly in the areas of energy efficiency 
and renewable energy. 

Adequate carbon pricing and increased 
technology  development  are  essential 
to  accelerate  development  and  deploy­
ment  of  advanced  low­ carbon  technolo­
gies.  Developed  countries  must  take  the 
lead in demonstrating their commitment 
to significant change at home, while also 
providing financing and low­ carbon tech­
nologies  to  developing  countries.  Devel­
oping  countries  require  paradigm  shifts 
in new climate­ smart development mod­
els.  The  technical  and  economic  means 
exist  for  these  transformative  changes, 
but only strong political will and unprece­
dented global cooperation will make them 
happen. 

Notes

1. IpCC 2007.
2. Authors’ estimates; Socolow 2006. estimates 
are  based  on  100  kilowatt­ hours  a  month  elec­
tricity  consumption  for  a  poor  household  with 
an  average  of  seven  people,  equivalent  to  170 
kilowatt­ hours  a  person­ year.  electricity  is  pro­

“If nothing is done, we shall lose our beloved planet. It is our 

collective responsibility to find ‘unselfish’ solutions and fast 

before it’s too late to reverse the damage caused every day.”

—Maria Kassabian, Nigeria, age 10

 

Energizing Development without Compromising the Climate 

223

vided at the current world average carbon inten­
sity of 590 grams of CO2 a kilowatt­ hour for 1.6 
billion  people,  equivalent  to  160  million  tons  of 
CO2. Socolow (2006) assumed providing 35 kilo­
grams of clean cooking fuels (liquefied petroleum 
gas) for each of the 2.6 billion people would emit 
275 million tons of CO2. So a total of 435 million 
tons of CO2 accounts for only 2 percent of current 
global emissions of 26,000 million tons of CO2.  

3. Black  carbon,  which  is  formed  through 
the  incomplete  combustion  of  fossil  fuels,  con­
tributes to global warming by absorbing heat in 
the  atmosphere  and,  when  deposited  on  snow 
and  ice,  by  reducing  their  reflective  power  and 
accelerating  melting.  Unlike  CO2,  black  carbon 
remains  in  the  atmosphere  for  only  a  few  days 
or weeks, so reducing these emissions will have 
almost  immediate  mitigation  impacts.  In  addi­
tion, black carbon is a major air pollutant and a 
leading cause of illness and premature death in 
many developing countries. 

4. SeG 2007.
5. Wilbanks and others 2008.
6. McKinsey & Company 2009b.
7. ebinger and others 2008.
8. The  meaning  and  importance  of  energy 
security  vary  by  country  depending  on  its 
income, energy consumption, energy resources, 
and trading partners. For many countries depen­
dence on imported oil and natural gas is a source 
of economic vulnerability and can lead to inter­
national  tensions.  The  poorest  countries  (with 
per  capita  income  of  $300  or  less)  are  particu­
larly  vulnerable  to  fuel  price  fluctuations,  with 
an average 1.5 percent decrease in GDp associ­
ated with every $10 increase in the price of a bar­
rel of oil (World Bank 2009a). 

9. Increasing 

fuel  prices  by  20  percent 
increases  the  costs  of  generation  by  16  percent 
for  gas  and  6  percent  for  coal,  while  leaving 
renewable  energy  practically  untouched;  see 
World economic Forum 2009.

10. IeA 2008b.
11. WrI  2008;  see  also  presentation  of  his­

torical emissions in the overview.

12. IeA 2008c.
13. IpCC 2007.
14. United Nations 2007.
15. IeA 2008b.
16. Chamon, Mauro, and Okawa 2008.
17. Schipper 2007.
18. Lam  and  Tam  2002;  2000  U.S.  Census, 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_U.S._cities 
_with_most_households_without_a_car (accessed 
May 2009). 

19. Kenworthy 2003.
20. District  heating  distributes  heat  for  resi­
dential  and  commercial  buildings  that  is  sup­

plied in a centralized location by efficient cogen­
eration plants or large­ scale heating boilers.

21. Negative  emissions  can  be  achieved  by 
sequestering  carbon  in  terrestrial  ecosystems 
(for example, by planting more forests). It could 
also be achieved by applying carbon capture and 
storage to biomass­ produced energy. 

22. A 450 ppm concentration of greenhouse 
gases  translates  into  a  40–50  percent  chance  of 
temperatures not exceeding 2°C above preindus­
trial  temperatures.  Schaeffer  and  others  2008; 
hare and Meinshausen 2006.

23. Tans 2009.
24. rao and others 2008. 
25. Biomass  obtained  from  plants  can  be  a 
carbon­ neutral fuel, because carbon is taken up 
out  of  the  atmosphere  as  the  plants  grow  and 
is  then  released  when  the  plants  are  burned  as 
fuel. Biomass­ based carbon capture and storage 
could  result  in  large­ scale “negative  emissions” 
by  capturing  the  carbon  emitted  from  biomass 
combustion.

26. Weyant and others 2009; Knopf and oth­
ers,  forthcoming;  rao  and  others  2008;  Calvin 
and others, forthcoming. 

27. German  Advisory  Council  on  Global 

Change 2008; Wise and others 2009. 

28. These five models (MeSSAGe, MiniCAM, 
reMIND, IMAGe, and IeA eTp) are the global 
leading energy­climate models from europe and 
the United States, with a balance of top­down and 
bottom­up  approaches  and  different  mitigation 
pathways.  MeSSAGe,  developed  by  the  Inter­
national  Institute  for  Applied  Systems  Analysis 
(IIASA), adopts the MeSSAGe modeling system, 
which  comprises  energy  systems  engineering 
optimization model MeSSAGe and the top­down 
macroeconomic  equilibrium  model  MACrO, 
in  addition  to  forest  management  model  DIMA 
and  agricultural  modeling  framework AeZ­BLS. 
This analysis considers the B2 scenarios, because 
they are intermediary between A2 (a high popula­
tion growth case) and B1 (a plausible “best case” 
to achieve low emissions in the absence of vigor­
ous  climate  policies),  characterized  by  “dynam­
ics  as  usual”  rates  of  change  (riahi,  Grübler, 
and  Nakic´enovic´  2007;  rao  and  others  2008). 
MiniCAM,  developed  at  the  pacific  Northwest 
National  Laboratory,  combines  a  technologically 
detailed  global  energy–economy–agricultural­
land­use model with a suite of coupled gas­cycle, 
climate and ice­melt models (edmonds and oth­
ers 2008). reMIND, developed by potsdam Insti­
tute  for  Climate  Impact  research,  is  an  optimal 
growth model that combines a top­down macro­
economic model with a bottom­up energy model, 
aiming  at  welfare  maximization  (Leimbach  and 
others,  forthcoming).  IMAGe  model,  developed 

224 

WOrL D   De VeLOpMeN T  r e pOr

T   2 0 1 0

by  the  Netherlands  environmental  Assessment 
Agency, is an integrated assessment model includ­
ing the TIMer 2 energy model coupled with the 
climate  policy  model  FAIr­SiMCap  (Bouw man, 
Kram,  and  Goldewijk  2006).  The  fifth  model  is 
the  IeA  energy  Technology  perspective,  a  linear 
programming  optimization  model  based  on  the 
MArKAL energy model (IeA 2008b).

29. Mitigation costs include additional capi­
tal investment costs, operation and maintenance 
costs,  and  fuel  costs,  compared  to  the  baseline. 
rao  and  others  2008;  Knopf  and  others,  forth­
coming; Calvin and others, forthcoming; riahi, 
Grübler, and Nakic´enovic´ 2007; IIASA 2009.

30. riahi,  Grübler,  and  Nakic´enovic´  2007; 
IIASA  2009;  Knopf  and  others,  forthcoming; 
IeA 2008c. 

31. IeA 2008b; McKinsey & Company 2009a.
32. Knopf  and  others,  forthcoming;  Calvin 

and others, forthcoming; IeA 2008c. 

33. rao and others 2008; IeA 2008b; Mignone 
and  others  2008.  This  is  true  in  the  absence  of 
effective and acceptable geoengineering technol­
ogy (see chapter 7 for a discussion).

34. IeA  2008b;  IeA  2008c;  riahi,  Grübler, 
and Nakic´enovic´ 2007; IIASA 2009; Calvin and 
others, forthcoming.

35. raupach and others 2007.
36. Shalizi and Lecocq 2009.
37. philibert 2007.
38. McKinsey & Company 2009b.
39. World Bank 2001.
40. IeA 2008b; Calvin and others, forthcom­
ing; riahi, Grübler, and Nakic´enovic´ 2007; IIASA 
2009.

41. IeA 2008b; Calvin and others, forthcom­
ing; riahi, Grübler, and Nakic´enovic´ 2007; IIASA 
2009. The size of emission reductions required is 
critically  dependent  on  the  baseline  scenarios, 
which vary greatly among different models. 

42. IeA 2008b; riahi, Grübler, and Nakic´en­
ovic´  2007;  IIASA  2009;  IAC  2007.  It  should  be 
noted that land­ use changes and methane reduc­
tions are also critical measures in nonenergy sec­
tors (see chapter 3) to achieve a 450 ppm CO2e 
trajectory, particularly to buy some time in the 
short term for new technology development.

43. Knopf and others, forthcoming; rao and 

others 2008.

44. rao  and  others  2008;  Calvin  and  others, 

forthcoming; Knopf and others, forthcoming.
45. Barrett 2003; Burtraw and others 2005.
46. A  molecule  of  methane,  the  major  com­
ponent of natural gas, has 21 times more global 
warming potential than a molecule of CO2.

47. SeG 2007.
48. IeA 2008b; McKinsey & Company 2009b.
49. de la Torre and others 2008.

50. McKinsey & Company 2009a.
51. The Mexico Low Carbon Study identified 
nearly  half  of  the  total  potential  for  emissions 
reduction to be from interventions with positive 
net benefits (Johnson and others 2008).

52. Bosseboeuf and others 2007.
53. IeA 2008b; Worldwatch Institute 2009.
54. UNep 2003.
55. IpCC 2007.
56. Brown,  Southworth,  and  Stovall  2005; 
Burton  and  others  2008.  A  comprehensive 
review  of  empirical  experience  based  on  146 
green  buildings  in  10  countries  concluded  that 
green buildings cost on average about 2 percent 
more  to  build  than  conventional  buildings  and 
could reduce energy use by a median of 33 per­
cent (Kats 2008).

57. Shalizi and Lecocq 2009.
58. Brown, Southworth, and Stovall 2005.
59. IeA 2008b.
60. Johnson and others 2008.
61. Brown,  Southworth,  and  Stovall  2005; 

eTAAC 2008.

62. Johnson and others 2008.
63. Sorrell 2008.
64. IeA 2008c.
65. Stern 2007. A small share of the subsidies 
supports clean energy technologies, such as the 
$10 billion a year for renewables.

66. World Bank 2008a.
67. Sterner 2007.
68. UNep 2008.
69. ezzati and others 2004.
70. Wang and Smith 1999.
71. A carbon tax of $50 a ton of CO2 trans­
lates to a tax on coal­ fired power of 4.5 cents a 
kilowatt­ hour, or a tax on petroleum of 45 cents 
a gallon (12 cents a liter). 

72. philibert 2007.
73. WBCSD 2008.
74. World energy Council 2008.
75. Goldstein 2007.
76. Meyers, McMahon, and McNeil 2005.
77. Goldstein 2007.
78. An energy­ efficient mortgage allows bor­
rowers to qualify for a larger mortgage by includ­
ing  energy  savings  gleaned  from  home  energy­
 efficiency measures.
79. eSMAp 2008.
80. World Bank 2008d.
81. Taylor and others 2008.
82. World Bank 2008b.
83. each  lamp  costs  about  $1  under  these 
bulk  procurement  programs,  instead  of  $3–$5, 
plus another dollar of transaction costs for dis­
tribution, awareness and promotion, monitoring 
and verification, and testing. 

84. eSMAp 2009.

 

Energizing Development without Compromising the Climate 

225

85. Armel 2008.
86. IeA 2008b; riahi, Grübler, and Nakic´en­

2.4. Bilthoven: Netherlands environmental 
Assessment Agency.

ovic´ 2007; IIASA 2009.

87. The costs of wind, geothermal, and hydro 
power vary greatly depending on resources and sites. 

88. IeA 2008a.
89. eSMAp 2006.
90. For example, renewable portfolio standards 
tend  to  favor  wind  energy  but  discourage  solar 
energy. 

91. World Bank 2006.
92. MIT 2003; Keystone Center 2007.
93. MIT 2003.
94. Worldwatch Institute 2008; IeA 2008b.
95. Calvin  and  others,  forthcoming;  riahi, 

Grübler, and Nakic´enovic´ 2007; IIASA 2009. 

96. riahi,  Grübler,  and  Nakic´enovic´  2007; 

IIASA 2009.

97. Gibbins and Chalmers 2008.
98. Sperling and Gordon 2008.
99. Weyant and others 2009.

References
Armel, K. C. 2008. “Behavior, energy and 
Climate Change: A Solutions­ Oriented 
Approach.” paper presented at the energy 
Forum, Stanford University, palo Alto, CA.
Barker, T., I. Bashmakov, L. Bernstein, J. e. Bog­

ner, p. r. Bosch, r. Dave, O. r. Davidson, B. S. 
Fisher, S. Gupta, K. halsnaes, B. heij, S. Khan 
ribeiro, S. Kobayashi, M. D. Levine, D. L. Mar­
tino, O. Masera, B. Metz, L. A. Meyer, G.­ J. 
Nabuurs, A. Najam, N. Nakic´enovic´, h.­ h. 
rogner, J. roy, J. Sathaye, r. Schock, p. Shukla, 
r. e. h. Sims, p. Smith, D. A. Tirpak, D. Urge­
 Vorsatz, and D. Zhou. 2007. “Technical Sum­
mary.” In Climate Change 2007: Mitigation. 
Contribution of Working Group III to the Fourth 
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change, ed. B. Metz, O. r. 
Davidson, p. r. Bosch, r. Dave, and L. A. Meyer. 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University press.

Barrett, S. 2003. Environment and Statecraft: 

The Strategy of Environmental Treaty- Making. 
Oxford, UK: Oxford University press.

Bowen, A., S. Fankhauser, N. Stern, and D. 

Zenghelis. 2009. An Outline of the Case for 
a “Green” Stimulus. London: Grantham 
research Institute on Climate Change and 
the environment and the Centre for Climate 
Change economics and policy.

Brazil Interministerial Committee on Climate 

Change. 2008. National Plan on Climate 
Change. Brasilia: Government of Brazil.

Brown, M. A., F. Southworth, and T. K. Stovall. 

2005. Towards a Climate- Friendly Built 
Environment. Arlington, VA: pew Center on 
Global Climate Change.

Burton, r., D. Goldston, G. Crabtree, L. Glicks­
man, D. Goldstein, D. Greene, D. Kammen, 
M. Levine, M. Lubell, M. Savitz, D. Sper­
ling, F. Schlachter, J. Scofield, and J. Dawson. 
2008. “how America Can Look Within to 
Achieve energy Security and reduce Global 
Warming.” Reviews of Modern Physics 80 (4): 
S1–S109.

Burtraw, D., D. A. evans, A. Krupnick, K. palmer, 

and r. Toth. 2005. “economics of pollution 
Trading for SO2 and NOx.” Discussion paper 
05­ 05, resources for the Future, Washington, 
DC.

California energy Commission. 2007a. “2007 

Integrated energy policy report.” California 
energy Commission, Sacramento, CA. 

———. 2007b. “Comparative Costs of Califor­

nia Central Station electricity Generation 
Technologies.” California energy Commis­
sion, Sacramento, CA.

Calvin, K., J. edmonds, B. Bond­ Lamberty, L. 
Clarke, p. Kyle, S. Smith, A. Thomson, and 
M. Wise. Forthcoming. “Limiting Climate 
Change to 450 ppm CO2 equivalent in the 
21st Century.” Energy Economics. 

Chamon, M., p. Mauro, and Y. Okawa. 2008. 
“Cars: Mass Car Ownership in the emerg­
ing Market Giants.” Economic Policy 23 (54): 
243–96.

Beck, F., and e. Martinot. 2004. “renewable 

Chikkatur, A. 2008. Policies for Advanced Coal 

energy policies and Barriers.” In Encyclope-
dia of Energy, ed. C. J. Cleveland. Amsterdam: 
elsevier.

Technologies in India (and China). Cam­
bridge, MA: Kennedy School of Government, 
harvard University.

Bosseboeuf, D., B. Lapillonne, W. eichhammer, 

and p. Boonekamp. 2007. Evaluation of Energy 
Efficiency in the EU- 15: Indicators and Policies. 
paris: ADeMe/IeeA.

Bouwman, A. F., T. Kram, and K. K. Goldewijk. 

2006. Integrated Modelling of Global Envi-
ronmental Change: An Overview of IMAGE 

Clarke, L., J. edmonds, V. Krey, r. richels, S. 
rose, and M. Tavoni. Forthcoming. “Inter­
national Climate policy Architectures: Over­
view of the eMF 22 International Scenarios.” 
Energy Economics. 

Dahowski, r. T., X. Li, C. L. Davidson, N. Wei, 
J. J. Dooley, and r. h. Gentile. 2009. “A pre­

226 

WOrL D   De VeLOpMeN T  r e pOr

T   2 0 1 0

liminary Cost Curve Assessment of Carbon 
 Dioxide Capture and Storage potential in 
China.” Energy Procedia 1 (1): 2849–56.

de la Torre, A., p. Fajnzylber, and J. Nash. 2008. 

Low Carbon, High Growth: Latin American 
Responses to Climate Change. Washington, 
DC: World Bank.

Deutsche Bank Advisors. 2008. Investing in Cli-

mate Change 2009: Necessity And Opportunity 
In Turbulent Times. Frankfurt: Deutsche Bank 
Group.

Dodman, D. 2009. “Blaming Cities for Climate 
Change? An Analysis of Urban Greenhouse 
Gas emissions Inventories.” Environment and 
Urbanization 21 (1): 185–201.

Dooley, J. J., r. T. Dahowski, C. L. Davidson, 
M. A. Wise, N. Gupta, S. h. Kim, and e. L. 
Malone. 2006. Carbon Dioxide Capture and 
Geologic Storage: A Core Element of a Global 
Energy Technology Strategy to Address Climate 
Change—A Technology Report from the Second 
Phase of the Global Energy Technology Strategy 
Program (GTSP). College park, MD: Battelle, 
Joint Global Change research Institute.

ebinger, J., B. hamso, F. Gerner, A. Lim, and A. 

plecas. 2008. “europe and Central Asia region: 
how resilient Is the energy Sector to Climate 
Change?” Background paper for Fay, Block, 
and ebinger, 2010, World Bank, Washington, 
DC.

edmonds, J., L. Clarke, J. Lurz, and M. Wise. 

2008. “Stabilizing CO2 Concentrations with 
Incomplete International Cooperation.” Cli-
mate Policy 8 (4): 355–76.

eeSI (environmental and energy Study Insti­
tute). 2008. Jobs from Renewable Energy and 
Energy Efficiency. Washington, DC: eeSI.

eSMAp (energy Sector Management Assistance 

program). 2006. Proceedings of the Interna-
tional Grid- Connected Renewable Energy Pol-
icy Forum. Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2008. An Analytical Compendium of 

Institutional Frameworks for Energy Efficiency 
Implementation. Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2009. Public Procurement of Energy Effi-
ciency Services. Washington, DC: World Bank.

eTAAC (economic and Technology Advance­

ment Advisory Committee). 2008. Tech-
nologies and Policies to Consider for Reducing 
Greenhouse Gas Emissions in California. Sac­
ramento, CA: eTAAC.

ezzati, M., A. Lopez, A. rodgers, and C. Mur­

ray, eds. 2004. Climate Change. Comparative 
Quantification of Health Risks: Global and 
Regional Burden of Disease Due to Selected 

Major Risk Factors, vol. 2. Geneva: World 
health Organization. 

Federal Ministry for the environment, Nature 

Conservation and Nuclear Safety. 2008. 
Renewable Energy Sources in Figures: National 
and International Development. Berlin: Fed­
eral Ministry for the environment, Nature 
Conservation and Nuclear Safety.

German Advisory Council on Global Change. 
2008. World in Transition: Future Bioenergy 
and Sustainable Land Use. London: earthscan.
Gibbins, J., and h. Chalmers. 2008. “preparing for 

Global rollout: A ‘Developed Country First’ 
Demonstration programme for rapid CCS 
Deployment.” Energy Policy 36 (2): 501–07.
Goldstein, D. B. 2007. Saving Energy, Growing 

Jobs: How Environmental Protection Promotes 
Economic Growth, Profitability, Innovation, and 
Competition. Berkeley, CA: Bay Tree publishing.
Government of China. 2008. China’s Policies and 

Actions for Addressing Climate Change. Bei­
jing: Information Office of the State Council 
of the people’s republic of China.

Government of India. 2008. India National 

Action Plan on Climate Change. New Delhi: 
prime Minister’s Council on Climate Change.

Government of India planning Commission. 
2006. Integrated Energy Policy: Report of the 
Expert Committee. New Delhi: Government 
of India.

Government of Mexico. 2008. National Strategy 

on Climate Change. Mexico City: Mexico Inter­
secretarial Commission on Climate Change.
Grübler, A. 2008. “energy Transitions.” Encyclo-

pedia of Earth, ed. C. J. Cleveland. Washington, 
DC: environmental Information Coalition, 
National Council for Science and environment.

hare, B., and M. Meinshausen. 2006. “how 

Much Warming Are We Committed to and 
how Much Can Be Avoided?” Climatic 
Change 75 (1–2): 111–49.

holloway, S., A. Garg, M. Kapshe, A. Deshpande, 
A. S. pracha, S. r. Kahn, M. A. Mahmood, T. N. 
Singh, K. L. Kirk, and J. Gale. 2008. “An Assess­
ment of the CO2 Storage potential of the Indian 
Subcontinent.” Energy Procedia 1 (1): 2607–13.

hughes, J. e., C. r. Knittel, and D. Sperling. 

2008. “evidence of a Shift in the Short­ run 
price elasticity of Gasoline Demand.” Energy 
Journal 29 (1): 113–34.

IAC (InterAcademy Council). 2007. Lighting the 
Way: Toward a Sustainable Energy Future. IAC 
Secretariat: The Netherlands.

IeA (International energy Agency). 2007. 

Renewables for Heating and Cooling: Untapped 

 

Energizing Development without Compromising the Climate 

227

Potential. paris: IeA and renewable energy 
Technology Development.

———. 2008a. Empowering Variable Renew-

ables: Options for Flexible Electricity Systems. 
paris: IeA.

———. 2008b. Energy Technology Perspective 2008: 

Scenarios and Strategies to 2050. paris: IeA.
———. 2008c. World Energy Outlook 2008. 

paris: IeA.

IIASA (International Institute for Applied Sys­

tems Analysis). 2009. “GGI Scenario Data­
base.” IIASA, Laxenburg, Austria. 

IpCC (Intergovernmental panel on Climate 

Change). 2007. “Summary for policymakers.” 
In Climate Change 2007: Mitigation. Contribu-
tion of Working Group III to the Fourth Assess-
ment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change, ed. B. Metz, O. r. Davidson, 
p. r. Bosch, r. Dave, and L. A. Meyer. Cam­
bridge, UK: Cambridge University press.

Johnson, T., F. Liu, C. Alatorre, and Z. romo. 

2008. “Mexico Low­ Carbon Study—México: 
estudio para la Disminución de emisiones de 
Carbono (MeDeC).” World Bank, Washing­
ton, DC.

Kats, G. 2008. Greening Buildings and Com-

munities: Costs and Benefits. London: Good 
energies.

Kenworthy, J. 2003. “Transport energy Use and 
Greenhouse Gases in Urban passenger Trans­
port Systems: A Study of 84 Global Cities.” 
paper presented at the third International 
Conference of the regional Government 
Network for Sustainable Development, Fre­
mantle, Australia.

Keystone Center. 2007. Nuclear Power Joint Fact-
 Finding. Keystone, CO: The Keystone Center.
Knopf, B., O. edenhofer, T. Barker, N. Bauer, L. 

Baumstark, B. Chateau, p. Criqui, A. held, 
M. Isaac, M. Jakob, e. Jochem, A. Kitous, S. 
Kypreos, M. Leimbach, B. Magné, S. Mima, 
W. Schade, S. Scrieciu, h. Turton, and D. van 
Vuuren. Forthcoming. “The economics of 
Low Stabilisation: Implications for Techno­
logical Change and policy.” In Making Cli-
mate Change Work for Us, ed. M. hulme and 
h. Neufeldt. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University press.

Lam, W. h. K., and M.­ L. Tam. 2002. “reliability 

of Territory­ Wide Car Ownership estimates 
in hong Kong.” Journal of Transport Geogra-
phy 10 (1): 51–60.

Leimbach, M., N. Bauer, L. Baumstark, and O. 

edenhofer. Forthcoming. “Mitigation Costs in 
a Globalized World.” Environmental Modeling 
and Assessment. 

Lin, J. 2007. Energy in China: Myths, Reality, and 

Challenges. San Francisco, CA: energy Foun­
dation.

Lin, J., N. Zhou, M. Levine, and D. Fridley. 
2006. Achieving China’s Target for Energy 
Intensity Reduction in 2010: An Explora-
tion of Recent Trends and Possible Future 
Scenarios. Berkeley, CA: Lawrence Berke­
ley National Laboratories, University of 
 California–Berkeley.

McKinsey & Company. 2009a. Pathways to a 

Low- carbon Economy: Version 2 of the Global 
Greenhouse Gas Abatement Cost Curve. 
 McKinsey & Company.

———. 2009b. “promoting energy efficiency in 

the Developing World.” McKinsey Quarterly, 
February.

Meyers, S., J. McMahon, and M. McNeil. 2005. 

Realized and Prospective Impacts of U.S. 
Energy Efficiency Standards for Residential 
Appliances: 2004 Update. Berkeley, CA: Law­
rence Berkeley National Laboratory, Univer­
sity of California–Berkeley.

Mignone, B. K., r. h. Socolow, J. L. Sarmiento, 

and M. Oppenheimer. 2008. “Atmospheric 
Stabilization and the Timing of Carbon Miti­
gation.” Climatic Change 88 (3–4): 251–65.
MIT (Massachusetts Institute of Technology). 
2003. The Future of Nuclear Power: An Inter-
disciplinary MIT Study. Cambridge, MA: MIT 
press.

Neij, L. 2007. “Cost Development of Future 

Technologies for power Generation: A Study 
Based on experience Curves and Comple­
mentary Bottom­ Up Assessments.” Energy 
Policy 36 (6): 2200–11.

Nemet, G. 2006. “Beyond the Learning Curve: 
Factors Influencing Cost reductions in pho­
tovoltaics.” Energy Policy 34 (17): 3218–32.
NrC (National research Council). 2008. The 

National Academies Summit on America’s 
Energy Future: Summary of a Meeting. Wash­
ington, DC: National Academies press.

NrDC (National resources Defense Council). 

2007. The Next Generation of Hybrid Cars: 
Plug- in Hybrids Can Help Reduce Global 
Warming and Slash Oil Dependency. Washing­
ton, DC: NrDC.

pew Center. 2008a. “Climate Change Mitiga­

tion Measures in India.” International Brief 2, 
Washington, DC.

———. 2008b. “Climate Change Mitigation 
Measures in South Africa.” pew Center on 
Global Climate Change International Brief 3, 
Arlington, VA.

228 

WOrL D   De VeLOpMeN T  r e pOr

T   2 0 1 0

philibert, C. 2007. Technology Penetration and 
Capital Stock Turnover: Lessons from IEA Sce-
nario Analysis. paris: Organisation for eco­
nomic Co­ operation and Development and 
International energy Agency.

project Catalyst. 2009. Towards a Global Climate 
Agreement: Project Catalyst. Synthesis briefing 
paper, ClimateWorks Foundation.

pryor, S., r. Barthelmie, and e. Kjellstrom. 2005. 
“potential Climate Change Impacts on Wind 
energy resources in Northern europe: Analy­
ses Using a regional Climate Model.” Climate 
Dynamics 25 (7–8): 815–35.

rao, S., K. riahi, e. Stehfest, D. van Vuuren, C. 
Cho, M. den elzen, M. Isaac, and J. van Vliet. 
2008. IMAGE and MESSAGE Scenarios Limit-
ing GHG Concentration to Low Levels. Lax­
enburg, Austria: International Institute for 
Applied Systems Analysis.

raupach, M. r., G. Marland, p. Ciais, C. Le 

Quere, J. G. Canadell, G. Klepper, and C. B. 
Field. 2007. “Global and regional Drivers of 
Accelerating CO2 emissions.” Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences 104 (24): 
10288–93.

reN 21. 2008. Renewables 2007 Global Status 
Report. paris and Washington: renewable 
energy policy Network for the 21st Century 
Secretariat and Worldwatch Institute.

riahi, K., A. Grübler, and N. Nakic´enovic´. 2007. 

“Scenarios of Long­ Term Socio­ economic 
and environmental Development under Cli­
mate Stabilization.” Technological Forecasting 
and Social Change 74 (7): 887–935.

rogers, C., M. Messenger, and S. Bender. 2005. 
Funding and Savings for Energy Efficiency Pro-
grams for Program Years 2000 through 2004. Sac­
ramento, CA: California energy Commission.

rokityanskiy, D., p. C. Benitez, F. Kraxner, 
I. McCallum, M. Obersteiner, e. ramet­
steiner, and Y. Yamagata. 2006. “Geographi­
cally explicit Global Modeling of Land­ Use 
Change, Carbon Sequestration, and Biomass 
Supply.” Technological Forecasting and Social 
Change 74 (7): 1057–82.

roland­ holst, D. 2008. Energy Efficiency, Inno-
vation, and Job Creation in California. Berke­
ley, CA: Center for energy, resources, and 
economic Sustainability, University of Cali­
fornia–Berkeley.

rosenfeld, A. h. 2007. “California’s Success in 
energy efficiency and Climate Change: past 
and Future.” paper presented at the electricite 
de France, paris.

Schaeffer, M., T. Kram, M. Meinshausen, D. p. 

van Vuuren, and W. L. hare. 2008. “Near­

 Linear Cost Increase to reduce Climate­
 Change risk.” Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences 105 (52): 20621–26.

Schipper, L. 2007. Automobile Fuel, Economy 
and CO2 emissions in Industrialized Coun­
tries: Troubling Trends through 2005/6. 
Washington, DC: eMBArQ, the World 
resources Institute Center for Sustainable 
Transport.

SeG (Scientific expert Group on Climate 

Change). 2007. Confronting Climate Change: 
Avoiding the Unmanageable and Managing the 
Unavoidable. Washington, DC: Sigma Xi and 
United Nations Foundation.

Shalizi, Z., and F. Lecocq. 2009. “economics of 

Targeted Mitigation programs in Sectors with 
Long­ lived Capital Stock.” policy research 
Working paper 5063, World Bank, Washing­
ton, DC.

Socolow, r. 2006. “Stabilization Wedges: Mitiga­
tion Tools for the Next half­ Century.” paper 
presented at the World Bank energy Week, 
Washington, DC.

Sorrell, S. 2008. “The rebound effect: Mecha­
nisms, evidence and policy Implications.” 
paper presented at the electricity policy 
Workshop, Toronto.

Sperling, D., and D. Gordon. 2008. Two Billion 

Cars: Driving Towards Sustainability. New 
York: Oxford University press.

Stern, N. 2007. The Economics of Climate 

Change: The Stern Review. Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge University press.

Sterner, T. 2007. “Fuel Taxes: An Important 

Instrument for Climate policy.” Energy Policy 
35: 3194–3202.

Sudarshan, A., and J. Sweeney. Forthcoming. 

“Deconstructing the ‘rosenfeld Curve’.” 
Energy Journal. 

Tans, p. 2009. “Trends in Atmospheric Carbon 

Dioxide.” National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration, Boulder, CO. 

Taylor, r. p., C. Govindarajalu, J. Levin, A. S. 

Meyer, and W. A. Ward. 2008. Financing Energy 
Efficiency: Lessons from Brazil, China, India and 
Beyond. Washington, DC: World Bank.

UNep (United Nations environment pro­
gramme). 2003. “energy and Cities: Sus­
tainable Building and Construction.” paper 
presented at the UNep Governing Council 
Side event, Osaka.

———. 2008. Reforming Energy Subsidies: 

Opportunities to Contribute to the Climate 
Change Agenda. Nairobi: UNep Division of 
Technology, Industry and economics.

 

Energizing Development without Compromising the Climate 

229

United Nations. 2007. State of the World Popula-

tion 2007: Unleashing the Potential of Urban 
Growth. New York: United Nations popula­
tion Fund.

van Vuuren, D. p., e. Stehfest, M. den elzen, 

J. van Vliet, and M. Isaac. Forthcoming. 
“exploring Scenarios that Keep Greenhouse 
Gas radiative Forcing Below 3 W/m2 in 2100 
in the IMAGe Model.” Energy Economics. 

Wang, T., and J. Watson. 2009. China’s Energy 
Transition: Pathways for Low Carbon Devel-
opment. Falmer and Brighton, UK: Sussex 
energy Group and Tyndall Centre for Climate 
Change research.

Wang, X., and K. r. Smith. 1999. “Near­ term 

Benefits of Greenhouse Gas reduction: 
health Impacts in China.” Environmental Sci-
ence and Technology 33 (18): 3056–61.

WBCSD (World Business Council for Sustain­

able Development). 2008. Power to Change: A 
Business Contribution to a Low Carbon Econ-
omy. Geneva: WBCSD.

Weber, C. L., G. p. peters, D. Guan, and K. 

hubacek. 2008. “The Contribution of Chi­
nese exports to Climate Change.” Energy Pol-
icy 36 (9): 3572–77.

Weyant, J., C. Azar, M. Kainuma, J. Kejun, N. 

Nakic´enovic´, p. r. Shukla, e. La rovere, and 
G. Yohe. 2009. Report of 2.6 Versus 2.9 Watts/
m2 RCPP Evaluation Panel. Geneva: Intergov­
ernmental panel on Climate Change.

Wilbanks, T. J., V. Bhatt, D. e. Bilello, S. r. Bull, 

J. ekmann, W. C. horak, Y. J. huang, M. D. 
Levine, M. J. Sale, D. K. Schmalzer, and 
M. J. Scott. 2008. Effects of Climate Change 
on Energy Production and Use in the United 
States. Washington, DC: U.S. Climate Change 
Science program.

Wise, M. A., L. Clarke, K. Calvin, A. Thomson, B. 

Bond­ Lamberty, r. Sands, S. Smith, T. Jane­
tos, and J. edmonds. 2009. “The 2000 Billion 
Ton Carbon Gorilla: Implication of Terrestrial 
Carbon emissions for a LCS.” paper presented 
at the Japan Low­ Carbon Society Scenarios 
Toward 2050 project Symposium, Tokyo.

Wiser, r., and M. Bolinger. 2008. Annual Report 

on U.S. Wind Power Installation, Cost, and 
Performance Trends: 2007. Washington, DC: 
U.S. Department of energy, energy efficiency 
and renewable energy.

World Bank. 2001. China: Opportunities to 

Improve Energy Efficiency in Buildings. Wash­
ington, DC: World Bank Asia Alternative 

energy programme and energy & Mining 
Unit, east Asia and pacific region.

———. 2006. Renewable Energy Toolkit: A 

Resource for Renewable Energy Development. 
Wahington, DC: World Bank.

———. 2008a. An Evaluation of World Bank 

Win- Win Energy Policy Reforms. Washington, 
DC: World Bank.

———. 2008b. Energy Efficiency in Eastern 

Europe and Central Asia. Washington, DC: 
World Bank.

———. 2008c. South Asia Climate Change Strat-

egy. Washington, DC: World Bank.

———. 2008d. The Development of China’s 

ESCO Industry, 2004–2007. Washington, DC: 
World Bank.

———. 2008e. World Development Indicators 

2008. Washington, DC: World Bank.

———. 2008f. World Development Report 2009: 
Reshaping Economic Geography. Washington, 
DC: World Bank.

———. 2009a. Energizing Climate- Friendly 

Development: World Bank Group Progress on 
Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency in Fis-
cal 2008. Washington, DC: World Bank.

———. 2009b. “World Bank Urban Strategy.” 

World Bank. Washington, DC.

———. 2009c. World Development Indicators 

2009. Washington, DC: World Bank.

World economic Forum. 2009. Green Invest-
ing: Towards a Clean Energy Infrastructure. 
Geneva: World economic Forum.

World energy Council. 2008. Energy Efficiency 

Policies around the World: Review and Evalua-
tion. London: World energy Council.

Worldwatch Institute. 2008. State of the World 
2008: Innovations for a Sustainable Economy. 
New York: W.W. Norton & Company.

———. 2009. State of the World 2009: Into a 

Warming World. New York: W.W. Norton & 
Company.

WrI (World resources Institute). 2008. “Cli­

mate Analysis Indicators Tool (CAIT).” Wash­
ington, DC. 

Yates, M., M. heller, and L. Yeung. 2009. Solar 
Thermal: Not Just Smoke and Mirrors. New 
York: Merrill Lynch.

Zhang, X. 2008. Observations on Energy Tech-
nology Research, Development and Deploy-
ment in China. Beijing: Tsinghua University 
Institute of energy, environment and econ­
omy.

pART 2

CHApTER 5

Integrating Development into  
the Global Climate Regime

The  past  two  decades  have  seen 

the creation and evolution of an 
international climate regime, with 
the  United  Nations  Framework 
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) 
and the Kyoto protocol as the main pillars 
(box  5.1).  Kyoto  set  binding  international 
limits on the greenhouse gas emissions of 
developed  countries.  It  created  a  carbon 
market  to  drive  private  investment  and 
lower the cost of emission reductions. And 
it prompted countries to prepare national 
climate- change strategies.

But the existing global regime has major 
limitations.  It  has  failed  to  substantially 
curb emissions, which have increased by 
25  percent  since  Kyoto  was  negotiated.1 
It has delivered only very limited support 
to developing countries. Its Clean Devel-
opment  Mechanism  (CDM)  has  so  far 
brought little transformational change in 
countries’ overall development strategies 
(see chapter 6 on the strengths and weak-
nesses of the CDM). The Global Environ-
ment Facility has invested $2.7 billion in 
climate  projects,2  well  short  of  the  flows 

Key messages
A global problem on the scale of climate change requires international coordination. Neverthe-
less, implementation depends on actions within countries. Therefore, an effective international 
climate regime must integrate development concerns, breaking free of the environment-versus-
equity dichotomy. A multitrack framework for climate action, with different goals or policies for 
developed countries and developing countries, may be one way to move forward; this framework 
would need to consider the process for defining and measuring success. The international 
climate regime will also need to support the integration of adaptation into development.

needed. The global regime has so far failed 
to spur countries to cooperate on research 
and  development  or  to  mobilize  signifi-
cant funding for the technology transfer 
and  deployment  needed  for  low- carbon 
development (see chapter 7). Aside from 
encouraging  poor  countries  to  prepare 
National Adaptation programs of Action, 
it has delivered little concrete support for 
adaptation  efforts.  And  the  Adaptation 
Fund, slow to get started, falls far short of 
the projected needs (see chapter 6). 

In 2007 the Bali Action plan launched 
negotiations  to  achieve  an  “agreed  out-
come”  during  the  UNFCCC  15th  ses-
sion  in  Copenhagen  in  2009.  These 
negotiations  present  an  opportunity  to 
strengthen the climate regime and address 
its shortcomings.

Building the climate regime: 
Transcending the tensions between 
climate and development3
If we are to meaningfully address climate 
change, there is no option but to integrate 
development concerns and climate change. 
The climate problem arises from the joint 
evolution of economic growth and green-
house  gas  emissions.  An  effective  regime 
must thus provide the incentives to recon-
sider  trajectories  of  industrialization  and 
unravel the ties that have bound develop-
ment to carbon. However, for ethical and 
practical  reasons,  this  rethinking  must 
include  meeting  development  aspirations 
and forging an equitable climate regime.

Until  recently,  climate  change  was  not 
seen as an opportunity to rethink industrial 

234 

WO R L D   D E V E LOpM E N T   R EpO RT   2 0 1 0

Box 5.1    The climate regime today

The United Nations Framework Con-
vention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), 
which was adopted in 1992 and entered 
into force in 1994, set an ultimate objec-
tive of stabilizing atmospheric concen-
trations of greenhouse gases at levels 
that would prevent “dangerous” human 
interference with the climate system. It 
divided countries into three main groups 
with different types of commitments:
Annex I parties include the industrial 

countries that were members of the OECD 
(Organisation for Economic Co-operation 
and Development) in 1992, plus countries 
with economies in transition (the EIT Par-
ties), including the Russian Federation, the 
Baltic states, and several Central and East-
ern European states. They commit to adopt 
climate-change policies and measures with 
the aim of reducing their greenhouse gas 
emissions to 1990 levels by the year 2000.

Annex II parties consist of the OECD 

members of Annex I, but not the EIT Par-
ties. They are required to provide financial 
resources to enable developing coun-
tries to undertake emissions reduction 
activities under the UNFCCC and to help 
them adapt to adverse effects of climate 
change. In addition, they have to “take all 
practicable steps” to promote the devel-
opment and transfer of environmentally 
friendly technologies to EIT parties and 
developing countries. 

Non–Annex I parties are mostly devel-
oping countries. They undertake general 
obligations to formulate and implement 
national programs on mitigation and 
adaptation. 

The ultimate decision-making body 
of the convention is its Conference of 

the Parties, which meets every year 
and reviews the implementation of the 
convention, adopts decisions to further 
develop the convention’s rules, and nego-
tiates substantive new commitments. 

The Kyoto Protocol supplements and 
strengthens the convention. Adopted in 
1997, it entered into force in February 2005, 
with 184 parties as of January 14, 2009. 

At the heart of the protocol lie its 
legally binding emissions targets for 
Annex I parties, which have individual 
emissions targets, decided in Kyoto after 
intensive negotiation.

In addition to emissions targets for 

Annex I parties, the Kyoto Protocol con-
tains a set of general commitments (mir-
roring those in the UNFCCC) that apply to 
all parties, such as

•	 Taking	steps	to	improve	the	quality	of	

emissions data,

•	 Mounting	national	mitigation	and	

adaptation programs,

•	 Promoting	environmentally	friendly	

technology transfer,

•	 Cooperating	in	scientific	research	and	
international climate observation net-
works, and

•	 Supporting	education,	training,	pub-
lic awareness, and capacity-building 
initiatives.

The protocol broke new ground with 

three innovative mechanisms—Joint 
Implementation, the Clean Development 
Mechanism,	and	emissions	tradinga—
designed to boost the cost-effectiveness 
of climate-change mitigation by open-
ing ways for parties to cut emissions, 

or enhance carbon sinks, more cheaply 
abroad than at home.

The Bali Action Plan, adopted in 2007 

by the parties to the UNFCCC, launched 
a comprehensive process to enable the 
full, effective, and sustained implemen-
tation of the convention through long-
term cooperative action, now, up to, and 
beyond 2012 in order to reach an agreed 
outcome at the UNFCCC’s 15th session in 
Copenhagen in December 2009. 

The Bali Action Plan centered negotia-

tions on four main building blocks—
mitigation, adaptation, technology, and 
financing. Parties also agreed that the 
negotiations should address a shared 
vision for long-term cooperative action, 
including a global goal for emission 
reductions. 

Source: Reproduced from UNFCCC 2005; 
UNFCCC decision 1/CP.13, http://unfccc.int/
resource/docs/2007/cop13/eng/06a01.pdf 
(accessed July 6, 2009).
a. Parties with commitments under the 
Kyoto Protocol have accepted targets for 
limiting or reducing emissions. Joint Imple-
mentation allows a country with a target to 
implement projects counted toward meet-
ing their own target, but conducted in other 
countries that also have targets. The Clean 
Development	Mechanism	(CDM)	allows	a	
country with commitments to implement an 
emission-reduction project in developing 
countries that do not have targets. Emis-
sions trading allows countries that have 
emission units to spare—emissions permit-
ted them but not used—to sell this excess 
capacity to countries that are over their 
targets. (Adapted from http://unfccc.int/
kyoto_protocol/mechanisms/items/1673.
php, accessed August 5, 2009.)

development. The climate debate was iso-
lated  from  mainstream  decision  making 
on financing, investment, technology, and 
institutional  change.  That  time  has  sub-
stantially, if not entirely, passed. Awareness 
of climate change among leaders and pub-
lics has grown to the level that there is now 
readiness to integrate climate change into 
development decision making. 

Turning  this  readiness  into  an  effec-
tive climate regime requires simultaneously 
addressing multiple goals involving equity, 
climate, and social and economic develop-
ment. It would be naïve to suggest that there 

are  no  tensions  among  these  objectives. 
Indeed, the very perception of tradeoffs can 
prove a potent political barrier to integrating 
climate change and development. Differences 
in perceptions and conceptual frameworks 
across  high-income  and  developing  coun-
tries can and do get in the way of a meaning-
ful discussion on how climate action can be 
integrated with development. Many of these 
tensions emerge along North- South lines. 

To ensure a climate regime that speaks to 
development  concerns,  it  is  useful  to  iden-
tify  and  engage  opposing  perspectives  and 
then  seek  to  transcend  them.  This  chapter 

 

Integrating Development into the Global Climate Regime 

235

discusses  four  points  of  tension  between  a 
climate perspective and a development per-
spective:  environment  and  equity;  burden 
sharing and opportunistic early action; a pre-
dictable climate outcome and an unpredict-
able development process; and conditionality 
in  financing  and  ownership.  These  points 
of tension are characterizations using broad 
brush strokes to bring out the disagreements 
and their possible resolution, knowing that 
in practice individual country positions, in 
both the North and the South, are far more 
nuanced than the extremes described here. 
The second part of the chapter explores alter-
native approaches to integrating developing 
countries into the international architecture. 

Mitigating climate change: 
Environment and equity
Since its beginning the climate regime has 
framed  both  equity  and  environmental 
goals as core elements. Over time, though, 
the articulation of these goals has turned 
their  complementarities  into  opposition, 
deadlocking the progress of climate nego-
tiations. Equity and environment have been 
increasingly perceived as competing ways 
of thinking about the problem, with coun-
tries arrayed behind these positions along 
predictable North- South lines. 

For much of the past two decades, cli-
mate change has been construed mainly as 
an environmental problem. This perspec-
tive  follows  directly  from  the  underlying 
science:  greenhouse  gases  are  accumulat-
ing in the atmosphere and causing climate 
impacts because of growing anthropogenic 
emissions,  combined  with  limits  to  the 
ocean’s  and  biosphere’s  ability  to  absorb 
greenhouse  gases.  In  this  perspective  the 
problem is one of global collective action, 
and the instrument of choice is negotiated 
commitments  for  absolute  reductions  in 
emissions.

This  strict  focus  on  the  environment 
forced the rise of a competing perspective, 
which construes climate change as essen-
tially a problem of equity. Adherents to this 
position agree that there are environmental 
limits, but they see the problem as wealthy 
countries  disproportionately  occupying 
the finite ecological space available. In this 
perspective, allocation principles based on 
equity, such as those centered on per capita 

and  historical  emissions,  should  provide 
the basis of a fair climate regime.

Equity  and  environmental  goals  have 
thus become polar elements of the debate. 
High-income  countries  argue  that  newly 
industrializing countries are already large 
emitters and will contribute an increasing 
share  of  emissions  in  the  future—hence 
the need for absolute emission reductions.4 
Industrializing and developing economies 
view a regime based on negotiated absolute 
reductions as locking in unequal emissions 
in perpetuity, a situation that is not viable 
for them. Concerns about equity have been 
heightened by evidence that emissions from 
many high-income countries have increased 
over the past two decades, since the initia-
tion of climate negotiations. As the urgency 
of finding a solution has increased, many 
developing countries, particularly the large, 
rapidly industrializing countries, fear that 
attention and responsibility for mitigating 
emissions  will  be  increasingly  displaced 
onto them. The notion of “major emitters,” 
including the large, rapidly industrializing 
countries, as primary drivers of the prob-
lem feeds this perception. 

An effective and legitimate global climate 
regime will have to find a way around these 
opposing framings—and speak to both per-
spectives. To begin with, global negotiations 
need to be approached in a spirit of plural-
ism. Given the history of entrenched politics 
and the kernel of truth in each, neither the 
environmental nor the equity framing of the 
climate problem can, practically, be an abso-
lute guide to negotiations, even though both 
are essential. Hybrid approaches seek to relo-
cate discussions within a development frame 
and could usefully broaden the debate. One 
approach seeks to reformulate the problem 
around the right to develop rather than the 
right to emit and identifies country “respon-
sibility”  and  “capacity”  to  act  on  climate 
change.5 Another strand of thinking suggests 
the articulation of “sustainable development 
policies and measures” (meaning measures 
to place a country on a low- carbon trajec-
tory that are fully compatible with domestic 
development priorities) by developing coun-
tries, combined with absolute reductions by 
high-income countries.6 While the specifics 
of any proposal may be debated, the climate 
regime would be well served by a politics of 

236 

WO R L D   D E V E LOpM E N T   R EpO RT   2 0 1 0

pragmatism built around the careful inte-
gration of climate and development. 

But for developing countries to believe 
that integrating climate and development 
is not a slippery slope toward ever greater 
mitigation  responsibility  being  displaced 
onto them, it will be necessary to have the 
backstop of an equity principle in the global 
regime. One example might be a long- term 
goal of per capita emissions across countries 
converging to a band; this principle could 
serve as a moral compass and a means of 
ensuring that the regime does not lock in 
grossly  unequal  emission  futures.  Again, 
while the specifics may be debated, a legiti-
mate climate regime will need anchoring in 
some form of equity principle.

Given the North’s historical responsibil-
ity for stocks of greenhouse gases, already 
supported  by  strong  statements  in  the 
framework convention, it is hard to imag-
ine an effective global regime that is not led 
by early and strong mitigation action by the 
developed world. The combination of early 
action by the North, a robust equity princi-
ple, and a spirit of pluralism in negotiations 
could provide the basis for transcending the 
environment- equity  dichotomy  that  has 
plagued global climate negotiations.

Burden sharing and opportunistic  
early action
The environmental and equity constructions 
of  the  climate  challenge  share  a  common 
assumption  that  the  challenge  is  a  prob-
lem of burden sharing. The burden  sharing 
language  suggests  that  climate  mitigation 
is  going  to  impose  considerable  costs  on 
national economies. Because current infra-
structure and economic production are built 
on the assumption of costless carbon, build-
ing economies and societies around costly 
carbon will impose considerable adjustment 
costs.  The  difficult  North- South  politics 
around climate is closely tied to the burden 
 sharing assumption, because environment 
and  equity  constructions  of  the  problem 
imply very different ways of sharing a bur-
den and therefore different political costs.

Recognizing  how  burden  sharing  con-
tributes  to  entrenched  politics,  advocates 
for early climate mitigation have sought to 
develop a counternarrative of climate miti-
gation as an opportunity to be seized rather 

than a burden to be shared. They point out 
that  the  history  of  environmental  regula-
tion is littered with examples of responses to 
regulation that have proved less costly than 
feared—acid rain and ozone depletion are 
two well-known examples.7 Even if climate 
mitigation imposes costs in the aggregate, 
there  are  relative  advantages  to  first  mov-
ers in mitigation technologies. First movers 
will be well placed to seize new markets that 
emerge as carbon is priced. Many climate-
mitigation  opportunities—notably  energy 
efficiency—can  be  harvested  at  negative 
economic cost and bring other co-benefits 
for development. And in the medium term, 
moving first allows societies to cultivate the 
positive feedbacks among institutions, mar-
kets, and technology as their economies are 
reoriented around a low-carbon future. In 
its strongest variant the opportunity narra-
tive is one of seizing advantage by moving 
first on climate mitigation, independent of 
what other countries do.

But it is important not to overplay this 
narrative.  Conceptually  the  tightness  of 
the weave between the climate and indus-
trial development suggests that adjustment 
costs are likely to be substantial—and that 
past  comparisons  such  as  acid  rain  and 
ozone  depletion  are  of  limited  relevance. 
Neither the stock of industrial capital built 
around costless carbon nor the dependence 
on endowments of fossil fuels can simply be 
wished away. Skeptics will note that, so far, 
the narrative of climate opportunity has not 
been  matched  by  concrete  actions  by  any 
major high-income country to enable devel-
oping countries to realize this opportunity. 
Moreover, even if countries believe the 
language  of  opportunity,  they  are  likely 
to act strategically by maintaining a pub-
lic stance based on burden sharing to win 
a  better  negotiating  deal,  even  while  pri-
vately organizing to seize available oppor-
tunities. So, opportunity-seizing is unlikely 
to  entirely  dethrone  burden  sharing  as  a 
dominant  narrative  in  the  short  run—it 
provides only a limited opening to change 
the entrenched politics of climate change. 

It is important, however, that this limited 
opening be seized. The prospect of a silver 
lining of economic opportunity to the climate 
cloud could tip the political balance toward 
getting started with the hard task of turning 

 

Integrating Development into the Global Climate Regime 

237

economies and societies toward a low-carbon 
future. Getting started with no prospect of 
an upside is a much harder sell. And start-
ing is important, because it creates constitu-
encies with a stake in a low-carbon future, 
begins the process of experimentation, and 
increases  the  costs  to  others  of  being  left 
behind, thus generating a pull effect. That the 
language of opportunity seizing is not water-
tight does not negate its potential to counter 
burden sharing as the prominent construct 
in the climate debate (box 5.2).

Predictable climate outcome and 
unpredictable development process
Burden sharing is linked to the environment 
framing of the climate problem, from which 
the need emerges to set absolute reduction 
targets to avoid catastrophic climate change. 
Drawing  on  the  recommendations  of  the 
Intergovernmental panel on Climate Change 
(IpCC), some countries and advocates have 
urged a global goal of restricting global tem-
perature rise to not more than 2°C, which 
will  require  reducing  global  emissions  by 
at least 50 percent (the lower bound of the 
IpCC’s range of 50–85 percent) by 2050 from 
their 1990 levels.8 In response several high-
income countries have submitted proposed 
national reduction targets (for 2050 and in 
some cases for interim years).9 The underly-
ing idea is to measure and benchmark prog-
ress toward meeting the climate challenge.

A  global  goal  is  particularly  useful  as 
a  way  to  assess  the  commitment  offers  of 
the high-income world against the magni-
tude  of  the  challenge.  But,  as  discussed  in 
chapter  4,  simple  arithmetic  suggests  that 
a  global  goal  also  carries  implications  for 
developing countries; the gap in reductions 
between the global goal and the sum of high-
income country targets will have to be met 
by the developing world. Several developing 
countries therefore resist this approach as a 
back door into forcing commitments by the 
developing world or insist on a simultane-
ous discussion of an allocation framework.10 
This resistance stems less from opposition to 
the global goal and more from a sense that 
the  language  of  predictability  will  prove  a 
slippery slope toward translating all actions 
into  absolute  emission  reductions,  leading 
to  an  implicit  cap  on  developing-country 
emissions.

The climate challenge looks quite differ-
ent  through  a  development  lens.  Building 
on a rich and complex intellectual history, 
a  recent  strand  of  development  thinking 
focuses  on  institutions  and  institutional 
inertia in development (chapter 8). In this 
perspective formal “rules of the game” and 
informal norms, including those embedded 
in  culture,  are  important  determinants  of 
economic incentives, institutional transfor-
mation, technological innovation, and social 
change. politics is central to this process, as 
different actors organize to change institu-
tions and transform incentives. Also central 
are the mental maps of what actors can bring 
to their engagement with development pro-
cesses. Three key ideas are relevant here. First, 
development is a process of change, largely 
driven from below. Second, history and the 
past patterns of institutions matter a great 
deal, so common templates are of only lim-
ited use—one size does not fit all. Third, this 
characterization  of  change  applies  equally 
to high-income countries, even though the 
challenge of imperfect and incomplete insti-
tutions appears less daunting, and top-down 
policy and price signals are considered to be 
the main drivers of change. 

In this perspective the task of low- carbon 
development  in  developing  countries  is  a 
long-term  process,  one  less  amenable  to 
being  driven  from  above  by  targets  and 
timetables than in high-income countries. 
Instead,  changes  in  the  direction  of  low-
 carbon development can be brought about 
only  by  internalizing  this  objective  in  the 
larger  development  processes  in  which 
bureaucracies, entrepreneurs, civil society, 
and citizens are already engaged. In other 
words,  climate  has  to  be  integrated  with 
development. An example of this approach 
might  be  rethinking  urban  planning  in  a 
low-carbon future, ensuring the colocation 
of work and residence to reduce the need for 
transport, designing more sustainable build-
ings, and devising solutions to public trans-
port (see chapter 4). This contrasts with a 
target-led short-run approach, which might 
emphasize  more  fuel-efficient  cars  within 
existing urban infrastructures. 

As  highlighted  in  chapter  4,  both 
approaches are necessary, one to yield results 
in the short run and the other to permit the 
necessary  long-run  transformation.  The 

238 

WO R L D   D E V E LOpM E N T   R EpO RT   2 0 1 0

Box 5.2    Some proposals for burden sharing

Contraction and convergence
The contraction-and-convergence 
approach assigns every human being 
an equal entitlement to greenhouse gas 
emissions. All countries would thus move 
toward the same per capita emissions. 
Total emissions would contract over time, 
and per capita emissions would converge 
on a single figure. The actual convergence 
value, the path toward convergence, and 
the time when it is to be reached would 
all be negotiable.

Greenhouse Development Rights
The Greenhouse Development Rights 
Framework argues that those struggling 
against poverty should not be expected 
to focus their limited resources on avert-
ing climate change. Instead it argues for 
wealthier countries with greater capac-
ity to pay and more responsibility for 
the existing stock of emissions to take 
on the bulk of the costs of a global miti-
gation and adaptation program. 
The novelty of the Greenhouse 

Development Rights approach is that it 
defines and calculates national obliga-
tions on the basis of individual rather 
than national income. A country’s capac-
ity (resources to pay without sacrificing 
necessities) and responsibility (contribu-
tion to the climate problem) are thus 
determined by the amount of national 
income or emissions above a “devel-
opment threshold.” This is estimated 
at about $20 a person a day ($7,500 a 
person a year), with emissions assumed 
proportional to income. The index of 
capacity and responsibility under the 
Greenhouse Development Rights Frame-
work	would	assign	to	the	United	States	
29 percent of the global emission reduc-
tions needed by 2020 for 2°C stabiliza-
tion, followed by the European Union (23 
percent) and China (10 percent). India’s 
share of global emission reductions 
would be around 1 percent.

Brazil proposal:  
historical responsibility
In 1997, in the negotiations leading to the 
Kyoto Protocol, the government of Brazil 
proposed that “historical responsibility” 
be used as the basis for apportioning 
the burden of mitigation among Annex 
I countries (meaning the countries with 
firm targets). The proposal sought to 
address “the relationship between the 
emissions of greenhouse gases by Par-
ties over a period of time and the effect 
of such emissions in terms of climate 
change, as measured by the increase 
in global mean surface temperature.” 
The notable feature of the proposal was 
the method used to distribute emission 
reduction burdens among countries, 
according to which an Annex I country’s 
emission targets should be set on the 
basis of that country’s relative responsibil-
ity for the global temperature rise. 

The proposal included a “policy maker 
model” for determining emission targets 
for countries and suggested the need for 
an “agreed climate-change model” for 
estimating a country’s contribution to 
global temperature increase. 

Carbon budget
A research group at the Chinese Academy 
of	Social	Sciences	argues	that
•	 Greenhouse	gas	emission	rights	are	a	
human right that ensures survival and 
development. Equality means ensuring 
equality among individuals, not among 
nations. 

•	 The	crux	of	promoting	equality	

between individuals is to ensure the 
rights of the current generation. Con-
trolling population growth is a policy 
option to promote sustainable devel-
opment and to slow climate change. 
•	 Given	the	wealth	accumulated	during	

development, which was accompa-
nied by greenhouse gas emissions, 

equality today includes equity acquired 
in historical, current, and future 
development. 

•	 Giving	priority	to	basic	needs	means	
that the allocation of emission entitle-
ments should reflect differences in 
natural environments.
If only CO2 emissions from fossil fuels 

are considered and emissions peak in 2015 
and fall to 50 percent of 2005 levels by 
2050, the annual per capita carbon budget 
for 1900 to 2050 would 2.33 metric tons of 
CO2. Initial carbon budget allocations for 
each country should be proportional to 
base-year population, with adjustments 
for natural factors such as climate, geogra-
phy, and natural resources.

Developing nations, despite often 
being historically under budget and 
therefore having the right to grow and to 
create emissions, have no choice but to 
transfer their carbon budgets to devel-
oped nations in order to cover the histori-
cal excesses of developed nations and 
ensure basic future needs. 

This historical debt amounts to some 
460 gigatons of CO2. At the current cost 
of $13 a ton, the value of this debt would 
be $59 trillion—substantially more than 
is currently provided to developing coun-
tries in financial assistance to combat 
climate change. 

Continued high per capita emissions 

in high-income countries could partly be 
offset through the carbon market. But 
progressive carbon taxes are likely to be 
necessary, with the excess carried over to 
the next round of commitments.
Sources: Contraction and convergence: 
Meyer	2001.	Greenhouse	development	
rights: Baer, Athanasiou, and Kartha 2007. 
Brazil: submission from the government 
of Brazil to the UNFCCC in 1997 (http://
unfccc.int/cop3/resource/docs/1997/agbm/
misc01a3.htm, accessed July 7, 2009). Car-
bon budget: reproduced from Jiahua and 
Ying 2008.

two perspectives are, thus, complementary. 
A  climate-oriented  perspective  can  throw 
up  a  series  of  short-term  policy  prescrip-
tions  that  can,  in  substantial  measure,  be 
implemented across countries with minimal 
adjustment while also yielding development 
benefits. Many of them are in the realm of 
energy efficiency, such as improved building 

codes, appliance standards, and the like.11 
And these approaches can be embedded in 
a longer-term process aimed at rethinking 
development through a climate lens.

But concern with the short term and the 
predictable should not crowd out or exclude 
longer-term  but  more  fundamental  trans-
formations toward low-carbon development. 

 

Integrating Development into the Global Climate Regime 

239

And there are risks that overly enthusiastic 
benchmarking of developing-country efforts 
to a long-term global target will do just that. 
As described above, many transformational 
measures are not subject to top-down plan-
ning and so are not subject to prediction and 
easy measurement. Indeed, an insistence on 
measurement and predictability will encour-
age only modest measures to minimize risks 
of  noncompliance.  In  addition,  any  hint 
of  an  implicit  target  reached  by  subtract-
ing high-income-country emissions from a 
global target encourages strategic gaming; 
under  these  conditions,  countries  have  an 
incentive to persuade the international com-
munity that little can be done at home and 
only at high cost.

Reconciling these two perspectives may 
require a nested two-track approach for the 
short-to-medium term, at least until 2020. 
Consonant with the UNFCCC principle of 
“common but differentiated responsibility,” 
high-income countries could agree to priori-
tize predictability of action aimed at carbon 
mitigation, to provide some assurance that 
the  world  is  on  track  to  meet  the  climate 
challenge.  Here,  short-  and  medium-term 
targets, for 2020 and 2030, are as significant 
as a target for 2050, because carbon reduc-
tions  are  more  useful  now  than  later  and 
because they can win the confidence of the 
developing world. The developing countries 
could  follow  a  second  track,  as  discussed 
later in this chapter, that sets priorities for 
reorienting their economies and societies to 
low-carbon development. 

These  approaches,  it  should  be  clear, 
need not and should not compromise living 
standards—they should instead aggressively 
explore the co-benefits of development for 
climate.  Nested  within  this  longer-term 
objective, developing countries could agree 
to short-term “best-practice” measures—
notably  for  energy  efficiency—that  bring 
both  developmental  and  climate  benefits. 
Agreeing to aggressively pursue these mea-
sures would provide some reassurance that 
some predictable climate gains will be real-
ized in the short term. 

The problem of financing—
conditionality and ownership
The  foregoing  tensions  are  closely  tied  to 
the problematic issue of financing climate 

actions. There is broad agreement that high-
income countries will transfer some funds 
to the developing world to assist specifically 
with  adaptation—and  provide  separate 
funding for mitigation. But questions remain 
about how much financing will be available, 
its source, how its expenditure will be con-
trolled, and on what basis it will be moni-
tored; those questions are discussed here. 

Governments of high-income countries 
are anxious that any funds provided be well 
targeted to climate mitigation or adaptation 
and  produce  real  and  measurable  reduc-
tions (in emissions or vulnerability). To this 
end they envision having oversight of these 
funds, particularly in the current tight fis-
cal climate, where domestic constituencies 
may have little appetite for sending money 
overseas. This is particularly true for miti-
gation finance. Indeed, many high-income 
countries see public funds as playing a lim-
ited role in supporting climate financing in 
the developing world, instead envisioning 
that a greater proportion of funds be har-
nessed through market mechanisms. 

Developing  countries  envision  these 
funds entirely differently, as paying to help 
them adjust to and contribute to the miti-
gation  of  a  problem  not  of  their  making. 
As a result, they eschew any overtones of 
aid and strongly resist any mechanisms of 
conditionality. To the contrary, they envi-
sion  the  use  of  these  funds  as  guided  by 
recipient- country priorities. 

Elements  in  both  positions  appear  rea-
sonable. There are good arguments for not 
considering  transfers  of  climate-related 
funds  within  an  aid  umbrella  because  of 
high-income-country  responsibility  for  a 
substantial  part  of  the  climate  problem. 
But it would appear politically difficult for 
high-income countries to sign a blank check 
without some mechanism of accountability 
for the funds. One way forward might be to 
focus on what the past teaches about condi-
tionality as a tool. 

Developing-country  positions  in  the 
climate debate are, in part, shaped by the 
fraught history of conditionality in devel-
opment  debates.  Civil  society  and  other 
actors  came  to  see  conditionality  as  an 
instrument  that  undercuts  democracy 
and  forced  through  unpopular  reforms. 
Because  the  conditions  imposed  did  not 

240 

WO R L D   D E V E LOpM E N T   R EpO RT   2 0 1 0

prove particularly effective in helping gov-
ernments  undertake  politically  difficult 
reforms, conditionality gave way within a 
decade  to  the  almost  opposite  concept  of 
borrower “ownership” of a reform agenda 
as a precondition for policy reform loans.12 
The lesson for climate change appears to be 
that—even  purely  on  pragmatic  grounds, 
putting  aside  principles  connected  with 
responsibility  for  the  problem—condi-
tionality is simply not an effective tool for 
getting governments to take measures with 
little domestic support. 

Fortunately, there is a more productive 
way  to  conceptualize  how  climate  funds 
might be used. A first step requires redirect-
ing  attention  from  implementing  actions 
predetermined  by  a  donor  to  organizing 
funding  around  a  process  to  encourage 
recipient-country development and owner-
ship of a low-carbon development agenda. 
This is similar to the poverty reduction strat-
egy approach discussed in chapter 6, whereby 
donors align around a strategy designed and 
owned by the recipient government. Such an 
approach would place the emphasis on the 
governance mechanism for fund providers 
and fund recipients to collectively scrutinize 
and oversee climate finance. 

A second step is for mitigation financing 
to  support  both  low-carbon  development 
and  well-specified  mitigation  actions  in 
developing countries. The concrete actions 
should  be  collectively  agreed  on  by  those 
providing and those receiving funds as serv-
ing the dual functions of climate mitigation 
and development gains. As discussed earlier, 
many energy-efficiency measures would be 
good candidates for easy agreement. 

Coming  to  agreement  on  supporting 
low-carbon  development  is  more  amor-
phous  and  challenging.  But  the  lesson 
from  conditionality  is  that  the  path  for 
low-carbon development should be devel-
oped through a process that builds consid-
erable  recipient-country  ownership.  The 
efforts of a number of governments, such 
as Mexico and South Africa among others, 
to develop a long-term carbon mitigation 
strategy as a basis for identifying concrete 
actions and seeking international support 
are one interesting model. The rest of this 
chapter discusses avenues for developing 
these alternative approaches. 

Options for integrating 
developing-country actions into 
the global architecture
Developing countries need to be persuaded 
that there is a feasible route to integrating 
climate change and development if they are 
to rapidly start the transition to a low- carbon 
development path. If the international cli-
mate regime is to promote stronger action 
by developing countries, it must incorporate 
new approaches appropriate to their circum-
stances. Any mitigation effort required for 
the developing countries must be grounded 
on “a clear understanding of the economic 
and governance context for their develop-
ment  choices  and  their  overriding  devel-
opment  priorities.”13  The  future  regime 
must be designed in a way that recognizes 
their efforts to reduce their emissions while 
achieving their development objectives.

So  far,  the  primary  vehicle  for  mitiga-
tion  action  within  the  regime  has  been 
economywide  emission  targets  pegged  to 
historical  base-year  emission  levels,  as  in 
the Kyoto protocol. Such an output-based 
approach  (focused  on  the  emission  “out-
put”)  is  driven  by  the  core  objective  of 
achieving and maintaining a tolerable level 
of  greenhouse  gas  concentrations  in  the 
atmosphere.14 Fixed economywide emission 
targets have two advantages. They provide 
certainty about the environmental outcome 
(assuming  they  are  met).  And  they  allow 
countries considerable flexibility to choose 
the most suitable and cost- effective means 
of  implementation.  This  target-driven 
approach  remains  appropriate  for  devel-
oped countries. 

But such a climate-centric approach is 
perceived  as  problematic  for  developing 
countries, at least at this stage of the climate 
regime.  Many  developing  countries  see  a 
cap on total emissions as a cap on economic 
growth. Having demonstrated their com-
petitive success, the countries fear that the 
climate agenda will hold them back. These 
concerns spring from the fact that the prin-
cipal  driving  forces  of  emissions  growth 
in  developing  countries  are  the  develop-
ment imperatives of energy and economic 
growth. And as a practical matter, setting 
and adhering to an economywide emission 
target requires the ability to accurately mea-
sure and reliably project emissions across a 

 

Integrating Development into the Global Climate Regime 

241

country’s  economy,  a  capacity  that  many 
developing countries now lack. 

So engaging developing countries more 
fully  in  the  climate  regime  may  require 
alternative  approaches  deemed  more 
appropriate to their circumstances. These 
approaches  could  build  on  the  types  of 
actions and strategies already being devel-
oped or implemented at the national level. 
Unlike  emission  targets,  these  actions 
can generally be characterized as “policy-
based,” centering on activities that generate 
emissions, rather than on emissions them-
selves. To achieve energy efficiency, a coun-
try could introduce a standard or incentive 
to  shift  behavior  or  technology.  Lower 
greenhouse  gas  emissions  would  be  one 
outcome, but the policy also would produce 
benefits more closely related to a country’s 
core development objectives, such as greater 
energy affordability and access. Depending 
on their circumstances, countries could put 
forward different sets of policies or actions 
that  address  such  development  objectives 
as economic growth, energy security, and 
improved mobility while also delivering the 
co-benefit of reduced emissions. 

A key question, however, is how to recon-
cile this approach with the urgency imparted 
in chapter 4—the notion that unless mitiga-
tion is immediate and global it will not be 
possible  to  maintain  warming  anywhere 
close to 2°C. New analysis, presented below, 
on multitrack frameworks and the impact of 
advance commitments suggests that a flex-
ible approach could be effective. 

An integrated multitrack climate 
framework
To better integrate development concerns 
into climate change efforts, the global cli-
mate regime must become more flexible and 
accommodate  different  national  circum-
stances and strategies, especially for mitiga-
tion efforts. The Kyoto protocol establishes 
a single type of mitigation commitment—
a binding, absolute, economywide limit on 
emissions. This is sound from the perspec-
tives  of  environmental  effectiveness  and 
economic efficiency, but as a political and 
practical matter it is an unlikely avenue for 
developing countries at this stage. 

A more flexible regime integrating dif-
ferent approaches by different countries can 

be conceptualized as an “integrated multi-
track”  framework.15  Many  international 
regimes  have  the  characteristics  of  such 
an approach. For example, the multilateral 
trade regime includes agreements accepted 
by all World Trade Organization members 
and plurilateral agreements among smaller 
groupings  of  members.  Europe’s  Long-
Range Transboundary Air pollution regime 
and the International Convention for the 
prevention of pollution from Ships include 
core  agreements  setting  forth  common 
terms and annexes establishing differential 
obligations. Experiences within these arenas 
provide valuable lessons for climate policy 
makers, but the climate regime requires a 
distinct architecture matching a unique set 
of political and policy imperatives.

In  broad  terms,  a  multitrack  climate 
regime  could  include  at  a  minimum  two 
distinct mitigation tracks:
•	 Target track. For developed countries and 
other countries that may be prepared to 
undertake such commitments, the target 
track would establish binding, absolute, 
economywide emission targets succeed-
ing  those  established  under  the  Kyoto 
protocol’s  first  commitment  period. 
Countries with such targets would have 
full  access  to  the  agreement’s  interna-
tional emissions-trading mechanisms.

•	 Policy-based track. On this track, other 
countries  would  agree  to  undertake 
nationally  driven  policies  and  actions 
that  would  have  the  effect  of  reducing 
emissions  or  emissions  growth.  Such 
policies could be sector based or econo-
mywide and could include, for example, 
energy-efficiency  standards,  renewable 
energy  targets,  fiscal  measures,  and 
land-use policies. Countries could pro-
pose individual policies or put forward 
comprehensive low-carbon development 
strategies  identifying  priority  sectors 
and policies and the support needed for 
their implementation. 

Recent modeling of such hybrid frame-
works suggests that multitrack approaches 
score well on environmental effectiveness 
and equity and that the efficiency losses may 
be  a  reasonable  tradeoff  to  achieve  broad 
participation  in  policies  that  put  coun-
tries  collectively  on  track  to  greenhouse 

242 

WO R L D   D E V E LOpM E N T   R EpO RT   2 0 1 0

Box 5.3    Multitrack approaches score well on effectiveness and equity

Recent	modeling	by	Battelle	Memorial	
Institute’s Joint Global Change Research 
Institute, in collaboration with the Pew 
Center on Global Climate Change, indi-
cates that an “integrated multitrack” 
climate framework, in which developed 
countries undertake economywide 
emission targets and developing coun-
tries undertake nontarget policies, can 
produce global emission reductions by 
midcentury consistent with achieving 
atmospheric greenhouse gas concentra-
tions of 450 ppm CO2 by 2100.a

In the global policy scenarios, devel-

oped regions reduce their emissions 
20 percent below 2005 levels by 2020, 
and 80 percent below by 2050; develop-
ing regions adopt a range of policies 
in the energy, transportation, industry, 
and buildings sectors, such as carbon-

intensity goals, efficiency standards, and 
renewable energy targets. The specific 
policies, and their stringency, vary among 
the developing-country regions. “Policy-
based crediting” awards developing 
regions tradable emission credits for a 
portion of the reductions their policies 
achieve (starting at 50 percent in 2020 
and declining to zero in 2050).

The analysis shows global emission 

reductions in 2050 nearly as steep as those 
under an idealized “efficient” 450 ppm 
pathway in which full global emissions 
trading achieves reductions wherever 
and whenever they are least expensive. 
Globally, costs through 2050 are higher 
than in the efficient case, emphasizing the 
importance of moving toward full emis-
sions coverage and full global trading 
by midcentury. But even with this loss in 

efficiency, costs remain below 2 percent 
of global gross domestic product (GDP) in 
2050. Further, the policy-based crediting 
approach redistributes costs globally so 
that costs as a share of GDP are signifi-
cantly lower in developing regions. In the 
early years, revenue from the sale of emis-
sion credits exceeds domestic mitigation 
costs in some developing regions, produc-
ing net economic gains.
Source: Calvin and others 2009.
a. The model does not specifically look at 
temperature increases. However 450 ppm 
CO2 corresponds to concentrations of about 
550 ppm CO2e (a measure of all greenhouse 
gases, not just CO2), hence possible tempera-
ture increases of around 3°C. At the time this 
report went to press, this exercise had not 
been conducted for 450 ppm CO2e, which 
corresponds to a 40 to 50 percent probability 
of warming remaining below 2°C.

gas concentrations of 450 parts per million 
(ppm) CO2 or 550 ppm of CO2e (box 5.3).

Other  modeling  has  also  convincingly 
shown that a multitrack framework can be 
very effective if it provides some certainty as 
to when a country may commit to a binding 
agreement.16 This, in fact, reduces the cost for 
any country of joining a binding agreement 
in the future because it spreads the transition 
over  a  longer  period  of  time  and  investors 
can factor eventual policy changes into their 
investment  choices,  a  process  that  reduces 
the amount of stranded assets or expensive 
retrofits a country can be left with. 

In  addition  to  the  mitigation  tracks,  a 
comprehensive  agreement  would  need  to 
include
•	 An adaptation track to assist vulnerable 
countries with adaptation planning and 
implementation

•	 Cross-cutting enabling elements on tech-
nology,  finance,  and  capacity- building 
support to developing countries

•	 Means to measure, report, and verify mit-
igation actions and support for the miti-
gation actions of developing countries, as 
specified under the Bali Action plan.

Chapter 4 showed that it would be almost 
impossible to remain close to 2°C warming 
with  delayed  participation  of  developing 

countries. Instead multi track frameworks 
permit early action but emphasize win-win 
options. And the models and the approaches 
discussed  here  suggest  that  multitrack 
approaches and forward-looking, predict-
able policies are worthwhile approaches to 
reconciling the need for urgent action and 
the priority that must be granted to devel-
opment and poverty alleviation. 

A policy-based mitigation track
To recognize and advance developing-coun-
try mitigation efforts, the major new element 
needed in the climate regime is a new cat-
egory of mitigation action that is broad and 
supple enough to incorporate a wide variety 
of actions. Many developing countries have 
begun to identify existing and potential pol-
icies and actions at the national level that, 
while  not  driven  exclusively  or  primarily 
by climate-change concerns, contribute to 
climate-mitigation efforts. As these policies 
and actions arise within national contexts, 
they inherently reflect a country’s national 
circumstances  and  its  development  objec-
tives  and  priorities.  Indeed  many  of  these 
policies are driven by development objectives 
such as energy access and security, better air 
quality,  improved  transportation  services, 
and sustainable forestry, with mitigation an 
incidental co-benefit.

 

Integrating Development into the Global Climate Regime 

243

A  mechanism  that  allows  the  integra-
tion of such nationally driven policies into 
the  international  framework  offers  four 
advantages  to  developing  countries.  First, 
it enables developing countries to contrib-
ute  to  the  climate  effort  in  ways  that,  by 
their  own  determination,  are  compatible 
with their development agendas. Second, it 
allows each country to come forward with 
a nationally defined package tailored to its 
circumstances, capabilities, and mitigation 
potential. Third, if it is coupled with a robust 
support mechanism, policies can be scaled 
or tiered to provide for stronger action on 
the provision of stronger support. Fourth, 
while providing a clear pathway for stronger 
mitigation efforts by developing countries, it 
does not bind them to quantified emission 
limits,  which  they  perceive  as  undue  con-
straints on their growth and development.

The case for a policy-based track has been 
advanced in the academic literature in dif-
ferent guises. One formulation, called “sus-
tainable development policies and measures” 
(SD-pAMs), envisions voluntary pledges by 
developing  countries.17  Another  proposal 
describes  “policy-based  commitments”  in 
which  the  policy  content  might  be  identi-
cal  to  that  under  an  SD-pAMs  approach 
but would be reflected in the international 
framework as a commitment rather than a 
voluntary action.18 Since the adoption of the 
Bali Action plan, governments have put for-
ward proposals addressing various aspects of 
how a policy-based approach could be made 
operational in a future climate agreement.19
In  fashioning  a  new  policy-based  track 
as part of an evolving international climate 
framework, governments would need to con-
sider several interrelated issues, including

•	 The  process  for  countries  to  bring  for-
ward policies and actions and have them 
reflected in the international framework 
•	 The legal character of these policies and 

actions 

•	 The  links  to  other  mechanisms  pro-
viding incentives and support for their 
implementation 

•	 The  standards  and  mechanisms  for 
measuring, reporting, and verifying the 
policies and actions and the support for 
them.

Process for introducing policy actions.      For 
country  policy  actions  to  be  recognized 
within the international framework, gov-
ernments would need to establish a process 
to bring them forward and, possibly, to have 
other  parties  consider  and  accept  them. 
Within the negotiations, some parties have 
proposed the establishment of a “registry” 
for countries to record nationally appropri-
ate mitigation actions they plan or propose 
to undertake.20

One critical issue is whether the process 
of  bringing  actions  forward  occurs  in  the 
course of negotiating a new agreement or is 
an outcome of those negotiations. The lat-
ter  may  be  preferable  for  most  developing 
countries. In this scenario a new agreement 
would establish binding emission targets for 
developed  countries,  mechanisms  to  sup-
port  developing-country  mitigation  and 
adaptation efforts, and a process for devel-
oping countries to then define their mitiga-
tion actions. But developed countries may be 
reluctant to enter into binding emission tar-
gets unless the major developing countries 
are prepared to indicate at the same time the 
actions they will undertake. In that case the 
process of specifying those actions could be 
structured as part of the negotiating process, 
with the aim of arriving at a comprehensive 
agreement  integrating  binding  targets  for 
developed  countries  and  specified  policy 
actions for developing countries.

In either case, parties also need to con-
sider whether the process should be com-
pletely open-ended, with countries free to 
propose  any  type  of  policy  or  action,  or 
circumscribed  in  some  way.  One  option 
proposed in the negotiations is a menu, or 
“tool box,” of mitigation actions for devel-
oping  countries  to  choose  from.21  The 
menu  could  identify  broad  categories  of 
action, with parties invited to put forward 
detailed policies or action plans within the 
categories they choose. For consistency or 
comparability it may be useful to establish 
some form of template for countries to fol-
low in describing their mitigation actions. 
Another  important  consideration  is 
quantifying the expected emission impacts 
of  mitigation  actions.  Although  countries 
participating in a policy-based track would 
not be committing to specific emission out-
comes, other parties will want to know what 

244 

WO R L D   D E V E LOpM E N T   R EpO RT   2 0 1 0

impact their actions are likely to have on their 
future emissions. At a minimum countries 
should be prepared to offer such projections. 
Depending on the type of process established, 
emission projections also could be prepared 
or verified by an intergovernmental body or 
an independent third party.

Legal  character.    The  Bali  Action  plan 
distinguishes  between  “nationally  appro-
priate mitigation commitments or actions” 
by  developed  countries  and  “nationally 
appropriate  mitigation  actions”  by  devel-
oping countries, implying that the actions 
of  developing  countries  are  not  to  take 
the form of legally binding commitments. 
Indeed,  proposals  put  forward  by  devel-
oping  countries  in  the  post-Bali  negotia-
tions, including proposals for a registry of 
developing-country actions, emphasize the 
voluntary nature of these actions.

But  the  Bali  Action  plan  does  not 
expressly preclude commitments by devel-
oping countries, contrary to the 1995 Berlin 
Mandate that framed the negotiations that 
led  to  the  Kyoto  protocol.  In  the  current 
round of negotiations some developed coun-
tries have taken the position that actions by 
some developing-countries should be bind-
ing.22 Developing countries, however, have 
been reluctant to take on binding commit-
ments, at least at this stage.

Links to support.      Robust efforts by devel-
oping countries will be feasible only with 
stronger  international  support.  Indeed, 
under  the  Bali  Action  plan,  the  mitiga-
tion actions of developing countries are to 
be “supported and enabled by technology, 
financing, and capacity building.” potential 
mechanisms to generate such support are 
discussed below. If parties were to establish 
a policy-based mitigation track for devel-
oping countries, a related question is how 
actions under that track would be linked to 
specific flows of support.

Any process to enable countries to bring 
forward  proposed  actions  could,  in  addi-
tion, identify means and levels of support for 
those actions. For example, in entering a pro-
posed action in a mitigation-action registry, 
a country could indicate the type and level of 
support needed to implement the action. Or 
a country might specify the level of effort it is 

prepared to deliver on its own, and a higher 
level of effort it would be prepared to under-
take with support. Or recording an action in 
the registry could initiate a review by a des-
ignated body, using agreed criteria, to evalu-
ate the need for support, taking into account 
a country’s circumstances and capacities. All 
of these approaches could lead to a determi-
nation of support commensurate with the 
proposed action. 

Measurement,  reporting,  and  verification.     
parties  agreed  in  Bali  that  the  mitigation 
efforts of developed and developing coun-
tries—as well as the support for developing-
country  efforts—are  to  be  “measurable, 
reportable, and verifiable” (MRV). Effective 
approaches to MRV can establish and main-
tain  parties’  confidence  in  one  another’s 
respective efforts and in the overall regime. 
To  be  workable,  MRV  terms  and  mecha-
nisms must balance the need for transpar-
ency and accountability against the parties’ 
traditional concerns about sovereignty.

Reporting requirements for developing 
countries  under  the  existing  regime  are 
fairly  minimal—national  “communica-
tions” (including emission inventories) are 
submitted infrequently and are not subject 
to review. In a future agreement the MRV 
of developing-country actions on a policy-
based mitigation track would likely require 
a  more  rigorous  approach.  parties  first 
must consider what actions are subject to 
measurement and verification. Some devel-
oping  countries  have  taken  the  view  that 
MRV should apply only to actions for which 
they are receiving support. A second issue 
is whether verification is performed by the 
country, an international body, or a third 
party. In some international regimes par-
ties verify their own actions under national 
systems that must conform to international 
guidelines. In others expert teams review 
parties’ submissions (as for national com-
munications and emission inventories sub-
mitted  by  developed  countries  under  the 
UNFCCC and the Kyoto protocol).

Third  is  the  metrics  to  be  employed, 
regardless  of  the  means  of  verification. 
One  rationale  for  a  policy-based  track  is 
that it allows parties to pursue the types of 
action  most  appropriate  to  their  circum-
stances  and  development  objectives.  This 

 

Integrating Development into the Global Climate Regime 

245

diversity presents challenges for MRV, how-
ever, because different metrics are needed 
to  measure  and  verify  different  types  of 
actions  (efficiency  standards,  renewable 
energy targets, carbon levies). How MRV is 
structured will therefore depend very heav-
ily on how the actions are defined. In turn, 
the need for actions to be measurable and 
verifiable could strongly influence the way 
parties  choose  to  define  them.  Somehow 
bounding the types of actions allowable in 
a policy-based track—say, by establishing 
a menu for parties to choose from—could 
make MRV more manageable.

Measurement  and  verification  of 
developed- country  support  will  likewise 
depend  heavily  on  the  specific  types  and 
mechanisms  of  support.  If  a  new  agree-
ment were to recognize support provided 
through bilateral channels, criteria would 
be needed to determine what flows are “cli-
mate  related”  and  “new  and  additional.” 
As  a  general  matter,  support  generated 
through  a  multilateral  instrument,  such 
as an international carbon levy or an auc-
tion of international emission allowances, 
would be more readily verifiable.

Support for developing-country 
mitigation efforts
The  ability  of  developing  countries  to 
develop  and  effectively  implement  miti-
gation actions will depend in part on the 
availability  of  adequate  and  predictable 
support from the international community. 
General areas of support include finance, 
technology,  and  capacity  building.  These 
could include analyzing mitigation poten-
tials  to  identify  opportunities  to  reduce 
greenhouse gases with the lowest cost and 
highest co-benefits, developing and imple-
menting  greenhouse  gas  mitigation  poli-
cies, disseminating and deploying the best 
available technologies, and measuring and 
verifying mitigation actions and their asso-
ciated sustainable development benefits.

Adequate support will require a range of 
mechanisms to generate and channel public 
resources and to do so in a way that leverages 
private  investment,  which  under  any  sce-
nario will be the majority of flows available 
for a low-carbon transition (see chapter 6). 
The climate regime has two broad forms of 
support—public finance and market-based 

mechanisms—and  both  must  be  substan-
tially scaled up in a future agreement.

Public finance
A  new  multilateral  effort  must  scale  up 
public  finance  in  support  of  developing 
countries. Among the key issues are fund-
ing  sources,  funding  criteria,  funding 
instruments, links to private finance, and 
managing  and  governing  any  new  fund-
ing mechanisms (all discussed extensively 
in chapter 6). This section highlights a few 
findings.

Most  of  the  funds  under  the  climate 
regime  have  relied  on  pledging  by  donor 
countries,  resulting  in  inadequate  and 
unpredictable  f lows.  Several  proposals 
now under discussion could produce more 
reliable  funding  streams.  These  include 
funding  commitments  based  on  agreed 
assessment criteria, a levy on international 
aviation or other greenhouse gas–generat-
ing activities, or an auction of a portion of 
developed  countries’  international  emis-
sion allowances. Another option—pressed 
by developing countries at the UN Climate 
Change Conference in poznan´, poland, in 
December  2008—is  an  extension  of  the 
existing levy on CDM transactions to the 
Kyoto protocol’s other market-based flexi-
bility mechanisms (international emissions 
trading and Joint Implementation).23

Any  new  fund  could  deploy  an  array 
of funding instruments, including grants, 
concessional  loans,  loan  guarantees  or 
other risk mitigation instruments, depend-
ing on the types of activity to be supported. 
For  technology  the  options  include  pay-
ments for access to and use of intellectual 
property and the associated technological 
know-how. Important criteria in selecting 
activities  for  funding  could  include  the 
projected  emission  reduction  per  dollar 
of  investment,  a  project’s  contribution  to 
a  host  country’s  sustainable  development 
objectives, or its ability to leverage carbon 
finance or other private investment. 

Market-based mechanisms
The  Kyoto  protocol’s  Clean  Development 
Mechanism has generated substantial flows 
supporting clean energy and other green-
house gas-reducing projects in developing 
countries. While the CDM has had many 

246 

WO R L D   D E V E LOpM E N T   R EpO RT   2 0 1 0

successes, experience has also highlighted 
many  concerns  and  areas  for  potential 
improvement  (chapter  6).  Beyond  the 
reform of the original CDM model, how-
ever,  parties  have  also  begun  to  consider 
alternative approaches to emission credit-
ing  to  provide  incentives  for  investment 
and emission reduction on a broader scale. 
As initially conceived and currently oper-
ating, the CDM generates emission credits 
from  individual  projects  proposed  and 
certified case by case. In the view of many, 
this project-based approach excludes many 
strategies with greater mitigation potential 
and  imposes  high  transaction  costs  and 
administrative burdens, significantly limit-
ing the CDM’s potential to transform long-
term emission trends. In an initial attempt 
to  address  these  concerns,  parties  have 
authorized a “programmatic” CDM, which 
allows an aggregation of multiple activities 
over space and time as a single project. But 
emission reductions are still measured on 
the basis of discrete activities.

Alternative models now under discussion 
include sectoral or policy-based crediting. 
By allowing the generation of credits on the 
basis of policies or other broad programs, 
such  approaches  would  help  drive  and 
support  larger-scale  emission- reduction 
efforts.  Under  a  sectoral  approach,  for 
instance,  emissions  would  be  measured 
across an entire sector, and a country could 
earn  credits  for  any  reductions  below  an 
agreed emissions baseline. (This approach 
is sometimes described as “no-lose sectoral 
crediting,” because a country faces no con-
sequences if emissions rise above the agreed 
baseline.) The baseline could be set at busi-
ness as usual, rewarding any deviation from 
projected emission levels. Or it could be set 
below  business  as  usual,  requiring  that  a 
country undertake some reductions on its 
own before qualifying for credits. Given the 
uncertainties  in  any  projection  of  future 
emissions,  however,  the  determination  of 
business  as  usual  is  somewhat  subjective 
and potentially quite contentious.

Under policy-based crediting a country 
could earn credits for verifiable reductions 
achieved by implementing mitigation poli-
cies  recognized  within  the  climate  regime 
or  by  deploying  technology  action.  This 

approach  fits  well  with  the  notion  of  a 
 policy-based  mitigation  track,  providing 
a   market-based  incentive  for  countries  to 
develop, put forward, and implement miti-
gation policies aligned with their develop-
ment  objectives.  Methodologies  could  be 
established to quantify the reductions from 
different types of policy approaches. Credit-
ing countries for all the reductions generated 
by their policy actions could cause an exces-
sive supply of credits; developed countries 
might also object on the grounds that devel-
oping countries should bear some of the cost 
of their policy actions. These concerns could 
be addressed by issuing credits only after a 
certain reduction has been achieved or by 
discounting credits (say, by issuing one ton 
of credit for every two tons reduced).

Promoting international efforts to 
integrate adaptation into climate-
smart development
Stronger  international  support  for  adap-
tation is a matter of need, because climate 
impacts are already being felt and because 
the poor who contribute least to the problem 
face the gravest risks. But adaptation efforts 
must extend well beyond the climate frame-
work. As chapters 2 and 3 suggest, adaptation 
concerns and priorities must be integrated 
across  the  full  breadth  of  economic  and 
development  planning  and  decision  mak-
ing,  both  national  and  international.  The 
role of the international climate regime in 
particular lies with catalyzing international 
support and facilitating national adaptation 
efforts. The focus here is on how adaptation 
can be best promoted and facilitated under 
the international climate regime.

Adaptation efforts under the current 
climate regime
Under the UNFCCC all parties commit to 
undertake national adaptation measures and 
to cooperate in preparing for the impacts of 
climate change. Special consideration is given 
to  the  least  developed  countries  for  their 
special needs to cope with adverse effects of 
climate change.24 The least developed coun-
tries are encouraged and supported under 
the convention to prepare a National Adap-
tation program of Action identifying prior-
ity activities that respond to their urgent and 

 

Integrating Development into the Global Climate Regime 

247

immediate needs to adapt to climate change 
(see chapter 8). To date, 41 least developed 
countries  have  submitted  national  action 
programs.25  The  five-year  Nairobi  Work 
program adopted in 2005 aims to help these 
countries improve their understanding and 
assessment of the impacts of climate change 
and to make informed decisions on practical 
adaptation actions and measures.26

Current  funding  for  adaptation  under 
the UNFCCC process is mainly through the 
Global Environment Facility’s Strategic pri-
ority  on  Adaptation  initiatives;  additional 
funding will come from the UNFCCC Adap-
tation Fund when it is fully operational.

The international effort to date has deliv-
ered some information and capacity build-
ing on adaptation, but it has yet to facilitate 
significant implementation at the domestic 
level, access to technology, or the building of 
national institutions to carry the adaptation 
agenda forward. The effort is constrained by 
limited funding (see chapter 6) and the lim-
ited  engagement  of  national  planning  and 
development agencies. The UNFCCC pro-
cess has traditionally involved environment 
agencies; its focus on climate change may not 
easily lead to a comprehensive, multisectoral 
effort addressing adaptation. 

Strengthening action on adaptation 
under the UNFCCC
Working through the national development 
process is essential to encourage early plan-
ning  to  strengthen  climate  resilience  and 
discourage investments that heighten climate 
vulnerability.  The  UNFCCC  process  can 
complement and facilitate this process by 

•	 Supporting comprehensive national adapta-
tion strategies in vulnerable countries. These 
strategies would establish frameworks for 
action  and  strengthen  national  capaci-
ties.  They  would  build  on  the  National 
Adaptation  programs  of  Action,  which 
target urgent priorities, to map out com-
prehensive  long-term  plans  identifying 
climate risks, existing and needed adap-
tation  capacities,  and  national  policies 
and  measures  to  fully  integrate  climate 
risk management into development deci-
sion  making.  In  addition  to  organizing 
national adaptation efforts, the strategies 

could serve as a basis for targeting imple-
mentation assistance through the climate 
regime or through other channels.

•	 Exchanging  experiences  and  best  prac-
tices,  and  coordinating  programmatic 
approaches to support national, regional, 
and  international  systems  for  adapta-
tion  and  resilience.27  This  effort  would 
provide  guidance  to  countries  on  vul-
nerability  assessments  and  on  how  to 
integrate adaptation activities into sec-
toral  and  national  development  plan-
ning  and  policies,  as  well  as  help  in 
accessing technology for adaptation. The 
universal membership of the UNFCCC 
provides a unique forum for countries, 
organizations,  and  private  entities  to 
exchange  experiences  and  learn  from 
each  other.  Bringing  national  devel-
opment  agencies  to  participate  in  this 
process  is  essential  to  success.  Apart 
from using the UNFCCC process to dis-
seminate information, it may be useful 
to  establish  regional  centers  of  excel-
lence for catalyzing local, national, and 
regional  activities.  The  direct  impacts 
of  climate  change  are  felt  locally,  and 
response measures need to be tailored to 
local  circumstances.  Regional  centers, 
with international support, can promote 
capacity  building,  coordinate  research 
activities, and exchange experiences and 
best practices. 

•	 Providing reliable funding to assist coun-
tries  in  implementing  high- priority 
measures  identified  in  their  national 
adaptation strategies. Funding for adap-
tation  largely  relies  on  public  financ-
ing (see chapter 6). Finding additional 
sources of adaptation finance and pack-
aging  them  with  existing  development 
finance are essential for effective adap-
tation. Funds could come from donors, 
a levy on the CDM, and the tax or auc-
tion revenues from emission allowances. 
Equally important are defining criteria 
for allocating funds and setting up insti-
tutional arrangements to manage them 
(see chapter 6). Efficient and equitable 
allocation and use of adaptation finance 
is in everybody’s interest, and wasteful 
use of resources can undermine public 
support for the whole climate agenda.

248 

WO R L D   D E V E LOpM E N T   R EpO RT   2 0 1 0

A new body under the UNFCCC may be 
needed to provide guidance to the parties, 
assess  national  adaptation  strategies,  and 
develop  criteria  for  allocating  resources. 
Such  a  body  would  need  to  coordinate 
closely  with  other  international  develop-
ment agencies and have enough indepen-
dence to credibly assess national strategies 
and resource allocation. 

As mentioned early in this chapter, the 
current UNFCCC regime does not include 
adequate  provisions  for  adaptation.  The 
Bali Action plan presents a great opportu-
nity  to  streamline  the  adaptation  process 
and mobilize adequate funding to support 
adaptation.

Notes

1. Energy-related  emissions  increased  by  24 
percent between 1997 (when the Kyoto protocol 
was signed) and 2006; see CDIAC database (DOE 
2009).

2. The  Global  Environment  Facility  (GEF) 
manages  projects  and  investments  through  a 
number  of  multilateral  organizations,  in  addi-
tion  to  functioning  as  the  financial  mechanism 
for  international  environmental  conventions, 
including  the  UNFCCC.  The  GEF  is  providing 
$17.2 billion in cofinancing; see GEF 2009.

3. This section is drawn from Dubash 2009.
4. Absolute  emission  reduction  entails  a  net 
decline in emissions relative to current levels, as 
opposed to a shift in projected emission trajectory. 
5.  Baer,  Athanasiou,  and  Kartha  2007.  See 

also box 5.2. 

6. Baumert and Winkler 2005.
7. Burtraw and others 2005; Barrett 2006.
8. See focus A on science and chapter 4 for a 

discussion.

9. EU submission to UNFCCC, http://unfccc 
.int/files/kyoto_protocol/application/pdf/
ecredd191108.pdf (accessed August 5, 2009).

10. India  and  China’s  submissions  to  the 
UNFCCC,  http://unfccc.int/files/kyoto_protocol/ 
application/pdf/indiasharedvisionv2.pdf and http:// 
unfccc.int/files/kyoto_protocol/application/pdf/
china240409b.pdf (accessed July 6, 2009). For a 
civil society perspective see Third World Network, 
“Understanding  the  European  Commission’s 
Climate  Communication,”  http://www.twnside.
org.sg/title2/climate/info.service/2009/climate.
change.20090301.htm (accessed July 8, 2009).

11. For  example,  McKinsey  Global  Institute 
(2008)  suggests  that  focused  action  in  six  policy 
areas could deliver about 40 percent of the abate-
ment  potential  identified  in  their  cost-curve 
approach.

12. Dollar and pritchett 1998. 
13. Heller and Shukla 2003.
14. Heller and Shukla 2003.
15. Bodansky and Diringer 2007.
16. Blanford,  Richels,  and  Rutherford  2008; 
Richels, Blanford, and Rutherford, forthcoming. 

17. Winkler and others 2002.
18. Lewis and Diringer 2007.
19. See,  for  instance,  submissions  to  the 
UNFCCC  from  South  Africa  (http://unfccc.int/
files/meetings/dialogue/application/pdf/work-
ing_paper_18_south_africa.pdf) and the Republic 
of  Korea  (http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/2006/
smsn/parties/009.pdf) (accessed June 2009).

20. Submissions to the UNFCCC from South 
Africa  and  the  Republic  of  Korea:  http://unfccc 
.int/resource/docs/2006/smsn/parties/009.pdf, 
(accessed June 2009).

21. Submission to the UNFCCC from South 
Africa: http://unfccc.int/files/meetings/dialogue/
application/pdf/working_paper_18_south_
africa.pdf (accessed June 2009). 

“Let’s put in a joint effort . . . now before it’s too late to save our Mama Earth.”

—Sonia R. Bhayani, Kenya, age 8

Tewanat Saypan, Thailand, age 12

 

Integrating Development into the Global Climate Regime 

249

22. For  example,  in  their  submissions  to 
the UNFCCC, the United States and European 
Union  indicate  that  major  developing  coun-
tries  shall  commit  to  formulate  and  submit 
low- carbon  strategies  to  the  UNFCCC.  See 
UNFCCC/AWGLCA/2009/MISC.4  at  http://
unfccc.int/resource/docs/2009/awglca6/eng/
misc04p02.pdf (accessed August 5, 2009).

23. Akanle and others 2008. See http://unfccc.
int/kyoto_protocol/mechanisms/items/1673.php 
(accessed July 8, 2009) for information about the 
Kyoto protocol’s flexibility mechanisms. 

24. Article 4.1 of the UNFCCC.
25. UNFCCC  Secretariat,  http://unfccc.int/
cooperation_support/least_developed_countries 
_portal/submitted_napas/items/4585.php 
(accessed August 5, 2009).

26. Decision 2/Cp.11 of the UNFCCC.
27. SEG 2007.

References
Akanle, T., A. Appleton, D. Bushey, K. Kulovesi, 
C. Spence, and Y. Yamineva. 2008. Summary 
of the Fourteenth Conference of Parties to 
the UN Framework Convention on Climate 
Change and Fourth Meeting of Parties to the 
Kyoto Protocol. New York: International Insti-
tute for Sustainable Development.

Baer, p., T. Athanasiou, and S. Kartha. 2007. 

The Right to Development in a Climate Con-
strained World: The Greenhouse Development 
Rights Framework. Berlin: Heinrich Böll 
Foundation, Christian Aid, EcoEquity, and 
Stockholm Environment Institute.

Barrett, S. 2006. “Managing the Global Commons.” 

In Expert Paper Series Two: Global Commons. 
Stockholm: Secretariat of the International Task 
Force on Global public Goods.

Baumert, K., and H. Winkler. 2005. “Sustain-

able Development policies and Measures and 
International Climate Agreements.” In Grow-
ing in the Greenhouse: Protecting the Climate 
by Putting Development First, ed. R. Bradley 
and K. Baumert. Washington, DC: World 
Resources Institute.

Blanford, G. J., R. G. Richels, and T. F. Ruther-
ford. 2008. “Revised Emissions Growth pro-
jections for China: Why post-Kyoto Climate 
policy Must Look East.” Kennedy School 
Discussion paper 08-06, Harvard project on 
International Climate Agreements, Cam-
bridge, MA.

Bodansky, D., and E. Diringer. 2007. “Towards 
an Integrated Multi-Track Framework.” pew 

Center on Global Climate Change, Arlington, 
VA.

Burtraw, D., D. A. Evans, A. Krupnick, K. palmer, 

and R. Toth. 2005. “Economics of pollution 
Trading for SO2 and NOx.” Discussion paper 
05-05. Resources for the Future, Washington, 
DC. 

Calvin, K., L. Clarke, E. Diringer, J. Edmonds, 

and M. Wise. 2009. “Modeling post-2012 Cli-
mate policy Scenarios.” pew Center on Global 
Climate Change, Arlington, VA. 

DOE (U.S. Department of Energy). 2009. “Car-

bon Dioxide Information Analysis Center 
(CDIAC).” Oak Ridge, TN.

Dollar, D., and L. pritchett. 1998. Assessing Aid: 
What Works, What Doesn’t and Why. Oxford, 
UK: Oxford University press.

Dubash, N. 2009. “Climate Change through a 
Development Lens.” Background paper for 
the WDR 2010. 

GEF (Global Environment Facility). 2009. 

“Focal Area: Climate Change,” Fact Sheet, 
GEF, Washington, DC, June.

Heller, T., and p. R. Shukla. 2003. “Development 

and Climate Change: Engaging Developing 
Countries.” In Beyond Kyoto: Advancing the 
International Effort against Climate Change, 
ed. J. E. Aldy, J. Ashton, R. Baron, D. Bodan-
sky, S. Charnovitz, E. Diringer, T. C. Heller, J. 
pershing, p. R. Shukla, L. Tubiana, F. Tudela, 
and X. Wang. Arlington, VA: pew Center on 
Global Climate Change.

Jiahua, p., and C. Ying. 2008. “Towards a Global 
Climate Regime.” China Dialogue, December 
10. http://www.chinadialogue.net/article/
show/single/en/2616.

Lewis, J., and E. Diringer. 2007. “policy-Based 
Commitments in a post-2012 Framework.” 
Working paper, pew Center on Global Cli-
mate Change, Arlington, VA.

McKinsey Gloabl Institute. 2008. The Carbon 

Productivity Challenge: Curbing Climate 
Change and Sustaining Economic Growth. 
McKinsey & Company.

Meyer, A. 2001. Contraction and Convergence: 
The Global Solution to Climate Change. Tot-
nes, Devon: Green Books on behalf of the 
Schumacher Society.

Richels, R. G., G. J. Blanford, and T. F. Ruther-
ford. Forthcoming. “International Climate 
policy: A Second Best Solution for a Second 
Best World?” Climate Change Letters. 

250 

WO R L D   D E V E LOpM E N T   R EpO RT   2 0 1 0

SEG (Scientific Expert Group on Climate 

Winkler, H., R. Spalding-Fecher, S. Mwaka-

Change). 2007. Confronting Climate Change: 
Avoiding the Unmanageable and Managing the 
Unavoidable. Washington, DC: Sigma Xi and 
The United Nations Foundation. 

UNFCCC (United Nations Framework Con-
vention on Climate Change). 2005. Caring 
for Climate: A Guide to the Climate Change 
Convention and the Kyoto Protocol. Bonn: 
UNFCCC.

sonda, and O. Davidson. 2002. “Sustainable 
Development policies and Measures: Start-
ing from Development to Tackle Climate 
Change.” In Building on the Kyoto Protocol: 
Options for Protecting the Climate, ed. K. 
A. Baumert, O. Blanchard, S. Llosa, and J. 
perkaus. Washington, DC: World Resources 
Institute.

focus C

Trade and climate change

The interaction between the international trade and climate change regimes has potentially major implications for devel-
oping countries. While there are positive reasons for exploring synergies between the two regimes and for aligning policies 
that could stimulate production, trade, and investment in cleaner technology options, instead much focus has been on using 
trade measures as sanctions in the global climate negotiations. 

This  focus  on  sanctions  stems 
mainly  from  competitiveness  con-
cerns in countries that are now racing 
to reduce greenhouse gas emissions to 
meet  Kyoto  2012  targets  and  beyond. 
These  concerns  have  led  to  proposals 
for tariff or border tax adjustments to 
offset  any  adverse  impact  of  capping 
carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions. There 
is also a concern about “leakage” of car-
bon-intensive industries into countries 
that  are  not  implementing  the  Kyoto 
Protocol.

The  broad  objective  of  bettering 
current  and  future  human  welfare  is 
shared  by  both  global  trade  and  cli-
mate regimes. Just as the World Trade 
Organization  (WTO)  recognizes  the 
importance of seeking to “protect and 
preserve the environment,”1 the Kyoto 
Protocol  states  that  parties  should 
“strive  to  implement  policies  and 
measures . . . in such a way as to mini-
mize  adverse  effect  on  international 
trade.”  The  United  Nations  Frame-
work  Convention  on  Climate  Change 
(UNFCCC)  features  similar  language 
in several places, and the Doha Com-
muniqué  specifically  states  that  “the 
aims  of  upholding  and  safeguarding 
an open and non-discriminatory mul-
tilateral trading system, and acting for 
the protection of the environment and 
promotion of sustainable development 
can and must be mutually supportive.”2 
Both treaties thus recognize and respect 
each other’s mandate.

Yet  both  climate  and  trade  agen-
das  have  evolved  largely  indepen-
dently through the years, despite their 

mutually  supporting  objectives  and 
the  potential  for  synergies.  While  the 
implementation of the Kyoto Protocol 
may  have  brought  to  light  some  con-
flicts  between  economic  growth  and 
environmental  protection,  the  objec-
tives  of  the  protocol  also  provide  an 
opportunity for aligning development 
and energy policies in ways that could 
stimulate production, trade, and invest-
ment in cleaner technology options.

Recent  attempts  to  bring  together 
the  two  agendas  have  been  received 
with a great deal of skepticism. While 
trade ministers meeting in 2007 at the 
UNFCCC  Bali  Conference  of  Parties 
widely  shared  the  view  that  the  trade 
and climate regimes could buttress each 
other in several areas, they noted that 
tension  between  the  two  could  arise, 
especially in the context of negotiations 
on  post-Kyoto  climate  commitments 
after 2012.

A  general  developing-country  per-
ception is that any discussion of climate 
change issues (and, more broadly, envi-
ronmental issues) in trade negotiations 
could  eventually  lead  to  “green  pro-
tectionism” by high-income countries, 
which  would  be  detrimental  to  their 
growth  prospects.  They  have  resisted 
attempts  to  include  climate  issues  in 
trade  by  stating  that  climate  change 
issues primarily belong and have to be 
negotiated  under  the  umbrella  of  the 
UNFCCC. Even within the WTO there 
has been a general reluctance to broaden 
the climate mandate in the absence of a 
directive from the UNFCCC. Interest-
ingly, despite all the rhetoric, a growing 

number  of  regional  trade  agreements 
(many  of  which  include  developing 
countries)  now  have  elaborate  envi-
ronmental  provisions.  However,  there 
is little evidence to show that they have 
contributed in any meaningful way to 
achieving positive environmental out-
comes.3 Also, regional trade agreements 
may  have  limited  value  in  addressing 
environmental issues that require global 
solutions, such as climate change. 

New developments
The proposed use of punitive trade sanc-
tions to support domestic climate action 
remains  prominent  and  has  gained 
ground in the midst of the current finan-
cial crisis. All the recent energy and cli-
mate policy bills introduced in the U.S. 
Congress  provide  for  trade  sanctions 
or  tariffs  (or  equivalent  instruments) 
on certain goods from those countries 
that  do  not  impose  controls  on  car-
bon emissions. Similarly, the European 
Commission’s plans to tighten Europe’s 
greenhouse  gas  reduction  regime  also 
recognizes  the  risk  that  new  legisla-
tion could put European companies at 
a  competitive  disadvantage  compared 
to those in countries with less stringent 
climate protection laws. 

The issue of imposing border mea-
sures  on  environmental  grounds  has 
been much discussed in the economic 
and  legal  literature.  The  WTO  and 
other  trade  agreements  do  allow  for 
“exceptions”  for  trade  measures  that 
might otherwise violate free trade rules 
but  that  can  be  justified  as  necessary 
or  related  to  an  effort  to  protect  the 

5,000

4,000

3,000

2,000

1,000

0

Box FC.1      Taxing virtual carbon

Should carbon be taxed where it is emit-
ted, or at the point where goods are 
consumed on the basis of their “embod-
ied” or “virtual” carbon—the amount 
of carbon emitted in producing and 
delivering the good? Many major export-
ing countries argue that they would be 
penalized by taxing carbon at the point 
of emission, when in fact much of this car-
bon is emitted in the production of goods 
for export—goods that are enjoyed by 
consumers in other countries. Based on 
analysis of carbon flows within a multi-
regional input-output table, the figure 
shows that China and the Russian Federa-
tion are net exporters of virtual carbon, 
while the European Union, the United 
States, and Japan are net importers.

However, countries imposing a carbon 
tax will be concerned about competitive-
ness and carbon leakage effects if other 
countries do not follow suit, and may 
consider taxing virtual carbon imports to 
level the playing field. The table shows 
the effective tariff rates in addition to the 
existing tariffs that countries would face 
if a tax of $50 a ton of CO2 were placed on 
the virtual carbon content of imported 
goods and services.

A carbon price of $50 a ton of CO2 is in 
line with recent experience—emission 
permits in the European Emission Trading 
Scheme traded as high as €35 in 2008. 
The table therefore suggests that virtual 

Production- and consumption-based emissions (millions of tons of CO2)
6,000

Virtual carbon in domestic final demand (foreign sources)
Virtual carbon in domestic final demand (domestic sources)
Virtual carbon in domestic production

Brazil Canada China

EU15

India

Japan Mexico Russian
Federation

United
States

South
Africa

Source: Atkinson and others 2009.
Note: The height of the blue bar measures total emissions from production of goods and services; the green 
bar represents how much carbon is emitted domestically to support domestic final demand (virtual carbon from 
domestic sources); the orange bar represents how much carbon is emitted abroad to support domestic final 
demand (the virtual carbon from foreign sources). If the height of the blue bar is greater than the sum of the 
other two bars, then the country is a net exporter of virtual carbon.

carbon tariff rates faced by developing 
countries could be significant if countries 
go this route.

Unilateral imposition of virtual carbon 
tariffs would clearly be a source of trade 
friction, however, damaging an inter-
national trading system that is already 
being stressed by the current financial 
crisis. Opening the door to border taxes 
for climate could lead to a proliferation 
of trade measures dealing with other 

areas where the competitive playing field 
is viewed as uneven. Accurate measure-
ment of virtual carbon would be highly 
complex and subject to dispute. More-
over, placing tariffs on virtual carbon 
could burden low-income countries that 
have contributed very little to the prob-
lem of climate change.

Source: Atkinson and others 2009.

Average tariff on imports of goods and services if virtual carbon is taxed at $50 a ton of CO2 
(percent)

Importing countries

 

s
e
i
r
t
n
u
o
c
g
n
i
t
r
o
p
x
E

Brazil
Canada
China
EU15
India
Japan
Mexico
Russian 
Federation
United 
States
South 
Africa
Average

Brazil
0.0
4.5
12.1
1.6
8.3
1.4
3.5
18.0

3.3

15.9

3.7

Canada

3.4
0.0
10.5
1.1
7.8
1.3
2.1
14.3

3.0

10.1

2.9

China
3.2
3.4
0.0
1.1
9.2
1.5
4.2
12.4

3.1

10.6

2.2

EU15
3.2
3.4
10.5
0.0
7.7
1.4
4.0
11.8

3.1

9.8

5.0

India
2.8
3.7
13.4
1.3
0.0
1.6
10.8
12.8

3.3

11.5

4.5

Japan

Mexico 

Russian 
Federation

United 
States

South 
Africa

Average

4.0
3.2
10.4
1.2
6.8
0.0
4.0
11.3

3.0

11.4

4.8

2.7
2.8
9.9
1.1
8.1
1.4
0.0
14.7

2.8

16.6

3.3

2.6
2.8
10.0
1.1
8.7
1.4
4.1
0.0

2.8

7.9

2.6

3.0
2.6
10.3
1.2
7.9
1.2
1.7
10.4

0.0

8.9

3.0

2.9
3.0
11.1
1.2
5.3
1.3
3.5
15.9

3.2

0.0

2.9

3.1
2.8
10.5
1.2
7.8
1.4
2.1
11.7

3.0

10.1

Source: Atkinson and others 2009.
Note: The last column is the trade-weighted average tariff faced by the exporting country; the last row is the trade-weighted average tariff applied by the importing country.

 

Trade and climate change 

253

environment  or  conserve  exhaustible 
natural  resources  and  so  long  as  they 
are  “nondiscriminatory”  and  “least-
trade-restrictive.”4  Trade  measures 
are  often  justified  as  a  mechanism  to 
ensure  compliance  with  multilateral 
environmental  agreements  (MEAs). 
Indeed MEAs such as the Convention 
on International Trade in Endangered 
Species and the Basel Convention use 
trade restrictions as a means to achieve 
MEA aims and these are accepted by all 
parties to the MEA. In case of climate 
change, however, a particularly thorny 
issue in assessing the compatibility of 
trade  measures  with  climate  change 
policy may arise from the application of 
unilateral measures based on national 
policies or product standards based on 
Processes  and  Production  Methods, 
or  both.  The  other  issue  with  respect 
to “border  tax  adjustments”  that  has 
received little attention is what would 
happen to the revenue that is generated. 
If it is all given back to the country that 
is  taxed  it  may  have  a  very  different 
political economy than if it stays in the 
country imposing the tax.

But  legal  experts  remain  divided 
on whether a tax on embodied carbon 
would be compatible with international 
trade regulations, because the WTO so 
far has not come out with clear provi-
sions on the subject. Nonetheless, the 
recent proposals could have significant 
implications for trade in manufactures 
in developing countries (box FC.1).

Many  high-income  countries  also 
express  concern  that  any  plan  that 
exempts  developing  countries  from 
emissions limits would not be effective 
because  carbon-intensive  industries 
would simply shift their operations to 
one  of  the  exempt  countries.  Carbon 
leakage,  as  such  a  shift  is  called,  not 
only would undercut the environmen-
tal  benefits  of  the  Kyoto  Protocol  but 
also  would  affect  the  competitiveness 
of  high-income-country  industries. 
For  energy-intensive  industries  such 
as cement and chemicals, international 
competitiveness  is  an  important  con-

cern.  This  issue  has  a  parallel  to  the 
“pollution  havens”  debate  that  domi-
nated  the  trade  and  environment  lit-
erature in the 1990s.

A  recent  World  Bank  study  exam-
ined the evidence for any relocation of 
 carbon-intensive  industries  attribut-
able to more stringent climate policies, 
mostly in high-income countries. One 
of the factors influencing the operations 
of  the  energy-intensive  sectors  gener-
ally is the relative energy price in addi-
tion to land and labor costs. The study 
used  import-export  ratios  of  energy-
intensive  production  in  high-income 
countries and low- and middle-income 
countries  as  a  proxy  for  any  shift  in 
production and trade patterns (figure 
FC.1).5 The import-export ratios show 
an  increasing  trend  for  high-income 
countries  and  a  declining  trend  for 
low-  and  middle-income  countries. 
While  not  conclusive,  this  seems  to 
suggest that some relocation of energy-
intensive  industries  may  already  be 
happening to countries that do not face 
caps on their greenhouse gas emissions. 
However, the ratio is still less than 1 for 
high-income countries and more than 
1 for developing economies, suggesting 
that high-income countries continue to 

be net exporters and developing coun-
tries net importers of energy-intensive 
products. 

In a similar vein, firms in some high-
income countries are adopting “carbon 
labeling” as a mechanism for mitigat-
ing  climate  change.  Carbon  labeling 
involves  measuring  carbon  emissions 
from the production of products or ser-
vices and conveying that information to 
consumers and those making sourcing 
decisions within companies. It is pos-
sible that well-designed schemes would 
create incentives for production in dif-
ferent parts of the supply chain to move 
to lower-emission locations. Thus, car-
bon  labeling  could  be  an  instrument 
that  enables  consumers  to  exercise 
their  desire  to  join  the  battle  against 
climate change by using their purchas-
ing preferences.

The  downside  of  carbon-labeling 
schemes is that they are likely to have 
a  significant  impact  on  exports  from 
low-income countries.6 Fears have been 
raised  that  low-income  countries  will 
face greater difficulties exporting in a 
climate-constrained  world  where  car-
bon emissions need to be measured and 
certification obtained to enable partici-
pation in carbon-labeled trade. Exports 

Figure FC.1      Import-export ratio of energy-intensive products in high-income countries and low- and 
middle-income countries

Ratio
2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0

Low- and middle-income countries
High-income countries

1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

Year

Source: World Bank 2008.

254 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 0

from  low-income  countries  typically 
depend  on  long-distance  transporta-
tion  and  are  produced  by  relatively 
small firms and tiny farms that will find 
it  difficult  to  participate  in  complex 
carbon-labeling schemes.

There is a significant knowledge gap 
to be filled regarding scientific studies 
of  the  structure  of  carbon  emissions 
throughout international supply chains 
that include low-income countries. The 
small number of existing studies sug-
gests that emissions patterns are highly 
complex, and an important finding is 
that geographic location alone is a poor 
proxy for emissions, because favorable 
production conditions may more than 
offset a disadvantage in transport. For 
example,  Kenyan-produced  roses  air-
freighted  to  and  sold  in  Europe  are 
associated with considerably lower car-
bon emissions than roses produced in 
the Netherlands. 

The  design  and  implementation 
of  carbon  labeling  will  also  need  to 
take  into  account  a  number  of  com-
plex, technical challenges.7 First, using 
secondary  data  from  producers  in 
rich  countries  to  estimate  the  carbon 
emissions of producers in low-income 
countries will not capture the fact that 
the technologies being applied in rich 
and low-income countries are substan-
tially different. A second technical issue 
relates to the use of emission factors—
the amount of carbon emitted during 
particular parts of the manufacture and 
use of products—and how they should 
be calculated. A third issue is the choice 
of system boundaries, which define the 
extent of processes that are included in 
the assessment of greenhouse gas emis-
sions. Estimates of the carbon footprint 
of a system, product, or activity will also 
depend on where the system boundary 
is drawn.

The positive agenda
The other area where trade and climate 
have recently overlapped relates to tech-
nology  transfer.  Given  the  limitations 
of the Clean Development Mechanism 
in delivering the kind and magnitude of 

technology transfer needed to deal with 
increasing greenhouse gas emissions in 
the developing world (see chapter 6), it 
has been suggested that broader trade 
and investment rules could be one way 
to  speed  up  transfer  of  technology.8 
Liberalizing  trade  in  environmental 
goods  and  services  has  been  on  the 
agenda of the WTO Doha Round since 
the beginning. All WTO members agree 
that environmental goods liberalization 
should be geared toward environmen-
tal  protection. Yet  very  little  has  been 
achieved owing to the differing percep-
tions  of  high-income  and  developing 
countries on what goods are to be lib-
eralized and how to liberalize. 

Efforts  have  been  made,  includ-
ing by the World Bank,9 to move these 
negotiations  forward  by  identifying 
 climate-friendly goods and services that 
currently face tariff and nontariff barri-
ers to trade, and making the removal of 
these barriers through the WTO negoti-
ations a priority. This effort has proved 
challenging,  because  WTO  members 
have yet to agree on a definition of “cli-
mate friendly” that both contributes to 
climate policy objectives and generates 
a  balanced  distribution  of  trade  ben-
efits  among  members.  Two  particular 
areas of controversy involve “dual use” 
technologies that may be used to reduce 
emissions as well as to meet other con-
sumer needs, and agricultural products, 
which are mired in a very contentious 
part of the Doha negotiations. 

The other issue that often goes unno-
ticed  is  the  huge  potential  for  trade 
between  developing  countries  (South-
South  trade)  in  clean  technology.  Tra-
ditionally  developing  countries  have 
been  importers  of  clean  technologies, 
while high-income countries have been 
exporters. However, as a result of their 
improving investment climate and huge 
consumer base, developing countries are 
increasingly becoming major players in 
the manufacture of clean technologies.10 
A key development in the global wind 
power market is the emergence of China 
as  a  significant  player,  both  in  manu-
facturing and in investing in additional 

wind  power  capacity.  Similarly  other 
developing  countries  have  emerged  as 
manufacturers  of  renewable  energy 
technologies. India’s solar photovoltaic 
manufacturing  capacity  has  increased 
several times in the past four years, while 
Brazil continues to be a world leader in 
the production of biofuels. These devel-
opments  call  for  liberalizing  bilateral 
trade  in  clean  technologies  that  could 
also facilitate buoyant South-South tech-
nology transfer in the future.

The way forward on trade and 
climate change
Countries have generally been reluctant 
to bring the trade and climate regimes 
closer for fear of one overwhelming the 
other. This is unfortunate because trade 
in clean energy technologies potentially 
offers  an  economic  opportunity  for 
developing countries that are emerging 
as  major  producers  and  exporters  of 
these technologies. 

Progress in the trade regime is possi-
ble even on very complex subjects. The 
success of the WTO’s 1997 Information 
Technology  Agreement  suggests  that 
implementation  of  any  agreement  on 
climate-friendly goods and technologies 
will certainly need to follow a phased 
approach  to  enable  developing  coun-
tries to deal gradually with implement-
ing liberalization, including increasing 
the  efficiency  of  customs  administra-
tion  and  harmonizing  customs  clas-
sifications  for  climate-friendly  goods. 
This  should  be  supported  through 
a  package  of  financial  and  technical 
assistance measures. Postponing action 
on the trade and climate agenda until 
another lengthy round of WTO negoti-
ations beyond the Doha Round is risky 
because  of  the  imminent  danger  that 
climate-related  trade  sanctions  of  the 
variety  proposed  in  the  United  States 
and the European Union could become 
a reality. 

If  climate-related  trade  measures 
bite deeply enough, developing coun-
tries  can  use  the  trade  and  climate 
negotiations to push back, or they may 
choose to adapt to the new policies and 

 

Trade and climate change 

255

standards  set  by  their  major  trading 
partners, in order to maintain access to 
their markets. In either case, developing 
countries will need to build their capac-
ity to better understand and respond to 
these developments. Further, the need 
to  push  for  financial  and  technology 
transfer as a part of any global deal on 
trade and climate change could not be 
more emphasized.

While  there  could  be  many  ben-
efits to bringing the trade and climate 
regimes closer, the potential for harm 
to the international trade regime from 
actions  such  as  unilateral  imposition 
of border taxes on carbon should not 
be  underestimated,  especially  since 
the burden will fall disproportionately 
on developing countries. It is thus in 
the  interest  of  developing  countries 
to  ensure  that  the  pursuit  of  global 
climate objectives is compatible with 
maintaining  a  fair,  open,  and  rule-
based  multilateral  trading  system  as 
a  foundation  for  their  growth  and 

development.  Developed  countries 
also  have  an  important  stake  in  the 
multilateral trading system and bear a 
major responsibility for ensuring that 
the system is maintained. 

Notes

1. Preamble  to  the  Marrakesh  Agree-

ment that established the WTO in 1995.

2. Quoted in World Bank 2008. 
3. Gallagher 2004.
4. See article XX (b) and (g) of the 1947 
General  Agreement  on  Tariffs  and  Trade. 
WTO 1986.

5. World Bank 2008.
6. Brenton,  Edwards-Jones,  and  Jensen 

2009.

7. Brenton,  Edwards-Jones,  and  Jensen 

2009.

8. Brewer 2007.
9. World Bank 2008.
10. World Bank 2008.

References
Atkinson, G., K. Hamilton, G. Ruta, and D. 

van der Mensbrugghe. 2009. “Trade in 

‘Virtual Carbon’: Empirical Results and 
Implications for Policy.” Background 
paper for the WDR 2010.

Brenton, P., G. Edwards-Jones, and M. Jensen. 

2009. “Carbon Labeling and Low Income 
Country Exports: An Issues Paper.” Devel-
opment Policy Review 27 (3): 243–267.

Brewer, T. L. 2007. “Climate Change Tech-

nology Transfer: International Trade and 
Investment Policy Issues in the G8+5 
Countries.” Paper prepared for the G8+5 
Climate Change Dialogue, Georgetown 
University, Washington, DC.

Gallagher, K. P. 2004. Free Trade and the 

Environment: Mexico, NAFTA and 
Beyond. Palo Alto, CA: Stanford Univer-
sity Press.

World Bank. 2008. International Trade and 

Climate Change: Economic, Legal and 
Institutional Perspectives. Washington, 
DC: World Bank.

WTO (World Trade Organization). 1986. 

Text of the General Agreement on Tariffs 
and Trade 1947. Geneva: WTO.

ChApTer 6

Generating the Funding Needed for 
Mitigation and Adaptation

Developed  countries  must  take 

the  lead  in  combating  climate 
change.  But  mitigation  will  be 
neither  effective  nor  efficient 
without  abatement  efforts  in  developing 
 countries.  Those  are  two  key  messages  of 
earlier chapters. But there is a critical third 
dimension to meeting the climate challenge: 
equity.  An  equitable  approach  to  limiting 
global  emissions  of  greenhouse  gases  has 
to recognize that developing countries have 
legitimate  development  needs,  that  their 
development may be jeopardized by climate 
change, and that they have contributed little, 
historically, to the problem.

Flows  of  climate  finance,  both  fiscal 
transfers  and  market  transactions,  from 
developed  to  developing  countries  repre-
sent the principal way to reconcile equity 
with effectiveness and efficiency in dealing 
with the climate problem. Financial flows 
can help developing countries reduce their 
greenhouse  gas  emissions  and  adapt  to 
the effects of climate change. In addition, 
there  will  be  financing  needs  related  to 

Key messages
Climate finance provides the means to reconcile equity with effectiveness and efficiency in 
actions to reduce emissions and adapt to climate change. But current levels fall far short of 
estimated needs—total climate finance for developing countries is $10 billion a year today, 
compared with projected annual requirements by 2030 of $30 to $100 billion for adaptation 
and $140 to $175 billion (with associated financing requirements of $265 to $565 billion) for 
mitigation. Filling the gap requires reforming existing carbon markets and tapping new sources, 
including carbon taxes. Pricing carbon will transform national climate finance, but international 
financial transfers and trading of emission rights will be needed if growth and poverty reduction 
in developing countries are not to be impeded in a carbon-constrained world.

developing and diffusing new technologies. 
Mitigation, adaptation, and the deployment 
of technologies have to happen in a way that 
allows  developing  countries  to  continue 
their  growth  and  reduce  poverty.  This  is 
why additional financial flows to develop-
ing countries are so crucial. 

The  funding  required  for  mitigation, 
adaptation, and technology is massive. In 
developing countries mitigation could cost 
$140  to  $175  billion  a  year  over  the  next 
20 years (with associated financing needs 
of  $265  to  $565  billion);  over  the  period 
2010 to 2050 adaptation investments could 
average $30 to $100 billion a year (in round 
numbers). These figures can be compared 
with  current  development  assistance  of 
roughly $100 billion a year. Yet efforts to 
raise funding for mitigation and adaptation 
have been woefully inadequate, standing at 
less than 5 percent of projected needs.

At  the  same  time,  existing  financing 
instruments  have  clear  limits  and  ineffi-
ciencies. Contributions from high- income 
country governments are affected by frag-
mentation and the vagaries of political and 
fiscal  cycles.  Despite  all  its  success,  the 
Clean  Development  Mechanism  (CDM), 
the  main  source  of  mitigation  finance  to 
date  for  developing  countries,  has  design 
shortcomings and operational and admin-
istrative limits. The scope for raising adap-
tation funding through the CDM, now the 
main source of income for the Adaptation 
Fund, is thus also limited. 

So new sources of finance will have to be 
tapped. Governments will have to step in, 
but it will be equally important to develop 

258 

WOrL D   De VeLOpMeN T  r e pOr

T   2 0 1 0

new  innovative  funding  mechanisms  and 
to leverage private finance. The private sec-
tor will have a key role in financing miti-
gation through carbon markets and related 
instruments.  But  official  flows  or  other 
international funding will be an important 
complement to build capacity, correct mar-
ket  imperfections,  and  target  areas  over-
looked by the market. private finance will 
also be important for adaptation, because 
private  agents—households  and  firms—
will carry much of the adaptation burden. 
But good adaptation is very closely linked to 
good development, and those most in need 
of  adaptation  assistance  are  the  poor  and 
disadvantaged in the developing world. This 
means public finance will have a key role. 

In addition to raising new funds, using 
available  resources  more  effectively  will 
be  crucial.  This  calls  both  for  exploiting 
synergies  with  existing  financial  flows, 
including development assistance, and for 
coordinating implementation. The scale of 
the financing gaps, the diversity of needs, 
and differences in national circumstances 
require  a  broad  range  of  instruments. 
Concerns with effectiveness and efficiency 
mean that finance for climate change must 
be raised and spent coherently.

Financing needs are linked to the scope 
and  timing  of  any  international  agree-
ment  on  climate  change.  The  size  of  the 
adaptation bill will depend directly on the 

effectiveness of the agreement. For mitiga-
tion, chapter 1 shows that delayed imple-
mentation of emission reductions, whether 
in  developed  or  developing  countries, 
risks  hugely  increasing  the  cost  of  limit-
ing global warming. The overview chap-
ter shows that on a global least- cost path 
for  climate  stabilization,  a  large  fraction 
(65 percent or more)1 of the needed miti-
gation  would  occur  in  developing  coun-
tries. The cost of limiting global warming 
can thus be substantially reduced if high-
income  countries  provide  enough  finan-
cial  incentives  for  developing  countries 
to switch to lower carbon paths. As other 
chapters emphasize, however, finance will 
need to be combined with access to tech-
nology and capacity building if develop-
ing countries are to shift to a lower- carbon 
development path. 

This  chapter  deals  with  raising  enough 
finance to reduce emissions and cope with 
the  impacts  of  unavoidable  changes.  It 
assesses the gap between the projected needs 
for mitigation and adaptation finance com-
pared with sources of finance available up to 
2012. It looks at inefficiencies in the existing 
climate- finance  instruments  and  discusses 
potential funding sources beyond the ones 
currently available (table 6.1). And it pres-
ents models for increasing the effectiveness 
of existing schemes, particularly the Clean 
Development Mechanism, and for allocating 

Table 6.1    Existing instruments of climate finance 

Type of instrument
Market- based mechanisms to lower 
the costs of climate action and create 
incentives

Mitigation
Emissions trading (CDM, JI, voluntary), 
tradable renewable energy certificates, 
debt instruments (bonds)

GEF, CTF, UN- REDD, FIP, FCPF

Grant resources and concessional 
finance (levies and contributions 
including official development 
assistance and philanthropy) to pilot 
new tools, scale up and catalyze action, 
and act as seed money to leverage the 
private sector.
Other instruments

Adaptation
Insurance (pools, indexes, weather 
derivatives, catastrophe bonds), 
payment for ecosystem services, debt 
instruments (bonds)
Adaptation Fund, GEF, LDCF, SCCF, PPCR 
and other bilateral and multilateral 
funds

Research, development, 
and diffusion

GEF, GEF/IFC Earth Fund, 
GEEREF

Fiscal incentives (tax benefits on investments, subsidized loans, targeted tax or subsidies, export credits), 
norms and standards (including labels), inducement prizes and advanced market commitments, and trade and 
technology agreements

Source: WDR team.
Note: CDM = Clean Development Mechanism; CTF = Clean Technology Fund; FCPF = Forest Carbon Partnership Facility; FIP = Forest Investment Program; GEEREF = Global 
Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Fund (European Union); GEF = Global Environment Facility; IFC = International Finance Corporation; JI = Joint Implementation; LDCF = 
Least Developed Country Fund (UNFCCC/GEF); PPCR = Pilot Program for Climate Resilience; SCCF = Strategic Climate Change Fund (UNFCCC/GEF); UN- REDD = UN Collaborative 
Program on Reduced Emissions from Deforestation and forest Degradation.

 

Generating the Funding Needed for Mitigation and Adaptation 

259

adaptation finance. Throughout the focus is 
on financing needs in developing countries, 
where  the  questions  of  effectiveness,  effi-
ciency, and equity all come together.

The financing gap
Successfully  tackling  climate  change  will 
cost trillions. how many depends on how 
ambitious the global response is, how it is 
structured,  how  the  measures  are  timed, 
how effectively they are implemented, where 
mitigation takes place, and how the money 
is raised. Bearing the costs will be the inter-
national community, national governments, 
local governments, firms, and households.

The need for finance
According to the Intergovernmental panel on 
Climate Change (IpCC), which reviewed cost 
estimates in its fourth assessment, the cost of 
cutting global greenhouse gas emissions by 
50 percent by 2050 could be in the range of 
1–3 percent of GDp.2 That is the minimum 
cut most scientists believe is needed to have a 
reasonable chance of limiting global warm-
ing close to 2°C above preindustrial tempera-
tures (see overview). 

But mitigation costs are sensitive to pol-
icy choices. They increase steeply with the 
stringency of the emission reduction target 
and with the certainty of reaching it (figure 
6.1).  Global  mitigation  costs  will  also  be 
higher if the world deviates from the least-
 cost  emission  reduction  path.  As  earlier 
chapters explain, not including developing 
countries  in  the  initial  mitigation  effort 
would increase global costs significantly (a 
consideration that led to the establishment 
of  the  Clean  Development  Mechanism 
under  the  Kyoto protocol).  Similarly,  not 
considering  all  mitigation  opportunities 
would markedly increase overall costs.

It is also important to distinguish between 
mitigation costs (the incremental costs of a 
low-carbon  project  over  its  lifetime)  and 
incremental  investment  needs  (the  addi-
tional  financing  requirement  created  as  a 
result of the project). Because many clean 
investments have high up-front capital costs, 
followed later by savings in operating costs, 
the incremental financing requirements tend 
to be higher than the lifetime costs reported 
in mitigation models. The difference could 
be as much as a factor of three (table 6.2). 

Figure 6.1      Annual mitigation costs rise with the 
stringency and certainty of the temperature target

1.5°C

Mitigation costs (% GDP)
2.0
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

2.5°C

2°C

0

3°C

0.2
0.8
Probability of reaching the target

0.4

0.6

1.0

Source: Schaeffer and others 2008.

For fiscally constrained developing countries 
these high up-front capital costs can be a sig-
nificant disincentive to invest in low-carbon 
technologies. 

Table 6.2 reports both incremental costs 
and  associated  financing  requirements  for 
the  mitigation  efforts  needed  to  stabilize 
atmospheric  concentrations  of  CO2e  (all 
greenhouse gases summed up and expressed 
in terms of their carbon dioxide equivalent) 
at 450 parts per million (ppm) over the next 
decade,  as  well  as  the  adaptation  invest-
ments  estimated  to  be  required  in  2030. 
Focusing on the 450 ppm target, mitigation 
costs in developing countries range between 
$140 billion and $175 billion a year by 2030 
with associated financing needs of $265 to 
$565 billion a year. For adaptation the most 
comparable estimates are the medium-term 
figures  produced  by  the  United  Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change 
(UNFCCC)  and  the  World  Bank,  which 
range from $30 billion to $100 billion.

Many,  but  not  all,  of  the  identified 
adaptation  needs  would  require  public 
expenditures. According to the UNFCCC 
secretariat,3  private  funding  would  cover 
about  a  quarter  of  identified  investment, 
although this estimate is unlikely to capture 
the full private investment in adaptation.

These numbers give a rough indication 
of the adaptation cost, but they are neither 
particularly  accurate  nor  fully  compre-
hensive.  Most  were  derived  from  rules  of 

260 

WOrL D   De VeLOpMeN T  r e pOr

T   2 0 1 0

Table 6.2    Estimated annual climate funding needed in developing countries
2005 $ billions

Source of estimate
Mitigation costs
McKinsey & Company
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory 
(PNNL)
Mitigation financing needs 
International Institute for Applied 
Systems Analysis (IIASA)
International Energy Agency (IEA) 
Energy Technology Perspectives
McKinsey & Company
Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact 
Research (PIK)
Adaptation costs 
Short term
World Bank
Stern Review
United Nations Development 
Programme
Oxfam

Medium term
United Nations Framework Convention 
on Climate Change (UNFCCC)
Project Catalyst

World Bank (EACC)

2010–20

2030

 

2010–20
63–165

565a

300

175
139

2030
264

563
384

2010–15

2030

Included measures

9–41
4–37
83–105

>50

Cost of climate-proofing development assistance, foreign and domestic investment
Cost of climate-proofing development assistance, foreign and domestic investment
Same as World Bank, plus cost of adapting Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers and 
strengthening disaster response
Same as World Bank plus cost of National Adaptation Plan of Action and 
nongovernmental organization projects

28–67

2030 cost in agriculture, forestry, water, health, coastal protection, and infrastructure

15–37

75–100

2030 cost for capacity building, research, disaster management and the UNFCCC 
sectors (most vulnerable countries and public sector only)
Average annual adaptation costs from 2010 to 2050 in the agriculture, forestry, fisheries, 
infrastructure, water resource management, and coastal zone sectors, including 
impacts on health, ecosystem services, and the effects of extreme- weather events.

Sources: For mitigation, IIASA 2009 and additional data provided by V. Krey; IEA 2008; McKinsey & Company 2009, and additional data provided by McKinsey (J. Dinkel) for 2030, 
using a dollar-to-Euro exchange rate of $1.25 to €1.00; PNNL figures from Edmonds and others 2008, and additional data provided by J. Edmonds and L. Clarke; PIK figures from 
Knopf and others, forthcoming, and additional data provided by B. Knopf; for adaptation, all figures from Agrawala and Fankhauser 2008, except World Bank EACC (Economics of 
Adaptation to Climate Change) from World Bank 2009; and Project Catalyst 2009.
Note: Estimates are for stabilization of greenhouse gases at 450 ppm CO2e, which would provide a 40–50 percent chance of staying below 2°C warming by 2100.
a. IEA figures are annual averages through 2050.

thumb, dominated by the cost of climate-
 proofing  future  infrastructure.  They 
underestimate  the  diversity  of  the  likely 
adaptation responses and ignore changes in 
behavior, innovation, operational practices, 
or locations of economic activity. They also 
ignore the need for adaptation to nonmar-
ket impacts such as those on human health 
and natural ecosystems. Some of the omit-
ted  options  could  reduce  the  adaptation 
bill  (for  example,  by  obviating  the  need 
for  costly  structural  investments);  others 
would increase it.4 The estimates also do not 
consider residual damages beyond effective 
adaptation. A recent attempt to encompass 

these complexities in measuring adaptation 
costs is reported in box 6.1.

Adaptation cost estimates also ignore the 
close  links  between  adaptation  and  devel-
opment. Although few studies are clear on 
this  point,  they  measure  the  extra  spend-
ing  to  accommodate  climate  change  over 
and above what would have been spent on 
climate- sensitive investments anyway, such 
as those accommodating the consequences 
of  income  and  population  growth  or  cor-
recting an existing adaptation deficit. But, 
in practice, the distinction between adapta-
tion  funding  and  development  funding  is 
not easy. Investments in education, health, 

 

Generating the Funding Needed for Mitigation and Adaptation 

261

Box 6.1      Costing adaptation to climate change in developing countries

A World Bank study published in 2009 on 
the economics of adaptation to climate 
change provides the most recent and 
comprehensive estimates of adaptation 
costs in developing countries, covering 
both country case studies and global esti-
mates of adaptation costs. Key elements 
of the design of the study include:

Coverage. The sectors studied comprise 
agriculture, forestry, fisheries, infrastruc-
ture, water resource management, and 
coastal zones, including impacts on 
health and ecosystem services, and the 
effects of extreme weather events. Infra-
structure is broken down into transport, 

energy, water and sanitation, communica-
tions, and urban and social infrastructure.

Baseline. The estimates do not include the 
existing “adaptation deficit”—the extent 
to which countries are incompletely or 
suboptimally adapted to existing climate 
variability.

Level of adaptation. For most sectors the 
study estimates the cost of restoring wel-
fare to the level that would exist without 
climate change.

Uncertainty. To capture the extremes of 
possible climate outcomes the study uses 
results from general circulation models 

spanning the wettest and driest climate 
projections, under the IPCC’s A2 scenario 
of possible socioeconomic and emissions 
trajectories.

Based on these design elements, the 
study arrives at bottom- line estimates of 
the global cost of adaptation to climate 
change in developing countries of $75 to 
$100 billion a year on average from 2010 
to 2050.a

Source: World Bank 2009.
a. Expressed in constant 2005 dollars.

sanitation, and livelihood security, for exam-
ple, constitute good development. They also 
help reduce socioeconomic vulnerability to 
both climatic and nonclimatic stress factors. 
Certainly  in  the  short  term,  development 
assistance is likely to be a key complement 
to close adaptation deficits, to reduce climate 
risks, and to increase economic productivity. 
But new adaptation finance is also needed.

Mitigation finance available to date
Over  the  coming  decades  trillions  of  dol-
lars  will  be  spent  to  upgrade  and  expand 
the world’s energy and transport infrastruc-
ture. These massive investments present an 
opportunity  to  decisively  shift  the  global 
economy onto a low- carbon path—but they 
also raise the risk of a high- carbon lock- in if 
the opportunity is missed. As earlier chap-
ters  show,  new  infrastructure  investments 
need to be steered to low- carbon outcomes. 
Both  public  and  private  flows  will  be 
needed  to  fund  these  investments.  Many 
instruments  already  exist  (table  6.1).  All 
will have a role in catalyzing climate action: 
mobilizing additional resources; reorient-
ing  public  and  private  flows  toward  low-
 carbon and climate- resilient investments; 
and  supporting  the  research,  develop-
ment, and deployment of climate- friendly 
technologies.

The  public  sector  will  provide  capital 
mostly for big infrastructure projects, but a 
large part of the investment to create a low-
 carbon  economy—from  energy- efficient 

machinery  to  cleaner  cars  to  renewable 
energy—will  come  from  the  private  sec-
tor.  Currently,  governments  account  for 
less than 15 percent of global economywide 
investment, although they largely control 
the underlying infrastructure investments 
that  affect  the  opportunities  for  energy-
 efficient products. 

There  are  various  ways  to  encourage 
private investment in mitigation,5 but the 
most prominent market instrument involv-
ing developing countries has been the Clean 
Development Mechanism. It has triggered 
more  than  4,000  recognized  emission 
reduction  projects  to  date.  Other  similar 
mechanisms, such as Joint Implementation 
(the  equivalent  mechanism  for  industrial 
countries) and voluntary carbon markets, 
are important for some regions (transition 
countries)  and  sectors  (forestry)  but  are 
much  smaller.  Under  the  CDM,  emission 
reduction activities in developing countries 
can generate “carbon credits”—measured 
against an agreed baseline and verified by 
an independent entity under the aegis of the 
UNFCCC—and trade them on the carbon 
market.  For  example,  a  european  power 
utility  may  acquire  emission  reductions 
(through direct purchase or financial sup-
port) from a Chinese steel plant embarking 
on an energy- efficiency project.

The financial revenues the CDM gener-
ates  are  modest  relative  to  the  amount  of 
mitigation money that will have to be raised. 
But  they  constitute  the  largest  source  of 

262 

WOrL D   De VeLOpMeN T  r e pOr

T   2 0 1 0

mitigation finance to developing countries to 
date. Between 2001, the first year CDM proj-
ects could be registered, and 2012, the end of 
the Kyoto commitment period, the CDM is 
expected to produce some 1.5 billion tons of 
carbon dioxide equivalent (CO2e) in emis-
sion  reductions,  much  through  renewable 

Table 6.3    Potential regional CDM delivery and carbon revenues (by 2012)

By region
East Asia and Pacific

China
Malaysia
Indonesia

Europe and Central Asia
Latin America and the 
Caribbean

Brazil
Mexico
Chile
Argentina

Middle East and North Africa
South Asia

India

Sub- Saharan Africa

Nigeria

Developed countries
By income
Low income

Nigeria

Lower middle income

China
India
Indonesia

Upper middle income

Brazil
Mexico
Malaysia
Chile
Argentina
High income

Korea, Rep. of
Total

Millions of 

certified emission 

reductionsa

871
786
36
21
10
230

102
41
21
20
15
250
231
39
16
85

46
16
1,127
786
231
21
242
102
41
36
21
20
85
54
1,500

Source: UNEP 2008.
Note: Volumes include withdrawn and rejected projects.
a. 1 million certified emission reductions = 1 million tons of CO2e. 

$ millions

Percentage 

 of total 

10,453
9,431
437
252
119
2,758

1,225
486
258
238
182
3,004
2,777
464
191
1,019

551
191
13,524
9,431
2,777
252
2,906
1,225
486
437
258
238
1,019
653
18,000

58
52
2
2
1
15

7
3
1
1
1
17
16
3
1
6

3
1
75
53
16
2
16
7
3
2
1
1
6
4
100

energy,  energy  efficiency,  and  fuel  switch-
ing. This could raise $18 billion ($15 billion 
to  $24  billion)  in  direct  carbon  revenues 
for developing countries, depending on the 
price of carbon (table 6.3).6 In addition each 
dollar of carbon revenue leverages on aver-
age $4.60 in investment and possibly up to 
$9.00 for some renewable energy projects. It 
is estimated that some $95 billion in clean 
energy investment benefited from the CDM 
over 2002–08.

In  comparison,  official  development 
assistance for mitigation was about $19 bil-
lion over 2002–07,7 and sustainable energy 
investment in developing countries totaled 
approximately $80 billion over 2002–08.8

Donors  and  international  financial 
institutions are establishing new financing 
vehicles to scale up their support for low-
 carbon investment in the lead- up to 2012 
(table 6.4). Total finance under these ini-
tiatives amounts to $19 billion up to 2012, 
although  this  figure  combines  mitigation 
and adaptation finance.

The  current  inadequacy  of  mitigation 
funding is obvious (figure 6.2). Combining 
the donor funds in table 6.4 (and counting 
them as if committed solely to mitigation) 
with  the  projected  CDM  finance  to  2012 
produces  mitigation  finance  of  roughly 
$37 billion up to 2012, or less than $8 billion 
a year. This falls far short of the estimated 
mitigation costs in developing countries of 
$140 to $175 billion a year in 2030, and even 
farther  short  of  the  associated  financing 
requirements ($265 to $565 billion).

Adaptation finance available to date
Funding  for  adaptation  started  to  flow 
only recently. The main existing source of 
adaptation funding is international donors, 
channeled either through bilateral agencies 
or through multilateral institutions like the 
Global environment Facility (GeF) and the 
World Bank.

The  establishment  of  the  Adaptation 
Fund in December 2007, a funding mecha-
nism with its own independent source of 
finance, was an important development. Its 
main income source is the 2 percent levy 
on the CDM, a novel financing source (dis-
cussed in more detail later) that could raise 
between  $300  million  and  $600  million 

 

Generating the Funding Needed for Mitigation and Adaptation 

263

Table 6.4    New bilateral and multilateral climate funds

Total amount ($ millions)

Period

Fund
Funding under UNFCCC
Strategic Priority on Adaptation
Least Developed Country Fund
Special Climate Change Fund
Adaptation Fund
Bilateral initiatives
Cool Earth Partnership (Japan)
ETF- IW (United Kingdom)
Climate and Forest Initiative (Norway)
UNDP- Spain MDG Achievement Fund
GCCA (European Commission) 
International Climate Initiative (Germany)
IFCI (Australia)
Multilateral initiatives
GFDRR

UN- REDD
Carbon Partnership Facility (World Bank)
Forest Carbon Partnership Facility  
(World Bank)
Climate Investment Funds, includes

50 (A)
172 (A)
91 (A)
300–600 (A)

10,000 (A+M)
1,182 (A+M)
2,250
22 (A) / 92 (M)
84 (A) / 76 (M)
200 (A) / 564 (M)
160 (M)

15 (A) (of $83 million in 
pledges)
35 (M)
500 (M) (140 committed)
385 (M) (160 committed)

6,200 (A+M)
4,800 (M)
1,400 (A+M)

GEF 3- GEF 4
As of October 2008
As of October 2008
2008–12

2008–12
2008–12

2007–10
2008–10
2008–12 
2007–12

2007–08

2008–20

2009–12

Figure 6.2    The gap is large: Estimated annual 
climate funding required for a 2°C trajectory 
compared with current resources 

Constant 2005$, billions
200

Mitigation:

$139 billion–$175 billion

Adaptation:

$28 billion–$100 billion

Funding for

adaptation and

mitigation
$9 billion

175

150

125

100

75

50

25

0

2008–2012

2030

Source: For 2030 values, see table 6.2; for 2008–2012 values, 
see text.

over the medium term, depending on the 
carbon price (see table 6.4 and endnote 7).
excluding private finance, $2.2 billion to 
$2.5 billion is projected to be raised for adap-
tation from now to 2012, depending on what 
the  Adaptation  Fund  raises.  The  potential 
adaptation finance now available is less than 
$1  billion  a  year,  against  funding  require-
ments of $30 to $100 billion a year over the 
medium term (see table 6.2). Figure 6.2 com-
pares  the  annual  climate  finance  available 
over 2008–12 (both mitigation and adapta-
tion,  roughly  $10  billion  a  year),  with  the 
projected medium- term financing needs.

Inefficiencies in existing climate-
 finance instruments 
Inefficiency could take what is already pro-
jected to be a very large and costly endeavor 
and make it even more expensive. So there 
is an obvious case for ensuring that climate 
finance is generated and spent efficiently. 
Three  aspects  of  the  efficiency  of  climate 
finance  are  considered  below:  the  frag-
mentation of climate finance into multiple 

350 (M) 
200 (M)
600 (A)

Clean Technology Fund
Strategic Climate Fund, including
Forest Investment Programme
Scaling up renewable energy
Pilot Program for Climate Resilience
Source: UNFCCC 2008a plus updates by authors.
Note: For a number of bilateral initiatives, part of the funds will be distributed through multilateral initiatives 
(for example, some pledges to the Climate Investment Funds or the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility). This 
leads to some double counting and makes it difficult to draw an accurate picture of upcoming climate change 
resources in developing countries. The Climate Investment Funds are managed by the World Bank and 
implemented by all multilateral development banks. All data for the Climate Investment Funds are as of July 
2009—$250 million of the Strategic Climate Fund was unallocated at that time, and the Scaling up Renewable 
Energy fund will require minimum pledges of $250 million before it becomes operational. A = funding devoted 
to adaptation; M = funding devoted to mitigation; ETF- IW = Environmental Transformation Fund- International 
Window; GCCA = Global Climate Change Alliance; IFCI = International Forest Carbon Initiative; UN- REDD = 
UN Collaborative Program on Reduced Emissions from Deforestation and forest Degradation; GFDRR = Global 
Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery. Pledges to the Climate and Forest Initiative (Norway) stood at 
$430 million in June 2009.

funding  sources,  the  limitations  of  car-
bon offset markets for mitigation, and the 
potential costs of taxing certified emission 
reductions (Cers) to finance the Adapta-
tion Fund.

Fragmentation of climate finance
There  is  a  risk  of  proliferation,  illustrated 
in  table  6.4,  of  special- purpose  climate 
funds.  Fragmentation  of  this  sort  threat-
ens  to  reduce  the  overall  effectiveness  of 

264 

WOrL D   De VeLOpMeN T  r e pOr

T   2 0 1 0

climate finance, because as transaction costs 
increase, recipient country ownership lags, 
and  alignment  with  country  development 
objectives becomes more difficult. each new 
source of finance, whether for development 
or  climate  change,  carries  with  it  a  set  of 
costs. These include transaction costs (which 
rise in aggregate as the number of funding 
sources  increases),  inefficient  allocation 
(particularly if funds are narrowly defined), 
and limitations on scaling up. The current 
fragmentation and the low level of resources 
highlights  the  importance  of  the  on going 
negotiations  about  a  climate- financing 
architecture adequate to mobilize resources 
at  scale  and  to  deliver  efficiently  across  a 
wide range of channels and instruments.

While  there  is  not  an  exact  parallel 
between climate finance and development 
aid,  some  of  the  lessons  from  the  aid-
 effectiveness literature are highly relevant 
to climate finance. Concern about the nega-
tive effects of aid fragmentation was one of 
the key drivers of the paris Declaration on 
Aid effectiveness. In that declaration, most 
recently  reaffirmed  in  the  Accra  Agenda 
for Action, both aid donors and recipients 
committed  to  incorporate  the  key  tenets 
of  ownership,  alignment,  harmonization, 
results  orientation,  and  mutual  account-
ability into their development activities.

The paris Declaration raises important 
issues for financing climate investments in 
developing  countries,  many  of  which  are 
widely accepted and reflected in negotiation 
documents, such as the Bali Action plan:9

•	 Ownership.  Building  a  shared  consen-
sus that climate change is a development 
issue, a central tenet of this report, will 
be  key  in  building  country  ownership. 
This consensus view must then be built 
into country development strategies.

•	 Alignment. ensuring alignment between 
climate actions and country priorities is 
the second critical step in increasing the 
effectiveness of climate finance. Moving 
from the project to the sector and pro-
gram level can facilitate this process. pre-
dictability and sustainability of finance 
is another key aspect of alignment. Stop-
 start  climate- action  programs,  driven 
by the volatility of finance, will reduce 
overall effectiveness.

•	 Harmonization.  To  the  extent  that  the 
various  climate  funds  have  divergent 
purposes, this fragmentation of climate 
finance presents a great challenge to har-
monizing different sources of finance and 
exploiting  synergies  among  adaptation, 
mitigation, and development finance. 

•	 Results.  The  results  agenda  for  climate 
action is not substantially different from 
those  of  other  development  domains. 
Designing and implementing meaning-
ful  outcome  indicators  will  be  key  to 
maintaining public support for climate 
finance and building country ownership 
for climate action.

•	 Mutual  accountability.  Weak  progress 
toward Kyoto targets by many developed 
countries puts their accountability for cli-
mate action in the spotlight. An essential 
part of any global agreement on climate 
change must be a framework that holds 
high- income countries accountable for 
moving toward their own emission tar-
gets and for providing climate finance, 
and that also holds developing countries 
accountable for climate actions and uses 
of climate finance, as established in the 
Bali  Action  plan.  Beyond  provision  of 
resources, monitoring and reporting of 
climate finance flows and verification of 
results are a central topic of the ongoing 
climate negotiations.

In addition to the sources of finance, an 
important question is what investments cli-
mate funds should finance and the associated 
financing  modalities.  While  some  climate 
investments will be for individual projects—
low- carbon  power  plants,  for  example—
efficiencies can, in many instances, be gained 
by  moving  to  the  sector  or  program  level. 
For adaptation, finance at the country level 
should  in  most  cases  be  commingled  with 
overall  development  finance,  not  used  for 
specific adaptation projects.

More generally, rather than being overly 
prescriptive, climate finance could emulate 
the poverty reduction strategy approach now 
implemented in many low- income countries. 
This  entails  linking  aid  resources  targeted 
at  reducing  poverty  to  a  poverty  reduction 
strategy  prepared  by  the  recipient  country. 
Based on an analysis of poverty and a defi-
nition of country priorities, as validated by 

 

Generating the Funding Needed for Mitigation and Adaptation 

265

participatory processes with civil society, the 
strategy  becomes  the  basis  for  broad  bud-
get support by donors to finance a program 
of  action  aimed  at  reducing  poverty.  Indi-
vidual projects become the exception rather 
than the rule. If countries integrate climate 
action  into  their  development  strategies,  a 
similar approach to climate finance should 
be feasible.

Inefficiencies of the Clean Development 
Mechanism
The  principal  instrument  for  catalyzing 
mitigation  in  developing  countries  is  the 
CDM. It has grown beyond initial expecta-
tions, demonstrating the ability of markets 
to stimulate emission reductions, provide 
essential  learning,  raise  awareness,  and 
build capacity. But the CDM contains some 
inherent  inefficiencies,  raising  questions 
about the overall process and its efficiency 
as a financing instrument:

Questionable  environmental  integrity.    
The long- term success of the CDM can be 
best assessed by its contribution to measur-
ably reducing greenhouse gas emissions. In 
order not to dilute the environmental effec-
tiveness of the Kyoto protocol, CDM emis-
sion  reductions  must  be  additional  to  the 
reductions that would have occurred other-
wise. The extent of additionality provided 
by the CDM has been debated vigorously.10 
The additionality of individual projects is 
difficult to prove and even more difficult to 
validate, because the point of reference is by 
definition a counterfactual reality that can 
never  be  incontrovertibly  argued  or  con-
clusively proven. Because debates on base-
line and additionality concerns continue to 
plague the CDM process, it is time to explore 
alternative, and simpler, approaches to dem-
onstrate additionality. Approaches such as 
benchmarks  and  a  positive  list  of  specific 
desired activities should be explored further 
to streamline project preparation and moni-
toring. revisiting additionality will not only 
address major inefficiencies in CDM opera-
tion but can also help to increase the cred-
ibility of the mechanism.

Insufficient  contribution  to  sustainable 
development.      The CDM was created with 
two  objectives:  the  global  mitigation  of 

climate change; and the sustainable devel-
opment  of  developing  countries.  But  the 
CDM has been more effective in reducing 
mitigation costs than in advancing sustain-
able development.11 A project is deemed to 
contribute  to  sustainable  development  if 
national authorities sign off on it, acknowl-
edging a wide range of local co- benefits in 
line with their development priorities (box 
6.2). While many critics accept this broad 
definition,12  some  nongovernmental  orga-
nizations  have  found  flaws  both  in  the 
acceptance  of  certain  project  types  (such 
as  hydropower,  palm  oil  plantations,  and 
the destruction of industrial gases) and in 
implementation. A closer look at the CDM 
project pipeline suggests that the treatment 
of sustainable development in project docu-
ments is sketchy and uneven and that project 
developers display only a rudimentary con-
cern for or understanding of the concept.

Weak governance and inefficient operation.    
The  CDM  is  unique  in  regulating  a  mar-
ket dominated by private players through 
an  executive  board—essentially  a  United 
Nations  committee—that  approves  the 
calculation methods and projects that cre-
ate the market’s underlying asset. The cred-
ibility of the CDM depends largely on the 
robustness of its regulatory framework and 
the private sector’s confidence in the oppor-
tunities the mechanism provides.13 Com-
plaints are mounting about the continuing 
lack of transparency and predictability in 
the board’s decision making.14 At the same 
time, the CDM architecture has begun to 
show some weaknesses that are signs of it 
being a victim of success. There have been 
copious complaints about yearlong delays 
in  the  approval  of  methodologies15  and 
the one-  to two- year time lag in the assess-
ment  of  projects.16  These  are  significant 
constraints to the continuing growth of the 
CDM as a key instrument to support miti-
gation efforts in developing countries. 

Limited  scope.      CDM  projects  are  not 
evenly  distributed.  A  full  75  percent  of 
sales revenues from offsets accrue to Brazil, 
China, and India (see table 6.3). The CDM 
has  pretty  much  bypassed  low- income 
countries, which have received only 3 per-
cent of carbon revenues, a third of them for 

266 

WOrL D   De VeLOpMeN T  r e pOr

T   2 0 1 0

Box 6.2    Assessing the co- benefits of the CDM

The Clean Development Mechanism 
produces three broad categories of 
potential host- country co- benefits (apart 
from the financial flow from carbon 
credit sales): the transfer and dissemina-
tion of technologies; the contribution to 
employment and economic growth; and 
the contribution to environmentally and 
socially sustainable development. 

The extent to which projects con-

tribute to these three objectives can be 
gauged by looking at project design 
documents, which can be searched 
for keywords associated with different 
co- benefits. This approach was used by 
Haites, Maosheng, and Seres to assess 
the technology transfer benefits of the 
CDM and by Watson and Fankhauser to 
assess contributions to economic growth 
and sustainable development.

Haites, Maosheng, and Seres found that 

only about a third of CDM projects claim 
to transfer technology, by passing on 
equipment, know- how, or both. A closer 
look reveals that they are predominantly 
projects involving foreign sponsors. 

Only a quarter of projects developed 
unilaterally by the host country claim to 
transfer technology. Technology transfer 
is also associated with larger projects. 
Although only a third of projects transfer 
technology, they account for two- thirds 
of emission reductions. Projects explicitly 
labeled and processed as “small” projects 
lead to technology transfer in only 26 per-
cent of the cases.

But technology transfer is a difficult 

concept to define. For mitigation, it tends 
to be not so much proprietary technology 
that is shared but operational and mana-
gerial know- how of how to run a particu-
lar process. A study by Dechezleprêtre 
and colleagues that specifically looked at 
the transfer of technologies protected by 
patent found that the Kyoto Protocol did 
not accelerate technology flows, though 
it may have stimulated innovation more 
generally.

Watson and Fankhauser found that a 
full 96 percent of projects claim to con-
tribute to environmental and social sus-
tainability, but most of these claims relate 

to contributions to economic growth and 
employment in particular. Just over 80 
percent of projects claim some employ-
ment impact, and 23 percent contribute 
to a better livelihood. There are relatively 
lower employment benefits from indus-
trial gas projects (hydrofluorocarbon, 
perfluorocarbon, and nitrous oxide reduc-
tion—18 percent) and fossil- fuel switching 
projects (43 percent) than with other sec-
tors, where at least 65 percent of projects 
state employment benefits.

Applying a more traditional and nar-
rower definition of sustainable develop-
ment, 67 percent of projects claim training 
or education benefits (increasing human 
capital), 24 percent reduce pollution 
or produce environmental co- benefits 
(increasing natural capital), and 50 percent 
have infrastructural or technology benefits 
(increasing man made capital).

Sources: Haites, Maosheng, and Seres 2006; 
Watson and Fankhauser 2009; Dechezle-
prêtre and others 2009.

three gas- flaring projects in Nigeria. There 
is a similar concentration in sectors, with 
much of the abatement action concentrated 
in a fairly small number of industrial gas 
projects.  The  CDM  has  not  supported 
any increased efficiencies in the built and 
household environments or transportation 
systems, which produce 30 percent of global 
carbon  emissions17  and  are  the  fastest-
 growing sources of carbon emissions in the 
emerging markets.18 Nor has the CDM sup-
ported sustainable livelihoods or catalyzed 
energy access for the rural and peri- urban 
poor.19 The exclusion of deforestation emis-
sions from the CDM leaves the largest emis-
sion  source  of  many  tropical  developing 
countries untapped.20

Weakness  of  the  incentive,  reinforced  by 
uncertainty about market continuity.      The 
CDM has not moved developing countries 
onto low- carbon development paths.21 The 
incentive of the CDM has been too weak to 
foster the necessary transformation in the 
economy,  without  which  carbon  intensi-
ties in developing countries will continue 

to increase.22 The CDM’s project approach 
structure and lack of leverage have restricted 
it  to  a  fairly  small  number  of  projects. 
Uncertainty about the continuation of the 
carbon  offset  market  beyond  2012  is  also 
having a chilling effect on transactions.

The efficiency cost of adaptation 
funding
An important source of adaptation finance, 
and the key revenue source of the Adapta-
tion Fund, is a 2 percent levy on the CDM, a 
tax that could be extended to include other 
trading schemes, such as Joint Implemen-
tation.  This  is  a  promising  route  to  rais-
ing financial resources for the Adaptation 
Fund, which offers clear additionality. But 
it also raises some basic economic issues. 
perhaps  the  most  important  objection  is 
that the CDM levy is taxing a good (mitiga-
tion finance) rather than a bad (emissions). 
More  generally,  the  levy  raises  two  basic 
questions:
•	 What is the scope for raising additional 
adaptation finance through the levy, and 

 

Generating the Funding Needed for Mitigation and Adaptation 

267

what  is  the  loss  in  economic  efficiency 
(or deadweight loss, in economic jargon) 
associated with the tax?

•	 how is the tax burden distributed between 
the  sellers  (developing  countries)  and 
buyers (developed countries)?

Analysis based on the U.K. government’s 
GLOCAF model shows that the ability of 
an  extended  carbon  trading  scheme  to 
raise  additional  adaptation  revenues  will 
depend on the type of global climate deal 
that is agreed.23 revenues will vary depend-
ing on the expected demand, particularly 
whether  demand  will  be  constrained  by 
supplementary  restrictions  to  promote 
domestic abatement, and to a lesser extent 
on the expected supply, including whether 
a  future  regime  could  encompass  credits 
from avoided deforestation and from other 
sectors and regions that currently produce 
little carbon trade. 

revenues  will  also  depend  on  the  tax 
rate. At the current rate of 2 percent the levy 
could be expected to raise around $2 billion 
a year in 2020 if demand is unconstrained 
but less than half that amount if restrictions 
are placed on the purchase of credits (table 
6.5). To raise $10 billion a year the tax rate 
would have to increase to 10 percent and 
all supplementary restrictions would have 
to be abolished. even at this higher rate the 
economic  cost  of  the  tax  would  be  fairly 
minor, particularly in relation to the overall 
gains from trade.

Like  all  taxes,  the  cost  of  the  levy  is 
shared  between  the  buyers  and  sellers  of 
carbon credits depending on their respon-
siveness to price changes (the price elastici-
ties of supply and demand). In the scenarios 
where  demand  is  constrained,  buyers  do 
not respond strongly to the tax, and much 
of the tax burden is thus passed on to them. 
But this response changes if constraints on 
demand  are  eased.  At  that  point  the  tax 
incidence shifts decidedly against develop-
ing countries, which have to shoulder more 
than two- thirds of the tax burden to keep 
the price of their credits competitive. That 
is,  developing  countries  would  make  the 
main contribution to the Adaptation Fund 
(through forgone carbon market revenues). 
rather than transferring funds from devel-
oped  to  developing  countries,  the  CDM 

levy would transfer resources from the big 
CDM host countries (Brazil, China, India 
—see table 6.3) to the vulnerable countries 
eligible for adaptation funding. 

Increasing the scale of climate-
 change finance 
To close the financing gap, financing sources 
have  to  be  diversified,  and  the  existing 
instruments have to be reformed to increase 
their  efficiency  and  permit  the  required 
scale- up. This section highlights some of the 
main challenges in this respect, arguing for 
the following:
•	 harnessing  new  sources  of  revenue  to 
support  adaptation  and  mitigation  by 
national  governments,  international 
organizations,  and  dedicated  financing 
mechanisms like the Adaptation Fund.

•	 Increasing the efficiency of carbon mar-
kets by reforming the CDM as a key vehicle 
to promote private mitigation funding.

•	 expanding performance- based incentives 
to land use, land- use change, and forestry 
to change the balance between private and 
public funding in this important area.

•	 Leveraging  private  sector  funding  for 

adaptation.

Countries  will  also  have  to  consider 
the  fiscal  framework  for  climate  action. 
Government action on climate mitigation 
and adaptation can have important fiscal 

Table 6.5    The tax incidence of an adaptation levy on the Clean Development Mechanism (2020)
$ millions

Deadweight 

loss

Burden to 
developing 
countries 

996
2,003

Revenue raised

Tax rate
2 percent
Restricted demand and low supply
Unrestricted demand and high supply
10 percent
Restricted demand and low supply
Unrestricted demand and high supply
Source: Fankhauser, Martin, and Prichard, forthcoming.
Note: Under restricted demand, regions can buy up to 20 percent of their target through credits; there is 
completely free trading in the unrestricted demand scenario. In the low- supply scenario the CDM operates 
in the same sectors and regions as it does now. In the high- supply scenario carbon trading is expanded 
in regional and sectoral scope, including credits from Reduced Emissions from Deforestation and forest 
Degradation (although, as noted, the latter emissions are not currently in the CDM). The total market volume 
(excluding secondary transactions) is around $50 billion in the restricted- demand, low- supply case and around 
$100 billion in the unrestricted- demand, high- supply case. 

4,946
10,069

249
1,257

869
6,962

1
7

20
126

268 

WOrL D   De VeLOpMeN T  r e pOr

T   2 0 1 0

Box 6.3    Carbon taxes versus cap- and- trade

The principal market- based instruments 
used for climate mitigation are carbon 
taxes and cap- and- trade schemes. By 
eschewing fixed quotas or technology 
standards (the usual regulatory instru-
ments employed by governments), these 
instruments leave individual firms and 
households free to find the least- cost way 
to meet a climate target.

A carbon tax is a price instrument and 
typically operates by taxing the carbon 
content of fuel inputs, thus creating an 
incentive either to switch to lower- carbon 
fuels or to use fuel more efficiently. How-
ever, because governments have imperfect 
information about the costs of fuel switch-
ing or increasing energy efficiency, there 
is corresponding uncertainty about how 
much abatement will actually occur for 
a given tax level. If a government has an 
emission cap under a global agreement, 
then it may need to adjust the tax rate 
iteratively to keep emissions within the cap.
Under a cap- and- trade scheme, govern-
ments issue emission permits representing 
a legal right to emit carbon—these permits 
are freely tradable between scheme par-
ticipants. Because firms and sectors will dif-
fer in their marginal costs of fuel switching 
or energy efficiency, the potential for gains 
from trade exists. For example, if one firm 
has a high marginal cost of mitigation while 
another has a much lower cost, then the 
firm with the lower cost can sell a permit 
at a price above its marginal cost of mitiga-
tion, reduce its emissions accordingly, and 
make a profit—and as long as the price of 
the permit is below the marginal mitiga-
tion cost of the buyer, then this is a profit-
able trade for the buyer as well. Because 
cap- and- trade is a quantitative instrument, 
there is high certainty that a country will 
stay within its cap (assuming that enforce-
ment is effective), but there may be a corre-
sponding uncertainty about the level and 
stability of permit prices.

The two instruments differ in important 

ways:
Efficiency
Because of imperfect information about 
mitigation costs, there is a risk with any 

market instrument of abating emissions, 
either too much or not enough, engen-
dering either excess costs or excess dam-
ages. A famous result by Weitzman shows 
that the choice of instrument under 
uncertainty depends on the relative slope 
of the damage and abatement cost func-
tions. What this means in the case of cli-
mate change is unclear, since the shape of 
the damage function is highly uncertain. 
However, because greenhouse gases are 
stock pollutants, many have argued that, 
in the short-term, damages are likely to 
be fairly constant per marginal ton, which 
would favor a tax.

Price volatility
While cap- and- trade creates certainty 
about the quantity of emissions, it may 
lead to uncertainty about price. For exam-
ple, if there is a shift in the business cycle 
or in the relative prices of low- carbon and 
high- carbon fuels, then permit prices will 
be directly affected. Price volatility not 
only makes it difficult to plan abatement 
strategies, it also reduces the incentive to 
invest in research and development on 
new abatement technologies. Banking 
and borrowing of allowances are two sim-
ple mechanisms that can help dampen 
price volatility.

Recycling revenues
A carbon tax is a direct source of fiscal rev-
enue, and governments have the option 
of either using the tax to finance expendi-
tures or recycling the revenues by lowering 
or eliminating other taxes. To the extent 
that recycling increases the overall effi-
ciency of the tax system, there is a “double 
dividend”—but a double dividend is not 
guaranteed if the carbon taxes themselves 
exacerbate existing inefficiencies in the 
tax system. If emission permits are auc-
tioned by the government, then these too 
become a source of fiscal revenue.

Political economy
Because the world has a fixed carbon 
budget for any chosen climate target, the 
certainty associated with a quantitative 
instrument may be appealing to some 
groups. And everyone, whether firms or 

individuals, dislikes taxes. This line of rea-
soning may seem to favor cap- and- trade, 
but tax aversion also means that firms 
will resist auctioning of permits and may 
instead lobby for their allocation of free 
permits. In general the process of allocat-
ing permits, if not done through auction, 
leads to rent seeking and potentially cor-
rupt behavior.
Administrative efficiency
The cost of administering climate policy 
and the institutional and human capi-
tal required are particularly important 
considerations in developing countries. 
A tax on the carbon content of fuels is 
potentially very cost- effective because it 
could piggyback on existing administra-
tive systems for levying excise taxes on 
fuels. In contrast setting up a market for 
auctioning and trading permits could be 
highly complex, and a regulator would be 
required to monitor the exercise of mar-
ket power by participants. In addition, a 
permit system would require monitoring 
and enforcement at the level of individual 
emitters, while monitoring of a carbon 
tax potentially could be done much more 
cheaply at the level of fuel wholesalers.

Carbon taxes and cap- and- trade are 
not necessarily mutually exclusive. The 
European Union has opted for emissions 
trading to address emissions from large 
sources (utilities, heat production, large 
energy- intensive industrial facilities, and 
aviation, to be phased in in 2011), cover-
ing about 40 percent of EU emissions. 
Other instruments (including a carbon 
tax in several European countries) target 
emissions from other sectors, notably 
residential and services, transport, waste 
management, and agriculture. In con-
trast in Australia and the United States 
cap- and- trade is emerging as the main 
instrument to regulate economywide 
greenhouse gas emissions (with a set of 
accompanying policies and measures, like 
renewable energy portfolio standards).

Sources: Bovenberg and Goulder 1996; 
Weitzman 1974; Aldy, Ley, and Parry 2008; 
Newell and Pizer 2000.

 

Generating the Funding Needed for Mitigation and Adaptation 

269

consequences for revenues, subsidies, and 
flows of international finance. Key elements 
of this framework include the following.

Choice  of  mitigation  instrument.    Taxes 
or tradable permits will be more efficient 
instruments than regulation, and each can 
generate significant fiscal revenues (assum-
ing  that  permits  are  auctioned  by  the 
government).  Box  6.3  highlights  the  key 
characteristics of carbon taxes versus cap-
 and- trade approaches.

Fiscal  neutrality.    Countries  have  the 
option  of  using  carbon  fiscal  revenues  to 
reduce other distorting taxes, which could 
have  major  growth  and  welfare  conse-
quences. But treasuries in developing coun-
tries  typically  have  a  weak  revenue  base, 
which may reduce the incentives for com-
plete fiscal neutrality.

Administrative simplicity and cost.    Car-
bon taxes, because they can be placed on the 
carbon content of fuels, offer the simplicity 
of building on existing fuel excise regimes. 
Cap- and- trade  systems  can  entail  large 
administrative costs for allocating permits 
and ensuring compliance.

Distributional impacts.    Any price instru-
ment  for  mitigation  will  have  distribu-
tional  consequences  for  different  income 
groups  depending  on  the  carbon  inten-
sity  of  their  consumption  and  whether 
they  are  employed  in  sectors  that  shrink 
as a result of carbon taxes or caps; offset-
ting fiscal actions may be required if low-
 income households are disproportionately 
affected.

Policy  coherence.    existing 
subsidy 
schemes,  particularly  on  energy  and  agri-
culture, may run counter to actions to miti-
gate and adapt to climate change. Subsidies 
on  goods  that  will  become  scarcer  under 
climate change, such as water, also risk per-
verse effects. 

Box 6.4 highlights the efforts of the Indo-
nesian Ministry of Finance to incorporate 
climate issues into overall macroeconomic 
and fiscal policy.

Generating new sources of finance for 
adaptation and mitigation
public institutions—national governments, 
international organizations, and the official 
financing  mechanisms  of  the  UNFCCC—
are among the key drivers of climate- smart 

Box 6.4    Indonesian Ministry of Finance engagement on climate change issues

Indonesia’s Finance Ministry has recog-
nized that mitigating and adapting to 
climate change require macroeconomic 
management, fiscal policy plans, revenue-
 raising alternatives, insurance markets, 
and long- term investment options. With 
development as the priority, Indonesia is 
trying to balance economic, social, and 
environmental goals. The country could 
benefit from investing in development 
with climate- friendly technology for a 
cleaner, more efficient growth path. Ben-
efits would include potential payments 
from carbon markets for the reductions in 
emissions achieved from a cleaner energy 
path or from reductions in the annual rate 
of deforestation. The Ministry of Finance 
will play an essential role in the financing, 
development, and implementation of 
climate- change policies and programs. To 
mobilize the financing needed, Indonesia 

envisions a mix of mechanisms paired 
with integrated national policies, a strong 
enabling framework, and long- term 
incentives to attract investment. 

The Finance Ministry’s comparative 

advantage is in considering the allocation 
and incentive decisions that affect the 
whole economy. In managing climate-
 financing opportunities, the ministry 
acknowledges the importance of investor 
and donor confidence in its approaches 
and institutions. Recognizing that donor 
funds—whether grants or soft loans—
will always be small relative to private 
investment in energy sector develop-
ment, infrastructure, and housing, 
Indonesia will continue to need sound 
policies and incentives to attract and 
leverage private investment toward sus-
tainable development and lower- carbon 
outcomes.

Indonesia has already taken steps to 
rationalize energy pricing by reducing 
fossil- fuel subsidies in 2005 and 2008, to 
reduce deforestation through improved 
enforcement and monitoring programs, 
and to provide incentives for import and 
installation of pollution control equip-
ment through tax breaks. The Finance 
and Development Planning ministries 
have established a national blueprint and 
budget priorities for integrating climate 
change into the national development 
process. The Finance Ministry is examin-
ing fiscal and financial policies to stimu-
late climate- friendly investment, move 
toward lower- carbon energy options 
including renewables and geothermal, 
and improve fiscal incentives in the for-
estry sector. 

Source: Ministry of Finance (Indonesia) 2008.

270 

WOrL D   De VeLOpMeN T  r e pOr

T   2 0 1 0

development. So far they have relied almost 
exclusively  on  government  revenues  to 
finance their activities. But it is unlikely that 
climate- change costs rising into the tens or 
hundreds of billions of dollars a year could be 
predominantly covered through government 
contributions.  Although  additional  funds 
will  be  forthcoming,  the  experience  with 
development  assistance  suggests  that  there 
are constraints on the amount of traditional 
donor finance that can be raised. Moreover, 
there is a worry from developing countries 
that contributions from developed countries 
may not be fully additional to existing devel-
opment assistance.

Other sources of finance will therefore 
have to be tapped, and there are several pro-
posals,  particularly  for  adaptation.  These 
include:

coordinated 

Internationally 
carbon 
tax.    proposals  for  a  nationally  adminis-
tered  but  globally  levied  carbon  tax  have 
the appeal that the tax base would be broad 
and the revenue flow fairly secure. Moreover, 
unlike the CDM levy, the tax would be aimed 
at emissions rather than emission reductions. 
rather than impose a deadweight loss, the 
tax  would  have  a  desirable  and  beneficial 
corrective effect. The main drawback is that 
an  internationally  coordinated  tax  could 
impinge  on  the  tax  authority  of  sovereign 
governments. Gaining international consen-
sus for this option may thus be difficult.

Tax on emissions from international trans-
port.    A  tax  more  narrowly  focused  on 
international  aviation  or  shipping  would 
have the advantage of targeting two sectors 
that so far have not been subject to carbon 
regulation and whose emissions are grow-
ing  fast.  The  international  nature  of  the 
sector might make a tax more palatable for 
national finance ministers, and the tax base 
would be large enough to raise considerable 
amounts. But the global governance of the 
sectors is complex, with considerable power 
in the hands of international bodies, such as 
the  International  Maritime  Organization. 
So the administrative hurdles of setting up 
such a tax might be considerable.

Auctioning  assigned  amount  units.    The 
emission  reduction  commitments  of  par-

ties under the Kyoto protocol are expressed 
in  assigned  amount  units  (AAUs)—the 
amount of carbon a country is permitted 
to emit. An innovative approach, put for-
ward originally by Norway, would set aside 
a fraction of each country’s AAU allocation 
and auction it to the highest bidder, with 
revenues earmarked for adaptation.

Domestic  auction  revenues.    earmarking 
auction revenues relies on the assumption 
that most developed countries will soon have 
fairly comprehensive cap- and- trade schemes 
and that most of the permits issued under 
the  schemes  would  be  auctioned  rather 
than  handed  out  for  free.  With  schemes 
already running or under consideration in 
practically  all  developed  countries,  this  is 
a  reasonable  expectation.  But  earmarking 
auction revenues would encroach on the fis-
cal autonomy of national governments just 
as much as an internationally coordinated 
carbon tax and may therefore be similarly 
difficult to implement. 

each of these options has its advantages 
and disadvantages.24 What is important is 
that the chosen options provide a secure, 
steady, and predictable stream of revenues 
of sufficient size. This suggests that finance 
will have to come from a combination of 
sources. Table 6.6 presents a range of poten-
tial sources of finance as proposed by devel-
oped and developing countries.

In  the  short  term  some  impetus  may 
also  come  from  international  efforts  to 
overcome the current economic slump and 
kick- start  the  economy  through  a  fiscal 
stimulus  (see  chapter  1).25  Globally,  well 
over $2 trillion has been committed in vari-
ous fiscal packages, chief among them the 
$800 billion U.S. package and the $600 bil-
lion Chinese plan. Some 18 percent of this, 
or about $400 billion, is green investment 
in energy efficiency and renewable energy, 
and also, in the Chinese plan, adaptation.26 
Deployed over the next 12–18 months these 
investments  could  do  much  to  shift  the 
world toward a low- carbon future. At the 
same time, the packages are by their very 
nature geared toward stimulating domestic 
activity.  Their  effect  on  international  cli-
mate finance to developing countries will 
at best be indirect.

 

Generating the Funding Needed for Mitigation and Adaptation 

271

Table 6.6    Potential sources of mitigation and adaptation finance

Proposal
Group of 77 and China

Switzerland

Norway
Mexico

European Union

Bangladesh, Pakistan

Colombia, least developed countries

Least developed countries

Least developed countries
Tuvalu

Source of funding

Note

Annual funding ($ billions)

0.25–0.5 percent of gross national 
product of Annex I Parties
$2 a ton of CO2 with a basic tax 
exemption of 1.5 ton CO2e per 
inhabitant
2 percent auctioning of AAUs
Contributions based on GDP, 
greenhouse gases, and population 
and possibly auctioning permits in 
developed countries
Continue 2 percent levy on share of 
proceeds from CDM
3–5 percent levy on share of 
proceeds from CDM
2 percent levy on share of proceeds 
from Joint Implementation and 
emissions trading
Levy on international air travel 
(IATAL)
Levy on bunker fuels (IMERS)
Auction of allowances for 
international aviation and marine 
emissions

Calculated for 2007 gross domestic product

201–402

Annually (based on 2012 projections)

Annually
Annually, scaling up as GDP and emissions 
rise

Ranging from low to high demand in 2020

Ranging from low to high demand in 2020

Annually, after 2012

Annually

Annually
Annually

18.4

15–25

10

0.2–0.68

0.3- 1.7 

0.03–2.25

4–10

4–15
28

Source: UNFCCC 2008a.
Note: AAU: assigned amount unit; IATAL: international air travel adaptation levy; IMERS: international maritime emission reduction scheme. Annex I Parties include the high-
income countries that were members of the OECD in 1992, plus countries with economies in transition. Annex I countries have committed themselves specifically to the aim of 
returning individually or jointly.

It takes more than finance:  
Market solutions are essential but 
additional policy tools are needed
With more national or regional initiatives 
exploring  emissions  trading,  the  carbon 
market will likely be significant in catalyz-
ing and financially supporting the needed 
transformation of investment patterns and 
lifestyles.  Through  purchasing  offsets  in 
developing  countries,  cap- and- trade  sys-
tems can finance lower- carbon investments 
in  developing  countries.  Carbon  markets 
also provide an essential impetus to finding 
efficient solutions to the climate problem.

Looking  forward,  stabilizing  tempera-
tures will require a global mitigation effort. 
At that point carbon will have a price world-
wide and will be traded, taxed, or regulated 
in  all  countries.  Once  an  efficient  carbon 
price  is  in  place,  market  forces  will  direct 
most consumption and investment decisions 
toward  low- carbon  options.  With  global 
coverage many of the complications affect-
ing the current carbon market—additional-
ity, leakage, competitiveness, scale—will fall 

away. They matter enormously today, and in 
addressing them the need for a smooth tran-
sition to an ultimately global carbon market 
must not be forgotten. however, some mar-
ket  failures  will  remain,  and  governments 
will need to intervene to correct them. 

Decisions  that  help  the  emergence  of  a 
long- term,  predictable,  and  adequate  car-
bon price are necessary for effective mitiga-
tion but, as chapter 4 shows, not sufficient. 
Some activities, such as risky research and 
development or energy- efficiency improve-
ments, are hindered by market or regulatory 
failures; others, such as urban planning, are 
not directly price sensitive. The forest and 
agriculture sectors present significant addi-
tional potential for emission reduction and 
sequestration  in  developing  countries  but 
are too complex, with intricate social issues, 
to  rely  exclusively  on  market  incentives. 
Many climate actions will require comple-
mentary finance and policy interventions—
for example, to overcome energy- efficiency 
barriers,  reduce  perceived  risks,  deepen 
domestic financial and capital markets, and 

272 

WOrL D   De VeLOpMeN T  r e pOr

T   2 0 1 0

accelerate the diffusion of climate- friendly 
technologies. 

Increasing the scale and efficiency  
of carbon markets
The absence of market continuity beyond 
2012 is the biggest risk to the momentum 
of  today’s  carbon  market.  Considerable 
uncertainties remain about the very exis-
tence  of  a  global  carbon  market  beyond 
2012, with questions about the ambition of 
mitigation targets, the resulting demand for 
carbon credits, the degree of linking of dif-
ferent trading schemes, and the role for off-
sets across various existing and upcoming 
regimes. Defining a global mitigation goal 
for 2050 supported by intermediate targets 
(to be determined through the UNFCCC 
process) would provide long- term carbon 
price  signals  and  certainty  to  the  private 
sector as major investment decisions with 
long- lasting impact on emission trajectories 
are made over the coming years. 

The next phase in constructing a global 
carbon  market  must  put  developed  coun-
tries  onto  a  low- carbon  path  and  provide 
the financial and other resources needed to 
assist the transition of developing countries 
to a lower- carbon development path. One of 
the main challenges for a climate agreement 
is to define a framework that supports and 
promotes this transformation and facilitates 
the transition to a more comprehensive sys-
tem where more countries assume emission 
reduction targets. As discussed in chapter 5, 
a gradual incorporation process can be envis-
aged, with transitions toward more stringent 
steps depending on responsibility and capac-
ity: adopting climate- friendly policies (a stage 
many  developing  countries  have  already 
reached), limiting emissions growth, and set-
ting emission reduction targets. To support 
this gradual progress, various models using 
carbon finance have been proposed.27

But  demand  for  international  offsets 
from Annex I countries will likely remain 
for  quite  some  time  at  levels  well  below 
what would be needed to reward all mitiga-
tion achievements in developing countries 
while  simultaneously  maintaining  a  suf-
ficiently  high  carbon  price.  Setting  more 
ambitious targets for Annex I countries28 
will create the incentive for greater cooper-
ation with developing countries in scaling 

up mitigation, provided a credible supply of 
offsets can be built at scale.

Concern about the effectiveness and effi-
ciency of the CDM has led to a broad array 
of proposals on how to enhance, expand, or 
evolve  the  mechanism.  Broadly  speaking, 
these could be organized along two lines of 
suggestions. One track would aim at stream-
lining the CDM to make it more appropri-
ate for a growing market dominated by the 
private sector by improving efficiency and 
governance  along  the  project  cycle  as  well 
as  by  reducing  transaction  costs.  Another 
track  would  aim  at  scaling  up  the  trans-
formational  impact  of  CDM  and  carbon 
finance beyond the limited scope of a project 
approach, focusing on investment trajecto-
ries and affecting emission trends.

It is probably not realistic to attain any-
thing more than incremental changes to the 
CDM by 2012. Some practitioners clamor 
for big improvements. But many countries 
are  still  learning  the  ropes  of  the  instru-
ment,  and  their  first  projects  have  just 
begun to enter the pipeline in the past few 
months. Others are focused on the agree-
ment and tools for scaling up post- 2012 mit-
igation. There is little or no political space 
to undertake immediate major revisions to 
the CDM before 2012, a point emphasized 
by developing countries that have argued 
that most of those revisions would require 
an amendment to the Kyoto protocol. So, 
to  organize  the  steps  in  a  possible  evolu-
tion, it may help to distinguish two levels 
of improvements or changes to the current 
CDM, which would ultimately result in two 
financial mechanisms, operating in parallel 
and complemented by a nonmarket mecha-
nism funded by public sources.

An  activity- based  CDM.      There  is  a  case 
to continue operating the current activity-
 based CDM within its existing rules, with 
some  targeted  improvements.  In  the  cur-
rent system the baseline and additionality 
are determined for the individual project 
activity, and the rules seek to differentiate 
and reward individual efforts that are bet-
ter than the norm (rather than promoting a 
better norm). Most medium- to- large instal-
lations in small countries can be effectively 
submitted  as  individual  CDM  projects, 
and microtechnologies such as light bulbs 

 

Generating the Funding Needed for Mitigation and Adaptation 

273

and  cooking  stoves  now  have  the  option 
of being registered as organized programs 
of activities under the current CDM (thus 
cutting down on transaction costs through 
aggregation).  Most  small  or  least  devel-
oped countries have more urgent demands 
on  scarce  institutional  capacity  than  the 
development  of  complex  greenhouse  gas 
accounting  schemes.  This  means  that  for 
some developing countries, perhaps most, 
there is no need for another set of rules to 
supply their mitigation potential into the 
market. 

Key  administrative  improvements 
would  target,  for  example,  improving 
the quality, relevance, and consistency of 
information flows within the CDM com-
munity;  engagement  of  a  professional, 
full- time  staff  for  the  CDM  executive 
Board and consideration of how to make 
it more representative of practitioners; and 
increasing the accountability of the pro-
cess,  potentially  including  a  mechanism 
that  provides  an  opportunity  for  project 
participants to appeal board decisions. In 
parallel, countries would have to create a 
business  environment  conducive  to  low-
 carbon investment in general.

A  trend- changing  market  mechanism.    
This new mechanism would seek to reduce 
long- term emission trends much more com-
prehensively. Set up either in or outside the 
current CDM, it would support the enact-
ment of policy changes that put developing 
countries onto a low- carbon path. It would 
recognize and promote emission reductions 
achieved  by  adopting  particular  policies 
or  programs  that  lead  to  emission  reduc-
tions at multiple sources. A programmatic 
CDM could be a first step toward a trend-
 changing market mechanism, allowing for 
the aggregation of unlimited similar activi-
ties resulting from the implementation of a 
policy across time and space. proposals to 
support a sectoral shift can be classified in 
two broad groups: those that stem from an 
agreement among industries that operate in 
the same sector but are located across dif-
ferent countries; and those that evolve from 
a national government’s decision to imple-
ment a specific policy or program. 

There have been many thoughts on how 
CDM  and  carbon  finance  could  support 

climate- friendly  policies  in  developing 
countries.  The  proposed  options  all  con-
sider  a  mechanism  for  carbon  finance  to 
reward the measurable outcomes of a policy 
(in reduced emissions). Variants pertain to 
the policy and country commitment under 
an international agreement (mandatory or 
flexible),  the  geographical  scale  (regional 
or national), or the sectoral scope (sectoral 
or  cross- sectoral).  Among  these  options 
sectoral  no- lose  targets,  whereby  a  coun-
try could sell carbon credits for emission 
reductions below an agreed target (which 
would lie below business-as-usual levels), 
while not being penalized for not achiev-
ing the target, have attracted a great deal 
of  interest.  Such  a  mechanism  would  be 
adapted to developing countries needing to 
significantly scale up private sector invest-
ment—beyond the reach of the CDM in its 
current form—in line with their sustain-
able development priorities. 

Creating financial incentives for REDD 
A particular concern for developing coun-
tries is the lack of financial incentives for 
reduced  emissions  from  Deforestation 
and forest Degradation (reDD). In 2005, 
nearly one fourth of emissions in develop-
ing countries came from land- use change 
and forestry, so this is a substantial exclu-
sion.29 But land use, land- use change, and 
forestry have always been problematic and 
contentious  in  the  climate  negotiations. 
There was great opposition to their inclu-
sion  in  the  Kyoto  protocol.  As  a  result, 

Table 6.7    National and multilateral initiatives to reduce deforestation and degradation

Total estimated funding 

($ millions)

Initiative
International Forest Carbon Initiative 
(Australia)
Climate and Forest Initiative (Norway)
Forest Carbon Partnership Facility 
(World Bank)
Forest Investment Program  
(part of Climate Investment Funds)
UN- REDD Program
Amazon Fund
Congo Basin Forest Fund
Source: UNFCCC 2008b.
Note: Names in parentheses are countries or institutions that championed the proposal.

35
1,000
200

160

2,250
300

350

Period
2007–12

2008–12
2008–18

2009–12

2008–12
2008–15
Uncertain

274 

WOrL D   De VeLOpMeN T  r e pOr

T   2 0 1 0

Box 6.5    Conserving agricultural soil carbon

The mitigation potential in the agri-
cultural sector could be significant, 
estimated to be around 6 gigatons 
of carbon dioxide equivalent (CO2e) 
a year by 2030, with soil carbon 
sequestration being the main mecha-
nism. Many mitigation opportunities 
(including cropland management, 
grazing land management, manage-
ment of organic soils, restoration of 
degraded land, and livestock manage-
ment) use current technologies and 
can be implemented immediately. In 
addition, these options are also cost 
competitive: assuming a price of less 
than $20 a ton of CO2e, the global eco-
nomic mitigation potential in the agri-
cultural sector is close to 2 gigatons of 
CO2e a year by 2030. 

Extending the scope of carbon 
markets to include agricultural soil 
carbon would allow carbon finance 

to play more of a role in sound land 
management practices. Agricul-
tural carbon sequestration can help 
increase agricultural productivity and 
enhance farmers’ capacity to adapt to 
climate change. Increased soil carbon 
improves soil structure, with corre-
sponding reduction in soil erosion and 
nutrient depletion. Soils with increased 
carbon stocks retain water better, 
thereby improving the resilience of 
agricultural systems to drought. These 
positive biophysical impacts of soil 
carbon sequestration lead directly to 
increased crop, forage, and plantation 
yields and land productivity. However, 
issues of monitoring and verification 
of the increased storage and the per-
manence of the carbon sequestration 
need to be resolved.

Source: IPCC 2007.

only afforestation and reforestation were 
allowed  within  the  CDM,  but  the  euro-
pean  Union  emission  Trading  Scheme 
excludes them.

Initial  attention  to  reDD  was  focused 
on countries where deforestation is occur-
ring (table 6.7). But some heavily forested 
countries  have  little  deforestation,  and 
they seek support to manage and conserve 
their forests sustainably, especially if reDD 
activities in other countries shift logging and 
agricultural expansion across national bor-
ders (leakage). Other countries already have 
policies and measures to bring their forests 
under  sustainable  management,  and  they 
seek recognition of their efforts in reducing 
emissions through market- based solutions 
akin  to  payments  for  environmental  ser-
vices. As discussed in chapter 3, conserving 
soil carbon (box 6.5) through performance-
 based mechanisms is also gaining traction, 
but discussions are at a less advanced stage 
than for reDD. 

reDD touches on many groups and other 
societal goals, often with a mix of potential 
positive and negative effects. It could pro-
vide a new source of income to indigenous 
peoples, but they are rightly concerned that 

reDD mechanisms may be used to threaten 
their rights of access and their use of tradi-
tional lands. reDD may provide resources 
to  bring  areas  of  high  biodiversity  value 
under  better  protection,  but  it  could  also 
displace  logging  and  land  clearing  across 
international  borders  to  high  biodiversity 
areas (another example of leakage).

It is generally recognized that before forest 
countries can receive financial incentives for 
reDD, they need to establish building blocks 
in the policy, legal, institutional, and techni-
cal areas—referred to as reDD- readiness. 
The  key  components  of  reDD- readiness 
ought to be carried out at the national level 
(not at the project level) to respond to the 
systemic causes of deforestation and forest 
degradation and to contain leakage.

The  Forest  Carbon  partnership  Facil-
ity (FCpF) has been designed to help forest 
countries in tropical and subtropical regions 
prepare for reDD and pilot performance-
 based  incentives.  In  the  FCpF,  reDD-
 readiness  consists  of  a  national  reDD 
strategy  and  implementation  framework; 
a national reference scenario for emissions 
from  deforestation  and  forest  degrada-
tion; and a national monitoring, reporting, 
and verification system. The UN- reDD, a 
joint initiative of the Food and Agriculture 
Organization, the United Nations Develop-
ment programme, and the United Nations 
environment  programme,  is  a  similar 
program. 

In its national reDD strategy a country 
would assess its land use and forest policy to 
date, identifying the drivers of deforestation 
and forest degradation. Next, it would con-
ceive strategic options to address these driv-
ers and would assess these options from the 
point of view of cost- effectiveness, fairness, 
and sustainability. This would be followed 
by an assessment of the legal and institu-
tional arrangements needed to implement 
the reDD strategy, including the body (or 
bodies) responsible for coordinating reDD 
at  the  national  level,  promoting  reDD, 
and raising funds; benefit- sharing mecha-
nisms for the financial flows expected from 
reDD;  and  a  national  carbon  registry  to 
manage reDD activities (both the emission 
reductions generated and the correspond-
ing revenue flows). In addition, the country 

 

Generating the Funding Needed for Mitigation and Adaptation 

275

would evaluate the investment and capacity 
building needed to implement the strategy 
and  would  assess  the  environmental  and 
social impacts of the various strategy and 
implementation options (the benefits, risks, 
and risk- mitigation measures).

reDD- ready countries need to develop 
a national reference scenario. The scenario 
should include a retrospective part, calculat-
ing a recent historical average of emissions, 
and could also include a forward- looking 
component,  forecasting  future  emissions 
based  on  economic  growth  trends  and 
national development plans.

A  national  monitoring,  reporting,  and 
verification  (MrV)  system  is  central  to  a 
system  of  performance- based  payments. 
The  MrV  system  could  include  the  pay-
ments’ impacts on biodiversity and liveli-
hoods as well as on carbon levels. The roles 
of remote- sensing technology and ground-
 based  measurements  must  be  defined  as 
part of the MrV system. experience from 
community- based  natural  resource  man-
agement initiatives has shown that involve-
ment of local people, including indigenous 
peoples,  in  participatory  monitoring  of 
natural  resources  can  also  provide  accu-
rate,  cost- effective,  and  locally  anchored 
information on forest biomass and natural 
resource trends.30 Natural resource stocks, 
benefit sharing, and wider social and eco-
logical  effects  of  reDD  schemes  can  be 
monitored by local communities. partici-
patory  approaches  have  the  potential  to 
greatly improve the governance and man-
agement of reDD schemes.

Before  large- scale,  performance- based 
payments for reDD can begin, most for-
est  countries  will  need  to  adopt  policy 
reforms  and  undertake  investment  pro-
grams.  Investments  may  be  needed  to 
build  institutional  capacity,  improve  for-
est governance and information, scale up 
conservation and sustainable management 
of  forests,  and  relieve  pressure  on  forests 
through, say, relocating agribusiness activ-
ities away from forests or improving agri-
cultural productivity. To assist countries in 
these activities several initiatives have been 
launched or are under design (see table 6.7). 
In addition the World Bank has proposed 
a  forest  investment  program  under  the 

Climate Investment Funds, and the prince’s 
rainforest  project  and  the  Coalition  for 
rainforest Nations have recently proposed 
that  financial  institutions  issue  bonds  to 
raise  significant  resources  to  help  forest 
countries finance forest conservation and 
development programs. This example illus-
trates how a mix of instruments is required 
to steer a transformation of behaviors and 
investment decisions: a combination of up- 
front finance (concessional and innovative 
finance)  and  performance- based  incen-
tives are needed to promote policy reforms, 
build capacity, and undertake investment 
programs. The example also highlights the 
crucial role of public finance as a catalyst 
for climate action.

Leveraging private finance for adaptation
Compared with mitigation, where the empha-
sis has been on private finance from carbon 
markets,  adaptation  finance  has  a  strong 
focus on official flows. This is not surpris-
ing, given that adaptation is closely linked to 
good development and that many adaptation 
measures  are  public  goods—for  example, 
the protection of coastal zones (a local pub-
lic good) and the provision of timely climate 
information (a national public good). 

Despite the emphasis on public finance, 
much of the adaptation burden will fall on 
individuals and firms. Insurance against cli-
mate hazards, for example, is provided pri-
marily by the private sector. Similarly, the 
task of climate- proofing the world’s capital 
stock—private dwellings, factory buildings, 
and  machinery—will  fall  predominantly 
on private owners, although the state will 
have to provide flood protection and disas-
ter  relief.  private  companies  also  own  or 
operate some of the public infrastructure 
that  will  have  to  be  adapted  to  a  warmer 
world—seaports, electric power plants, and 
water and sewage systems.

For governments the challenge of involv-
ing the private sector in adaptation finance 
is threefold: getting private players to adapt; 
sharing the cost of adapting public infra-
structure; and leveraging private finance to 
fund dedicated adaptation investments.

Getting private players to adapt effectively.    
Most consumption and business decisions 

276 

WOrL D   De VeLOpMeN T  r e pOr

T   2 0 1 0

are  affected,  directly  or  indirectly,  by  cli-
mate factors—from the clothes people wear 
to  the  planting  decisions  farmers  make  to 
the way buildings are designed. people are 
used  to  making  these  implicit  adaptation 
decisions.  The  main  role  for  governments 
will be to provide an economic environment 
that facilitates these decisions. This can take 
the form of economic incentives (tax breaks 
for adaptation investments, property taxes 
differentiated by risk, differentiated insur-
ance premiums), regulation (zone planning, 
building  codes)  or  simply  education  and 
better information (long- term weather fore-
casts, agricultural extension services). 

These measures will entail an economic 
cost, such as meeting stricter building reg-
ulation,  using  different  seed  varieties,  or 
paying  higher  insurance  premiums.  That 
cost  will  be  borne  by  the  economy  and 
spread across sectors as producers pass on 
higher costs to their clients and as insurance 
schemes  help  to  pool  risks.  There  will  be 
little need to draw on dedicated adaptation 
funding,  except  perhaps  to  meet  the  gov-
ernment’s administrative costs or to protect 
vulnerable groups from the adverse effects 
of a policy.

Sharing the costs of adapting public infra-
structure.      A  large  part  of  the  public 
adaptation bill involves climate- proofing a 
country’s transport infrastructure, electric 
power networks, water systems, and commu-
nication networks. Whether these services 
are provided by public, private, or commer-
cialized public entities, the bill will need to 
be funded either by taxpayers (domestic, or 
foreign if adaptation assistance is provided) 
or by users (through higher tariffs). 

For infrastructure service providers cli-
mate change (and climate policy) will become 
another  risk  factor  to  take  into  account 
alongside other regulatory, commercial, and 
macroeconomic risks.31 It would therefore 
be wise to build responsibility for adapta-
tion into the regulatory regime as early and 
predictably as possible. The greater physical 
uncertainty also requires building more flex-
ibility into the regulatory system because ex 
ante regulation is ill suited to situations with 
unpredictable changes. New and innovative 
approaches  to  regulation  offer  promising 

alternatives. A good example is the model 
adopted by the U.K. energy regulator, which 
can act as an auditor and leave investment 
decisions to the key actors in the government 
and the private sector.32

Leveraging private finance to fund dedicated 
adaptation investments.      For several rea-
sons the scope for private participation in 
dedicated adaptation infrastructure is prob-
ably limited. Given that dedicated adapta-
tion  investments  typically  do  not  create 
commercial revenues for private operators, 
they must be remunerated from the public 
purse. This creates a debt- like liability for 
the government that needs to be recorded 
in the public accounts. Nor does the effi-
ciency argument look compelling.33 Adap-
tation structures such as flood defenses are 
fairly cheap and simple to operate and so 
offer little scope for operational efficiency 
gains by a private manager. There may be 
more scope for efficiency gains in the con-
struction and design phase, but these can 
be captured equally well through appropri-
ate procurement mechanisms.

More  generally  private  f lows  have 
amounted  to  a  small  share  of  the  overall 
infrastructure funding needs of developing 
countries and are likely to remain modest for 
the duration of the current financial crisis.34 
For  this  and  the  reasons  discussed  above, 
infrastructure  experts  have  warned  not  to 
expect too much from public- private part-
nerships in raising climate- change finance.35

Ensuring the transparent, efficient, 
and equitable use of funds
however successful the attempts at raising 
additional funds may be, climate finance will 
be scarce, so funds have to be used effectively 
and allocated transparently and equitably.

On  the  mitigation  side,  fund  alloca-
tion will be dominated by efficiency con-
siderations.  Mitigation  is  a  global  public 
good, and its benefits are the same wher-
ever  abatement  takes  place  (although 
the  allocation  of  mitigation  costs  raises 
equity  issues).  With  the  right  framework 
in place—essentially a carbon market that 
allows the exploration of abatement oppor-
tunities on a global scale while protecting 

 

Generating the Funding Needed for Mitigation and Adaptation 

277

host- country interests—a combination of 
carbon markets, other performance- based 
systems, and public funds aimed at niches 
overlooked by the market can allocate capi-
tal fairly effectively. 

The  allocation  of  adaptation  finance, 
by contrast, raises important questions of 
fairness  as  well  as  efficiency.  Unlike  that 
for  mitigation  the  allocation  of  adapta-
tion  resources  has  strong  distributional 
implications.  Money  spent  protecting 
small island states is no longer available for 
African  farmers.  The  question  of  how  to 
classify adaptation finance is still debated, 
and  the  controversy  spills  over  to  how  to 
allocate this finance. Developing countries 
are inclined to view adaptation finance as 
compensation  for  damages,  invoking  a 
global  polluter- pays  principle.  From  the 
developing- country  viewpoint,  therefore, 
the  question  of  how  adaptation  finance 
is  used  is  beyond  the  purview  of  high-
 income countries. But the latter countries 
feel strongly that scarce financial resources 
should be used efficiently, whatever the jus-
tification for or provenance of the funds.

It  can  certainly  be  argued  that  the  effi-
cient  and  equitable  allocation  and  use  of 
adaptation finance are in everybody’s inter-
est. Wasteful use of resources can undermine 
public support for the whole climate agenda. 
That  makes  the  transparent,  efficient,  and 
equitable  allocation  of  adaptation  funding 
paramount. As an example of how develop-
ment institutions have handled the allocation 
of finance, consider the approach taken by 
the International Development Association 
(IDA), which constructs an index combining 
the need for finance, the absorptive capacity 
of the government, and the performance of 
the central government (box 6.6). The IDA 
approach is not without its faults. Because 
the formula is uniform across countries, it 
essentially  imposes  the  same  development 
model  on  all  countries.36  This  is  already 
problematic for standard development issues 
and may be even more so for climate change, 
where  much  less  is  known  about  the  right 
adaptation  model.  even  so,  an  empirical 
approach  to  allocating  adaptation  finance 
that  aims  to  address  these  concerns  could 
serve at least three purposes: it could reduce 
transaction costs if lobbying and negotiation 

Box 6.6      Allocating concessional development finance

The International Development Asso-
ciation (IDA) allocation formula offers 
a possible model for allocating con-
cessional finance in a transparent and 
empirically driven way. This evolving 
model of resource allocation, with 10 
years of progressive refinement, has 
allocated roughly $10 billion of con-
cessional finance a year to the world’s 
poorest countries.

The IDA allocation formula breaks 
down into three basic indexes, one 
of need for concessional finance, 
one of absorptive capacity, and one 
of performance of the central govern-
ment. On need, the basic criterion 
is the average poverty level in each 
country, weighted to favor the poorest 
countries, times the number of people 
in the country. Absorptive capacity 
is measured by World Bank portfolio 
performance—delays in disbursement 
and cancellations of loans or credits 
are clear indicators of poor ability to 
absorb additional finance. Based on 
results from the aid- effectiveness 
literature, the formula is weighted 
toward countries with the strongest 
governance because the evidence 
suggests that these countries most 
successfully translate aid resources 
into economic growth. Performance 

of central government in turn has two 
subindexes: quality of macroeconomic, 
structural, and social policies and institu-
tions and quality of governance, derived 
from the World Bank Country Policy 
and Institutional Assessment. 

The formula gives weights of 

68 percent to governance; 24 per-
cent to macroeconomic, social, and 
structural policies; and 8 percent to 
absorptive capacity. The composite 
of these scores is then multiplied by 
the number of people in the country, 
weighted by the average income of 
the population (to capture need) to 
derive the final score that drives the 
allocation of concessional finance.

Because this formula could penal-
ize some of the neediest countries, 
a portion of the annual supply of 
finance is allocated off the top: each 
country receives a minimum alloca-
tion; countries coming out of conflict 
and with extremely fragile institu-
tions are given additional assistance; 
and allowance is made for natural 
disasters. In addition IDA finance is 
capped for “blend” countries, which 
have access to commercial finance.

Sources: IDA 2007; Burnside and Dollar 
2000.

are not part of the allocation process; it could 
support the results agenda with an allocation 
process based on empirical measures; and it 
could support mutual accountability through 
transparency in allocations.

The measure of need for finance should 
be closely related to the concept of climate 
vulnerability. As conceived by the IpCC, 
vulnerability is a function of the capacity 
to adapt, the sensitivity to climate factors, 
and the exposure to climate change.37 The 
measure  of  need  for  finance  could  thus 
be  some  population- weighted  index  of 
sensitivity  and  exposure,  perhaps  with  a 
poverty weight as well. For large countries 
in particular, the distribution of impacts 
and  differences  in  vulnerability  between 
localities would also have to be taken into 
account.

278 

WOrL D   De VeLOpMeN T  r e pOr

T   2 0 1 0

Central  government  performance  and 
absorptive  capacity  for  flows  of  finance 
clearly  determine  a  country’s  capacity  to 
adapt,  but  they  are  not  the  only  critical 
performance factors in climate adaptation. 
What might be called “social capacity” would 
appear important in determining the sever-
ity of local climatic impacts, including such 
factors as inequality (Gini coefficient), depth 
of financial markets, dependency ratio, adult 
literacy rate, and female education.

In sum, an allocation index for adapta-
tion finance could consist of the following 
factors:

Allocation index =

Central government 
performance
× Absorptive capacity
× Lack of social capacity
× Climate sensitivity
× Climate change exposure
× Population weight
× Poverty weight

Actually constructing such an index pres-
ents several challenges. Information about 
the vulnerability of developing countries is 
still  sketchy.  Difficulties  emerge  from  the 
complicated, and often undefined, pathways 
that translate potential impacts, themselves 
uncertain, into vulnerability. Compound-
ing the uncertainty in linking environmen-
tal to socioeconomic impacts is the further 
uncertainty inherent in future climate sce-
narios.  Models  rely  on  a  limited  number 
of defined socioeconomic predictions, and 
each model has a range of potential changes. 
So most studies relating to future climatic 
scenarios focus on expected impacts within 
sectors or relate to specific outcomes, such 
as changes in health and losses because of 
sea- level rise. Few studies have attempted to 
translate these outputs into an assessment of 
vulnerability on the ground.38

As with IDA allocations, there is a risk 
that  a  climate  adaptation  allocation  index 
will penalize poor countries with high cli-
mate sensitivity and exposure but very weak 
institutions. If an allocation formula is pur-
sued, allowances for extremely fragile coun-
tries should be part of the overall allocation 
framework.

Some  tentative  first  steps  toward  con-
structing a vulnerability index are shown 
in box 6.7, which plots a composite index of 
projected physical impacts against a com-
posite index of social capacity. The results 
of this stylized exercise are indicative only, 
but they suggest that the countries with the 
highest vulnerability are predominantly in 
Sub-Saharan Africa.39 Box 6.8 scatters the 
same projected impact index against a mea-
sure  of  country  performance  (combined 
central government capacity and ability to 
absorb finance) derived from the IDA allo-
cation formula. Again Sub- Saharan Africa 
exhibits the combination of projected high 
impacts and low capacity to adapt.

Matching financing needs and 
sources of funds 
Combating climate change is a massive socio-
economic, technological, institutional, and 
policy  challenge.  particularly  for  develop-
ing countries it is also a financing challenge. 
By about 2030 the incremental investment 
needs for mitigation in developing countries 
could be $140 to $175 billion (with associated 
financing requirements of $265 to $565 bil-
lion) a year. The financing needs for adapta-
tion by that time could be $30 to $100 billion 
a  year.  This  is  additional  funding  beyond 
baseline development finance needs, which 
also remain essential and will help in part to 
close existing adaptation gaps.

Though growing, current climate- related 
financial flows to developing countries cover 
only a tiny fraction of the estimated needs. 
No  single  source  will  provide  that  much 
additional revenue, and so a combination 
of  funding  sources  will  be  required.  For 
adaptation funding might come from the 
current adaptation levy on the CDM, which 
could raise around $2 billion a year by 2020 
if extended to a wider set of carbon transac-
tions. proposals like the sale of AAUs, a levy 
on international transport emissions, and a 
global carbon tax could each raise around 
$15 billion a year. 

For mitigation at the national level the 
majority  of  funding  will  have  to  come 
from the private sector. But public policy 
will need to create a business environment 
conducive  to  low- carbon  investment, 
including but not limited to an expanded, 

 

Generating the Funding Needed for Mitigation and Adaptation 

279

Box 6.7    Climate vulnerability versus social capacity

The figure plots a composite index of 
physical impact (taken as a function of cli-
mate sensitivity and climate- change expo-
sure and derived from a number of global 
impact studies) against a composite index 
of social capacity (derived from a number 
of socioeconomic indicators).

Social capacity and vulnerability, as 

measured by projected impacts, are com-
posite indexes of the indicators described 
in the table below.

Vulnerability to impacts
2.50

2.00

1.50

1.00

0.50

0.00

–0.50

–1.00

–1.50

East Asia and Pacific
Europe and 
Central Asia
Middle East and 
North Africa
Latin America and 
Caribbean
South Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa

–2.00

–2.50

–2.00

–1.50

–1.00

–0.50
0.00
Social capacity

0.50

1.00

1.50

2.00

Impact

Indicator
Sea- level rise

Agriculture

Metric
Percent population affected 
by 1 meter rise
Percent yield loss in 2050, 
IPCC SRES scenario A2b

Source
Dasgupta and others  
2007
Parry and others 2004

Health 

Disaster

Literacy 

Social 
capacity

Age dependency ratio

Primary completion 
rate (female)

Gini

Domestic credit to 
private sector

Governance

Percent additional deaths 
in 2050
Percent population killed by 
disasters (historical data set)
Percent population, aged >15 
years, literate (1991–2005)
Ratio of dependent 
population to working 
population (2006)
Percent female population 
completing primary 
education (1991–2006)
Gini coefficient (latest 
available year)
Domestic credit to private 
sector, as percent of GDP 
(1998–2006)
WGI (World Governance 
Indicator) voice and 
accountability

Assumptions
Landlocked countries assumed to experience zero 
impact
Decreasing yields represent decreasing welfare 
for country. Increased yields from climate change 
represent increasing welfare. Farm- level adaptation 
present
Additional deaths representative of all health 
impacts from climate change
Current disaster patterns to represent future areas 
at risk
The higher the literacy rate, the higher the social 
capacity
The lower the age dependency ratio, the higher the 
social capacity

Bosello, Roson, and  
Tol 2006
CRED 2008

World Bank 2007c

World Bank 2007c

World Bank 2007c

The higher the completion rate, the higher the 
social capacity

World Bank 2007c

World Bank 2007c

The lower the inequality, the higher the social 
capacity
The greater the investment, the higher the social 
capacity

Kaufman, Kraay, and 
Mastruzzi 2008

The higher the WGI score, the higher the social 
capacity

280 

WOrL D   De VeLOpMeN T  r e pOr

T   2 0 1 0

Box 6.8      Climate vulnerability versus capacity to adapt

The figure plots the impact index against 
a measure of country performance (com-
bined central government capacity and 
ability to absorb finance) derived from 
the International Development Associa-
tion allocation formula.

Capacity to adapt is a composite index 

of the indicators described in the table 
below, and it is calculated by the formula: 
Country performance = 0.24*average 
(CPIAa, CPIAb and CPIAc) + 0.68*CPIAd + 
0.08*ARPP,
where CPIA = Country Policy and Insti-
tutional Assessment and ARPP = Annual 
Report on Portfolio Performance.

Vulnerability to impacts
2.50

2.00

1.50

1.00

0.50

0.00

–0.50

–1.00

–1.50

East Asia and
Pacific
Europe and 
Central Asia
Middle East and 
North Africa
Latin America
and Caribbean
South Asia
Sub-Saharan
Africa

–2.00

–4.00

–3.00

–2.00

–1.00
0.00
Capacity to adapt

1.00

2.00

3.00

Indicator
Economic management

Capacity 
to adapt

Structural policies
Policies for social inclusion  
and equity
Public sector management  
and institutions (governance)
Capacity to absorb finance

Metric (year)
CPIAa (2007)

CPIAb (2007)
CPIAc (2007)

CPIAd (2007)

ARPP (2007) World  
Bank portfolio at risk  
(age- discounted)

Source
World Bank 

World Bank 
World Bank 

World Bank 

World Bank

Assumptions
The higher the country performance,  
the higher the capacity to adapt

Sources: CPIA figures http://go.worldbank.org/S2THWI1X60. For details on the calculation of CPIA scores, see World Bank 2007b. ARPP scores 
are reported in World Bank 2007a.

efficient, and well- regulated carbon mar-
ket.  Complementary  public  funding—
most likely from fiscal transfers—may be 
required  to  overcome  investment  barri-
ers (such as those related to risk) and to 
reach  areas  the  private  sector  is  likely  to 
neglect.  Stringent  emission  targets  will 
also be required—initially in high-income 
countries, eventually for many others—to 
create enough demand for offsets and to 
support the carbon price. 

Once the majority of countries have emis-
sion  caps  under  an  international  climate 

agreement, markets can autonomously gen-
erate much of the needed national mitiga-
tion finance as consumption and production 
decisions respond to carbon prices, whether 
through taxes or cap- and- trade. But national 
carbon markets will not automatically gen-
erate  international  flows  of  finance.  Flows 
of  mitigation  finance  to  developing  coun-
tries can come from fiscal flows, from link-
ing  national  emission  trading  schemes,  or 
potentially from trading AAUs. Flows from 
developed to developing countries can thus 
be achieved in several ways. But these flows 

 

Generating the Funding Needed for Mitigation and Adaptation 

281

are central to ensuring that an effective and 
efficient solution to the climate problem is 
also an equitable solution.

Notes

1. See the overview chapter for details. 
2. Barker and others 2007.
3. UNFCCC 2008a.
4. Agrawala  and  Fankhauser  (2008)  review 
the adaptation cost literature; Klein and persson 
(2008) discuss the link between adaptation and 
development.  parry  and  others  (2009)  critique 
the UNFCCC adaptation cost estimate, suggest-
ing that the true costs could be 2–3 times higher.
5. Besides  carbon  markets,  tradable  green 
and white certificates schemes (targeting respec-
tively the expansion of renewable energy sources 
or the improvement of energy efficiency through 
demand- side  management  measures)  are  other 
examples  of  market- based  mechanisms  with 
potential mitigation benefits. Other instruments 
include  financial  incentives  (taxes  or  subsidies, 
price  support,  tax  benefits  on  investment,  or 
subsidized loans) and other policy and measures 
(norms, labels).

6. The  financial  benefit  to  host  countries  is 
lower than the overall size of the CDM market 
for  two  reasons.  First  a  vast  majority  of  CDM 
transactions on the primary market are forward 
purchase  agreements  with  payment  on  delivery 
of  emission  reductions.  Depending  on  project 
performance,  the  amount  and  schedule  of  car-
bon  delivery  may  prove  quite  different.  project 
developers tend to sell forward credits at a dis-
count  that  reflects  these  delivery  risks.  Second 
CDM credits are bought and sold several times 
on a secondary market until they reach the end 
user.  The  financial  intermediaries  active  on  the 
secondary market that take on the delivery risk 
are  compensated  with  a  higher  sell- on  price  if 
the  risk  does  not  materialize.  These  trades  do 
not  directly  give  rise  to  emission  reductions, 
unlike transactions in the primary market. The 

secondary  CDM  market  continued  to  grow  in 
2008  with  transactions  in  excess  of  $26  billion 
(a  fivefold  increase  over  2007).  In  contrast  the 
primary CDM market declined in value for the 
first time, to $ 7.2 billion (down 12 percent from 
2007 levels), under the weight of the economic 
downturn and amid lingering uncertainty about 
market  continuity  after  2012.  See  Capoor  and 
Ambrosi 2009. 

7. OeCD/DAC,  rio  Marker 

for  climate 
change,  http://www.oecd.org/document/11/0,33
43,en_2649_34469_11396811_1_1_1_1,00.html 
(accessed May 2009).

8. UNep  2009.  estimates  of  clean  energy 
investments  that  benefit  from  CDM  tend  to  be 
higher than actual sustainable energy investment 
in  developing  countries  because  many  CDM 
projects are at an early stage (not operational or 
commissioned or at financial closure) when cer-
tified emission reductions are transacted.

9. See Decision 1/Cp.13 reached at the 13th 
Conference  of  the  parties  of  the  UNFCCC  in 
Bali, December 2007, http://unfccc.int/resource/
docs/2007/cop13/eng/06a01.pdf#page=3 
(accessed July 3, 2009).

10. Michaelowa  and  pallav  (2007)  and 
 Schneider (2007), for example, claim that a num-
ber of projects would have happened anyway. In 
contrast, business organizations complain about 
an excessively stringent additionality test (IeTA 
2008; UNFCCC 2007).

11. Olsen  2007;  Sutter  and  parreno  2007; 

Olsen and Fenhann 2008; Nussbaumer 2009.

12. Cosbey and others 2005; Brown and others 

2004; Michaelowa and Umamaheswaran 2006.

13. Streck  and  Chagas  2007;  Meijer  2007; 

Streck and Lin 2008.

14. IeTA 2005; Stehr 2008.
15. IeTA 2008.
16. Michaelowa and pallav 2007; IeTA 2008.
17. Barker and others 2007.
18. Sperling and Salon 2002.
19. Figueres and Newcombe 2007.
20. eliasch 2008.

“The ice is melting because of rising temperature. The boy sits upset. A 

bird has fallen—another victim of polluted air. Flowers grow near the 

trash can. They die before the boy could take them to the bird. To reverse 

these phenomena my appeal to world leaders is keep nature clean, use 

solar and wind energies, and improve technologies.”

—Shant Hakobyan, Armenia, age 12

282 

WOrL D   De VeLOpMeN T  r e pOr

T   2 0 1 0

21. Figueres,  haites,  and  hoyt  2005;  Wara 

2007; Wara and Victor 2008.

22. Sterk 2008.
23. See  Fankhauser,  Martin,  and  prichard, 

forthcoming.

24. See Müller 2008 for a discussion.
25. Barbier 2009; Bowen and others 2009.
26. robins, Clover, and Magness 2009, as dis-

cussed in chapter 1. 

27. These include models under which emis-
sion  reductions  would  be  rewarded  in  relation 
to particular sectors or that are built on various 
forms of targets, such as intensity or absolute or 
relative  emission  reduction.  Crediting  achieve-
ments could take place on the national level only 
or  involve  project  activities.  Crediting  could  be 
based on an initial allocation of allowances (cap-
 and- trade) or ex post (baseline- and- credit). And 
it could be linked or separated from existing car-
bon  markets.  Mechanisms  that  build  on  emis-
sions trading can be directly or indirectly linked 
to  other  carbon  markets  and  can  create  credits 
that are fully, partly, or not fungible with existing 
carbon markets.

28. If  achieved,  the  total  reductions  of  the 
various  proposals  of  high-income  countries 
would reduce emissions in aggregate only 10–15 
percent  below  1990  emissions  levels  by  2020. 
This is far short of the 25–40 percent reductions 
below 1990 levels that have been called for by the 
IpCC in the 2020 time frame; see howes 2009.

29. WrI 2008; houghton 2009.
30. Danielsen and others 2009.
31. Vagliasindi 2008.
32. pollitt 2008.
33. Agrawala and Fankhauser 2008.
34. Investment commitments through public-
 private  partnerships  have  amounted  to  0.3–0.4 
percent  of  developing  countries’  GDp  over  the 
2005–07  period  (private  participation  in  Infra-
structure  Database,  http://ppi.worldbank.org/). 
In  contrast,  infrastructure  investment  needs  are 
estimated to range from 2 percent to 7 percent of 
GDp, with fast- growing countries like China and 
Vietnam investing upward of 7 percent of GDp a 
year. estache and Fay 2007. 

35. estache 2008.
36. Kanbur 2005.
37. Füssel 2007.
38. Impact  and  vulnerability  studies  include, 
for  instance,  Bättig,  Wild,  and  Imboden  (2007); 
Deressa, hassan, and ringler (2008); Diffenbaugh 
and others (2007); and Giorgi (2006). Other stud-
ies have focused on sectoral losses or case study/
country  specific  vulnerability:  see  Dasgupta  and 
others (2007) on coastal zones; parry and others 
(1999)  and  parry  and  others  (2004)  on  changes 
in  global  agricultural  yields;  Arnell  (2004)  and 

Alcamo and henrichs (2002) for water availabil-
ity changes; Tol, ebi, and Yohe (2006) and Bosello, 
roson, and Tol (2006) for health.

39. In  boxes  6.7  and  6.8,  composite  indexes 
are  calculated  by  transforming  individual  indi-
cators  to  z- scores  then  taking  an  unweighted 
average of the resulting scores.

References
Agrawala, S., and S. Fankhauser. 2008. Economic 

Aspects of Adaptation to Climate Change: 
Costs, Benefits and Policy Instruments. paris: 
Organisation for economic Co- operation and 
Development.

Alcamo, J., and T. henrichs. 2002. “Critical 

regions: A Model- based estimation of World 
Water resources Sensitive to Global Changes.” 
Aquatic Sciences 64 (4): 352–62.

Aldy, J. e., e. Ley, and I. parry. 2008. A Tax-

 Based Approach to Slowing Global Climate 
Change. Washington, DC: resources for the 
Future.

Arnell, N. W. 2004. “Climate Change and Global 
Water resources: SreS emissions and Socio-
 economic Scenarios.” Global Environmental 
Change 14 (1): 31–52.

Bättig, M. B., M. Wild, and D. M. Imboden. 2007. 

“A Climate Change Index: Where Climate 
Change May Be prominent in the 21st Cen-
tury.” Geophysical Research Letters 34 (1): 1–4.
Barbier, e. B. 2009. A Global Green New Deal. 
Geneva: United Nations environment pro-
gramme.

Barker, T., I. Bashmakov, L. Bernstein, J. e. Bog-

ner, p. r. Bosch, r. Dave, O. r. Davidson, B. S. 
Fisher, S. Gupta, K. halsnaes, B. heij, S. Khan 
ribeiro, S. Kobayashi, M. D. Levine, D. L. Mar-
tino, O. Masera, B. Metz, L. A. Meyer, G.- J. Nab-
uurs, A. Najam, N. Nakic´enovic´, h.- h. rogner, 
J. roy, J. Sathaye, r. Schock, p. Shukla, r. e. h. 
Sims, p. Smith, D. A. Tirpak, D. Urge- Vorsatz, 
and D. Zhou. 2007. “Technical Summary.” In 
Climate Change 2007: Mitigation. Contribution 
of Working Group III to the Fourth Assessment 
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Cli-
mate Change, ed. B. Metz, O. r. Davidson, p. r. 
Bosch, r. Dave, and L. A. Meyer. Cambridge, 
UK: Cambridge University press.

Bosello, F., r. roson, and r. S. J. Tol. 2006. 

“economy- Wide estimates of the Implica-
tions of Climate Change: human health.” 
Ecological Economics 58 (3): 579–91.

Bovenberg, A. L., and L. Goulder. 1996. “Opti-

mal environmental Taxation in the pres-
ence of Other Taxes: General equilibrium 
Analyses.” American Economic Review 86 (4): 
985–1000.

 

Generating the Funding Needed for Mitigation and Adaptation 

283

Bowen, A., S. Fankhauser, N. Stern, and D. 

Zenghelis. 2009. An Outline of the Case for 
a “Green” Stimulus. London: Grantham 
research Institute on Climate Change and 
the environment and the Centre for Climate 
Change economics and policy.

Brown, K., W. N. Adger, e. Boyd, e. Corbera-
 elizalde, and S. Shackley. 2004. “how Do 
CDM projects Contribute to Sustainable 
Development?” Tyndall Centre for Climate 
Change research Technical report 16, Nor-
wich, UK.

Burnside, C., and D. Dollar. 2000. “Aid, policies 
and Growth.” American Economic Review 90 
(4): 847–68.

Capoor, K., and p. Ambrosi. 2009. State and 

Trends of the Carbon Market 2009. Washing-
ton, DC: World Bank.

Cosbey, A., J. parry, J. Browne, Y. D. Babu, p. 

Bhandari, J. Drexhage, and D. Murphy. 2005. 
Realizing the Development Dividend: Making 
the CDM Work for Developing Countries. Win-
nipeg: International Institute for Sustainable 
Development.

CreD (Centre for research on the epidemi-
ology of Disasters). 2008. “eM- DAT: The 
International emergency Disasters Database.” 
Université Catholique de Louvain, ecole de 
Santé publique, Louvain. 

Danielsen, F., N. D. Burgess, A. Balmford, p. F. 
Donald, M. Funder, J. p. Jones, p. Alviola, D. 
S. Balete, T. Blomley, J. Brashares, B. Child, 
M. enghoff, J. Fieldsa, S. holt, h. hubertz, 
A. e. Jensen, p. M. Jensen, J. Massao, M. M. 
Mendoza, Y. Nqaqa, M. K. poulsen, r. rueda, 
M. Sam, T. Skielboe, G. Stuart- hill, e. Topp-
 Jorgensen, and D. Yonten. 2009. “Local par-
ticipation in Natural resource Monitoring: a 
Characterization of Approaches.” Conserva-
tion Biology 23 (1): 31–42.

Dasgupta, S., B. Laplante, C. Meisner, D. 

Wheeler, and J. Yan. 2007. “The Impact of Sea 
Level rise on Developing Countries: A Com-
parative Analysis.” policy research Working 
paper 4136, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Dechezleprêtre, A., M. Glachant, I. hascic, N. 
Johnstone, and Y. Meniérè. 2008. Invention 
and Transfer of Climate Change Mitigation 
Technologies on a Global Scale: A Study Draw-
ing on Patent Data. paris: CerNA. 

Deressa, T., r. M. hassan, and C. ringler. 2008. 
“Measuring ethiopian Farmers’ Vulnerability 
to Climate Change Across regional States.” 
Discussion paper 00806, International Food 
policy research Institute, Washington, DC.
Diffenbaugh, N. S., F. Giorgi, L. raymond, and 

X. Bi. 2007. “Indicators of 21st Century Socio-

climatic exposure.” Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences 104 (51): 20195–98.

edmonds, J., L. Clarke, J. Lurz, and M. Wise. 

2008. “Stabilizing CO2 Concentrations with 
Incomplete International Cooperation.” Cli-
mate Policy 8 (4): 355–76.

eliasch, J. 2008. Climate Change: Financing Global 
Forests: The Eliasch Review. London: earthscan.
estache, A. 2008. Public- Private Partnerships for 

Climate Change Investments: Learning from 
the Infrastructure PPP Experience. Brussels: 
european Center for Advanced research in 
economics and Statistics.

estache, A., and M. Fay. 2007. “Current Debates on 
Infrastructure policy.” policy research Working 
paper 4410, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Fankhauser, S., N. Martin, and S. prichard. 

Forthcoming. “The economics of the CDM 
Levy: revenue potential, Tax Incidence, and 
Distortionary effects.” Working paper, Lon-
don School of economics.

Figueres, C., e. haites, and e. hoyt. 2005. Pro-

grammatic CDM Project Activities: Eligibility, 
Methodological Requirements and Implemen-
tation. Washington, DC: World Bank Carbon 
Finance Business Unit.

Figueres, C., and K. Newcombe. 2007. “evolu-

tion of the CDM: Toward 2012 and Beyond.” 
Climate Change Capital, London, UK.

Füssel, h. M. 2007. “Vulnerability: A Generally 

Applicable Conceptual Framework for Cli-
mate Change research.” Global Environmental 
Change 17 (2): 155–67.

Giorgi, F. 2006. “Climate Change hot- Spots.” 
Geophysical Research Letters 33(8):L08707–
doi:10.1029/2006GL025734.

haites, e., D. Maosheng, and S. Seres. 2006. 

“Technology Transfer by CDM projects.” Cli-
mate Policy 6: 327–44.

houghton, r. A. 2009. “emissions of Carbon 

from Land Management.” Background note for 
the WDr 2010.

howes, S. 2009. Finding a Way Forward: Three 
Critical Issues for a Post- Kyoto Global Agree-
ment on Climate Change. Canberra: Crawford 
School of economics and Government, Aus-
tralian National University.

IDA (International Development Association). 
2007. IDA’s Performance Based Allocation Sys-
tem: Simplification of the Formula and Other 
Outstanding Issues. Washington, DC.

IeA (International energy Agency). 2008. 

Energy Technology Perspective 2008: Scenarios 
and Strategies to 2050. paris: IeA.

IeTA (International emissions Trading Associa-
tion). 2005. Strengthening the CDM: Position 
Paper for COP 11 and COP/MoP 1. Geneva: 
IeTA.

284 

WOrL D   De VeLOpMeN T  r e pOr

T   2 0 1 0

———. 2008. State of the CDM 2008: Facilitat-
ing a Smooth Transition into a Mature Envi-
ronmental Financing Mechanism. Geneva: 
IeTA. 

IIASA (International Institute for Applied Sys-

tems Analysis). 2009. “GGI Scenario Data-
base.” Laxenburg, Austria. 

IpCC (Intergovernmental panel on Climate 

Change). 2007. Climate Change 2007: Mitiga-
tion. Contribution of Working Group III to the 
Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovern-
mental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge, 
UK: Cambridge University press.

Kanbur, r. 2005. “reforming the Formula: A 
Modest proposal for Introducing Develop-
ment Outcomes in IDA Allocation proce-
dures.” Centre for economic policy research 
Discussion paper 4971, London.

Kaufman, D., A. Kraay, and M. Mastruzzi. 2008. 
World Governance Indicators 2008. Washing-
ton, DC: World Bank.

Klein, r. J. T., and A. persson. 2008. “Financ-
ing Adaptation to Climate Change: Issues 
and priorities.” european Climate platform 
report 8, Centre for european policy Studies, 
Brussels.

Knopf, B., O. edenhofer, T. Barker, N. Bauer, L. 

Baumstark, B. Chateau, p. Criqui, A. held, 
M. Isaac, M. Jakob, e. Jochem, A. Kitous, S. 
Kypreos, M. Leimbach, B. Magné, S. Mima, 
W. Schade, S. Scrieciu, h. Turton, and D. van 
Vuuren. Forthcoming. “The economics of 
Low Stabilisation: Implications for Techno-
logical Change and policy.” In Making Cli-
mate Change Work for Us, ed. M. hulme and 
h. Neufeldt. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University press.

McKinsey & Company. 2009. Pathways to a 

Low- carbon Economy: Version 2 of the Global 
Greenhouse Gas Abatement Cost Curve. 
 McKinsey & Company.

Meijer, e. 2007. “The International Institu-

tions of the Clean Development Mechanism 
Brought before National Courts: Limiting 
Jurisdictional Immunity to Achieve Access 
to Justice.” NYU Journal of International Law 
and Politics 39 (4): 873–928.

Michaelowa, A., and p. pallav. 2007. Additional-

ity Determination of Indian CDM Projects. 
Can Indian CDM Project Developers Outwit 
the CDM Executive Board? Zurich: University 
of Zurich.

Michaelowa, A., and K. Umamaheswaran. 2006. 
“Additionality and Sustainable Development 
Issues regarding CDM projects in energy 
efficiency Sector.” hWWA Discussion paper 
346, hamburg.

Ministry of Finance (Indonesia). 2008. Climate 

Change and Fiscal Policy Issues: 2008 Initia-
tives. Jakarta: Working Group on Fiscal policy 
for Climate Change.

Müller, B. 2008. “International Adaptation 
Finance: The Need for an Innovative and 
Strategic Approach.” economic Working 
paper 42, Oxford Institute for energy Studies, 
Oxford, UK.

Newell, r. G., and W. A. pizer. 2000. “regulat-
ing Stock externalities Under Uncertainty.” 
Working paper 99- 10, resources for the 
Future, Washington, DC.

Nussbaumer, p. 2009. “On the Contribution of 

Labelled Certified emission reductions to 
Sustainable Development: A Multi- criteria 
evaluation of CDM projects.” Energy Policy 
37 (1): 91–101.

Olsen, K. h. 2007. “The Clean Development 
Mechanism’s Contribution to Sustainable 
Development: A review of the Literature.” 
Climatic Change 84 (1): 59–73.

Olsen, K. h., and J. Fenhann. 2008. “Sustainable 
Development Benefits of Clean Development 
Mechanism projects. A New Methodology 
for Sustainability Assessment Based on Text 
Analysis of the project Design Documents 
Submitted for Validation.” Energy Policy 36 
(8): 2819–30.

parry, M., C. rosenzweig, A. Iglesias, G. Fischer, 

and M. Livermore. 1999. “Climate Change 
and World Food Security: A New Assess-
ment.” Global Environmental Change 9 (S1): 
S51-S67.

parry, M., C. rosenzweig, A. Iglesias, M. Liver-
more, and G. Fischer. 2004. “effects of Cli-
mate Change on Global Food production 
Under SreS emissions and Socio- economic 
Scenarios.” Global Environmental Change 14 
(1): 53–67.

parry, M., N. Arnell, p. Berry, D. Dodman, S. 

Fankhauser, C. hope, S. Kovats, r. Nicholls, 
D. Satterthwaite, r. Tiffin, and T. Wheeler. 
2009. Assessing the Costs of Adaptation to Cli-
mate Change: A Review of the UNFCCC and 
Other Recent Estimates. London: International 
Institute for environment and Development 
and Grantham Institute for Climate Change.

pollitt, M. 2008. “The Arguments For and Against 

Ownership Unbundling of energy Transmis-
sion Networks.” Energy Policy 36 (2): 704–13.
project Catalyst. 2009. Adaptation to Climate 

Change: Potential Costs and Choices for a 
Global Agreement. London: Climate Works 
and european Climate Foundation.

robins, N., r. Clover, and J. Magness. 2009. 

The Green Rebound: Clean Energy to Become 

 

Generating the Funding Needed for Mitigation and Adaptation 

285

an Important Component of Global Recovery 
Plans. London: hSBC.

Schaeffer, M., T. Kram, M. Meinshausen, D. p. 

van Vuuren, and W. L. hare. 2008. “Near-
 linear Cost Increase to reduce Climate 
Change risk.” Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences 105 (52): 20621–26.
Schneider, L. 2007. Is the CDM Fulfilling Its 

Environmental and Sustainable Development 
Objective? An Evaluation of the CDM and 
Options for Improvement. Berlin: Institute for 
Applied ecology.

Sperling, D., and D. Salon. 2002. Transportation 

in Developing Countries: An Overview of Green-
house Gas Reduction Strategies. Arlington, VA: 
pew Center on Global Climate Change.

Stehr, h. J. 2008. “Does the CDM Need and 

Institutional reform?” In A Reformed CDM: 
Including New Mechanisms for Sustainable 
Development, ed. K. h. Olsen and J. Fenhann. 
roskilde, Denmark: United Nations environ-
ment programme, risoe Centre perspective 
Series 2008.

Sterk, W. 2008. “From Clean Development 

Mechanism to Sectoral Crediting Approaches: 
Way Forward or Wrong Turn?” JIKO policy 
paper 1/2008, Wuppertal Institute for Cli-
mate, environment and energy, Wuppertal, 
Germany.

Streck, C., and T. B. Chagas. 2007. “The Future 
of the CDM in a post- Kyoto World.” Carbon 
& Climate Law Review 1 (1): 53–63.

Streck, C., and J. Lin. 2008. “Making Markets 
Work: A review of CDM performance and 
the Need for reform.” European Journal of 
International Law 19 (2): 409–42.

Sutter, C., and J. C. parreno. 2007. “Does the Cur-
rent Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) 
Deliver Its Sustainable Development Claim? 
An Analysis of Officially registered CDM proj-
ects.” Climatic Change 84 (1): 75–90.

———- . 2009. Global Trends in Sustainable 
Energy Investment 2009: Analysis of Trends 
and Issues in the Financing of Renewable 
Energy and Energy Efficiency. paris: UNep 
and New energy Finance.

UNFCCC (United Nations Framework Conven-
tion on Climate Change). 2007. Call for Input 
on Non- Binding Best- Practice Examples on the 
Demonstration of Additionality to Assist the 
Development of PDDs, Particularly for SSC 
Project Activities. Bonn: UNFCCC.

———- . 2008a. Investment and Financial Flows 
to Address Climate Change: An Update. Bonn: 
UNFCCC.

———- . 2008b. Mechanisms to Manage Finan-

cial Risk from Direct Impacts of Climate 
Change. Bonn: UNFCCC.

Vagliasindi, M. 2008. “Climate Change Uncer-
tainty, regulation and private participation 
in Infrastructure.” Background note for the 
WDr 2010.

Wara, M. 2007. “Is the Global Carbon Market 

Working?” Nature 445: 595–96.

Wara, M., and D. Victor. 2008. “A realistic policy 

on International Carbon Markets.” Working 
paper 74, program on energy and Sustainable 
Development, Stanford University, Stanford, CA.
Watson, C., and S. Fankhauser. 2009. “The Clean 

Development Mechanism: Too Flexible to 
produce Sustainable Development Benefits?” 
Background paper for the WDr 2010.

Weitzman, M. L. 1974. “prices vs. Quantities.” 
Review of Economic Studies 41 (4): 477–491.

World Bank. 2007a. “Annual report On portfolio 
performance, Fiscal Year 2006.” Quality Assur-
ance Group, World Bank, Washington, DC. 
———. 2007b. “Country policy And Institu-
tional Assessments 2007: Assessment Ques-
tionnaire.” Operations policy And Country 
Services, World Bank, Washington, DC. 

———. 2007c. World Development Indicators 

Tol, r. S. J., K. L. ebi, and G. W. Yohe. 2006. 

2007. Washington, DC: World Bank.

“Infectious Disease, Development, and Cli-
mate Change: A Scenario Analysis.” Environ-
ment and Development Economics 12: 687–706.

UNep (United Nations environment pro-
gramme). 2008. “UNep risoe CDM/JI 
pipeline Analysis and Database.” roskilde, 
Denmark. 

———. 2009. The Economics of Adaptation to 

Climate Change. Washington, DC: World 
Bank.

WrI (World resources Institute). 2008. “Cli-

mate Analysis Indicators tool (CAIT).” Wash-
ington, DC.

CHApTEr 7

Accelerating Innovation and 
Technology Diffusion

Windmills  peppered  Euro-

pean  landscapes  to  pro-
vide energy for agricultural 
activities long before the dis-
covery of electricity. Thanks to the forces of 
innovation and technology diffusion, wind 
is  now  powering  the  first  stages  of  what 
could become a veritable energy revolution. 
Between 1996 and 2008 the global installed 
wind capacity increased twentyfold to stand 
at  more  than  120  gigawatts,  displacing  an 
estimated 158 million tons of carbon diox-
ide (CO2) a year while creating some 400,000 
jobs  (figure  7.1).1  Much  of  this  growth  is 
attributable to government incentives and 
to  publicly  and  privately  funded  research, 
driving down the cost of wind technology 
and driving up efficiency.

And although most installed capacity is 
in Europe and the United States, the pat-
tern  is  shifting.  In  2008  India  and  China 
each  installed  more  wind  capacity  than 
any other country except the United States, 

and together they host nearly 20 percent of 
the world’s capacity. An Indian company, 
Suzlon, is one of the world’s leading wind 
turbine manufacturers, employing 13,000 
people across Asia. So the global takeoff of 
wind  technology  is  setting  an  early  prec-
edent for climate- smart development. And 
complementary  advances,  such  as  global 
geospatial wind resource information, are 
making siting decisions easier (map 7.1).

Technological innovation and its asso-
ciated  institutional  adjustments  are  key 
to managing climate change at reasonable 
cost. Strengthening national innovation and 
technology capacity can become a power-
ful catalyst for development.2 High- income 
economies, the world’s major emitters, can 
replace  their  stock  of  high- carbon  tech-
nologies  with  climate- smart  alternatives 
while  massively  investing  in  tomorrow’s 
breakthrough innovations. Middle- income 

Figure 7.1      Global cumulative installed wind 
capacity has soared in the past decade

Key messages
Meeting climate change and development goals requires significantly stepping up international 
efforts to diffuse existing technologies and develop and deploy new ones. Public and private 
investment—now in the tens of billions of dollars per year—need to be steeply ramped up to 
several hundreds of billions of dollars annually. “Technology-push” policies based on increasing 
public investments in R&D will not be sufficient. They need to be matched with “market-pull” 
policies that create public and private sector incentives for entrepreneurship, for collaboration, 
and to find innovative solutions in unlikely places. Diffusing climate-smart technology requires 
much more than shipping ready-to-use equipment to developing countries; it requires building 
absorptive capacity and enhancing the ability of the public and private sectors to identify, adopt, 
adapt, improve, and employ the most appropriate technologies..

Gigawatts
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
1996

1998

2000

2002
Year

2004

2006

2008

Source: Global Wind Energy Council 2009.

288 

WOrL D   D E V E LOpM E N T  rEpOr

T   2 0 1 0

Map 7.1      Advances in wind mapping open up new opportunities

Map 7.1

Average annual wind speed (meters/second)
High
Low

3 

6   

 9

Source: Data provided by 3 Tier Inc.
Note: This is a 5-kilometer resolution map of average annual wind speed, with the average measured at a height of 80 meters (the height of some windmills), across the world’s 
landmass.

countries can ensure that their investments 
take them in the direction of low- carbon 
growth and that their firms reap the ben-
efits  of  existing  technologies  to  compete 
globally. Low- income countries can ensure 
that  they  have  the  technological  capacity 
to adapt to climate change, by identifying, 
assessing, adopting, and improving exist-
ing technologies with local knowledge and 
know- how. As chapter 8 points out, reaping 
the benefits of technological changes will 
require significant changes in human and 
organizational  behavior,  as  well  as  a  host 
of innovative supportive policies to reduce 
human vulnerability and manage natural 
resources. 

Yet  today’s  global  efforts  to  innovate 
and diffuse climate- smart technologies fall 
far short of what is required for significant 
mitigation  and  adaptation  in  the  coming 
decades. Investment in research, develop-
ment,  demonstration,  and  deployment 

(rDD&D) is lacking, and the financial cri-
sis is reducing private spending on climate-
 smart  technology,  delaying  its  diffusion. 
Mobilizing technology and fostering inno-
vation  on  an  adequate  scale  will  require 
that countries not only cooperate and pool 
their resources but also craft domestic poli-
cies that promote a supportive knowledge 
infrastructure and business environment. 
And  most  developing  countries,  particu-
larly  low-income  countries,  have  small 
market  sizes  which,  taken  individually, 
are unattractive to entrepreneurs wishing 
to  introduce  new  technologies.  But  con-
tiguous  countries  can  achieve  a  critical 
mass  through  greater  regional  economic 
integration.

International  cooperation  must  be 
scaled up to supply more financing and to 
formulate  policy  instruments  that  stimu-
late  demand  for  climate- smart  innova-
tion, rather than simply focus on research 

 

Accelerating Innovation and Technology Diffusion 

289

subsidies.  The  international  harmoniza-
tion of regulatory incentives (such as car-
bon pricing) can have a multiplier effect on 
investment by creating economies of scale 
and by building momentum in the direc-
tion of climate- smart technologies. Innova-
tion prizes and procurement subsidies can 
build demand and stimulate ingenuity. And 
where research priorities coincide with high 
costs, joint rDD&D can push out the tech-
nical frontiers. The concept of technology 
transfer needs to be broadened to include 
country capacities to absorb existing tech-
nologies.  In  this  respect  an  international 
climate treaty with a focus on specific tech-
nological  systems  or  subsystems  presents 
a  unique  opportunity.  Bundling  in  cost-
 sharing and technology transfer provisions 
could facilitate an accord.

Complementary  domestic  policies 
can  ensure  that  technology  is  effectively 
selected, adapted, and absorbed. But iden-
tifying,  evaluating,  and  integrating  for-
eign  technologies  impose  oft- overlooked 
learning  costs,  as  do  their  modification 
and improvement. So the knowledge infra-
structure of universities, research institutes, 
and firms has to be supported to build this 
capacity.

This  chapter  draws  on  the  analysis  of 
systems in which technology has withered 
or  thrived  and  on  the  plethora  of  policies 
and  factors  that  have  acted  as  barriers  or 
catalysts, suggesting what can be achieved if 
selected policies are combined and scaled up. 
It first describes the importance of technol-
ogy in lowering greenhouse gas emissions, 
the needed tools to advance adaptation to 
climate change, and the role of both in cre-
ating competitive economies. It next assesses 
the gap between invention, innovation, and 
widespread  diffusion  in  the  marketplace. 
It  then  examines  how  international  and 
domestic policies can bridge that gap.

The right tools, technologies, and 
institutions can put a climate- smart 
world well within our reach
To  keep  global  temperatures  from  rising 
more than 2°C, global greenhouse gas emis-
sions must come down by 50–80 percent in 
the coming decades. In the short term they 
can be drastically reduced by accelerating 

the deployment of existing mitigation tech-
nologies in high- emitting countries. 

But  to  achieve  the  more  ambitious 
medium- term  emission  objectives  will 
require breakthrough technologies. Mod-
els  show  that  four  future  key  technology 
areas  could  be  at  the  core  of  a  solution: 
energy efficiency; carbon capture and stor-
age; next- generation renewables, including 
biomass, wind and solar power; and nuclear 
power (see chapter 4).3 All four need more 
research, development, and demonstration 
(rD&D) to determine whether they can be 
rapidly deployed in the marketplace with-
out adverse consequences.

Despite  their  great  promise,  both 
short- and medium- term emission reduc-
tion strategies face major challenges. End-
 use  technologies  that  improve  efficiency 
and  use  sources  with  low  emissions  can 
dampen  total  energy  demand,  but  they 
require changing the behavior of individu-
als and firms (see chapter 8). Carbon cap-
ture and storage could play a large role if 
geologically appropriate sites can be identi-
fied near power plants and if governments 
provide  resources  and  policies  to  enable 
long- term  sequestration.4  Biotechnology 
and second- generation biofuels have great 
potential for mitigating carbon emissions 
but with increasing demands on land use 
(see  chapter  3).  Wind  and  solar  power 
(both  photovoltaic  and  solar  thermal) 
could expand faster if energy storage and 
transmission  improve.  A  new  generation 
of nuclear power plants could be deployed 
extensively throughout the world but would 
have to overcome institutional constraints, 
safety and proliferation issues, and popular 
resistance in some countries. In addition, 
some  have  proposed  that  geoengineering 
options could not only decrease emissions 
rates but also temper the impacts of climate 
change (box 7.1).

The role of technology and innovation in 
adaptation has been much less studied than 
for mitigation, but it is clear that future cli-
mate conditions will be fundamentally dif-
ferent from the ones today. responding to 
changes outside of historic experience will 
require  increased  institutional  coordina-
tion on a regional scale, new tools for plan-
ning, and the ability to respond to multiple 

290 

WOrL D   D E V E LOpM E N T  rEpOr

T   2 0 1 0

Box 7.1      Geoengineering the world out of climate change

Given the pace of climate change, current 
proposals for mitigation and adaptation 
may not be sufficient to avoid consider-
able impacts. Thus, possible geoengi-
neering options are receiving increasing 
scrutiny. Geoengineering can be defined 
as actions or interventions taken for the 
primary purpose of limiting the causes of 
climate change or the impacts that result. 
They include mechanisms that could 
enhance carbon dioxide (CO2) absorp-
tion or sequestration by the oceans or by 
vegetation, deflect or reflect incoming 
sunlight, or store CO2 produced by energy 
use in reservoirs. The last of these is dis-
cussed in chapter 4, so this box focuses 
on the other two classes of options. 

Possible options for sequestering addi-
tional carbon dioxide include terrestrial 
management practices that increase car-
bon held in soils or trees, as discussed in 
chapter 3. It may also be possible to stim-
ulate phytoplankton growth and algal 
blooms in the oceans by adding needed 
nutrients such as iron or urea. As these 
tiny plants photosynthesize, they take 
up carbon dioxide from surface waters. 
The effectiveness of such enhanced 
approaches will depend on what hap-
pens to the CO2 over the longer term; if 
it is integrated into the waste products 
from animals that eat the plankton and 
settles to the seafloor, then the CO2 will 
essentially be removed from the system 
for millennia. However, recent research 
shows that previous quantifications of 
carbon removal capacity may have been 
greatly overestimated. Also, more experi-
ments need to be done on the duration 
of sequestration as well as the potential 
toxicological impacts of sudden increases 
in iron or urea in marine ecosystems. If 
further studies confirm its potential, this 
is one geoengineering option that could 
be started quickly and at relevant scale.
Bringing cool, nutrient- rich water to 

the ocean’s surface could also stimulate 
increased marine productivity and poten-
tially remove CO2 from the surface water. 
Such cooling would also be beneficial for 
coral, which are very sensitive to higher 
temperatures. Finally, cooling surface 
water could also dampen hurricane inten-
sities. Initial research on a wave- powered 
pump to bring cool water to the surface 

suggests that the approach might work, 
but much more research and investiga-
tion is needed.

Other geoengineering options to 
remove greenhouse gases include 
scrubbing gases from the atmosphere 
with a CO2 absorbing solution (and then 
sequestering the captured carbon below 
the land surface or in the deep ocean), or 
using lasers to destroy long- lived halocar-
bon molecules—best known as culprits 
in ozone depletion but also powerful 
greenhouse gases (see focus A on sci-
ence). These options are still in the early 
experimental stage.

Several approaches to reflect incom-
ing sunlight have been offered. Some 
of these could be targeted to particular 
regions, to prevent further melting of 
Arctic sea ice or the Greenland ice sheet, 
for example. One approach would be 
to inject sulfate aerosols into the atmo-
sphere. This has shown to be an effective 
method for cooling—the 1991 eruption 
of Mount Pinatubo resulted in the earth 
cooling by nearly 1°C for about a year. To 
maintain this type of cooling, however, a 
constant stream or regular injections of 
aerosol must be released. Further, sulfate 
aerosols can exacerbate ozone depletion, 
increase acid rain, and cause adverse 
health impacts. 

Alternatively, sea mist could be sprayed 

into the sky from a fleet of automated 
ships, thus “whitening” and increasing 
reflectivity of the low marine clouds that 
cover a quarter of the world’s ocean. 
However, uneven cloud distribution could 
lead to regional cold and hot spots and 
droughts downwind of the spray vessels. 

Increasing the reflectivity of the land 

surface would also help. Making roofs and 
pavements white or light- colored would 
help to reduce global warming by both 
conserving energy and reflecting sunlight 
back into space and would be the equiva-
lent of taking all the cars in the world off 
the road for 11 years.

Another proposal would place a solar 

deflector disk between the Sun and Earth. 
A disk of approximately 1,400 kilometers 
in diameter could reduce solar radia-
tion by approximately 1 percent, about 
equivalent to the radiative forcing of 
emissions projected for the 21st century. 

But analysis shows that the most cost-
 effective approach for implementing 
this strategy is to set up a manufactur-
ing plant for the deflector on the Moon, 
hardly a straightforward task. Similar 
ideas using multiple mirrors (such as 
55,000 orbiting solar mirrors each roughly 
10 square kilometers in size) have been 
discussed. However, when each of the 
orbiting mirrors passed between the Sun 
and Earth, they would eclipse the Sun, 
causing sunlight at the earth’s surface to 
flicker.

There are even geoengineering pro-

posals more akin to weather modification, 
such as attempting to push advancing 
tropical storms out to sea and away from 
human settlements to reduce damage. 
Although research on such ideas is in its 
very earliest stages, the newest climate 
models are becoming capable of analyz-
ing the potential effectiveness of such 
proposals, something that was not pos-
sible when hurricane modification was 
first attempted several decades ago.

Although it may be possible for geoen-

gineering to be undertaken by one 
nation, every nation would be affected 
by such actions taken. For this reason, it is 
essential that discussions begin on gover-
nance issues relating to geoengineering. 
Already, investor- funded experiments in 
support of iron fertilization have raised 
questions over what international entity 
or institution has jurisdiction. Questions 
about using geoengineering to limit the 
intensity of tropical cyclones or Arctic 
warming would add complexity. Thus, in 
addition to scientific research on possible 
approaches and their impacts, social, eth-
ical, legal, and economic research should 
be supported to explore what geoengi-
neering measures are and are not within 
the bounds of international acceptance.

Sources: S. Connor, “Climate Guru: ‘Paint 
Roofs White.’” New Zealand Herald, May 28, 
2009; American Meteorological Associa-
tion, http://www.ametsoc.org/policy/200
9geoengineeringclimate_amsstatement.
html (accessed July 27, 2009); Atmocean, 
Inc., http://www.atmocean.com/ (accessed 
July 27, 2009); MacCracken 2009; “Geo-
 engineering: Every Silver Lining Has a 
Cloud,” Economist, January 29, 2009; see also 
U.S. Energy Secretary Steven Chu, http://
www.youtube.com/watch?v=5wDIkKroOUQ.

 

Accelerating Innovation and Technology Diffusion 

291

environmental  pressures  occurring  con-
comitantly  with  climate  change.  Greater 
investments  are  needed  in  understand-
ing  vulnerability,  in  conducting  iterative 
assessments,  and  in  developing  strategies 
for helping societies cope with a changing 
climate.5

Integrating climate considerations into 
development  strategies  will  foster  think-
ing about adaptation.6 Chapter 2 discusses 
how climate change will require designing 
appropriate  physical  infrastructure  and 
protecting human health. Chapter 3 illus-
trates how adaptation will require new ways 
to  manage  natural  resources.  promoting 
diversification—of  energy  systems,  agri-
cultural crops, and economic activities, for 
example—can also help communities cope 
with rapidly changing conditions. Innova-
tion will be a necessary ingredient for all of 
these activities.

research is also required to understand 
the effects of climate change and different 
adaptation options on individual countries. 
This research must characterize the effects 
of multiple stresses on natural and socioeco-
nomic systems, biodiversity vulnerability and 
preservation,  and  changes  in  atmospheric 
and oceanic circulation. Such research has 
to produce new monitoring tools, new strat-
egies to enhance resilience, and better con-
tingency planning. Scientific capacity at the 
national level is thus required.

The capacity to tackle mitigation 
and adaptation will help build strong 
competitive economies
Many advanced technologies, such as infor-
mation and communication technologies, 
can  help  specifically  with  climate  change 
yet are generic enough for use across a wide 
range  of  productivity- enhancing  areas. 
Sensors  are  valuable  in  industrial  auto-
mation but can also help waste managers 
limit pollution. Mobile phones have helped 
in responding to impending disaster, as in 
the coastal village of Nallavadu, India, dur-
ing  the  2004  tsunami,7  but  they  can  also 
increase business productivity. In parts of 
Benin, Senegal, and Zambia mobile phones 
are used to disseminate information about 
food  prices  and  innovations  in  farming 
techniques.8

Harnessing the technological opportu-
nities arising from climate change concerns 
can also create opportunities for technolog-
ical leadership and a new competitive edge. 
China, for example, has not yet locked in to 
carbon- intensive growth and has enormous 
(and economically attractive) potential for 
leapfrogging  old  inefficient  technologies. 
Unlike in developed countries a large share 
of China’s residential and industrial capital 
stock of the next decade is yet to be built. 
By  using  existing  technologies,  such  as 
optimizing motor- driven systems (pumps 
and compressors), China could reduce its 
industrial  energy  demand  in  2020  by  20 
percent while increasing productivity.9

The current global recession can provide 
a platform for innovation and climate- smart 
growth. Crises can spur innovation because 
they  cause  an  urgent  focus  on  mobilizing 
resources and break down barriers that nor-
mally stand in the way of innovation.10 And 
the opportunity cost of research and devel-
opment (r&D), a long- term investment, is 
lower  during  an  economic  crisis.11  In  the 
early 1990s Finland’s recovery from a severe 
economic recession was credited largely to 
its restructuring into an innovation- based 
economy,  with  sharp  increases  in  govern-
ment  spending  on  r&D  paving  the  way 
for  the  private  sector.  The  same  could  be 
achieved with climate- smart r&D. 

And with high rates of return, r&D pres-
ents untapped opportunities for economic 
growth.  Most  measures  of  rates  of  return 
on r&D are in the range of 20 to 50 per-
cent, much higher than on investments in 
capital.12 Estimates also show that develop-
ing countries could invest more than twice 
as much as they now do.13 Yet, experience 
shows that r&D is procyclical, rising and 
falling  with  booms  and  busts,  and  firms 
tend to be short- sighted during recessions, 
limiting  their  investments  in  innovation, 
even though this is a suboptimal strategy.14 
The stimulus packages developed by many 
countries in reaction to the recession offer a 
timely opportunity for new investments in 
climate- smart innovation (see chapter 1).15
The  current  global  recession  also  pro-
vides opportunities for economic restruc-
turing  in  high- income  countries  that 
are  locked  into  high- carbon  lifestyles. 

292 

WOrL D   D E V E LOpM E N T  rEpOr

T   2 0 1 0

Overcoming  technological  inertia  and 
institutional incumbency in these countries 
remains one of the most critical obstacles to 
the transition to a low- carbon economy.16 
Inertia  and  incumbency  are  themselves 
attributes of existing technoeconomic sys-
tems and cannot be wished away through 
diplomatic processes. Unseating them will 
entail  actual  changes  in  economic  struc-
tures.  Climate- smart  policies  will  need 
to  include  mechanisms  to  identify  those 
who stand to lose and to minimize socio-
economic dislocations.

Although  climate- smart  innovation  is 
concentrated mostly in high- income coun-
tries, developing countries are starting to 
make important contributions. Developing 
countries  accounted  for  23  percent  ($26 
billion) of the new investments in energy 
efficiency and renewable energy in 2007, up 
from 13 percent in 2004.17 Eighty- two per-
cent of those investments were concentrated 
in  three  countries—Brazil,  China,  and 
India.  The  world’s  best- selling  developer 
and manufacturer of on- road electric cars 
is an Indian venture, the reva Electric Car 
Company. As a first- mover it has penetrated 
the auto manufacturer market, including in 
high-income countries.18

Figure 7.2      Government budgets for energy RD&D are near their lows, and nuclear dominates

Government RD&D ($ billions)
25

Energy R&D/total R&D (%)
12.5

20

15

10

5

0

Hydrogen and fuel cells
Other
Energy efficiency
Renewable energy source
Fossil fuels
Nuclear
Share of energy R&D in total R&D

1974

1977

1980

1983

1986

1989

1992

1995

1998

2001

2004

2007

Year

10.0

7.5

5.0

2.5

0

Sources: IEA 2008a; IEA, http://www.iea.org/Textbase/stats/rd.asp (accessed April 2, 2009); Organisation for 
Economic Co- operation and Development (OECD), http://www.oecd.org/statsportal (accessed April 2, 2009).
Note: RD&D calculated at 2007 prices and exchange rates. Values on left axis are for RD&D (that is, including 
demonstration in addition to research and development), as is typical in the energy sector. However because 
totals of cross-sectoral R&D alone are available, the right axis only includes R&D.

BrIICS  countries  (Brazil,  the  russian 
Federation,  India,  Indonesia,  China,  and 
South Africa) accounted for only 6.5 per-
cent of global renewable energy patents in 
2005,19 but they are quickly catching up to 
high-income  countries,  with  annual  pat-
enting growth rates more than twice those 
of the European Union (EU) or the United 
States.  And  they  are  developing  a  tech-
nological  edge  in  renewable  energy  tech-
nologies, with roughly 0.7 percent of their 
patents  filed  in  this  sector  from  2003  to 
2005, compared with less than 0.3 percent 
in  the  United  States.  In  2005  China  was 
seventh in overall renewable energy patent-
ing and second only to Japan in geothermal 
and cement inventions, two major potential 
sources of emission reductions.20

All countries will need to step up their 
efforts to diffuse existing climate- smart 
technologies and create new ones
Neither  public  nor  private  funding  of 
energy- related  research,  development, 
and  deployment  is  remotely  close  to  the 
amounts  needed  for  transitioning  to  a 
climate- smart  world.  In  absolute  terms, 
global government energy rD&D budgets 
have declined since the early 1980s, falling 
by  almost  half  from  1980  to  2007  (figure 
7.2). Energy’s share in government research 
and  development  budgets  (not  including 
demonstration) also plunged, from 11 per-
cent in 1985 to less than 4 percent in 2007 
(the green line in figure 7.2), heavily con-
centrated in nuclear power. Comparisons 
with public subsidies for energy or petro-
leum products are even more stark (figure 
7.3). But recent calls for increases in energy 
research and development to $100 billion to 
$700 billion a year21 are achievable. Japan is 
already taking the lead, spending 0.08 per-
cent of its gross domestic product (GDp) on 
public energy rD&D, far ahead of the 0.03 
average  in  the  group  of  high- income  and 
upper- middle-income-country  members 
of the International Energy Agency.22 

Given a recent upsurge, private spend-
ing on energy rD&D, at $40 billion to $60 
billion a year, far exceeds public spending. 
Even so, at 0.5 percent of revenue, it remains 
an  order  of  magnitude  smaller  than  the  
8 percent of revenue invested in rD&D in 

 

Accelerating Innovation and Technology Diffusion 

293

the electronics industry and the 15 percent 
in the pharmaceuticals sector.23

progress  in  some  technologies  has  just 
been too slow. Although patenting in renew-
able  energy  has  grown  rapidly  since  the 
mid- 1990s, it was less than 0.4 percent of all 
patents in 2005, with only 700 applications.24 
Most growth in low- carbon technology pat-
enting has been concentrated in the areas of 
waste, lighting, methane, and wind power, 
but improvement in many other promising 
technologies like solar, ocean, and geother-
mal  power  has  been  more  limited  (figure 
7.4), with little of the needed progress toward 
steep cost reductions.

Developing countries are still lagging in 
innovation for adaptation. While it is more 
cost- effective  to  adopt  technologies  from 
abroad than to reinvent them, in some cases 
technological solutions for local problems 
do  not  exist.25  So  innovation  is  not  only 
relevant  to  high- income  economies.  For 
example, advances in biotechnology offer 
potential  for  adapting  to  climate-related 
events  (droughts,  heat  waves,  pests,  and 
diseases)  affecting  agriculture  and  for-
estry.  But  patents  from  developing  coun-
tries  still  represent  a  negligible  fraction 
of  global  biotechnology  patents.26  That 
will make it difficult to develop location-
 specific agricultural and health responses 
to climate change. Moreover, little spend-
ing  on  agricultural  r&D—though  on 
the rise since 1981—occurs in developing 
countries.  High- income  economies  con-
tinue to account for more than 73 percent 
of investments in global agricultural r&D. 
In  developing  countries  the  public  sec-
tor makes 93 percent of agricultural r&D 
investments, compared with 47 percent in 
high- income  countries.  But  public  sector 
organizations are typically less effective at 
commercializing research results than the 
private sector.27 

International collaboration and 
cost sharing can leverage domestic 
efforts to promote innovation
Cooperation to drive technological change 
covers legislative and regulatory harmoni-
zation,  knowledge  sharing  and  coordina-
tion, cost sharing, and technology transfer 

Figure 7.3      Annual spending for energy and climate 
change R&D pales against subsidies

$ (billions)
350

300

250

200

150

100

50

0

World

subsidies
to energy

World subsidies

to petroleum

products

World public
funding for
energy R&D

Sources: IEA 2008a; IEA 2008b; IEA, http://www.iea.org/ 
Textbase/stats/rd.asp (accessed April 2, 2009).
Note: Global subsidy estimates are based on subsidies shown 
for 20 highest-subsidizing non- OECD countries only (energy 
subsidies in OECD countries are minimal).

(table 7.1). Some efforts are under way, while 
other opportunities are as yet untapped.

Because of the mix of required technol-
ogies and their stages of development and 
because their global adoption rates are so 
widely varied, all these approaches to coop-
eration will be required. Moreover, climate-
 smart  technology  cannot  be  produced 
through  fragmented  efforts.  Innovation 
has to be seen as a system of multiple inter-
acting actors and technologies, path depen-
dency, and learning processes, not just as 
a  product  of  r&D  (box  7.2).28  Subsidies 
for research, development, demonstration, 
and deployment have to be combined with 
market incentives for firms to innovate and 

Figure 7.4      The pace of invention is uneven across low- carbon technologies

Ocean power
Solar power
Cement production
Hydropower
Geothermal power
Buildings
Bioenergy
Fuel injection engines
Wind power
Methane
Lighting
Waste

–100

0

Source: Dechezleprêtre and others 2008.

200

400

100
600
Increase in patents from 1978 to 2003 (%)

300

500

700

800

294 

WOrL D   D E V E LOpM E N T  rEpOr

T   2 0 1 0

Table 7.1      International technology- oriented agreements specific to climate change

Type of 
agreements
Legislative 
and regulatory 
harmonization

Subcategory

Technology 
deployment and 
performance 
mandates

Existing 
agreements

Very little (mainly 
EU)

Potential impact

Risk

Implementation 

Target

High impact

Wrong 
technological 
choices made by 
government

Difficult

Knowledge sharing 
and coordination

Knowledge 
exchange 
and research 
coordination
Voluntary 
standards and 
labels

Many (such as 
International 
Energy Agency)

Several 
(EnergyStar, ISO 
14001)

Low impact

No major risk

Low impact

Limited adoption 
of standards and 
labeling by private 
sector

Easy

Easy

Cost- sharing 
innovation

Subsidy- based 
“technology push” 
instruments

Very few (ITER)

High impact

Uncertainty of 
research outcomes

Difficult

Reward- based 
“market pull” 
instruments

Very few (Ansari 
X- prize)

Medium impact

Bridge- the- gap 
instruments

Technology 
transfer

Technology 
transfer

High impact

High impact

Very few (Qatar- UK 
Clean Technology 
Investment Fund)
Several (Clean 
Development 
Mechanism, Global 
Environment 
Facility)

Compensation 
and required 
effort may result 
in inappropriate 
levels of innovation

Funding remains 
unused due to lack 
of deal flow
Low absorptive 
capacities of 
recipient countries

Moderate

Moderate

Moderate

Sources: Davis and Davis 2004; De Coninck and others 2007; Justus and Philibert 2005; Newell and Wilson 2005; Philibert 2004; World Bank 2008a.

Energy 
technologies with 
strong lock- in 
effects (transport) 
and that are highly 
decentralized 
(energy efficiency)
All sectors

Industrial and 
consumer 
products; 
communication 
systems 
Precompetitive 
RD&D with 
important 
economies of scale 
(carbon capture 
and storage, deep 
offshore wind) 
Specific medium-
 scale problems; 
solutions for 
developing-country 
markets; solutions 
not requiring 
fundamental R&D
Technologies at the 
demonstration and 
deployment stage
Established (wind, 
energy efficiency), 
region- specific 
(agriculture), and 
public sector 
(early- warning, 
coastal protection) 
technologies

move  technologies  along  the  innovation 
chain (figure 7.5).29 And innovation has to 
rely on knowledge flows across sectors and 
on advances in such broad technologies as 
information and communications technol-
ogies and biotechnology.

Regulatory harmonization across 
countries forms the backbone of any 
climate- smart technology agreement
Harmonized incentives with a broad geo-
graphic  reach  can  create  large  investor 
pools and markets for climate- smart inno-
vation. Carbon pricing, renewable portfolio 

standards that regulate the share of energy 
coming from renewable sources, and per-
formance mandates such as automobile fuel 
economy standards (see chapter 4) are cost-
 effective and can promote the development 
and diffusion of low- carbon technologies. 
For example, a number of countries have 
initiated measures to phase out incandes-
cent  light  bulbs,  because  more  efficient 
technologies  such  as  compact  fluorescent 
lamps as well as light emitting diodes now 
exist. Harmonized at a global scale, these 
regulations can drive the market for low-
 carbon products in the same way that the 

 

Accelerating Innovation and Technology Diffusion 

295

Box 7.2      Innovation is a messy process and can be promoted only by policies that address multiple 
parts of a complex system

In most countries, government policy is 
still driven by an outdated linear view of 
innovation, that perceives innovation as 
happening in four consecutive stages.
•	 R&D,	to	find	solutions	to	specific	techni-

cal problems and apply them to new 
technologies.

•	 Demonstration	projects,	to	further	

adapt the technology and demonstrate 
its functioning in larger- scale and real- 
world applications.

•	 Deployment,	once	fundamental	techni-
cal barriers have been resolved and the 
commercial potential of a technology 
becomes apparent.

•	 Diffusion,	when	technology	becomes	

competitive in the market.
But experience shows that the process 

of innovation is much more complex. 

Most innovations fail in one stage or 
another. Feedback from manufactur-
ers in the deployment stage, or from 
retailers and consumers in the diffusion 
stage, trickles back to the earlier stages, 
completely modifying the course of 
innovation, leading to new, unexpected 
ideas and products and sometimes to 
unforeseen costs. Sometimes break-
through innovations are driven not by 
R&D	but	by	new	business	models	that	
put together existing technologies. 
And learning curves, whereby unit costs 
decline as a function of cumulative pro-
duction	or	cumulative	RDD&D,	are	not	
well understood.

So why does this matter for policy? The 

linear view gives the misleading impres-
sion that innovation can be managed 
simply by supplying more research inputs 

(technology push) and creating market 
demand (market pull). While both types 
of policy are extremely important, they 
ignore the contributions of the numerous 
interactions among the actors involved in 
the different stages of innovation: firms, 
consumers, governments, universities, 
and the like. Partnerships, learning by 
selling or buying a technology, and learn-
ing through imitation play critical roles. 
Equally critical are the forces that drive 
diffusion. The compatibility, perceived 
benefits, and learning costs of using a new 
product are all key factors for innovation. 
Effective policies must view innovation as 
part of a system and find ways to stimulate 
all these facets of the innovation process, 
particularly where there are market gaps.

Sources: Tidd 2006; World Bank 2008a.

harmonization  of  GSM  communications 
standards for mobile phones created a crit-
ical mass for the mobile phone market in 
Europe in the 1990s. 

Knowledge-sharing and coordination 
agreements are useful complements
Knowledge agreements can address market 
and system failures in innovation and diffu-
sion. Such agreements coordinate national 
research  agendas,  information  exchange 
systems, and voluntary standards and label-
ing schemes. research coordination agree-
ments  include  many  of  the  International 
Energy Agency’s 42 technology agreements, 
where  countries  finance  and  implement 
their  individual  contributions  to  differ-
ent  sector- specific  projects,  ranging  from 
advanced  fuel  cells  to  electric  vehicles.30 
Such  agreements  can  avoid  duplicating 
investments  across  countries.  They  allow 
countries to jointly decide on who works on 
what, thus ensuring that no key technolo-
gies are ignored, particularly those relevant 
to  developing  countries  (such  as  biofuels 
from  developing- country  feedstocks  and 
lower- capacity  power  generation).  Infor-
mation  exchange  systems  include  the 
Global  Earth  Observation  System  of  Sys-
tems, which will make data available from 

various  observation  and  measurement 
systems (box 7.3). prominent examples of 
international coordination in labels are the 
Energy Star program agreements, whereby 
government agencies in various countries 

Figure 7.5      Policy affects every link of the innovation chain

Enabling environment: macroeconomic stability, education,
intellectual property protection, trade integration, regulations...

Governments

Markets

Financing,
technology,
and ideas

j

s
t
c
e
o
r
p
 
f
o
 
r
e
b
m
u
N

Research

and

Development

Demonstration

Deployment

Diffusion

Feedback

Source: Adapted from IEA 2008a. 

296 

WOrL D   D E V E LOpM E N T  rEpOr

T   2 0 1 0

Box 7.3      Innovative monitoring: Creating a global climate service and a “system of systems”

Demand for sustained and reliable data 
and information on trends, unusual 
events, and long- range predictions has 
never been greater than it is today. A 
number of public and private entities 
in sectors as diverse as transportation, 
insurance, energy, water, agriculture, and 
fisheries are increasingly incorporating 
climate information into their planning. 
Such forecasting has become a critical 
component of their adaptation strategies. 

A global climate services enterprise 

(GCS) could provide the climate- relevant 
information that society needs to better 
plan for and anticipate climate conditions 
on timescales from months to decades. 
Such an enterprise would build on exist-
ing observation systems but must go 
far beyond them. A GCS would provide 
information to help answer questions 
about appropriate city infrastructure 
to cope with the 100- year extreme pre-
cipitation and storm surge events that 
will now occur at higher magnitude and 
greater frequency, help farmers decide 
on appropriate crops and water manage-
ment during droughts, monitor changing 
stocks and flows of carbon in forests and 
soils, and evaluate efficacy of disaster 
response strategies under changing cli-
mate conditions.

A GCS will require innovative partner-

ships across governments, the private 
sector, and other institutions, and its 
design will be quite critical. Beginning 
with today’s observations and model-
ing capacity, a connected multi- hub-
 and- spoke design should be developed 
whereby global services are provided to 
regional service providers that in turn 
deliver information to local providers. 
This eliminates the requirement that 
every community develop very sophisti-
cated information on their own. 

Building the Components of a GCS
Some of the necessary information to 
develop a GCS is being provided by 
United States National Meteorologi-
cal and Hydrologic Service Centers and 
increasingly by Global Climate Observing 
System contributions through various 
government agencies and nongovern-
mental institutions. Also, a number of 

other institutions, such as the World Data 
Centers and the International Research 
Institute, regularly provide climate-
 related data and products including fore-
casts on monthly to annual timescales.

There are also a few examples of fledg-
ling regional climate services. One such 
example is the Pacific Climate Informa-
tion System (PaCIS), which provides a 
regional framework to integrate ongoing 
and future climate observations, opera-
tional forecasting services, and climate 
projections. PaCIS facilitates the pool-
ing of resources and expertise, and the 
identification of regional priorities. One 
of the highest priorities for this effort 
is the creation of a Web- based portal 
that will facilitate access to climate data, 
products, and services developed by the 
U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration and its partners across the 
Pacific region.

Another example is the formation 
of regional climate centers, which the 
World Meteorological Organization 
(WMO) has formally sought to define and 
establish since 1999. The WMO has been 
sensitive to the idea that the responsi-
bilities of regional centers should not 
duplicate or replace those of existing 
agencies but instead support five key 
areas: operational activities, including 
the interpretation of output from global 
prediction centers; coordination efforts 
that strengthen collaboration on observ-
ing, communication, and computing net-
works; data services involving providing 
data, archiving it and ensuring its qual-
ity; training and capacity building; and 
research on climate variability, predict-
ability, and impacts in a region.

Integrating climate services with 
other innovative monitoring systems
Building a comprehensive and inte-
grated system to monitor environmental 
changes across the planet is beyond the 
means of any single country, as is analyz-
ing the wealth of data it would generate. 
That is why the Group on Earth Observa-
tion (GEO), a voluntary partnership of 
governments and international organiza-
tions, developed the concept of a Global 
Earth Observation System of Systems 

(GEOSS). Providing the institutional 
mechanisms to ensure the coordination, 
strengthening, and supplementation 
of existing global Earth observation 
systems, GEOSS supports policy makers, 
resource managers, scientific researchers, 
and a broad spectrum of decision mak-
ers in nine areas: disaster risk mitigation; 
adaptation to climate change; integrated 
water resource management; manage-
ment of marine resources; biodiversity 
conservation; sustainable agriculture 
and forestry; public health; distribu-
tion of energy resources; and weather 
monitoring. Information is combined 
from oceanic buoys, hydrological and 
meteorological stations, remote- sensing 
satellites, and internet- based Earth-
 monitoring portals. 

Some early progress: 

•	 In	2007	China	and	Brazil	jointly	

launched a land- imaging satellite and 
committed to distribute their Earth 
observation data to Africa. 

•	 The	United	States	recently	made	avail-
able 40 years of data from the world’s 
most extensive archive of remotely 
sensed imagery. 

•	 A	regional	visualization	and	monitor-

ing system for Mesoamerica, SERVIR, is 
the largest open- access repository of 
environmental data, satellite imagery, 
documents, metadata, and online map-
ping applications. SERVIR’s regional 
node for Africa in Nairobi is predicting 
floods in high- risk areas and outbreaks 
of Rift Valley Fever.

•	 GEO	is	beginning	to	measure	forest-
 related carbon stocks and emissions 
through integrated models, in situ 
monitoring, and remote sensing.

Sources: Global Earth Observation System 
of Systems, http://www.epa.gov/geoss 
(accessed January 2009); Group on Earth 
Observations, http://www.earthobserva-
tions.org (accessed January 2009); IRI 2006; 
note from Tom Karl, National Oceanic and 
Atmospheric Administration, National Cli-
matic Data Center, 2009; Pacific Region Inte-
grated Climatology Information Products, 
http://www.pricip.org/ (accessed May 29, 
2009); Rogers 2009; Westermeyer 2009. 

 

Accelerating Innovation and Technology Diffusion 

297

unify  certain  voluntary  energy- efficiency 
labeling schemes by providing a single set 
of energy- efficiency qualifications.31

The  Montreal  protocol’s  Technology 
and  Economic  Assessment  panels  offer 
a  model  for  a  technology  agreement  on 
climate  change,  in  this  case  the  effects 
of  ozone  depletion.  The  panels  brought 
together  governments,  businesses,  aca-
demic experts, and nongovernmental orga-
nizations into work groups to establish the 
technical feasibility of specific technologies 
and timetables for phasing out the produc-
tion  and  use  of  chlorofluorocarbons  and 
other ozone- depleting chemicals. The pan-
els  showed  that  technology  coordination 
agreements work best when linked to emis-
sion mandates, which provided incentives 
for industry to participate.32 One challenge 
to replicating this model for climate change 
is that a large number of panels would be 
required to tackle the wide range of tech-
nologies that affect climate change. A more 
feasible approach would be to initially limit 
this approach to several strategic sectors. 

The European Union’s “New Approach” 
to standardization also offers a model for 
harmonization  of  climate- smart  stan-
dards. Goods traded within the EU must 
comply  with  basic  safety,  public  health, 
consumer  protection,  and  environmen-
tal  protection  rules.  The  EU  first  tackled 
this  issue  by  requiring  member  states  to 
harmonize legislation containing detailed 
technical specifications. But this approach 
caused deadlocks in the European Council 
and updating legislation to reflect techno-
logical progress was difficult. In 1985, the 
New Approach was designed to overcome 
this  problem.  Goods  classified  under  the 
New  Approach  must  simply  comply  with 
very  broad,  technology- neutral  “essential 
requirements” enshrined in legislation that 
must be adopted by every EU member state. 
To meet the New Approach requirements, 
products  can  comply  with  harmonized 
European  standards  developed  by  one  of 
the three regional voluntary standardiza-
tion  bodies.  There,  technical  committees 
representing  a  mix  of  industry,  govern-
ments, academia, and consumers from dif-
ferent EU countries agree on standards by 
consensus. Technical committees are open 

to  any  stakeholder  from  any  EU  mem-
ber state wishing to participate. A similar 
approach could harmonize broad climate-
 smart regulations across countries through 
a  climate  treaty  supported  by  voluntary 
standards developed separately through an 
open- consensus process.33

Voluntary standards, labels, and research 
coordination are lower- cost means of tech-
nology  cooperation,  but  it  is  difficult  to 
assess  whether  they  generate  additional 
technology  investments.34  It  is  unlikely 
that they alone could address the massive 
investment  needs,  urgency,  and  learning-
 by- doing required for such technologies as 
carbon capture and storage.

Cost- sharing agreements have the 
highest potential payoffs, if they can 
surmount implementation barriers
Cost- sharing agreements can be “technology-
 push” agreements, where the joint develop-
ment of promising technologies is subsidized 
by  multiple  countries  (the  top-down,  left-
most,  orange  arrow  in  figure  7.5)  before 
knowing whether they will succeed. Or they 
can  be  “market- pull”  agreements,  where 
funding,  pooled  from  multiple  countries, 
rewards  technologies  that  have  demon-
strated  commercial  potential—providing 
market signals through feedback loops. They 
can also bridge the gaps in the innovation 
chain between research and the market.

Research  agreements.      Only  a  few  inter-
national  cost- sharing  programs  support 
climate- change  innovation,  among  them 
the  $12  billion  ITEr  fusion  reactor  (box 
7.4)  and  several  technology  agreements 
coordinated  by  the  International  Energy 
Agency, with budgets of several million dol-
lars. Another partnership model of research 
institutions is the Inter- American Institute 
for Global Change research, an intergov-
ernmental  organization  supported  by  19 
countries  in  the  Americas,  with  a  focus 
on the exchange of scientific information 
among  scientists  and  between  scientists 
and policymakers. The mission of the cen-
ter is to encourage a regional, rather than 
national, approach.

There is potential for massively scaling 
up  cost- sharing  research  agreements  for 

298 

WOrL D   D E V E LOpM E N T  rEpOr

T   2 0 1 0

Box 7.4      ITER: A protracted start for energy R&D cost sharing

ITER is an international research and 
development project to demonstrate 
the scientific and technical feasibility 
of nuclear fusion to generate electric-
ity without producing the radioactive 
waste associated with nuclear fission. 
The partners in the project are China, 
the European Union, India, Japan, the 
Republic of Korea, the Russian Fed-
eration, and the United States.

ITER was proposed in 1986, and the 
design of its facilities was finalized in 
1990. The initial schedule anticipated 
construction of an experimental 
reactor beginning in 1997, but this 
was postponed by negotiations over 
experimental design, cost sharing, 
the design site, the construction site, 

and staffing. Several countries pulled 
out of ITER, some later rejoined, and 
some temporarily withdrew their 
funding. 

ITER shows the difficulties in 
negotiating a more than $12 bil-
lion research project with uncertain 
outcomes. Funding for construction 
was finally approved in 2006. ITER 
is expected to be operational for 20 
years, once construction is completed 
around 2017. 

Source: http://www.iter.org (accessed 
December 12, 2008).
Note: ITER originally stood for Interna-
tional Thermonuclear Experimental 
Reactors but now is simply known as 
ITER.

fundamental research and demonstration 
projects, where expenses and uncertainty 
are high. research consortia are also well 
suited to conduct long- term research with 
economies of scale and economies of learn-
ing, such as carbon capture and storage (box 
7.5),  third- generation  photovoltaic,  deep 
offshore wind, second- generation biofuels, 
and climate- monitoring technologies. The 
scope for cooperation is narrower for tech-
nologies closer to commercialization, when 
intellectual  property  rights  become  more 
problematic and when individual countries 
may want a first- mover advantage.

Cost- sharing  agreements  can  focus  on 
a few high- priority areas and be negotiated 
through centralized international institu-
tions with existing negotiation structures. 
The  ITEr  project  shows  that  large- scale 
cost- sharing  agreements  are  difficult  to 
implement when countries can renege on 
their commitments or disagree on imple-
mentation.  Ensuring  the  sustainability  of 
funding  for  such  agreements  will  require 
added incentives, such as withdrawal pen-
alties or contractual commitments by each 
party  to  increase  their  funding  (up  to  a 
cap) when new parties join, in order to dis-
courage free-riding and lock cost- sharing 
agreements  into  a  climate  treaty.35  Most 
of  the  technological  efforts  can  be  borne 

by high- income countries. But to be effec-
tive,  collaborative  research  agreements 
must  subsidize  the  involvement  of  devel-
oping countries, particularly fast- growing 
middle- income  countries  that  must  start 
early  to  build  technological  capacity  that 
will be essential for their long- term climate-
 smart development. The private sector must 
also  be  included  in  research  partnerships 
to ensure technologies can later be diffused 
through the market.

Market- pull,  reward- based  agreements.    
Many  breakthrough  innovations  come 
from  unlikely  places  that  can  be  easily 
missed by grant funding programs. In 1993 
Shuji Nakamura, a lone engineer working 
with a limited budget in a small company 
in the Japanese countryside, astonished the 
scientific community with the first success-
ful  blue- light- emitting  diodes.  This  was 
the  critical  step  for  creating  today’s  bril-
liant  high- efficiency  white- light- emitting 
diodes.36  Many  of  the  leading  global 
innovators—including the computer giant 
Dell—spend much less than their industry 
peers on r&D as a share of sales.37 But they 
are uniquely skilled at scoping the horizon 
for high- potential technologies and ideas, 
at collaborating with others on r&D, and 
at  bringing  new  technologies  to  the  mar-
ket.38 Some of the most promising climate-
 smart technologies are likely to come out 
of sectors that are typically not associated 
with climate change. For example, super-
 water- absorbent polymers could play a key 
role in promoting revegetation of drylands 
and other degraded ecosystems by holding 
water in the soil. But much of the interest 
in this technology is concentrated among 
manufacturers  of  products  such  as  dia-
pers.  Similarly,  producers  of  water  repel-
lent materials could manufacture clothing 
that requires less washing, with significant 
reductions in water and energy use. 

Financial instruments that reward risk 
taking, rather than picking winners from 
the  start,  represent  a  tremendous  unex-
ploited  opportunity.  Solutions  to  tech-
nological  problems  can  come  from  rapid 
advances  in  unexpected  places  or  from 
new business models that traditional r&D 
subsidy programs can easily overlook. New 

 

Accelerating Innovation and Technology Diffusion 

299

Box 7.5      Technologies on the scale of carbon capture and storage require international efforts

For carbon capture and storage to achieve 
a fifth of the emission reductions needed 
to limit atmospheric concentrations to, for 
example, 550 parts per million, the technol-
ogy has to ramp up from the 3.7 million 
tons of carbon sequestered todaya to more 
than 255 million tons by 2020 and at least 
22 billion tons by the end of the century, or 
about the same amount of current global 
emissions from energy use today (figure). 
Each capture and storage plant costs 
between $1.5 and $2.5 billion to construct, 
and deploying the 20–30 needed by 2020 
to prove the commercial viability of the 
technology would be prohibitive for a sin-
gle country. There are only four commercial 
end- to- end carbon capture and storage 
projects, and their storage capacity is one 
to two orders of magnitude smaller than 
the capacity a commercial 1,000 megawatt 
plant would need over its expected opera-
tional lifetime. 

Sources: Edmonds and others 2007; IEA 
2006; IEA 2008b.
a. To convert tons of carbon to CO2, multiply 
by 3.67.

Carbon capture and storage technology requires massive additional efforts

CO2 removed/year (millions of tons)
25,000

22,330

20,000

15,000

10,000

5,000

0

4

2000

257

2020

2160

2050

2095

Note: Observed data for 2000. For all other years, projections based on needs in order to limit greenhouse gas 
concentrations to 550 ppm.

global financial instruments give markets 
the flexibility to find innovative solutions.
Inducement prizes and advanced mar-
ket  commitments  are  two  closely  related 
market- pull incentives for rewarding inno-
vations that attain prespecified technologi-
cal  targets  in  a  competition.  Inducement 
prizes involve a known reward; advanced 
market  commitments  are  financial  com-
mitments to subsidize future purchases of 
a product or service up to predetermined 
prices and volumes. 

Although there are no examples of inter-
nationally  funded  climate- smart  prizes, 
other  recent  national  public  and  private 
initiatives have gathered growing interest. 
The $10 million Ansari X- prize was estab-
lished in the mid- 1990s to encourage non-
governmental space flight. The competition 
induced  $100  million  of  private  research 
investments  across  26  teams,  leveraging 
10  times  the  prize  investment,  before  the 

winner was announced in 2004.39 In March 
2008 the X- prize Foundation and a com-
mercial partner announced a new $10 mil-
lion  international  competition  to  design, 
build,  and  bring  to  market  high-fuel-
 mileage vehicles. One hundred and eleven 
teams from 14 countries have registered in 
the competition.40

Advanced market commitments, which 
encourage  innovation  by  guaranteeing 
some minimum market demand to reduce 
uncertainty, have promoted climate- smart 
technologies  through  the  U.S.  Environ-
mental protection Agency, in partnership 
with  nonprofit  groups  and  utilities  (box 
7.6). A more recent international initiative 
is a pilot program for pneumococcal vac-
cines  designed  by  the  GAVI  Alliance  and 
the World Bank.41 In 2007 donors pledged 
$1.5  billion  in  advanced  market  commit-
ments to the pilot. Vaccines are bought with 
donor- committed  funds  and  with  minor 

300 

WOrL D   D E V E LOpM E N T  rEpOr

T   2 0 1 0

Box 7.6      The Super-Efficient Refrigerator: A pioneer 
advanced market commitment program?

In 1991, under the Super- Efficient 
Refrigerator Program, a consortium  
of utilities agreed to pool more than 
$30 million to reward a manufacturer 
that could produce and market a 
refrigerator free of ozone- depleting 
chlorofluorocarbons that used  
25 percent less energy than required 
by existing regulations. The winner 
would receive a fixed reward for each 
unit sold, up to the cap set by the 
fund’s size. The Whirlpool company 

exceeded the performance require-
ments and won the prize and national 
publicity. However, because of low 
market acceptance the company 
could not sell enough refrigerators to 
claim the entire prize. Nonetheless, 
the competition likely produced spill-
overs, with competing manufacturers 
designing their own lines of efficient 
refrigerators.
Sources: Davis and Davis 2004; Newell 
and Wilson 2005.

funding  from  recipient  countries  if  they 
meet specified performance objectives. It is 
still too early to judge probable success.42

Market- pull  inducements  can  comple-
ment  but  not  replace  technology- push 
incentives.  Market- pull  techniques  can 
multiply  public  financial  resources  and 
foster  competition  to  develop  proof- of-
 concept and working prototypes. They have 
low barriers to entry—because funding is 
not awarded on past research credentials, 
small  organizations  and  organizations 
from  developing  countries  can  compete. 
But these incentives cannot reduce risk to a 
point that private investors would be will-
ing to finance large- scale or very early stage 
research.

prizes  and  advanced  market  commit-
ments offer good potential for multilateral 

Figure 7.6      The “valley of death” between research 
and the market

Bank loans,

equity,

subsidies,
customers

Government

research
funding

g
n
i
c
n
a
n
i
f
 
f
o
 
y
t
i
l
i
b
a
l
i
a
v
A

Venture
capital

Business
angels

Basic research

Demonstrated products

Maturity of the technology

Source: WDR team.

funding. Since prizes do not entail com-
mercialization,  they  could  be  offered  to 
solve  precommercial  research  problems 
in such technologies as battery storage or 
photovoltaics. private and public organi-
zations in search of technology solutions 
could  post  competitions  for  designated 
cash prizes in a global technology market-
place. The World Bank Group is exploring 
prize  competitions  for  early-stage  clean 
technology innovations supported by the 
new  Earth  Fund  launched  by  the  Global 
Environment  Facility  and  the  Interna-
tional Finance Corporation.

Advanced  market  commitments  could 
be useful where deployment learning costs 
are prohibitive, where there are no lead users 
willing to pay initial premiums for the tech-
nology, or where the market is too small or 
risky. These include energy generation and 
use but also adaptation technologies (such 
as malaria treatments and drought-resistant 
crop varieties), where the demand side of 
the market is fragmented (individual gov-
ernments), financial resources are limited 
(particularly for developing countries), and 
the potential size of the market is blurred 
(by long- term policy uncertainty).43

Agreements  to  bridge  the  commercializa-
tion gap.      A major obstacle for innovation 
is the “valley of death,” the lack of financing 
for bringing applied research to the market 
(figure  7.6).  Governments  are  typically 
willing  to  fund  r&D  for  unproven  tech-
nologies, and the private sector is willing to 
finance technologies that have been dem-
onstrated  in  the  marketplace—the  r&D 
block in figure 7.3—but there is little fund-
ing for technologies at the demonstration 
and deployment stages.44 Governments are 
often reluctant to fund early- stage ventures 
for fear of distorting the market, and pri-
vate investors consider them too risky, with 
the exception of a limited number of inde-
pendent investors termed “business angels” 
and some corporations. Venture capitalists, 
who typically only fund firms with demon-
strated technologies, were able to deploy no 
more than 73 percent of capital available in 
the clean technology sector in 2006 because 
so few firms in this sector had survived the 
valley of death.45

 

Accelerating Innovation and Technology Diffusion 

301

Venture capital funding is also lacking 
for many types of climate- smart technolo-
gies. Investors are unlikely to be attracted 
to market segments involving particularly 
high- risk and capital- intensive energy tech-
nologies where demonstration costs can be 
massive.  And  it  is  expected  that  today’s 
financial  crisis  will  slow  corporate  ven-
ture capital, given the higher cost of debt.46 
Moreover,  the  bulk  of  the  global  venture 
capital industry is in a few developed coun-
tries, far from opportunities in several rap-
idly growing middle- income countries.47 

programs to commercialize technology 
can also support links with potential users 
of climate- smart technologies, particularly 
for small firms where breakthrough innova-
tions often occur but which face the great-
est financial and market access constraints. 
To commercialize ideas that meet its tech-
nology needs, the U.S. Environmental pro-
tection Agency provides funding to small 
firms  through  the  Small  Business  Inno-
vation  research  program.48  The  French 
government’s passerelle program provides 
cofunding  to  large  enterprises  willing  to 
invest  in  innovation  projects  of  potential 
interest in small firms.49 Other programs 
provide special grants to collaborative proj-
ects to encourage technology spillovers. 

Because  the  gap  between  research  and 
the market is particularly wide in develop-
ing countries and because many solutions 
to local problems may come from foreign 
countries,  special  multilateral  funding 
can support research projects that include 
developing- country  participants.  This 
funding can create incentives for conduct-
ing research relevant to developing- country 
needs such as drought- resistant crops. Mul-
tilateral efforts can also promote climate-
 smart venture capital funds in high- income 
countries and in the several rapidly grow-
ing  middle- income  countries  that  have 
the critical mass of innovative activity and 
financial infrastructure to attract venture 
capital investors. This latter group includes 
China and India. In Israel, the republic of 
Korea, and Taiwan, China, the government 
provided venture capital, acting as a core 
investor and attracting other funds.50 Such 
strategies  can  provide  the  “valley  of  life” 
needed to nurture nascent technologies to 

levels where they can take root in the global 
economy.

The scale and scope of international 
efforts are far short of the challenge
Technology  transfer  comprises  the  broad 
processes to support flows of information, 
know- how, experience, and equipment to 
governments, enterprises, nonprofits, and 
research and educational institutions. The 
absorption of foreign technologies depends 
on  much  more  than  financing  physical 
equipment  and  technology  licenses.  It 
requires building national capacity to iden-
tify, understand, use, and replicate useful 
technology.  As  discussed  below,  interna-
tional policies can work hand in hand with 
national efforts to improve national institu-
tions and create an enabling environment 
for technology transfer.

International organizations.    Many inter-
national organizations dealing with envi-
ronmental  challenges  are  mainly  mission 
focused;  these  include  the  World  Health 
Organization,  the  Food  and  Agriculture 
Organization,  and  the  UN  Environment 
programme.  But  these  entities  can  be 
encouraged to collectively enhance the ade-
quacy and coherence of the existing institu-
tions for addressing climate change. 

Similarly,  many  international  agree-
ments  exist  to  address  particular  envi-
ronmental  problems  but  as  these  are 
operationalized,  they  should  be  mutually 
reinforcing.51  These  can  be  evaluated  in 
terms of goals and means to achieve them 
in relation to their ability to support miti-
gation  and  adaptation  of  the  magnitude 
expected  under  a  2°C  world  or  a  5°C  or 
beyond world.

Financing  mechanisms.    The  Clean 
Development  Mechanism  (CDM),  the 
main  channel  for  financing  investments 
in low- carbon technologies in developing 
countries, has leveraged public and private 
capital  to  finance  over  4,000  low- carbon 
projects.  But  the  majority  of  its  projects 
do not involve either knowledge or equip-
ment  transfer  from  abroad.52  (Chapter  6 
discusses the limits of scaling up the CDM 
to accelerate technology transfers.)

302 

WOrL D   D E V E LOpM E N T  rEpOr

T   2 0 1 0

The Global Environment Facility (GEF) 
is today the largest funder of projects that 
promote  environmental  protection  while 
supporting  national  sustainable  devel-
opment  goals.  The  GEF  functions  as  the 
financial  arm  of  the  UNFCCC  and  pro-
vides support for technology needs assess-
ments for more than 130 countries. Most 
GEF  mitigation  funding  between  1998  to 
2006—about  $250  million  a  year—was 
directed at removing barriers to the diffu-
sion of energy- efficient technologies.53 The 
GEF’s adaptation efforts focus on building 
capacity to identify the urgent and immedi-
ate needs of least developed countries. But 
its impact is limited by its modest proposed 
adaptation budget of $500 million for the 
2010–14 period.54

The new Carbon partnership Facility will 
provide complementary assistance to devel-
oping  countries  by  supporting  large  and 
risky investments in clean energy and infra-
structure with good potential for long- term 
emission reductions.55 The Clean Technol-
ogy Fund, a $5.2 billion multidonor initiative 
established in 2008, is another effort to pro-
vide  low- interest  financing  for  demonstra-
tion, deployment, and transfer of low- carbon 
technologies. In 2009 the Arab republic of 
Egypt, Mexico, and Turkey are to be the first 
countries to benefit from a combined $1 bil-
lion of financing from this fund. 

The Montreal protocol shows how sus-
tained multilateral funding can be achieved 
by  making  the  financing  of  incremental 

Box 7.7      A promising innovation for coastal adaptation

Bangladesh’s coastal regions expect 
more frequent storm surges and tidal 
floods as a result of climate change. 
The University of Alabama at Birming-
ham is working with Bangladeshi 
researchers on home foundations 
and frames built of a lightweight 
composite material that bends—but 
does not break—in a hurricane and 
that can float on the rising tide of a 
coastal surge. Fibers from jute, one 
of Bangladesh’s common plants, are 
woven with recycled plastics to form 
an ultrastrong building material. Jute 
does not require fertilizer, pesticides, 

or irrigation; is biodegradable; is inex-
pensive; and is already widely used to 
produce cloth, ropes, and other items 
in Bangladesh. Local architects are 
helping to incorporate the technol-
ogy in local house designs. Bangla-
deshi researchers will contribute their 
expertise on the mass- manufacturing 
of jute products.

Sources: University of Alabama at Bir-
mingham, http://main.uab.edu/Sites/
MediaRelations/articles/55613/ (accessed 
February 17, 2009); interview with Profes-
sor Nassim Uddin, University of Alabama 
at Birmingham, on March 4, 2009.

costs  of  upgrading  technology  an  obliga-
tion of an environmental treaty. The Mul-
tilateral  Fund  for  Implementation  of  the 
Montreal  protocol  provided  developing 
countries with incentives to join the pro-
tocol by committing funds for incremental 
compliance costs.56 In exchange, develop-
ing  countries  agreed  to  gradually  phase 
out ozone- depleting substances. The fund 
provided grants or loans to cover the costs 
of  facilities  conversion,  training,  person-
nel, and licensing technologies. While the 
protocol is considered a successful model 
of  technology  diffusion,  the  sources  of 
emissions  of  greenhouse  gases  are  orders 
of magnitude larger than chlorofluorocar-
bons, and many greenhouse gas reduction 
technologies  are  not  commercially  avail-
able. A climate change fund similar to the 
Multilateral Fund would need to be scaled 
up appropriately.57

Financial and technological resources.    As 
chapter  6  emphasizes,  substantially  more 
financing for developing countries is nec-
essary.  Estimates  for  additional  required 
investments  for  mitigation  and  adapta-
tion range from $170 billion to $765 billion 
annually  by  2030.  But  financial  transfers 
alone will not be enough. Acquiring tech-
nology, far from easy, is a long, costly, and 
risky process ridden with market failures. 
Adaptation  technologies  depend  on  local 
technical skills and indigenous knowledge 
because they involve designing systems tai-
lored to local needs (box 7.7). 

Even when technology can be imported, 
it involves a search process, prior technical 
knowledge, and the skills and resources nec-
essary to use the technology efficiently. That 
capacity rests on various forms of knowl-
edge, many of which are tacit and cannot be 
easily  codified  or  transferred.  Large- scale 
energy projects that can be contracted out 
to foreign firms, for example, require local 
capacity for policy makers to evaluate their 
merits, and for operation and maintenance. 
The European Union is developing legisla-
tion for managing risks associated with car-
bon capture and storage,58 but few countries 
have the technical capacity to design such 
legislation, another barrier to deploying the 
technology.

 

Accelerating Innovation and Technology Diffusion 

303

Multilateral funding can have a greater 
impact on technology transfer and absorp-
tion  by  extending  its  scope  from  trans-
ferring  physical  and  codified  technology 
to  enhancing  human  and  organizational 
absorptive capacities in developing coun-
tries.  Technology  absorption  is  about 
learning: learning by investing in foreign 
technologies,  learning  through  training 
and  education,  learning  by  interacting 
and collaborating with others outside and 
inside one’s country, and learning through 
r&D.  Multilateral  funding  can  support 
technology transfer in three ways: by sub-
sidizing investments in homegrown or for-
eign technologies in developing countries; 
by  subsidizing  the  involvement  of  devel-
oping countries in the types of knowledge 
exchange,  coordination,  and  cost- sharing 
agreements  as  discussed  above;  and  by 

supporting national knowledge infrastruc-
tures  and  private  sectors,  as  discussed  in 
the following section.

Public programs, policies, and 
institutions power innovation and 
accelerate its diffusion
Innovation is the outcome of a complex sys-
tem that relies on the individual capacity of 
a multitude of actors, ranging from govern-
ments, universities, and research institutes 
to businesses, consumers, and nonprofits. 
Strengthening the capacity of this diverse 
set of actors, and how these actors interact, 
is a difficult but necessary task for tackling 
both  development  and  climate  change. 
Table 7.2 describes key policy priorities for 
encouraging innovation in countries of dif-
ferent income levels. 

Table 7.2      Key national policy priorities for innovation

Countries
Low- income 

Middle- income 

High- income 

All countries

Source: WDR team.

Main policies

Invest in engineering, design, and management skills
Increase funding to research institutions for adaptation research, development, demonstration, and diffusion
Increase links between academic and research institutions, the private sector, and public planning agencies
Introduce subsidies for adopting adaptation technologies
Improve the business environment
Import outside knowledge and technology whenever possible
Introduce climate- smart standards 
Create incentives for imports of mitigation technologies and, in rapidly industrializing countries, create long- term conditions 
for local production
Create incentives for climate- smart venture capital in rapidly industrializing countries with a critical density of innovation 
(such as China and India)
Improve the business environment
Strengthen the intellectual property rights regime
Facilitate climate- smart foreign direct investment
Increase links between academic and research institutions, the private sector, and public planning agencies
Introduce climate- smart performance standards and carbon pricing
Increase mitigation and adaptation innovation and diffusion through subsidies, prizes, venture capital incentives, and 
policies to encourage collaboration among firms and other sources and users of climate- smart innovation
Assist developing countries in enhancing their technological absorptive and innovative capacities
Support transfers of know- how and technologies to developing countries
Support middle- income- country participation in long- term energy RDD&D projects
Share climate change–related data with developing countries
Remove barriers to trade in climate- smart technologies
Remove subsidies to high- carbon technologies
Redefine knowledge- based institutions, especially universities, as loci of the diffusion of low- carbon practices

304 

WOrL D   D E V E LOpM E N T  rEpOr

T   2 0 1 0

Skills  and  knowledge  constitute  a  key 
pillar  for  building  a  climate- smart  econ-
omy. Basic education provides the founda-
tion of any technology absorption process 
and reduces economic inequity, but a large 
enough  pool  of  qualified  engineers  and 
researchers  is  also  crucial.  Engineers,  in 
particularly  short  supply  in  low- income 
countries,  play  a  role  in  implementing 
context- specific technologies for adaptation 
and  are  critical  to  rebuilding  efforts  after 
natural  disasters  (figure  7.7).  Bangladesh, 
particularly  prone  to  hurricanes  and  sea-
 level rise, is an extreme example: university 
students  enrolled  in  engineering  repre-
sented barely 0.04 percent of the population 
in 2006, compared with 0.43 percent in the 
Kyrgyz republic, a country with a very sim-
ilar per capita GDp.59 Equally important are 
the management and entrepreneurial skills 
that channel technical knowledge into prac-
tical applications in the private sector. And 
in the public sector, skills are required in a 
wide range of areas including utility regula-
tion, communication, urban planning, and 
climate policy development.

Figure 7.7      Enrollment in engineering remains low in many developing countries

Enrollment in engineering, manufacturing, and construction 
in tertiary education as a share of the total population (%)
1.6

1.4

1.2

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

0

Belarus

Ukraine

Iran, Islamic Rep.

Lithuania

Mongolia

Colombia

Bulgaria

Chile

Latvia

Kyrgyz Republic

Jordan

Turkey

Mexico

Hungary

Ethiopia

Georgia

Cambodia
Lao PDR

Pakistan
4,000

2,000

El Salvador

Tunisia

Algeria

Guatemala
Swaziland

6,000

Mauritius

South Africa

Peru
8,000
12,000
GDP per capita ($, PPP)

10,000

14,000

16,000

18,000

20,000

Source: WDR team based on UNESCO Institute for Statistics, http://stats.uis.unesco.org/unesco/ 
ReportFolders/ReportFolders.aspx (accessed August 30, 2009).

Skills and knowledge can be acquired by 
investing in the institutions and programs 
that make up a country’s knowledge infra-
structure. Institutions such as universities, 
schools,  training  institutes,  r&D  institu-
tions,  and  laboratories,  and  such  techno-
logical  services  as  agricultural  extension 
and business incubation60 can support the 
private and public capacity to use climate-
 smart technologies and make decisions on 
the basis of sound science. 

Another  pillar  for  building  a  climate-
 smart economy is to create incentives for 
the private sector to invest in climate- smart 
technologies. This means creating not only 
regulatory incentives but also an enabling 
environment  paired  with  public  support 
programs for business innovation and tech-
nology absorption. 

Knowledge infrastructure is a key to 
creating and adapting local mitigation 
and adaptation systems
research  institutes  in  developing  coun-
tries  can  help  governments  better  prepare 
for the consequences of climate change. In 
Indonesia and Thailand, for example, they 
are using NASA satellites to monitor envi-
ronmental characteristics affecting malaria 
transmission  in  Southeast  Asia,  such  as 
rainfall  patterns  and  vegetation  status.61 
research  institutes  can  partner  with  gov-
ernment  agencies  and  private  contractors 
to  identify  and  design  appropriate  coastal 
adaptation technologies and to implement, 
operate, and maintain them. They can help 
devise adaptation strategies for farmers by 
combining local knowledge with scientific 
testing of alternative agroforestry systems or 
support  forestry  management  by  combin-
ing  indigenous  peoples’  knowledge  of  for-
est  conservation  with  genetically  superior 
planting material.62 And they can help firms 
improve the energy efficiency of their pro-
cesses through consultancy, testing, trouble-
shooting, and training.

In  middle- income  countries  research 
institutions can also solve longer- term mit-
igation  challenges.  Mastering  the  energy 
technologies  that  will  be  useful  involves 
a  learning  process  that  can  take  decades. 
Agriculture  and  health  depend  on  bio-
technology  to  develop  new  technologies 

 

Accelerating Innovation and Technology Diffusion 

305

and climate science for planning purposes. 
Development  of  smart  grids  for  national 
electricity distribution relies on mastering 
integrated  communications,  sensing,  and 
measurement technologies.

Yet after investing in research and aca-
demic institutions, many governments have 
found  the  contributions  to  development 
minimal.63 The reasons: the research typi-
cally is not demand- driven, and there are 
few links between research institutes, uni-
versities, the private sector, and the com-
munities in which they operate (box 7.8).64 
In addition universities in many develop-
ing countries have historically focused on 
teaching and do little research. 

Shifting  the  balance  of  government 
funding  in  favor  of  competitive  research 
funding, instead of guaranteed institutional 
funding, can go a long way to increase the 
effectiveness of public research institutions. 
In Ecuador the government’s program for 
Modernization  of  Agricultural  Services 
finances  a  competitive  research  grant 
program  that  supports  strategic  work  on 
innovations  to  open  new  export  markets 
by controlling fruit flies, reducing produc-
tion  costs  for  new  export  products,  and 
controlling disease and pests in traditional 
exports  crops.  The  program  introduced 
a  new  research  culture  and  brought  new 
organizations  into  the  research  system. 
Cofinancing requirements helped increase 

national research funding by 92 percent.65 
Institutional reforms that give the private 
sector a greater voice in the governance of 
research institutions and that reward trans-
fer of knowledge and technology to exter-
nal  clients  can  also  help.66  In  some  cases 
“bridging  institutions”  such  as  business 
incubators  can  facilitate  knowledge  spill-
overs from research institutions. In 2007, 
283 clean technology companies were under 
incubation worldwide (even before includ-
ing China), twice as many as in 2005.67

High- income  countries  can  support 
the  global  development  and  diffusion  of 
climate- smart  systems  by  helping  build 
capacity  and  partnering  with  research 
institutions  in  developing  countries.  An 
example is the International research Insti-
tute for Climate and Society at Columbia 
University in the United States, which col-
laborates with local institutions in Africa, 
Asia, and Latin America.

Another  example  is  the  Consulta-
tive  Group  on  International  Agricultural 
research (CGIAr). A donor- funded, decen-
tralized,  and  cooperative  global  structure 
of research institutions, the CGIAr already 
targets a number of topics relevant to climate 
adaptation  (box  7.9).  A  similar  approach 
can be used for other climate technologies. 
Lessons from CGIAr suggest that regional 
research centers can be funded in develop-
ing countries to focus on a limited number 

Box 7.8      Universities need to be innovative: The case of Africa

Most donor assistance to Africa does not 
address the need to harness the world’s 
existing fund of knowledge for long-
 term development. Higher education 
enrollments in Africa average close to 
5 percent, compared with typical figures 
of more than 50 percent in developed 
economies. The challenge, however, is 
not only to increase access to African uni-
versities but also to make them function 
as engines of development. 

There are opportunities for universities 

to forge closer links with the private sec-
tor, train more graduates for professional 
careers, and diffuse knowledge into the 
economy. As a model, the United States 
has a long tradition of land grant colleges, 

which since the 19th century have been 
working directly with their communities 
to diffuse agricultural knowledge. The 
task ahead requires qualitative change in 
the goals, functions, and structure of the 
university. As part of this process, funda-
mental reforms will be needed in curricu-
lum design, teaching, location, student 
selection, and university management.

Training will have to become more inter-
disciplinary to address the interconnected 
problems that transcend traditional 
disciplinary boundaries. South Africa’s 
Stellenbosch University offers a shining 
example of how to adjust curricula to the 
needs	of	R&D	organizations.	It	was	the	
first university in the world to design and 

launch an advanced microsatellite as part 
of its training. The aim for the program was 
to build competence in new technologies 
in the fields of remote sensing, spacecraft 
control, and earth sciences. Uganda’s 
Makerere University has new teaching 
approaches that allow students to solve 
public health problems in their com-
munities as part of their training. Similar 
approaches can be adopted by students 
in other technical fields, such as infrastruc-
ture development and maintenance.

Sources: Juma 2008; Land grant colleges, 
https://www.aplu.org/NetCommunity/ 
Page.aspx?pid=183; sea grant colleges, 
http://www.seagrant.noaa.gov/ (accessed 
August 31, 2009).

306 

WOrL D   D E V E LOpM E N T  rEpOr

T   2 0 1 0

Box 7.9      CGIAR: A model for climate change?

The Consultative Group on International 
Agricultural Research (CGIAR) is a strategic 
partnership of 64 members from devel-
oping and industrial countries, founda-
tions, and international organizations 
including the World Bank. Founded in 
1971 in response to widespread concern 
that many developing countries were in 
danger of succumbing to famine, it has 
contributed significantly to agricultural 
productivity gains through improved crop 
varieties and played a pivotal role in bring-
ing about the Green Revolution. Over time 
the CGIAR’s mandate has expanded to 
include policy and institutional matters, 
conservation of biodiversity, and manage-
ment of natural resources including fisher-
ies, forests, soil, and water.

The CGIAR supports agricultural 

research by assisting 15 research centers, 
independent institutions with their own 
staff and governance structures, mostly 
in developing countries—and by running 
challenge programs. These are indepen-
dently governed broad- based research 
partnerships designed to confront global 
or regional issues of vital importance, 

such as genetic resource conservation 
and improvement, water scarcity, micro-
nutrient deficiency, and climate change. 
In 2008 the CGIAR implemented an 
independent review of its governance, 
scientific work, and partnerships. The 
review concluded that CGIAR research 
has produced high overall returns since 
its inception, with benefits far exceed-
ing costs. The benefit of yield- enhancing 
and yield- stabilizing crop varieties pro-
duced by the centers and their national 
partners is estimated at more than $10 
billion annually, attributable largely to 
improved staple crops such as wheat, rice, 
and maize. Natural resource management 
research also shows substantial benefits 
and high returns on investment. However, 
the impact of these efforts has varied 
geographically because of a complex of 
factors such as local collective action, 
extension services, or assignment of 
property rights. The review deemed the 
CGIAR “one of the world’s most innova-
tive development partnerships,” thanks 
to its multidisciplinary research activities 
and range of collaborations. But it also 

found that the CGIAR has lost focus on 
its comparative advantages and that its 
growing mandate has diluted its impact. 
At the same time volatile food prices, 
more extreme weather patterns, growing 
global demand for food, and increasingly 
stressed natural resources are challenging 
the CGIAR like never before.

In December 2008 the CGIAR adopted 
a new business model. The reform entails 
a programmatic approach that will focus 
on a limited number of strategic “mega-
programs” on key issues. The reforms 
also emphasize results- oriented research 
agenda setting and management, clear 
accountabilities, streamlined governance 
and programs, and stronger partnerships. 
The changes are expected to strengthen 
the CGIAR so that it can more effectively 
address many complex global issues, 
including climate change, but it is still too 
early to gauge their success.

Sources: Consultative Group on International 
Agricultural Research, http://www.cgiar 
.org/ (accessed March 5, 2009); CGIAR Inde-
pendent Review Panel 2008; CGIAR Science 
Council 2008; World Bank 2008a. 

of well- defined, region- specific topics, such 
as  biomass,  bioenergy,  energy- efficient 
buildings,  methane  mitigation,  and  forest 
management.

Knowledge institutions can help inform 
and coordinate policy, particularly context-
 specific adaptation policies. As adaptations 
to  climate  change  begin  to  be  considered 
within policy processes, it becomes impor-
tant to share solutions and experiences.68 
When  planners,  managers,  and  policy 
makers begin to recognize how their indi-
vidual  decisions  can  combine  to  reduce 
vulnerability to climate change, there is a 
tremendous opportunity to enhance coor-
dination  among  sectors  to  improve  the 
use of resources and to share this valuable 
information  with  other  nations,  regions, 
and  localities.69  Establishing  and  manag-
ing  a  “clearinghouse”  that  processes  and 
makes available adaptation success stories 
and  options  from  around  the  world  will 
help  communities  faced  with  adaptation 
decisions.70

Carbon pricing and regulations to 
mobilize the private sector
As  chapter  4  discusses,  carbon  pricing  is 
essential for catalyzing market- driven inno-
vation and adoption of mitigation technolo-
gies.71  As  relative  prices  change  firms  are 
likely to respond with new types of techno-
logical investments to economize on the fac-
tor that has become more expensive.72 There 
is strong evidence that pricing can induce 
technological  change.73  One  study  found 
that if energy prices had remained at their 
low  1973  level  until  1993,  the  energy  effi-
ciency of air conditioners would have been 
16 percent lower in the United States.74

regulation and its proper enforcement 
can  also  induce  innovation.  performance 
standards for emissions or energy efficiency 
can induce technological change in much 
the  same  way  as  carbon  pricing,  because 
they can be associated with implicit prices 
that firms face in emitting pollutants.75 In 
the United States patenting activity in sulfur 
dioxide (SO2) emissions technology started 

 

Accelerating Innovation and Technology Diffusion 

307

to increase only in the late 1960s in antici-
pation  of  new  national  standards  on  SO2 
control.  From  1975  to  1995  technological 
improvements reduced the capital costs for 
removing SO2 from power plant emissions 
by half, and the share of SO2 removed rose 
from less than 75 percent to above 95 per-
cent.76 regulations can also provide firms 
with  niche  markets  to  develop  new  tech-
nologies and allow countries to gain a com-
petitive edge. A ban on gasoline- propelled 
motorbikes in several urban areas of China 
in  2004—which  coincided  with  techno-
logical improvements in electric motor and 
battery  technologies,  faster  urbanization, 
higher gasoline prices, and increases in pur-
chasing power—boosted the electric bicy-
cle market from a mere 40,000 in 1998 to 
21 million in 2008. E- bikes are now cheaper 
and cleaner than other motorized modes of 
transportation, including buses (figure 7.8), 
and  China  is  exporting  these  low- carbon 
vehicles to developed countries.77 

But regulation alone can have its draw-
backs. Unlike price signals, regulations can 
limit the flexibility of firms, especially when 
they are technology- specific. They can also 
result  in  mitigation  options  that  are  more 
costly for society. But they are a necessary 
complement to carbon pricing (see chapter 
4). Studies have analyzed the comparative 
effects  of  environmental  regulations  and 
market- based incentives on innovation: the 
general view is that combining different pol-
icy instruments may be the most effective, so 
long as their development and enforcement 
are predictable to stakeholders.78

An enabling business environment 
provides the basic framework for 
climate- smart technology diffusion and 
innovation
Markets need to function properly to ensure 
that firms do not face unnecessary risk, have 
access to information, operate within a well-
 defined legal framework, and have supportive 

Figure 7.8      E- bikes are now among the cheapest and cleanest travel mode options in China

Cost per km (US cent)
12

10

8

6

4

2

0

Bicycle

E-bike

Bus

Motor
scooter
(gasoline)

CO2 (g/passenger/km)
350

Compact

car

(gasoline)

300

250

200

150

100

50

0

Bicycle

Light
E-bike 

Heavy
E-bike 

Bus

Motor
vehicle

Sources: Cherry 2007; Weinert, Ma, and Cherry 2007; photograph from the Wikipedia Foundation.
Note: E-bike emissions refer to full life-cycle, which, in this case, includes production, energy production, and use. For the regular 
bicycle only emissions from production are included.

308 

WOrL D   D E V E LOpM E N T  rEpOr

T   2 0 1 0

market  institutions.  Securing  land  tenure, 
documenting  land  rights,  strengthening 
land rental and sale markets, and broadening 
access to financial services can create incen-
tives for technology transfer for rural small-
holders  (see  chapter  3).79  But  an  enabling 
business environment needs to recognize the 
basic  rights  of  vulnerable  groups,  particu-
larly indigenous peoples, heavily dependent 
on land and natural resources. Many of them 
have become landless, live on small parcels of 
land, or do not have secure tenure.80 

reducing  entry  barriers  for  firms  and 
offering  a  flexible  labor  market  supports 
technology start- ups that can create break-
through innovations and agribusinesses that 
can bring new types of fertilizers or seeds to 
farmers.81 The case of hybrid pearl millet in 
India shows that market liberalization in the 
late 1980s increased not only the role of pri-
vate companies in seed development and dis-
tribution but also the rates of innovation.82 
Macroeconomic stability is another pillar of 
the enabling environment, along with a well-
 functioning financial sector. Basic infrastruc-
ture services, such as continuous energy and 
water supplies, are also indispensable.

Eliminating  tariff  and  nontariff  barri-
ers on clean energy technologies—such as 
cleaner coal, wind power, solar photovolta-
ics,  and  energy- efficient  lighting—could 
increase their traded volume by 14 percent 
in the 18 developing countries that emit high 
levels of greenhouse gases.83 Trade barriers 
on imports, such as quotas, rules of origin, 
or unclear customs code specifications, can 
impede the transfer of climate- smart tech-
nologies  by  raising  their  domestic  prices 
and making them cost- ineffective. In Egypt 
the average tariffs on photovoltaic panels 
are 32 percent, 10 times the 3 percent tariff 
imposed  in  high- income  members  of  the 
Organisation for Economic Co- operation 
and  Development  (OECD).  In  Nigeria 
potential users of photovoltaic panels face 
nontariff barriers of 70 percent in addition 
to a 20 percent tariff.84 Biofuels are hit par-
ticularly hard by tariffs. Tariffs on ethanol 
and on some biodiesel feedstocks, includ-
ing import and export duties on Brazilian 
ethanol, totaled $6 billion in 2006. OECD 
country subsidies to their domestic biofu-
els producers came to $11 billion in 2006. 

As a result, investments are not being made 
where technology is the most cost- effective. 
Brazil, the world’s lowest- cost ethanol pro-
ducer, saw a modest 6 percent increase in 
its ethanol production between 2004 and 
2005, whereas the United States and Ger-
many saw production increases of 20 and 
60 percent respectively, protected by tariffs 
of over 25 percent in the United States and 
over 50 percent in the EU.85 removing these 
tariffs and subsidies would likely reallocate 
production  to  the  most  efficient  biofuel 
producers.86

An  attractive  investment  climate  for 
foreign  direct  investment  (FDI)  is  criti-
cal to accelerating technology transfer and 
absorption.87 In 2007 FDI accounted for 12.6 
percent of total gross fixed capital formation 
in electricity, gas, and water in developing 
countries, three times the amount of mul-
tilateral  and  bilateral  aid.88  Transnational 
corporations  based  in  high-income  coun-
tries have invested massively in photovoltaic 
production in India (Bp Solar), ethanol in 
Brazil  (Archer  Daniels  Midland  and  Car-
gill),  and  wind  power  in  China  (Gamesa 
and Vestas). China had one foreign- owned 
r&D laboratory in 1993 and 700 in 2005.89 
General  Electric,  a  world  leader  in  energy 
generation and efficiency products, opened 
global r&D centers in India and China in 
2000, centers that now employ thousands of 
researchers. Figure 7.9 highlights the oppor-
tunities brought about by the globalization 
of wind power equipment r&D and produc-
tion in middle- income countries.

Developing  local  production  capacity 
can help these countries ensure their long-
 term uptake of climate- smart technologies 
and  compete  in  global  markets,  driving 
prices down and performance up. This will 
occur fastest through licensing or FDI.

To facilitate the transfer of climate- smart 
technologies, middle- income countries can 
allow foreign firms to establish fully owned 
subsidiaries  instead  of  mandating  joint 
ventures or licensing. They can also build 
a base of local suppliers and potential part-
ners  for  foreign- invested  firms  by  invest-
ing  in  training  and  capacity  building.90 
And they can ensure that their intellectual 
property rights adequately protect foreign 
technology transfer and r&D. 

 

Accelerating Innovation and Technology Diffusion 

309

When enforcement of intellectual prop-
erty rights (Ipr) is perceived to be weak (see 
figure 7.9), foreign firms may not be willing 
to  license  their  most  sophisticated  tech-
nologies, for fear that competitors will use 
it—which is the situation for wind equip-
ment  in  China.91  Weak  Ipr  enforcement 
also discourages foreign subsidiaries from 
increasing the scale of their r&D activities 

and foreign venture capitalists from invest-
ing  in  promising  domestic  enterprises.92 
Despite  their  investments  in  local  manu-
facturing and r&D, foreign subsidiaries of 
global wind equipment producers register 
very few patents in Brazil, China, India, or 
Turkey. All these countries have weak Ipr 
regimes  that  could  discourage  scaling  up 
r&D.93

IBRD 37134
September 2009
M 7.2

Figure 7.9      Middle- income countries are attracting investments from the top five wind equipment firms, but weak intellectual property rights constrain 
technology transfers and R&D capacity

a. Intellectual property rights performance

Intellectual property rights index

< 3.50

5.51–6.50

3.51–4.50

6.51–7.50

4.51–5.50

> 7.50

No data

b. Number of wind power patents in 2007
Australia:

China:

India:

Italy:

1

2

2

2
United

Kingdom: 10
Spain: 23

Denmark:

86

United
States:

29

Germany: 41

c. Location of investments of top five wind firms

Number of R&D and production investments
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

Germany
United States
India

China

Denmark
Spain
Netherlands

Singapore

Australia

Belgium

Production plants
R&D centers

Brazil

Canada

Italy
Norway

Portugal

Sweden

United Kingdom
Turkey

Sources: Published patent data from U.S., Japanese, European, and international patent application databases, annual reports, and Web sites of Vestas, General Electric, 
Gamesa, Enercon, and Suzlon (accessed on March 4, 2009); Dedigama 2009. 
Note: A country’s IPR score reflects its ranking according to an IPR index based on the strength of its intellectual property protection policies and their enforcement.

310 

WOrL D   D E V E LOpM E N T  rEpOr

T   2 0 1 0

Yet  Iprs  may  also  hamper  innovation 
if  a  patent  blocks  other  useful  inventions 
because it is too broad in scope. Some pat-
ent  claims  on  synthetic  biology  products 
and  processes  with  promise  for  synthetic 
biofuels  are  perceived  by  critics  to  be  so 
broad that scientists fear they may halt sci-
entific  progress  in  related  fields.94  Strong 
Iprs can also hamper technology transfer 
if firms refuse to license their technology to 
keep their market power. 

There is no evidence that overly restric-
tive Iprs have been a big barrier to transfer-
ring renewable energy production capacity 
to  middle- income  countries,  but  there  are 
fears  that  they  could  one  day  become  so. 
Brazil,  China,  and  India  have  joined  the 
ranks of global industry leaders in photovol-
taics, wind, and biofuels, often by acquiring 
licensed technologies. Ipr issues may become 
more of a barrier to technology transfer as 
patenting activity accelerates in photovoltaics 
and biofuels and as equipment supplier con-
solidation continues in the wind sector.95

In low- income countries weak Iprs do 
not  appear  to  be  a  barrier  to  deploying 
sophisticated climate- smart technologies. 
But  predictable  and  clearly  defined  Iprs 
can  still  stimulate  technology  transfer 
from abroad. In these countries, licensing 
and building local versions of a technol-
ogy is not a realistic option given the lim-
ited domestic production capacity.96 The 
absorption of energy technologies gener-
ally occurs through imports of equipment. 
For climate adaptation, patents and plant 
variety rights held in developed countries 
are seldom a problem in small and lower-
 income  countries.  A  patent  registered  in 
a  specific  country  can  only  be  protected 
in  that  market,  and  foreign  companies 
do not register their intellectual property 
in  many  low- income  countries,  because 
they  do  not  represent  attractive  markets 
or potential competitors. poorer countries 
can thus decide to use a gene or tool from 
abroad.97

High-income countries can ensure that 
excessive industry consolidation in climate-
 smart sectors does not reduce incentives to 
license technology to developing countries. 
They can also ensure that national policies 
do not prevent foreign firms from licensing 

publicly funded research for climate- smart 
technologies of global importance. In many 
countries,  universities  are  not  allowed  to 
license technology funded by their national 
government to foreign firms.98 Other pro-
posals  include  patent  buyouts  and  the 
transfer of climate- smart Iprs to the public 
domain by international organizations.

High-income countries can also ensure 
that concerns over Iprs and transfer and 
innovation of climate- smart technologies 
are  considered  in  international  treaties 
such  as  those  of  the  World  Trade  Orga-
nization  (WTO).  The  WTO’s  agreement 
on  Trade- related  Aspects  of  Intellectual 
property  rights  (TrIpS)  establishes  the 
minimum legal standards of protection for 
WTO members. But the TrIpS agreement 
also recognizes that patents should not be 
abused, namely, that they should not pre-
vent technology from serving the urgent 
needs of developing countries. In fact, the 
TrIpS  agreement  includes  provisions  to 
allow developing countries to exploit pat-
ented  inventions  without  the  consent  of 
the Ipr owner.99 The WTO and its mem-
bers  can  limit  abuses  in  Ipr  protection 
if they ensure that the TrIpS agreement 
grants such exceptions for mitigation and 
adaptation technologies.

On  the  whole  however,  the  impact  of 
Iprs on technology transfer may be over-
stated in comparison with other costs such 
as management and training and barriers 
such as limited absorptive capacity. Build-
ing engineering competence could go a long 
way in enhancing the absorptive capacity of 
developing countries. 

Public funding can help firms overcome 
market failures associated with 
innovation and technology diffusion
There is a limit to how much carbon prices 
and emission standards can increase invest-
ments in low- carbon technology and inno-
vation.  New  technologies  are  not  always 
rapidly  adopted  even  when  they  become 
economically attractive to potential users 
(see  box  4.5  in  chapter  4).  Accelerating 
technological change requires supplement-
ing  carbon  pricing  and  regulations  with 
public funding to explore a wide portfolio 
of  technological  options.100  Well- known 

 

Accelerating Innovation and Technology Diffusion 

311

market failures leading to private underin-
vestment in innovation and diffusion have 
provided the basis for public funding poli-
cies for decades.101 

In middle- income countries with indus-
trial capacity, financial support can go to 
the  local  design,  production,  and  export 
of  climate- smart  systems.  public  funding 
policies  can  broadly  define  innovation  to 
include adapting, improving, and develop-
ing products, processes, and services that 
are new to a firm, irrespective of whether 
they are new to their markets. This takes 
into account the spillover effects of r&D 
in  helping  build  technological  absorptive 
capacity.102  For  example,  the  Technology 
Development  Foundation  of  Turkey  pro-
vides  zero- interest  loans  of  up  to  $1  mil-
lion  to  companies  that  adopt  or  develop 
systems  for  energy  efficiency,  renewable 
energy, or cleaner production.103 In small 
and low- income countries where there are 
even  more  market  barriers  to  technology 
absorption,  public  financial  support  can 
selectively finance technology absorption in 
firms, along with related technical consult-
ing and training. 

publicly supported technology diffusion 
programs bridge gaps in information and 
know- how among firms, farmers, and pub-
lic agencies. The most effective programs 
respond to real demand, address multiple 
barriers,  and  include  community  institu-
tions from the beginning. This creates local 
buy- in,  builds  sustainability,  and  ensures 
that the programs are compatible with local 
development goals.104 In South Africa the 
Clean  production  Demonstration  project 
for metal finishers was successful precisely 
because it targeted a wide range of issues 
in parallel—from the lack of information 
about the advantages of cleaner technolo-
gies to the lack of legislation or its enforce-
ment. The demand- driven project obtained 
the  buy- in  of  all  stakeholders—a  broad 
range of company owners, managers, staff, 
consultants, regulators, and suppliers—and 
combined awareness campaigns, training, 
technical  consulting,  and  financial  assis-
tance.105 In China the government’s strat-
egy to improve and diffuse biomass cook 
stove  technology  was  equally  successful 
because it recognized the systems nature of 

innovation and was largely demand- driven 
(box 7.10). 

As already pointed out in chapter 4, gov-
ernment procurement is another market-
 pull  instrument  that  can  create  market 
niches  for  climate- smart  technology,  but 
it relies on good governance and a sound 
institutional  environment.  public  pur-
chasing preferences can stimulate climate-
 smart innovation and technology adoption 
when the government is a major customer 
in areas such as wastewater management, 
construction,  and  transport  equipment 
and services. Germany and Sweden already 
include  “green”  criteria  in  more  than  60 
percent of their tenders.106 

preventing  unmanageable  climate 
change,  coping  with  its  unavoidable 
impacts  on  society,  and  meeting  global 
development  objectives  requires  signifi-
cantly stepping up international efforts at 
diffusing existing technologies and deploy-
ing new ones. For ambitious high- priority 
initiatives,  such  as  carbon  capture  and 
storage, countries can pool their resources, 
share the risks and share the learning ben-
efits of joint rDD&D. They can create new 
global funding mechanisms. “Technology-
 push” policies based on increasing public 
investments in r&D will not be sufficient 
to reach our technological objectives. They 
need  to  be  matched  with  “market- pull” 
policies that create public and private sec-
tor  incentives  for  entrepreneurship,  for 
collaboration, and to find innovative solu-
tions in unlikely places.

The  world  must  ensure  that  techno-
logical  advances  find  their  ways  rapidly 
to  countries  that  have  the  least  ability 
to  adopt  them  but  the  most  need.  Dif-
fusing  climate- smart  technology  will 
require much more than shipping ready-
 to- use equipment to developing countries. 
Namely,  it  will  require  building  techno-
logical absorptive capacity—the ability of 
the public and private sectors to identify, 
adopt,  adapt,  improve,  and  employ  the 
most appropriate technologies. It will also 
require creating environments that facili-
tate the transfer of mitigation and adap-
tation  technologies  from  one  country  to 
the  next  through  channels  of  trade  and 
investment. 

312 

WOrL D   D E V E LOpM E N T  rEpOr

T   2 0 1 0

Box 7.10      Improved cook stoves designs can reduce soot, producing important benefits for human 
health and for mitigation 

About 2 billion people in developing 
countries depend on biomass for heating 
and cooking. Rudimentary cookstoves in 
rural areas from Central America to Africa, 
India, and China release CO2 along with 
black carbon (tiny particles of carbon in 
soot) and products of incomplete com-
bustion (carbon monoxide, nitrogen com-
pounds, methane, and volatile organic 
compounds). These products pose a seri-
ous health hazard. Inhalation of indoor 
smoke from burning of solid biomass is 
thought to contribute to the deaths of 1.6 
million people a year globally, about 1 
million of them children under five years 
of age. 

Recent studies suggest that the power 

of black carbon as a driver for climate 
change could be as much as twice what 
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change previously estimated. New analy-
ses suggest that black carbon could have 
contributed more than 70 percent of the 
warming of the Arctic since 1976 and 
could have been a strong factor in the 
retreat of Himalayan glaciers.

Given that household solid fuel used 
in cookstoves in the developing world is 
responsible for 18 percent of the emis-
sions of black carbon, new cookstove 
technologies that improve combustion 
and thus reduce soot and emissions of 
other gases can have benefits not only for 
human health but also for mitigation.

A lot of funding has been devoted to 
support the use of liquefied petroleum 
gas (LPG) stoves as a cleaner alternative 
to biomass stoves, mostly by subsidizing 
LPG, but that has proved ineffective at 
diffusing the technology widely in devel-
oping countries. Even with subsidies, 
most poor people cannot afford the fuel. 

Public programs to introduce improved 
biomass cook stoves over the past two 
decades have produced mixed results. 
In India the government subsidized 50 
percent of the cost of 8 million stoves 
that it distributed. Initially, the program 
encountered some difficulties because 
the stove design was not appropriate for 
the tools and foods used by the popula-
tion, but during the past five years the 
government has launched new research 
to correct these problems. Improved 
cook stoves are gaining some ground in 
other countries. In China the government 
recognized that success hinged on meet-
ing people’s needs, and that this could 
not be achieved through a supply- driven 
top- down approach. It confined its role 
to research, technical training, setting 
manufacturing standards, and reducing 
bureaucratic impediments to the produc-
tion and diffusion of new stoves. The 
enterprise sector was mobilized for local 
distribution.

Given recent technological progress 
in biomass cookstoves, their impact on 
health, and their recently revealed impact 
on climate change, it is appropriate to 
massively scale up and commercialize 
high- quality biomass- based cookstoves. 
The most effective stoves will be afford-
able to the poor, adaptable to local 
cooking needs, durable, and appealing 
to customers. Project Surya, a pilot evalu-
ation program, is going to undertake the 
most comprehensive and rigorous scien-
tific evaluation to date on the efficacy of 
improved cookstoves on climate warming 
and people’s health. The project will sup-
port the introduction of new cookstove 
models in 15,000 households in three 
different regions of India. By monitoring 

A woman cooks with her Envirofit G-3300 
cookstove

Photo credit: Envirofit India.

pollutants through cutting edge sensor 
technologies, measuring solar heating of 
the air, and combining these data with 
measurements from NASA satellites, the 
project team hopes to observe a “black 
carbon hole”—the absence of the usual 
black carbon particles—in the atmosphere 
over the areas of intervention, and to 
measure how this impacts regional tem-
peratures and people’s health. The study 
will also improve understanding of how 
future cookstove programs should address 
households’ needs and behaviors.

Sources: Bond and others 2004; Columbia 
Earthscape, http://www.earthscape.org/
r1/kad09/ (accessed May 14, 2009); Forster 
and others 2007; Hendriksen, Ruzibuka, and 
Rutagambwa 2007; Project Surya, http://
www-ramanathan.ucsd.edu/ProjectSurya 
.html (accessed August 31, 2009); Ramana-
than and Carmichael 2008; Ramanathan, 
Rehman, and Ramanathan 2009; Shindell 
and Faluvegi 2009; Smith, Rogers, and 
Cowlin 2005; UNEP 2008b; Watkins and Ehst 
2008.

Notes

1. Global Wind  Energy  Council,  http://www 
.gwec.net/fileadmin/documents/pressreleases/
pr_stats_annex_table_2nd_feb_final_final.pdf 
(accessed April 2009).

2. Metcalfe and ramlogan 2008.
3. Edmonds  and  others  2007;  Stern  2007; 

World Bank 2008a.

4. Most integrated assessment models show a 
demand for no more than 600 gigatons of carbon 
(2,220 gigatons of carbon dioxide) storage capac-

ity over the course of this century. published esti-
mates place the potential global geologic storage 
capacity at about 3,000 gigatons of carbon (11,000 
gigatons  of  carbon  dioxide).  Dooley,  Dahowski, 
and Davidson 2007. 

5. SEG  2007.  See,  in  particular,  appendix  B, 
“Sectoral Toolkit for Integrating Adaptation into 
planning/Management and Technology/r&D.”

6. Heller and Zavaleta 2009.
7. Hulse 2007.
8. Commonwealth Secretariat 2007.

 

Accelerating Innovation and Technology Diffusion 

313

9. McKinsey Global Institute 2007.
10. Leadbeater and others 2008.
11. Aghion and others 2005.
12. Salter and Martin 2001.
13. De Ferranti and others 2003.
14. Barlevy 2007.
15. robins and others 2009.
16. Berkhout 2002.
17. UNEp 2008a.
18. A. Gentleman, “Bangalore Turning into a 
power in Electric Cars.” International Herald Tri-
bune, August  14,  2006;  Maini  2005;  S.  Nagrath, 
“Gee Whiz, It’s A reva! The Diminutive Indian 
Electric Car Is a Hit on the Streets of London.” 
Businessworld, Dec. 19, 2008.

19. The number of patents is often used as a 
measure  of  inventive  activity,  but  there  can  be 
drawbacks  to  comparing  patents  across  coun-
tries because certain types of inventions are less 
suited to patenting than others.

20. OECD  2008;  Dechezleprêtre  and  others 

2008.

21. IEA 2008a; SEG 2007; Stern 2007; Nemet 
and  Kammen  2007;  Davis  and  Owens  2003; 
pCAST 1999.

22. Based  on  International  Energy  Agency 
(IEA) rD&D statistics including high- and upper-
middle-income IEA countries except for Australia, 
Belgium, the Czech republic, Greece, Luxemburg, 
poland, the Slovak republic, and Spain.

23. IEA 2008a.
24. OECD 2008.
25. For example, crops and growing methods 
often  need  to  be  adapted  to  local  climatic,  soil, 
and technological conditions.

26. OECD 2008.
27. Beintema and Stads 2008.
28. Carlsson  2006;  Freeman  1987;  Lundvall 

1992; Nelson 1996; OECD 1997.

29. pCAST 1999.
30. IEA, http://www.iea.org/Textbase/techno/

index.asp (accessed December 15, 2008).

31. http://www.energystar.gov/ (accessed Decem-

ber 15, 2008).

32. Milford, Ducther, and Barker 2008; Stern 

2007.

33. Guasch and others 2007.
34. De Coninck and others 2007.
35. De Coninck and others 2007.
36. The Millennium Technology prize, http://
www.millenniumprize.fi  (accessed  February  16, 
2009).

37. Jaruzelski, Dehoff, and Bordia 2006.
38. Chesbrough 2003.
39. Newell and Wilson 2005; X prize Founda-
tion,  http://www.xprize.org/  (accessed  Decem-
ber 15, 2008).

40. progressive  Automotive  X  prize,  http://
www.progressiveautoxprize.org/  (accessed  April 
19, 2009).

41. pneumonia is the leading infectious cause 
of childhood mortality worldwide; World Bank 
2008a.

42. World Bank 2008a.
43. World Bank 2008a.
44. Branscomb and Auerswald 2002.
45. DB Advisors 2008.
46. UNEp 2008a.
47. Nemet and Kammen 2007.
48. National  Center 

for  Environmental 
research, http://www.epa.gov/ncer/sbir/ (accessed 
April 2009).

49.  passerelles  pacte  pME,  http://www.oseo 
.fr/a_la_une/actualites/passerelles_pacte_pme 
(accessed November 30, 2008).

50. Goldberg and others 2006.
51. Among  the  pertinent  framework  con-
ventions  are  those  on  climate  change  (United 
Nations  Framework  Convention  on  Climate 
Change, or UNFCCC), biodiversity (Convention 
on  Biological  Diversity),  desertification  (Con-
vention to Combat Desertification), the ramsar 
Convention  on  Wetlands,  shared  international 

“Through my painting I would like to transmit to all the people, including 

world’s leaders, my hope to stop global warming promoting the use of our sun 

because it is powerful, clean, and practically endless. . . . If we want, we could 

turn it to be our everyday energy source. Governments and companies should 

support the use of solar energy and scientists to find the best way so the people 

can easily use it in their homes, appliances, machines, factories, and vehicles.” 

—Laura Paulina Tercero Araiza, Mexico, age 10 

314 

WOrL D   D E V E LOpM E N T  rEpOr

T   2 0 1 0

watercourses,  and  the  plant  Genetic  resources 
for Food and Agriculture. 

52. Brewer 2008; De Coninck, Haake, and van 
der Linden 2007; Dechezleprêtre, Glachant, and 
Meniérè 2007.

53. Doornbosch,  Gielen,  and  Koutstaal 
2008;  Global  Environment  Facility,  http://www 
.gefweb.org/ (accessed December 4, 2008).

54. GEF 2008; GEF 2009.
55. The  World  Bank  Carbon  Finance  Unit, 
http://wbcarbonfinance.org/  (accessed  Decem-
ber 4, 2008).

56. Barrett 2006.
57. De Coninck and others 2007.
58. CCS  in  Europe,  http://ec.europa.eu/ 
environment/climat/ccs/work_en.htm  (accessed 
July 2, 2009).

59. UNESCO  Institute  for  Statistics,  http://
www.uis.unesco.org (accessed January 18, 2009).

60. Lundvall 2007.
61. Humanitarian  practice  Network,  http://
www.odihpn.org/report.asp?id=2522  (accessed 
January 14, 2009); Kiang 2006.

62. IpCC 2000.
63. Goldman  and  Ergas  1997;  World  Bank 

2007a.

64. Juma 2006.
65. World Bank 2005.
66. Watkins and Ehst 2008.
67. UNEp 2008a.
68. Huq, reid, and Murray 2003.
69. See  ecosystems- based  management  in 

chapter 3.

70. SEG 2007.
71. Schneider and Goulder 1997; popp 2006; 

also see chapter 4.
72. Hicks 1932.
73. Hayami  and  ruttan  1970;  Hayami  and 
ruttan  1985;  ruttan  1997;  Jaffe,  Newell,  and 
Stavins 2003; popp 2002.

74. Newell, Jaffe, and Stavins 1999.
75. Jaffe, Newell, and Stavins 2003.
76. Taylor, rubin, and Hounshell 2005.
77. Weinert,  Ma,  and  Cherry  2007;  the  Cli-
mate  Group  2008;  Hang  and  Chen  2008;  C. 
Whelan,  “Electric  Bikes  Are  Taking  Off.”  New 
York  Times,  March  14,  2007,  http://www.time 
.com/time/world/article/0,8599,1904334,00 
.html (accessed July 5, 2009).

78. Bernauer and others 2006.
79. World Bank 2007b.
80. de Chavez and Tauli- Corpuz 2008.
81. World Bank 2008b; Scarpetta and Tressel 

2004.

82. Matuschke and Qaim 2008.
83. These countries are Argentina, Bangladesh, 
Brazil, Chile, China, Colombia, Arab republic of 
Egypt,  India,  Indonesia,  Kazakhstan,  Malaysia, 

Mexico,  Nigeria,  the  philippines,  South  Africa, 
Thailand,  república  Bolivariana  de  Venezuela, 
and Zambia. World Bank 2008c.

84. World Bank 2008c.
85. Steenblik 2007.
86. IMF 2008.
87. Goldberg and others 2008.
88. Brewer 2008.
89. UNCTAD 2005.
90. Maskus  2004;  Hoekman,  Maskus,  and 

Saggi 2004; Lewis 2007.

91. Barton 2007.
92. Branstetter, Fisman, and Fritz Foley 2005; 

Deloitte 2007.

93. Dedigama 2009.
94. ICTSD 2008.
95. Barton 2007; Lewis 2007; ICTSD 2008.
96. Hoekman, Maskus, and Saggi 2004.
97. World Bank 2007b.
98. Barton 2007.
99. ICTSD 2008.
100. Baker and Shittu 2006; Jaffe, Newell, and 
Stavins 2003; Schneider and Goulder 1997; popp 
2006.

101. Nelson 1959; Arrow 1962.
102. Cohen and Levinthal 2009.
103. Technology Development Foundation of 
Turkey, http://www.ttgv.org.tr/en/page.php?id=35 
(accessed March 5, 2009).

104. IpCC 2000.
105. Koefoed and Buckley 2008.
106. Bouwer and others 2006.

References
Aghion, p., G. M. Angeletos, A. Banerjee, and K. 
Manova. 2005. “Volatility and Growth: Credit 
Constraints and productivity- Enhancing 
Investments.” Department of Economics 
Working paper 05- 15. Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology, Cambridge, MA.

Arrow, K. J. 1962. “Economic Welfare and the 
Allocation of resources for Invention.” In 
The Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity: 
Economic and Social Factors, ed. r. Nelson. 
prince ton, NJ: princeton University press.

Baker, E., and E. Shittu. 2006. “profit-

 Maximizing r&D in response to a random 
Carbon Tax.” Resource and Energy Economics 
28 (2): 160–180.

Barlevy, G. 2007. “On the Cyclicality of research 

and Development.” American Economic 
Review 97 (4): 1131–1164.

Barrett, S. 2006. “Managing the Global Com-
mons.” In Expert Paper Series Two: Global 
Commons. Stockholm: Secretariat of the 
International Task Force on Global public 
Goods. 

 

Accelerating Innovation and Technology Diffusion 

315

Barton, J. H. 2007. “Intellectual property and 

Access to Clean Energy Technologies in 
Developing Countries: An Analysis of Solar 
photovoltaic, Biofuels and Wind Technolo-
gies.” Trade and Sustainable Energy Series 
Issue paper 2, International Centre for Trade 
and Sustainable Development, Geneva.

Beintema, N. M., and G.  J. Stads. 2008. “Mea-
suring Agricultural research Investments: 
A revised Global picture.” Agricultural and 
Technology Indicators Background Note, 
International Food policy research Institute, 
Washington, DC.

Berkhout, F. 2002. “Technological regimes, path 

Dependency and the Environment.” Global 
Environmental Change 12 (1): 1–4.

Bernauer, T., S. Engel, D. Kammerer, and J. Sei-

jas. 2006. “Explaining Green Innovation.” 
Working paper 17, Center for Comparative 
and International Studies, Zurich.

Bond, T. C., D. G. Streets, K. F. Yarber, S. M. 

Nelson, J.- H. Woo, and Z. Klimont. 2004. “A 
Technology- Based Global Inventory of Black 
and Organic Carbon Emissions from Com-
bustion.” Journal of Geophysical Research 109: 
D14203–doi:10.1029/2003JD003697.

Bouwer, M., M. Jonk, T. Berman, r. Bersani, 

H. Lusser, V. Nappa, A. Nissinen, K. parikka, 
p. Szuppinger, and C. Vigano. 2006. Green 
Public Procurement in Europe 2006—Conclu-
sions and Recommendations. Haarlem: Virage 
Milieu & Management.

Branscomb, L. M., and p. E. Auerswald. 2002. 

Between Invention and Innovation: An Analy-
sis of Funding for Early- Stage Technology 
Development. Gaithersburg, MD: National 
Institute of Standards and Technology.

Branstetter, L., r. Fisman, and C. F. Foley. 2005. 

“Do Stronger Intellectual property rights 
Increase International Technology Transfer? 
Empirical Evidence from U.S. Firm- Level 
Data.” Working paper 11516, National Bureau 
of Economic research, Cambridge, MA.

Brewer, T. L. 2008. “International Energy Tech-
nology Transfer for Climate Change Mitiga-
tion: What, Who, How, Why, When, Where, 
How Much . . . and the Implications for Inter-
national Institutional Architecture.” Working 
paper 2048, CESifo, Venice.

Carlsson, B. 2006. “Internationalization of Inno-

vation Systems: A Survey of the Literature.” 
Research Policy 35 (1): 56–67.

CGIAr Independent review panel. 2008. Bring-

ing Together the Best of Science and the Best 
of Development: Independent Review of the 
CGIAR System: Report to the Executive Coun-

cil. Washington, DC: Consultative Group on 
International Agricultural research.

CGIAr Science Council. 2008. Report of the 

First External Review of the Generation Chal-
lenge Program. rome: Consultative Group on 
International Agricultural research.

Cherry, C. r. 2007. “Electric Two- Wheelers in 

China: Analysis of Environmental, Safety, and 
Mobility Impacts.” ph.D. thesis. University of 
California, Berkeley, CA.

Chesbrough, H. W. 2003. Open Innovation: The 

New Imperative for Creating and Profiting 
from Technology. Boston, MA: Harvard Busi-
ness School press.

Climate Group. 2008. China’s Clean Revolution. 

London: The Climate Group.

Cohen, W. M., and D. A. Levinthal. 2009. “Inno-
vation and Learning: The Two Faces of r&D.” 
Economic Journal 99 (397): 569–96.

Commonwealth Secretariat. 2007. Common-
wealth Ministers Reference Book 2007. Lon-
don: Henley Media Group.

Davis, G., and B. Owens. 2003. “Optimizing the 

Level of renewable Electric r&D Expendi-
tures Using real Option Analysis.” Energy 
Policy 31 (15): 1589–1608.

Davis, L., and J. Davis. 2004. “How Effective Are 
prizes as Incentives to Innovation? Evidence 
from Three 20th Century Contests.” paper 
presented at the Danish research Unit for 
Industrial Dynamics Summer Conference on 
Industrial Dynamics, Innovation and Devel-
opment. Elsinore, Denmark.

DB Advisors. 2008. “Investing in Climate 

Change 2009 Necessity And Opportunity In 
Turbulent Times.” Global team, DB Advisors, 
Deutsche Bank Group, Frankfurt. 

de Chavez, r., and V. Tauli- Corpuz. 2008. Guide 

on Climate Change and Indigenous Peoples. 
Baguio City, philippines: Tebtebba Foundation.

de Coninck, H. C., C. Fisher, r. G. Newell, and 

T. Ueno. 2007. International Technology-
 Oriented Agreements to Address Climate 
Change. Washington, DC: resources for the 
Future.

de Coninck, H. C., F. Haake, and N. J. van der 

Linden. 2007. Technology Transfer in the Clean 
Development Mechanism. petten, The Neth-
erlands: Energy research Centre of the Neth-
erlands.

de Ferranti, D. M., G. E. perry, I. Gill, J. L. 

Guasch, W. F. Maloney, C. Sanchez- paramo, 
and N. Schady. 2003. Closing the Gap in 
Education and Technology. Washington, DC: 
World Bank.

316 

WOrL D   D E V E LOpM E N T  rEpOr

T   2 0 1 0

Dechezleprêtre, A., M. Glachant, I. Hascic, N. 
Johnstone, and Y. Meniérè. 2008. Invention 
and Transfer of Climate Change Mitigation 
Technologies on a Global Scale: A Study Draw-
ing on Patent Data. paris: CErNA.

Dechezleprêtre, A., M. Glachant, and Y. Meniérè. 

2007. “The Clean Development Mechanism 
and the International Diffusion of Technolo-
gies: An Empirical Study.” Working paper 
2007.105, Fondazione Eni Enrico Mattei, 
Milan.

Dedigama, A. C. 2009. International Property 

Rights Index (IPRI): 2009 Report. Washington, 
DC: property rights Alliance.

Deloitte. 2007. Global Trends in Venture Capi-
tal 2007 Survey. New York: Deloitte Touche 
Tohmatsu.

Dooley, J. J., r. T. Dahowski, and C. Davidson. 

2007. “CCS: A Key to Addressing Climate 
Change.” In Fundamentals of the Global Oil 
and Gas Industry 2007. London: petroleum 
Economist.

Doornbosch, r., D. Gielen, and p. Koutstaal. 

2008. Mobilising Investments in Low- Emissions 
Technologies on the Scale Needed to Reduce the 
Risks of Climate Change. paris: OECD round 
Table on Sustainable Development.

Edmonds, J., M. A. Wise, J. J. Dooley, S. H.  
Kim, S. J. Smith, p. J. runci, L. E. Clarke,  
E. L. Malone, and G. M. Stokes. 2007. Global 
Energy Technology Strategy Addressing Cli-
mate Change: Phase 2 Findings from an Inter-
national Public- Private Sponsored Research 
Program. Washington, DC: Battelle pacific 
Northwest Laboratories.

Forster, p., V. ramaswamy, p. Artaxo, T. Bern-
sten, r. Betts, D. W. Fahey, J. Haywood, J. 
Lean, D. C. Lowe, G. Myhre, J. Nganga, r. 
prinn, G. raga, M. Schulz, and r. Van Dor-
land. 2007. “Changes in Atmospheric Constit-
uents and in radiative Forcing.” In Climate 
Change 2007: The Physical Science Basis. 
Contribution of Working Group I to the Fourth 
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change, ed. S. Solomon, D. 
Qin, M. Manning, Z. Chen, M. Marquis,  
K. B. Averyt, M. Tignor, and H. L. Miller. 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University press.

Freeman, C. 1987. Technology Policy and Eco-

nomic Performance: Lessons from Japan. Lon-
don: pinter.

GEF (Global Environment Facility). 2008. Trans-
fer of Environmentally Sound Technologies: The 
GEF Experience. Washington, DC: GEF.

———. 2009. Draft Adaptation to Climate 

Change Programming Strategy. Washington, 
DC: GEF.

Global Wind Energy Council. 2009. Global Wind 

2008 Report. Brussels: Global Wind Energy 
Council.

Goldberg, I., L. Branstetter, J. G. Goddard, and S. 
Kuriakose. 2008. Globalization and Technology 
Absorption in Europe and Central Asia. Wash-
ington, DC: World Bank.

Goldberg, I., M. Trajtenberg, A. B. Jaffe, J. Sun-

derland, T. Muller, and E. Blanco Armas. 
2006. “public Financial Support for Com-
mercial Innovation.” Europe and Central Asia 
Chief Economist’s regional Working paper 1, 
World Bank, Washington, DC.

Goldman, M., and H. Ergas. 1997. “Technology 
Institutions and policies: Their role in Devel-
oping Technological Capability in Industry.” 
Technical paper 383, World Bank, Washing-
ton, DC.

Guasch, J. L., J. L. racine, I. Sanchez, and M. Diop. 
2007. Quality Systems and Standards for a Com-
petitive Edge. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Hang, C. C., and J. Chen. 2008. “Disruptive Inno-
vation: An Appropriate Innovation Approach 
for Developing Countries.” ETM Internal 
report 1/08. National University of Singapore, 
Division of Engineering and Technology Man-
agement, Singapore.

Hayami, Y., and V. W. ruttan. 1970. “Factor 

prices and Technical Change in Agricultural 
Development: The United States and Japan.” 
Journal of Political Economy 78: 1115–41.
———. 1985. Agricultural Development: An 
International Perspective. Baltimore: John 
Hopkins University press.

Heller, N. E., and E. S. Zavaleta. 2009. “Biodi-
versity Management in the Face of Climate 
Change: A review of 22 Years of recom-
mendations.” Biological Conservation 142 (1): 
14–32.

Hendriksen, G., r. ruzibuka, and T. rutag-

ambwa. 2007. Capacity Building for Science, 
Technology and Innovation for Sustainable 
Development and Poverty Reduction. Washing-
ton, DC: World Bank.

Hicks, J. r. 1932. The Theory of Wages. London: 

Macmillan.

Hoekman, B. M., K. E. Maskus, and K. Saggi. 

2004. “Transfer of Technology to Developing 
Countries: Unilateral and Multilateral policy 
Options.” policy research Working paper 
3332, World Bank, Washington, DC.

 

Accelerating Innovation and Technology Diffusion 

317

Hulse, J. H. 2007. Sustainable Development at 
Risk: Ignoring the Past. Ottawa: Foundation 
Books/IDrC.

Huq, S., H. reid, and L. Murray. 2003. “Main-
streaming Adaptation to Climate Change in 
Least Developed Countries.” Working paper 
1: Country by Country Vulnerability to Cli-
mate Change, International Institute for 
Environment and Development, London.
ICTSD (International Centre for Trade and 

Sustainable Development). 2008. “Climate 
Change, Technology Transfer and Intellec-
tual property rights.” paper presented at the 
Trade and Climate Change Seminar. Copen-
hagen.

IEA (International Energy Agency). 2006. 

Energy Technology Perspectives: In Support of 
the G8 Plan of Action. Scenarios and Strategies 
to 2050. paris: IEA.

———. 2008a. Energy Technology Perspective 
2008: Scenarios and Strategies to 2050. paris: 
IEA.

———. 2008b. World Energy Outlook 2008. 

paris: IEA.

IMF (International Monetary Fund). 2008. Fuel 

and Food Price Subsidies: Issues and Reform 
Options. Washington, DC: IMF.

IpCC (Intergovernmental panel on Climate 

Change). 2000. Special Report: Methodological 
and Technological Issues in Technology Trans-
fer: Summary for Policymakers. Cambridge, 
UK: Cambridge University press.

IrI (International research Institute for Climate 

and Society). 2006. “A Gap Analysis for the 
Implementation of the Global Climate Observ-
ing System programme in Africa.” Technical 
report IrI- Tr/06/1, IrI, palisades, N.Y.

Jaffe, A., r. G. Newell, and r. N. Stavins. 2003. 

“Technological Change and the Environ-
ment.” In Handbook of Environmental 
Economics, vol. 1, ed. K. G. Maler and J. r. 
Vincent. Amsterdam: Elsevier.

Jaruzelski, B., K. Dehoff, and r. Bordia. 2006. 

Smart Spenders: The Global Innovation 1000. 
McLean, VA: Booz Allen Hamilton.

Juma, C. 2006. Reinventing African Economies: 
Technological Innovation and the Sustainabil-
ity Transition: 6th John Pesek Colloquium on 
Sustainable Agriculture. Ames, IA: Iowa State 
University.

———. 2008. “Agricultural Innovation and 

Economic Growth in Africa: renewing 
International Cooperation.” International 
Journal of Technology and Globalisation 4 (3): 
256–75.

Justus, D., and C. philibert. 2005. International 
Energy Technology Collaboration and Climate 
Change Mitigation. paris: OECD/IEA.

Kiang, r. 2006. Malaria Modeling and Surveil-
lance Verification and Validation Report, Part 
1: Assessing Malaria Risks in Thailand Prov-
inces Using Meteorological and Environmental 
Parameters. Greenbelt, MD: NASA Goddard 
Space Flight Center.

Koefoed, M., and C. Buckley. 2008. “Clean 
Technology Transfer: A Case Study from 
the South African Metal Finishing Industry 
2000–2005.” Journal of Cleaner Production 
16S1: S78–S84.

Leadbeater, C., J. Meadway, M. Harris, T. Crow-
ley, S. Mahroum, and B. poirson. 2008. Mak-
ing Innovation Flourish. Birmingham, UK: 
National Endowment for Science, Technol-
ogy, and the Arts.

Lewis, J. I. 2007. “Technology Aquisition and 
Innovation in the Developing World: Wind 
Turbine Development in China and India.” 
Studies in Comparative International Develop-
ment 42: 208–232.

Lundvall, B. A., ed. 1992. National Systems of 
Innovation: Towards a Theory of Innovation 
and Interactive Learning. London: pinter. 

———. 2007. “National Innovation- Systems: 
Analytical Concept and Development Tool.” 
Industry and Innovation 14 (1): 95–119.

MacCracken, M. 2009. “Beyond Mitigation: 

potential Options for Counter- Balancing the 
Climatic and Environmental Consequences 
of the rising Concentrations of Greenhouse 
Gases.” policy research Working paper Series 
4938, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Maini, C. 2005. “Development of a Globally 

Competitive Electric Vehicle In India.” Journal 
of the Indian Insitute of Science 85: 83–95.

Maskus, K. E. 2004. “Encouraging International 
Technology Transfer.” project on Intellectual 
property rights and Sustainable Develop-
ment 7, United Nations Conference on Trade 
and Development and International Centre 
for Trade and Sustainable Development, Cha-
vanod, France.

Matuschke, I., and M. Qaim. 2008. “Seed Mar-

ket privatisation and Farmers’ Access to Crop 
Technologies: The Case of Hybrid pearl Mil-
let Adoption in India.” Journal of Agricultural 
Economics 59 (3): 498–515.

McKinsey Global Institute. 2007. Leapfrogging 
to Higher Productivity in China. McKinsey & 
Company.

Metcalfe, S., and r. ramlogan. 2008. “Innova-

tion Systems and the Competitive process in 

318 

WOrL D   D E V E LOpM E N T  rEpOr

T   2 0 1 0

Developing Economies.” Quarterly Review of 
Economics and Finance 48 (2): 433–46.

Milford, L., D. Ducther, and T. Barker. 2008. How 

Distributed and Open Innovation Could Accel-
erate Technology Development and Deployment. 
Montpelier, VT: Clean Energy Group.

Nelson, r. r. 1959. “The Simple Economics of 
Basic Scientific research.” Journal of Political 
Economy 67: 297–306.

———. 1996. National Innovation Systems. New 

York: Oxford University press.

Nemet, G., and D. M. Kammen. 2007. “U.S. 

Energy research and Development: Declining 
Investment, Increasing Need, and the Feasi-
bility of Expansion.” Energy Policy 35: 746–55.
Newell, r. G., A. B. Jaffe, and r. N. Stavins. 1999. 

“The Induced Innovation Hypothesis and 
Energy- saving Technological Change.” Quar-
terly Journal of Economics 114: 941–75.

Newell, r. G., and N. E. Wilson. 2005. “Technol-

ogy prizes for Climate Change Mitigation.” 
Discussion paper 05- 33, resources for the 
Future, Washington, DC.

OECD (Organisation for Economic Co- 

operation and Development). 1997. National 
Innovation Systems. paris: OECD.

———. 2008. Compendium on Patent Statistics 

2008. paris: OECD.

pCAST (president’s Committee of Advisors 

on Science and Technology). 1999. Powerful 
Partnerships: The Federal Role in International 
Cooperation on Energy Innovation. Washing-
ton, DC: pCAST.

philibert, C. 2004. International Energy Tech-
nology Collaboration and Climate Change 
Mitigation. paris: Organisation for Economic 
Co- operation and Development and Interna-
tional Energy Agency.

popp, D. 2002. “Induced Innovation and Energy 

prices.” American Economic Review 92 (1): 
160–80.

———. 2006. “r&D Subsidies and Climate pol-
icy: Is There a Free Lunch?” Climatic Change 
77: 311–41.

ramanathan, N., I. H. rehman, and V. ramana-

than. 2009. “project Surya: Mitigation of 
Global and regional Climate Change: Buying 
the planet Time by reducing Black Carbon, 
Methane and Ozone.” Background note for 
the WDr 2010.

ramanathan, V., and G. Carmichael. 2008. 

“Global and regional Climate Changes Due to 
Black Carbon.” Nature Geoscience 1: 221–27.

robins, N., r. Clover, and C. Singh. 2009. A 

Climate for Recovery: The Colour of Stimulus 
Goes Green. London, UK: HSBC. 

rogers, D. 2009. “Environmental Information 

Services and Development.” Background note 
for the WDr 2010.

ruttan, V. W. 1997. “Induced Innovation, Evo-

lutionary Theory and path Dependence: 
Sources of Technical Change.” Economic Jour-
nal 107 (444): 1520–29.

Salter, A. J., and B. r. Martin. 2001. “The Eco-

nomic Benefits of publicly Funded Basic 
research: A Critical review.” Research Policy 
30 (3): 509–32.

Scarpetta, S., and T. Tressel. 2004. “Boosting 

productivity Via Innovation and Adoption of 
New Technologies: Any role for Labor Mar-
ket Institutions?” policy research Working 
paper 3273, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Schneider, S. H., and L. H. Goulder. 1997. 

“Achieving Low- Cost Emissions Targets.” 
Nature 389 (6646): 13–14.

SEG (Scientific Expert Group on Climate 

Change). 2007. Confronting Climate Change: 
Avoiding the Unmanageable and Managing the 
Unavoidable. Washington, DC: Sigma Xi and 
the United Nations Foundation.

Shindell, D., and G. Faluvegi. 2009. “Climate 

response to regional radiative Forcing dur-
ing the Twentieth Century.” Nature Geoscience 
2: 294–300.

Smith, K. r., J. rogers, and S. C. Cowlin. 2005. 
“Household Fuels and Ill- Health in Develop-
ing Countries: What Improvements Can be 
Brought by Lp Gas?” paper presented at 18th 
World Lp Gas Foum, Sept. 14–16, Shanghai.
Steenblik, r., eds. 2007. Biofuels: At What Cost? 
Government Support for Ethanol and Biodiesel 
in Selected OECD Countries. Geneva: Interna-
tional Institute for Sustainable Development, 
Global Subsidies Initiative. 

Stern, N. 2007. The Economics of Climate 

Change: The Stern Review. Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge University press.

Taylor, M. r., E. S. rubin, and D. A. Hounshell. 
2005. “Control of SO2 Emissions from power 
plants: A Case of Induced Technological 
Innovation in the U.S.” Technological Forecast-
ing and Social Change 72 (6): 697–718.

Tidd, J. 2006. Innovation Models. London: Impe-

rial College London.

UNCTAD (United Nations Conference on Trade 

and Development). 2005. World Investment 
Report 2005: Transnational Corporations and 
the Internationalization of R&D. New York: 
United Nations.

UNEp (United Nations Environment pro-

gramme). 2008a. Global Trends in Sustainable 

 

Accelerating Innovation and Technology Diffusion 

319

Energy Investments. paris: UNEp Sustainable 
Energy Finance Initiative.

———. 2008b. Reforming Energy Subsidies: 
Opportunities to Contribute to the Climate 
Change Agenda. Nairobi: UNEp Division of 
Technology, Industry and Economics.

———. 2007a. Building Knowledge Economies: 
Advanced Strategies for Development. Wash-
ington, DC: World Bank Institute.

———. 2007b. World Development Report 2008: 
Agriculture for Development. Washington, DC: 
World Bank.

Watkins, A., and M. Ehst, eds. 2008. Science, 

———. 2008a. “Accelerating Clean Technology 

Technology and Innovation Capacity Building 
for Sustainable Growth and Poverty Reduction. 
Washington, DC: World Bank. 

Weinert, J., C. Ma, and C. Cherry. 2007. “The 

Transition to Electric Bikes in China: History 
and Key reasons for rapid Growth.” Trans-
portation 34 (3): 301–18.

Westermeyer, W. 2009. “Observing the Climate 
for Development.” Background note for the 
WDr 2010.

World Bank. 2005. Agricultural Investment 

Source book. Washington, DC: World Bank.

research, Development and Deployment: 
Lessons from Nonenergy Sector.” Working 
paper 138, World Bank, Washington, DC.
———. 2008b. Doing Business 2008 Report. 

Washington, DC: World Bank.

———. 2008c. International Trade and Climate 
Change: Economic, Legal and Institutional Per-
spectives. Washington, DC: World Bank.

ChAPTEr 8

Overcoming Behavioral  
and Institutional Inertia

Many policies to address adap-

tation  and  mitigation  are 
already known. Secure prop-
erty  rights,  energy- efficient 
technologies,  market- based  eco- taxes  and 
tradable  permits—all  have  been  piloted 
and studied over decades. But implement-
ing them still proves difficult. Their success 
relies not just on new finance and new tech-
nology  but  also  on  complex  and  context-
 specific  social,  economic,  and  political 
factors  normally  called  institutions—the 
formal and informal rules affecting policy 
design, implementation, and outcomes.1

Values,  norms,  and  organizational 
arrangements  can  make  policy  change 
hard. Experiences frame current and future 
action. Patterns of individual and organi-
zational behavior die hard even in the face 
of new challenges. And political traditions 
constrain policy choices. Some examples. 

Key messages
Achieving results in tackling the climate challenge requires going beyond the international 
mobilization of finance and technology, by addressing the psychological, organizational, and 
political barriers to climate action. These barriers stem from the way people perceive and think 
about the climate problem, the way bureaucracies work, and the interests shaping government 
action. Policy change requires shifting political incentives and even organizational responsibili-
ties. And it requires the active marketing of climate policies, tapping into social norms and 
behaviors, in order to translate the public’s concern into understanding and understanding into 
action—starting at home.

Most countries still gear policies and regu-
latory institutions to ensure the supply of 
energy—not  to  manage  demand.  Pollu-
tion taxes in economies where pollution is 
not considered a public bad will generate 
resistance  from  decision  makers  and  the 
public  alike.  And  economic  interests  can 
hinder the deployment of energy- efficient 
technologies.2

The examples show another dimension 
of the urgency of tackling climate change. 
In addition to the inertia of climate, tech-
nology,  and  capital  stocks,  policy  has  to 
overcome  institutional  inertia.  Institu-
tions tend to be sticky—once in place and 
accepted, they can limit policy change and 
future choices.3 

Institutional inertia has three implica-
tions for climate- smart development pol-
icy. First, institutional change should be a 
priority.  Success  will  hinge  on  reshaping 
the  institutional  framework  supporting 
interventions. Second, institutional reform 
pays off. Addressing the institutional deter-
minants  of  climate  policy  can  ensure  the 
effectiveness and sustainability of interven-
tions, maximize the impact of finance and 
technology, and yield additional develop-
ment payoffs. Third, institutional change is 
feasible. Increasing gender inclusion, recog-
nizing indigenous peoples’ rights, reform-
ing property rights, and shaping individual 
incentives can be demanding, but they are 
not impossible. Many of these changes can 
be  accomplished  without  technological 

322 

WOrL D   D E V E LO P M E N T  rE P Or T   2 0 1 0

breakthrough or additional finance. More 
important, many of these interventions fall 
within the realm of national or even local 
policy—there is no need for a global climate 
deal to enhance press freedom, for example, 
or the voice of civil society.4

This  chapter  discusses  the  behavioral, 
organizational,  and  political  determi-
nants of the institutional inertia hindering 
climate- smart development. It shows how 
these  forces  affect  the  implementation  of 
new  policies  and  hamper  their  success  in 
both developed and developing countries. 
And  it  argues  that  overcoming  inertia 
requires reconsidering the scope and qual-
ity of government’s role. We start with indi-
viduals’ minds. 

Harnessing individuals’  
behavioral change 
Understanding  the  drivers  of  human 
behavior  is  essential  for  climate- smart 
development policy. First, myriad private 
acts of consumption are at the root of cli-
mate  change.  As  consumers,  individuals 
hold  a  reservoir  of  mitigation  capacity. 
A  large  share  of  emissions  in  developed 
countries  results  directly  from  decisions 
by  individuals—for  travel,  heating,  food 
purchases.  U.S.  households  account  for 
roughly 33 percent of the nation’s carbon 
dioxide (CO2) emissions—more than U.S. 
industry and any other country bar China 

Figure 8.1      The direct actions of U.S. consumers 
produce up to one- third of total U.S. CO2 emissions

Industrial

27%

Commercial

18%

Residential

(natural gas, electricity,

LPG, and fuel oil)

21%

Transportation

(passenger vehicles

and boats)

12%

Transportation

(light and heavy trucks,

buses, rail, jet fuel,
and other sources)

22%
Direct actions
Indirect actions

Sources: EIA 2009; EPA 2009.
Note: LPG = liquified petroleum gas.

(figures  8.1  and  8.2).5  If  fully  adopted, 
existing efficiency measures for households 
and motor vehicles could produce energy 
savings  of  almost  30  percent—10  per-
cent of total U.S. consumption.6 Second, 
individuals  drive  the  larger  processes  of 
change in organizations and political sys-
tems. Particularly in democratic countries, 
much  government  action  is  the  result  of 
citizen and voter pressures to act. Third, 
when designing and implementing policy, 
decision  makers  apply  the  same  mental 
processes as other individuals.

The  debate  about  changing  individual 
behavior  has  focused  on  market  mecha-
nisms.  Better  pricing  of  energy  and  cost-
ing of scarce resources can steer individuals 
away  from  carbon- intensive  consumption 
and encourage them to preserve endangered 
habitats and manage ecosystems better. But 
the drivers of consumption by individuals 
and  groups  go  beyond  prices.  Many  cost-
 effective energy- efficient technologies have 
been available for years. “No- regret” invest-
ments  such  as  improving  building  insula-
tion,  addressing  water  leaks,  and  limiting 
building in flood- prone areas yield benefits 
beyond mitigation and adaptation. So, why 
haven’t they been adopted? Because concern 
does not mean understanding, and under-
standing does not necessarily lead to action.

Concern does not mean understanding
Over the past decade, awareness of climate 
change has grown without translating into 
widespread  individual  action.7  Indeed, 
flying,  driving,  holidaying  abroad,  and 
using household appliances have increased 
globally.8 

What explains the disconnect between 
perception  and  action?  Concern  about 
climate change does not necessarily mean 
understanding its drivers and dynamics or 
the responses needed. Polls show that the 
public admits to remaining confused over 
climate change’s causes and solutions.9 This 
“green gap” in public attitudes stems partly 
from how climate science is communicated 
and how our minds (mis)understand cli-
mate dynamics (box 8.1).10

Standard  information- deficit  models 
assume that when people “know” more, they 

 

Overcoming Behavioral and Institutional Inertia 

323

act differently.11 People today are exposed to 
lots of information on the causes, dynam-
ics,  and  effects  of  climate  change.  This 
information has clearly increased concern, 
but it has not led to action.12 Why? Because 
information  can  produce  misleading  feel-
ings of “empowerment,” which then turns 
into ambivalent powerlessness when paired 
with  more  “realistic”  messages.  Convey-
ing urgency by stressing the unprecedented 
nature and scale of the problems can result in 
paralysis.13 Similarly, playing up the multi-
stakeholder nature of mitigation and adapta-
tion is a reminder that the solution rests with 
no single actor, resulting in a general feeling 
of helplessness and disempowerment.14 This 
might explain why, in developed countries 
where  information  on  climate  change  is 
more readily available, people are less opti-
mistic about a possible solution (figure 8.3).
To produce action, awareness needs to be 
grounded in clear information from trust-
worthy  sources.  The  way  climate  change 
science is communicated to the public can 
complicate things. Scientific debate evolves 
through testing and cross- checking of the-
ories and findings. News coverage can veer 
from one extreme to another, resulting in 
more confusion for the public, which may 
perceive the debate not as scientific prog-
ress but as a proliferation of contradictory 
opinions.15 Moreover, the media’s need to 
present  “balanced”  stories  has  given  dis-
proportionate coverage to climate science 
contrarians lacking scientific expertise and 
standing.16

Figure 8.2      Small local adjustments for big global benefits: Switching from SUVs to fuel-
 efficient passenger cars in the United States alone would nearly offset the emissions 
generated by providing energy to 1.6 billion more people

Emissions (million tons of CO2)
350

300

250

200

150

100

50

0

Emission reductions by switching
fleet of American SUVs to cars with

EU fuel economy standards.

Emission increase by providing

basic electricity to 1.6 billion people

without access to electricity.

Source: WDR team calculations based on BTS 2008.
Note: Estimates are based on 40 million SUVs (sports utility vehicles) in the United States traveling a total of 480 
billion miles (assuming 12,000 miles a car) a year. With average fuel efficiency of 18 miles a gallon, the SUV fleet 
consumes 27 billion gallons of gasoline annually with emissions of 2,421 grams of carbon a gallon. Switching to 
fuel-efficient cars with the average fuel efficiency of new passenger cars sold in the European Union (45 miles 
a gallon; see ICCT 2007) results in a reduction of 142 million tons of CO2 (39 million tons of carbon) annually. Elec-
tricity consumption of poor households in developing countries is estimated at 170 kilowatt hours a person-year 
and electricity is assumed to be provided at the current world average carbon intensity of 160 grams of carbon a 
kilowatt-hour, equivalent to 160 million tons of CO2 (44 million tons of carbon). The size of the electricity symbol in 
the global map corresponds to the number of people without access to electricity.

Box 8.1    Miscommunicating the need for climate action

Reporting on climate change can have 
the counterproductive effect of immo-
bilizing people. A linguistic analysis of 
media coverage and environmental 
groups’ communications on climate 
change found that the more people are 
bombarded with words or images of the 
devastating, quasi- biblical effects of cli-
mate change, the more likely they are to 
tune out and switch off. Depicting climate 
change as “scary weather” can set up a 
pernicious set of reactions, because peo-
ple tend to see weather as being outside 

human control. They cannot prevent or 
change it. They prepare for it, adjust to 
it, or move away from it. And focusing on 
the long time lines and scale of climate 
change encourages them to think “it 
won’t happen in my lifetime” and “there’s 
nothing one can do.”

Stressing the large scale of climate 
change while telling people they can 
solve it through small actions (like 
changing a light bulb) creates a discon-
nect that undermines the credibility of 
the messages and encourages people 

to think that action is meaningless. A 
typical global warming news story—
outlining the scientific proof, stressing 
the severe consequences of inaction, 
and urging immediate steps—can lead 
people to think that preventive action is 
meaningless.

Source: Retallack, S., www.opendemocracy 
.net/globalization- climate_change_debate/
ankelohe_3550.jsp (accessed July 17, 2008).

324 

WOrL D   D E V E LO P M E N T  rE P Or T   2 0 1 0

Figure 8.3      Individuals’ willingness to respond to climate change differs across countries and does not always translate into concrete actions

a.  Globally, individual intentions to act
do not yet translate into concrete action

b.   In emerging markets people are more confident that climate change

will be solved have higher intentions to act

12

15

73

Yes, I have switched
to a greener energy
provider
I am currently
considering switching

I have not 
switched, and I 
am not considering 
switching

89

11

Higher confidence and lower intentions

Higher confidence and higher intentions

India

China

Brazil

Argentina

Chile

South Africa

Italy

Spain

Russian
Federation

Japan

Australia

United States

Netherlands

United Kingdom

Canada

Ireland

France

Germany

Scandinavian
countries

Intentions
declared in

2007, %

Actions taken

between
2007–08, %

Lower confidence and lower intentions

Lower confidence and higher intentions

Yes, I am
willing to
switch to
a greener
energy
provider

No, I am
not willing
to switch

Source: Accenture 2009.
Note: The 2009 Accenture Climate Change Survey was conducted with a sample of 10,733 individuals in 22 developed and emerging economies. The sample was representative 
of the general population in developed countries and urban populations in developing countries. Panel a: Respondents were asked about their willingness to switch to a greener 
energy provider if the provider offered services that help reduce carbon emissions. Intentions did not translate into action, with most respondents staying with their old energy 
provider. Panel b: Based on the questionnaire, countries were ranked on two criteria—confidence and intention. Confidence measured the individual’s optimism about the ability 
of individuals, politicians, and energy providers to find a solution. Respondents in emerging economies generally were more optimistic about humankind’s ability to take action to 
solve global climate change.

The media, in search of punchy stories, 
tend to shy away from the scientific com-
munity’s careful wording to express uncer-
tainty. readers then face messages lacking 
scientific  caution  and  containing  strong 
appeals that might then be refuted by other 
similarly strongly worded statements, ham-
pering the perceived reliability of the infor-
mation source. In addition to confusing the 
public  (and  policy  makers)  about  causes, 
impacts, and potential solutions, different 
types of framing can antagonize individu-
als and induce a sense of guilt, and even of 
being  vilified,  when  the  problem  of  con-
sumption is characterized as a problem of 
consumers.17 This can lead people to reject 
the message rather than act on it.

An  added  challenge  in  moving  from 
concern to understanding has to do with 
how the mind perceives the problem. The 
dynamics  of  climate  change  stretch  our 
mental capacities in several ways.18 Psycho-
logical research shows that individuals are 
ill  equipped  to  deal  with  multiple- cause 
problems.19 Simplifying problems by adopt-
ing single- cause explanations in turn leads 
to  searching  for  individual  solutions  and 

focusing on (often nonexistent) technologi-
cal silver bullets. The inertia affecting our 
responses can be linked to a limited under-
standing  of  stock- and- flow  relationships, 
which  characterize  the  concentration, 
removal,  and  stabilization  of  greenhouse 
gases. The fact that even the most drastic 
and  sudden  emission  reductions  will  not 
prevent further warming, or make the need 
for adaptation disappear in the short and 
medium  term,  is  something  we  struggle 
with and, without careful explanation, sim-
ply do not understand (box 8.2).20 

Understanding does not necessarily  
lead to action
Knowledge is mediated through value sys-
tems shaped by psychological, cultural, and 
economic factors that determine whether we 
act or not. Again the idea here is not that we 
are irrational but that we need to understand 
better how we make decisions. Our evolution 
as a species has shaped the way our brains 
work. We are particularly good at acting on 
threats that can be linked to a human face; 
that present themselves as unexpected, dra-
matic, and immediate; that involve obvious 

 

Overcoming Behavioral and Institutional Inertia 

325

links to human health; that challenge our 
moral framework, provoking visceral reac-
tions; or that evoke recent personal experi-
ence.21 The slow pace of climate change as 
well as the delayed, intangible, and statisti-
cal nature of its risks, simply do not move 
us (box 8.3).

Behavioral  economics  shows  that  fea-
tures  of  human  decision  making  under 
uncertainty constrain our natural instinct 
to adapt.22 We tend to underestimate cumu-
lative  probabilities  (the  sum  of  the  prob-
abilities of an event occurring over a period 
of  time),  which  explains  why  building 
continues in areas prone to fires, flooding, 
and earthquakes. People strongly favor the 
status quo and prefer to make only small 
incremental adjustments to it. They are at 
a loss when measuring achievements is dif-
ficult,  as  in  disaster  preparedness,  where 
there are no clear counterfactuals. We are 
“myopic  decision  makers”  who  strongly 
discount  future  events  and  assign  higher 
priorities to problems closer in space and 
time. For instance, the public tends to be 
mobilized by visible environmental prob-
lems (urban air pollution) but not by less 
visible ones (species extinction). Individu-
als rank  climate  change  lower  than  other 

Box 8.2      Misunderstandings about the dynamics of climate 
change encourage complacency

Support for policies to control green-
house gas emissions is hampered by 
people’s limited understanding of 
climate change’s dynamics. Experi-
ments show that a majority of people 
misunderstand the basic stock- and-
 flow nature of the problem: they 
believe that stabilizing emissions 
near the current rates would stabilize 
concentrations of greenhouse gases 
in the atmosphere and halt climate 
change. Instead the flow of emissions 
is best compared to the flow of water 
entering a bathtub: as long as the 
inflow is greater than the outflow, the 
level of water in the tub will rise. As 

long as emissions exceed the amounts 
that can be taken up by terrestrial and 
aquatic systems, concentrations of 
greenhouse gases will rise. Even for 
those who consider climate change 
a priority, a misunderstanding of 
the stock- and- flow process favors 
wait- and- see policies, limiting public 
pressure and political will for active 
policy to stabilize the climate. These 
misperceptions can be corrected 
through communication strategies 
that use analogies, such as the bath-
tub example. 
Sources: Sternman and Sweeney 2007; 
Moxnes and Saysel 2009.

environmental issues perceived as closer to 
home (figure 8.4).23

Even if people were indeed fully rational, 
knowledge  would  not  necessarily  lead  to 
action. Their “finite pool of worries” might 
prevent them from acting on existing infor-
mation because they prioritize basic needs 
such as security, shelter, and the like.24 They 

Box 8.3      How risk perceptions can sink policies: Flood risk management

The impulse to address risk is fundamen-
tally related to perceptions of the serious-
ness and likelihood of impacts. 

The perception of probabilities and the 
methods people tend to use to estimate 
those probabilities can be misleading. 
For example, people evaluate the likeli-
hood of an event occurring in a given 
place based on how similar the latter is 
to locations where such events normally 
occur.a The availability of recent and vivid 
memories of an event also leads people 
to overestimate its probability. It has 
been observed that often people overes-
timate the likelihood of low-probability 
events and underestimate the likelihood 
of high-probability events. People are 
notoriously more scared of sitting in a 
plane than in a car (although the risk of a 
deadly car accident event is significantly 
higher). Similarly, rare natural disasters 
such as tsunamis, generate more concern 

than more frequent events such as storm 
surges.b

These behavior patterns were identi-
fied among farmers and policy makers 
in Mozambique after the 2000 floods 
and during the subsequent resettlement 
program implemented by the govern-
ment. Farmers (more than policy makers) 
showed a bias toward the status quo: 
for farmers, actions to adapt to climate 
factors are often weighted against risks 
of negative outcomes. The decision to 
move to a safe area on higher ground, 
for example, entails the risk of losing 
one’s livelihood or community. The deci-
sion to plant a drought- tolerant crop can 
lead to the risk of having a lower harvest, 
if the rains are plentiful. Farmers want-
ing to avoid personal responsibility for 
negative outcomes will avoid making 
new choices. By contrast, policy makers 
can gain personal credit for avoiding a 

negative outcome, but only if they take 
visible action—say, by helping farmers 
survive through resettlement. 

Different stakeholders view probabili-
ties differently. Policy makers in Maputo 
tend to associate the Limpopo River 
floodplain with flood risk alone. For the 
people living there, however, life in the 
floodplain is defined by many other fac-
tors in addition to climate risks. Relative 
to local farmers, these policy makers have 
a propensity to overestimate climate-
 related risks. Unless risk analysis and 
communication are adequately factored 
in, major differences in perceptions of risk 
can impede successful policy design and 
implementation. 

Sources: Patt and Schröter 2008.
a. Tversky and Kahneman 1974.
b. Kahneman and Tversky 1979.

326 

WOrL D   D E V E LO P M E N T  rE P Or T   2 0 1 0

also assess both the market and nonmarket 
costs of decisions. The nonmarket costs of 
acting on information that challenges core 
value systems (such as calls for resettlement 
and migration or for limiting consumption 
patterns) can be high. Indeed, the very act 
of  interpreting  or  mediating  additional 
information  is  costly.  For  a  household 
having to decide whether to keep rebuild-
ing  on  a  flood- prone  area,  or  for  a  local 
official  designing  and  enforcing  building 
codes in low- lying coastal areas, the trans-
action costs can be substantial. Moreover, 
both  mitigation—and,  very  often,  adap-
tation—present themselves as tragedies of 
the  commons  requiring  collective  action. 
rational  and  self- interested  individuals 
face  structural  disincentives  to  cooperate 
in solving these problems.25 Cooperation in 
these conditions requires the payoffs to be 
clear—obviously not the case with climate-
 change impacts and responses.26

Understanding  barriers  to  behavior 
change also requires going beyond psycho-
logical explanations based on the individ-
ual as a unit of analysis—and embracing 

Figure 8.4      Climate change is not a priority yet

Global warming

Extinction of plants and animals

Loss of rain forests

Air pollution

Supply of fresh water for households

Toxic contamination of soil/water

Water pollution

Pollution of drinking water

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

Percentage of respondents concerned a great deal

or fair amount about each problem

Source: Gallup Poll, www.gallup.com/poll/106660/Little- Increase- Americans- Global- Warming- Worries.aspx 
(accessed March 6, 2009).
Note: Respondents were asked the following question: “ I’m going to read you a list of environmental prob-
lems. As I read each one, please tell me if you personally worry a great deal, a fair amount, only a little, or not 
at all.” Results are based on phone interviews on March 5–8, 2009. The sample comprised 1,012 U.S. citizens 
aged 18 and older.

the  way  social  factors  influence  percep-
tions, decisions, and actions. People natu-
rally  tend  to  resist  and  deny  information 
that  contradicts  their  cultural  values  or 
ideological beliefs. This includes informa-
tion  that  challenges  notions  of  belonging 
and identity as well as of rights to freedom 
and consumption. Notions of needs and the 
priorities deriving from them are socially 
and  culturally  constructed.27  This  might 
explain  why  awareness  of  environmental 
problems normally increases with wealth, 
but concern about climate change does not 
(figure  8.5).28  Individuals  (and  nations) 
with  higher  incomes  (and  higher  carbon 
dioxide  emissions)  may  disregard  global 
warming  as  a  way  to  avoid  incurring  the 
potential costs of solutions associated with 
lower  levels  of  consumption  and  lifestyle 
changes.29

People  also  construct  and  reconstruct 
information to make it less uncomfortable, 
leading to strategies of socially organized 
denial that shape the way societies and gov-
ernments interpret and respond to climate 
change.30  The  evolution  of  standard  nar-
ratives  about  climate  change  provides  an 
example.  Focusing  on  country  emissions 
rather than per capita emissions can lead 
people  living  outside  the  big  emitters  to 
minimize their responsibility and rational-
ize their failure to act. Drastic calls for the 
need for an international response tend to 
play down the fact that domestic action will 
be required in any case. And uncertainty 
about dynamics and impacts can be over-
played to justify inaction.

These forms of denial are not abstract—
nor  are  they  confined  to  climate  policy. 
Similar  processes  operate  at  various  lev-
els  of  day- to- day  decision  making,  and 
addressing them is part of solving crucial 
development challenges, such as reducing 
the  spread  of  hIV- AIDS  or  the  incidence 
of  common  water-   and  sanitation- related 
diseases. rather than an aberration, denial 
needs  to  be  considered  a  coping  strategy 
deployed by individuals and communities 
facing  unmanageable  and  uncomfortable 
events. resistance to change is never sim-
ply the result of ignorance—it derives from 
individual  perceptions,  needs,  and  wants 
based on material and cultural values. 

 

Overcoming Behavioral and Institutional Inertia 

327

Figure 8.5      Concern about climate change decreases as wealth goes up

Percentage of respondents who consider climate change a serious problem

100

IDN

CHN

PHL THA
BRA
MYS

TUR

IND

VNM

CHL PRT

ZAF

ARG
LTU

HUN

GRC
ESP

KOR
CZE

POL

LVA

RUS

NZL

EST

FRA
SGP

JAP

HKG

CHE

ITA
SWE

GBR
AUT

FIN

CAN

DNK

BEL

NLD

IRL

NOR

USA

95

90

85

80

75

70

65

60

Encouraging behavioral change
Policy  makers  need  to  be  aware  of  these 
barriers to action and treat policy options 
accordingly. Three policy areas are relevant 
here: communications, institutional mea-
sures, and social norms. 

From  information  to  communication.    
Information,  education,  and  awareness 
raising, as carried out so far, are at best not 
enough to spur people to action and at worst 
counterproductive. This calls for a different 
approach to providing information about cli-
mate change.31 First, the information- driven 
approach must shift to an audience- centric 
one  in  communicating  climate  change. 
Both scientists and the media need to work 
together  to  enhance  the  salience  of  their 
messages. Second, as in other policy areas, 
such as AIDS prevention, this shift should 
entail a marketing approach to communica-
tion, where the individual is considered not 
merely the passive receiver of information 
but an active agent in both causes and solu-
tions (box 8.4).

Well- designed  communication  cam-
paigns that address individuals as members 
of a local community—and not as power-
less  members  of  an  unmanageably  large 
group—can  empower  them  to  act.  This 
treatment can help make a global phenom-
enon  personally  relevant  and  immediate, 
and  accentuate  the  local  and  individual 
ownership of the solutions. It is important 
to limit “greenwash” in business and gov-
ernment—the gap between agreeing pub-
licly on the reality of climate change while 
doing nothing about it—to avoid confusion 
and public backlash (box 8.5).

A  controversial  question  is  whether 
detailed  public  understanding  of  highly 
complex  issues  such  as  climate  change  is 
feasible, even necessary, for effective policy 
making. The answer is no, or at least not 
always.  Much  policy  making  is  based  on 
technicalities  fully  ignored  by  the  public. 
Few  people  understand  the  intricacies  of 
trade policies affecting the price of the food 
they buy and eat, or produce and sell. Where 
buy- in is necessary, it is often encouraged 
through other means. 

Yet  discounting  information  and  pub-
lic  awareness  as  unnecessary  would  be  a 

0

10

20

30

40

50

GDP per capita ($, PPP, thousands)

Source: Sandvik 2008.
Note: Public concern about global warming is expressed as percentage based on respondents who consider 
climate change a serious problem. It was taken from a global online survey conducted by ACNielsen in 2007 on 
consumer attitudes toward global warming. Respondents from 46 different countries were asked how serious 
a problem (on a scale from 1 to 5) they thought global warming was. The base population is respondents who 
have heard or read about global warming.

mistake. recent work has highlighted that 
information  is  key  for  the  public  to  back 
costly measures. The benefits of providing 
more accurate information about people’s 
consumption  decisions—say,  through 

Box 8.4      End- to- end community engagement for landslide 
risk reduction in the Caribbean

A new way of delivering real landslide-
 risk reduction to vulnerable com-
munities was piloted by MoSSaiC, 
a program aimed at improving the 
management of slopes in communi-
ties in the eastern Caribbean. MoSSaiC 
identifies and implements low- cost, 
community- based approaches to 
landslide- risk reduction, in which 
community residents indicate areas of 
perceived drainage problems before 
assessing options for reducing land-
slide risk by managing surface water.
The activities? Managing surface 
water in all forms (roof water, grey 
water, and overland flow of rainfall 
water), monitoring shallow ground-
water conditions, and constructing 
low- cost drain systems. All the work 
is bid out to contractors in the com-
munity. This end- to- end community 
engagement encourages participa-
tion in planning, executing, and 

maintaining surface water manage-
ment on high- risk slopes. It produces 
a program owned by the community 
rather than imposed by the agency or 
government. 

MoSSaiC has lowered landslide risk 

by offering the community employ-
ment and risk awareness—and has 
taken a participatory approach to 
rolling out the program to other com-
munities. The program shows that 
changing community views of hazard 
mitigation can enhance community 
perceptions about climate risks. It also 
establishes a feedback loop between 
project inputs and outputs, with more 
than 80 percent of funds spent in the 
communities, allowing communities 
and governments to establish a clear 
link between risk perceptions, inputs, 
and tangible outputs. 

Source: Anderson and Holcombe 2007.

328 

WOrL D   D E V E LO P M E N T  rE P Or T   2 0 1 0

Box 8.5      Communicating climate change

How an issue is framed—the words, met-
aphors, stories, and images used to com-
municate information—determines the 
action. Frames trigger deeply held world 
views, widely held assumptions, and cul-
tural models in judging the message and 
in accepting or rejecting it accordingly. If 
the facts don’t fit the frames, the facts are 
rejected, not the frame.

Based on that understanding, it can 

be decided whether a cause is best 
served by repeating or breaking domi-
nant discourse, or by reframing an issue 
using different concepts, languages, and 
images to evoke a different way of think-
ing and facilitate alternative choices. 

Applying this approach to communica-
tions on climate change could take many 
forms: 

•	 Place	the	issue	in	the	context	of	

higher values, such as responsibility, 
stewardship, competence, vision, and 
ingenuity.

•	 Characterize	mitigation	actions	as	

being about new thinking, new tech-
nologies, planning ahead, smartness, 
farsightedness, balance, efficiency, and 
prudent caring.

•	 Simplify	the	model,	analogy,	or	

metaphor to help the public under-
stand how global warming works—a 

conceptual hook to make sense of 
information and set up appropriate rea-
soning (instead of the “greenhouse gas 
effect” call it a “heat trap”).

•	 Refocus	communications	to	under-

score the human causes of the prob-
lem and the solutions that exist to 
address it, suggesting that humans 
can and should act to prevent the 
problem now.

•	 Evoke	the	existence	and	effectiveness	

of solutions upfront.

Source: Lorenzoni, Nicholson- Cole, and 
Whitmarsh 2007.

carbon  labeling  and  smart  meters—have 
long  been  proven.  A  U.S.- based  survey 
found that one of the main factors respon-
sible  for  the  public’s  negative  perceptions 
of  cap- and- trade  schemes  is  not  the  fear 
of additional costs but the limited knowl-
edge of their effectiveness, reducing public 
trust  in  them.32  Similarly,  opposition  to 
environmental taxes seems to fall once the 
public fully understands that they are a way 
not  simply  to  raise  money  but  to  change 
behavior.33 

Institutional  measures.      Beyond  com-
munication, a key issue for climate policy 
is  designing  interventions  that  take  into 
account the social and psychological con-
straints to positive action. Effective adap-
tation  interventions  should  reduce  the 
transaction costs for individuals in making 
decisions and enhance the ownership of the 
information  available.  This  requires  that 
adaptation strategies be informed by com-
munity  perceptions  of  risk,  vulnerability, 
and  capacity  (see  box  8.5).  Institutional-
izing  participatory  self- assessments  for 
national  and  local  disaster  preparedness, 
adaptation  planning,  and  mitigation  can 
be useful here. 

Limiting the tendency of individuals to 
discount the value of the future is another 
area for action. Although discounting the 
future  is  an  innate  mental  propensity,  it 

varies with social characteristics and exter-
nal  pressures.  Evidence  from  Peru  shows 
that farmers with limited access to credit 
and  insurance  and  with  weak  property 
rights  have  higher  discount  rates—and 
that steeper discounting increases individ-
uals’ incentives to deforest.34 Institutional 
reforms to improve credit access and prop-
erty rights can affect inner behavioral driv-
ers of discounting. So can education (box 
8.6).

Similarly,  interventions  that  rely  on 
individuals and businesses facing up- front 
costs but gaining long- term benefits (such 
as  those  deriving  from  energy- efficiency 
investments)  should  consider  providing 
immediate payoffs in tax rebates or subsi-
dies. Giving private actors a sense of long-
 term  policy  direction  is  also  useful.  An 
international  survey  of  business  leaders 
conducted in 2007 found that 81 percent of 
those polled believed that the government 
needs to provide clear long- term policy sig-
nals to help companies find the incentives 
to  change  and  plan  investments.35  (Ways 
for government to signal long- term direc-
tion are explored below.)

Climate policy should also heed the ten-
dency of individuals to favor local, visible, 
and  privately  securable  outcomes.  Miti-
gation  actions  produce  benefits  that  are 
global and diffuse, and the direct benefits 
of adaptation measures may or may not be 

 

Overcoming Behavioral and Institutional Inertia 

329

immediately apparent, based on the type 
of climate event under consideration and 
on the rate of change. The public at large 
may perceive these benefits as distant and 
uncertain. It is the role of institutions to 
communicate  clearly  the  direct  benefits 
and  co-benefits  of  both  adaptation  and 
mitigation, particularly emphasizing those 
that involve human health, a subject that 
moves people.

Improved cost- benefit tools can encour-
age public and private decision makers to act 
more decisively. The estimation of costs and 
benefits of energy- efficiency projects often 
does  not  include  nonenergy  co- benefits. 
These  include  the  public  health  benefits 
from  cleaner  air  and  water,  the  possibly 
greater comfort of building occupants, and 
higher labor productivity.36 Switching from 
fossil to renewable energy can create jobs.37 
Case  studies  in  manufacturing  conclude 
that  these  benefits  can  be  considerable, 
sometimes  equivalent  to  the  value  of  the 
energy savings alone.38 So the time frame 
for  investment  paybacks  can  be  substan-
tially shortened, providing better incentives 
to  invest.  Similarly,  earmarking  revenues 
from carbon or energy taxes can increase the 
visibility of benefits of mitigation. Although 
fiscal earmarking is deemed economically 
inefficient, it can increase political accep-
tance of new taxes, because the public sees 
clearly where the money goes.

Social norms.      Social norms are the pat-
terns of behavior that most people approve 
of—the  yardsticks  they  use  to  assess  the 
appropriateness  of  their  own  conduct.  In 
shaping  human  action,  social  norms  can 
achieve socially desirable outcomes, gener-
ally at a fairly low cost. The basic idea is that 
people want to act in a socially acceptable 
way and tend to follow the lead of others, 
particularly when the others are numerous 
and are perceived as similar.

Social norms have a particularly strong 
impact under conditions of uncertainty.39 
When looking for clues about how to behave, 
people rely on what others do. Appeals for 
proenvironmental behavior based on social 
norms are superior to traditional persua-
sion. Not littering is an example.

Box 8.6      Inserting climate education in school curricula

Education can help drive behavioral 
change. In the Philippines the presi-
dent signed into law the National 
Environmental Awareness and Edu-
cation Act of 2008, which promotes 
the integration of climate- change 
education in school curricula at all 
levels. The 1998 education reforms in 
Lebanon incorporated environmental 
studies, including climate change, 
into science, civic, and geography 
classes. In 2006 the U.S. Environ-
mental Protection Agency created a 
climate- change- based educational 
resource for high school students, 
allowing them to calculate emissions 
inventories. In 2007 Canadian prov-
inces committed to include climate 
change in their school curricula. 
Under Australia’s Third National Com-
munication on Climate Change the 
government provides support and 
develops material to promote climate 

change education, such as a school 
resource kit developed by the Austra-
lian Greenhouse Office.

Incorporating climate change 
education in school curricula is a 
first step. Developing a new cadre of 
professionals to tackle the complex 
problems posed by climate change 
is equally important (see chapter 7). 
Finally, an educated citizenry is essen-
tial to facilitate change. Research 
shows that students and the general 
public hold onto misunderstandings 
about various aspects of climate 
change, the greenhouse effects, and 
ozone layer depletion.a To address 
these shortcomings, the public must 
be informed about climate change 
accurately and systematically.

Sources: Hungerford and Volk 1990;  
Kastens and Turrin 2006.
a. Gautier, Deutsch, and Rebich 2006.

A climate- relevant example comes from 
a psychological experiment on California 
residents to test the impact of social norms 
on  energy  consumption.40  The  average 
household energy consumption was com-
municated  through  energy  bills  to  one 
group of high- energy households and two 
groups of low- energy households. This set 
the social norm. One group of low- energy 
households received positive feedback for 
their  energy  consumption  statement  (a 
smiley  face),  conveying  approval  of  their 
energy footprint. high- energy households 
were  shown  their  use  coupled  with  nega-
tive feedback (a sad face) to convey disap-
proval. The result: high- energy households 
reduced consumption, and low- energy ones 
maintained their lower- than- average con-
sumption.  The  third  group—low- energy 
households initially exposed to the social 
norm  but  receiving  no  positive  feedback 
about their behavior—increased their con-
sumption  to  reach  the  average.  Utilities 
eager to reduce energy use have adopted the 
approach in 10 major metropolitan areas in 
the  United  States,  including  Chicago  and 
Seattle. 

330 

WOrL D   D E V E LO P M E N T  rE P Or T   2 0 1 0

harnessing  the  power  of  social  norms 
implies increasing the visibility of behavior 
and its implications. Individual decisions 
and actions that have a bearing on energy 
consumption today are largely invisible to 
the public and even to restricted circles of 
family and friends. In these cases human 
action cannot benefit from patterns of reci-
procity, peer pressure, and group behavior 
normally  at  play  in  more  visible  cases  of 
behavior change and compliance, such as 
compliance with traffic control. 

research  on  cooperation  leads  to  the 
same conclusion. Unless information about 
other players’ behavior is available, people 
tend not to cooperate.41 Farmers within a 
river basin should receive information not 
only about their water use but also about 
whether they are below or above the stan-
dard set by their peers. residents of flood-  
prone  areas  can  be  encouraged  to  adopt 
protection measures by exposing them to 
the rapid uptake of such measures by oth-
ers in their community. Conversely, appeals 
stressing that too many people have not yet 
installed basic energy- efficiency measures 
are bound to lead to even less adoption of 
such measures, not more. 

Social  norms  can  complement  tradi-
tional public policy approaches and mea-
sures,  such  as  regulation,  taxation,  and 
pricing.  Thinking  about  group  behavior 
can  ameliorate  the  impact  of  these  mea-
sures, opening opportunities for combining 
different  instruments.  But  some  policies 
based  on  economic  incentives  might  do 
more  harm  than  good  by  weakening  the 
effect of social norms. Pricing pollution or 
emissions might give polluters the impres-
sion that it is all right to pollute, as long as 
they pay their fair share. Similarly, imper-
fectly enforced regulation, or perceptions 
that formal rules can be eluded, can favor 
more self- interested behavior and weaken 
cooperation.42 

More radical calls for social norms focus 
on alternative parameters of progress, such as 
stressing a shift toward notions of well- being 
decoupled from consumption.43 And politi-
cal opposition to instruments such as green 
taxes  can  be  overcome  through  tax-rebate 
schemes—in Sweden, for example, very high 
tax rates on nitrogen oxide emissions from 

power producers were politically acceptable 
because taxes were fully rebated to produc-
ers on the basis of how much electricity they 
produced.44 

These  measures  are  obviously  not 
enough  to  ensure  the  success  of  climate 
policy. But they might well prove necessary. 
Encouraging  behavior  change  for  mitiga-
tion and adaptation goes beyond providing 
additional information, finance, or technol-
ogy. Traditional measures can be comple-
mented by alternative interventions, often 
at low cost. rather than simply treat these 
social and psychological drivers of behav-
ior as barriers to adaptation and mitigation, 
policy makers can use them to build more 
effective and sustainable policy.

Bringing the state back in
Over the past 30 years the role of the state 
has been cut back in various domains key 
to  addressing  the  climate  challenge,  such 
as energy research. The retreat from direct 
intervention occurred with a switch from 
“government”  to  “governance”  and  an 
emphasis on the state’s role in steering and 
enabling the private sector.45 This general 
trend hides a complex picture. Twentieth-
century  Europe  saw  various  forms  and 
degrees of state capitalism. The rise of East 
Asian economies, including China’s, dem-
onstrated the preeminence of the state in 
“governing the market” to deliver the most 
successful example of accelerated develop-
ment.46  Most  recently,  the  2008  financial 
crisis  showed  the  pitfalls  of  deregulation 
and unrestrained markets—and triggered 
renewed  emphasis  on  bringing  back  the 
state. 

Climate  change  requires  public  inter-
ventions  to  address  the  multiple  market 
failures driving it—the failures of pricing; 
of  research  and  technology  development; 
and of coordination and collective action, 
global, national, and local.47 As providers of 
public goods and correctors of externalities, 
governments are expected to address these 
market failures. But there are more specific 
drivers of government intervention. 

First,  the  private  sector’s  role  in  solv-
ing  the  climate  challenge  is  crucial,  but 
overplaying  it  would  be  unwise.  Despite 
the  enthusiasm  for  the  private  sector’s 

 

Overcoming Behavioral and Institutional Inertia 

331

contribution to major investment projects 
in the 1980s and 1990s, private participation 
in infrastructure remains limited. Although 
the bulk of the additional investment and 
financing needed for climate- change miti-
gation and adaptation is expected to come 
from the private sector, government poli-
cies and incentives will be fundamental.48 
Moreover,  energy  providers  and  electric 
utilities are usually government-owned or 
government- regulated private corporations. 
Changing  the  mix  of  generation  facilities 
may require subsidies and up- front fixed-
 capital investments. Business certainly has 
an incentive to secure the attractive returns 
from investments in energy efficiency, but, 
as discussed in chapter 4, market barriers 
are  likely  to  require  government  action. 
Where high costs of new technology (low-
emission vehicles or solar electricity gener-
ation, for example) are constraining supply 
and demand, a range of government incen-
tives may be required to expand markets.

Second,  mitigation  and  adaptation  are 
both  likely  to  increase  public  spending. 
Auctioning  emission  permits  or  taxing 
carbon generates revenues. Keeping expen-
diture  flat  would  require  government  to 
deliver complete tax rebates or full revenue 
recycling. But such fiscal neutrality might 
be perceived as a luxury in countries look-
ing for cash to fund new public investments 
for  adaptation  and  for  new  energy  infra-
structure while containing their fiscal defi-
cits. As chapter 7 highlights, governments 
need  to  expand  their  already  significant 
role in technology research, development, 
and  demonstration.  Governments  can 
change  incentives,  either  by  subsidizing 
investments with wider social benefits that 
markets tend to undersupply (such as risky 
energy  r&D)  or  by  taxing  or  regulating 
actions that are socially harmful.

Third, the greater frequency and severity 
of extreme weather events will pressure gov-
ernments to enhance their insurance func-
tion. As chapter 2 notes, insurance markets 
can go only so far in securitizing climate 
risks. Developed- world insurance systems 
are already stretched in dealing with rising 
hazards along the U.S. and Japanese coasts, 
in upper- middle- income Caribbean islands, 
and  on  floodplains  in  northern  Europe. 

Climate  change  is  expected  to  exacerbate 
insurability problems, requiring renegotia-
tion of the boundary between private and 
public  insurance  systems.  Governments 
will  face  pressures  to  become  insurers  of 
last resort for more of the population and 
for  more  damages.  In  parallel,  they  will 
need to address the moral hazards induc-
ing people to make bad choices because of 
insurance. 

Fourth,  governments  will  have  to  do 
more  as  knowledge  and  learning  plat-
forms,  particularly  around  adaptation.49 
As chapter 7 argues, this will require more 
investments  in  r&D  and  more  effective 
markets for technology innovation. It will 
also  require  transforming  meteorological 
services  into  climate  services,  overseeing 
the distribution of information at different 
levels, and using international regimes and 
organizations as policy- learning arenas for 
governments to learn from each other and 
adapt policy to local circumstances. 

Fifth, as the prime repositories of politi-
cal legitimacy, governments will be expected 
to  steer  the  private  sector,  facilitate  com-
munity  action,  and  establish  the  optimal 
decentralization of adaptation and mitiga-
tion decision making and action. On top of 
steering, governments will be expected to 
play an “ensuring” function: guaranteeing 
that targets and goals are achieved through 
new emphasis on regulation, taxation, long-
 term planning, and communication.50

None of this means that the size of the 
state needs to expand—government size is 
not always associated with better provision 
of public goods.51 Instead, it is about rec-
ognizing, as chapter 2 points out, that the 
added challenges of climate change will also 
increase  the  cost  of  government  failures. 
Addressing  these  challenges  will  require 
broadening  government  objectives  and 
agendas  and  stepping  up  the  type,  scope, 
and quality of government interventions.

Toward climate- smart government 
Governments  will  need  to  review  the  way 
they operate if they are to successfully address 
the  climate  challenge.  As  attention  shifts 
from identifying the causes and impacts of 
climate change to devising responses, gov-
ernment setups will need rearranging.52

332 

WOrL D   D E V E LO P M E N T  rE P Or T   2 0 1 0

In most countries no single government 
agency  can  fully  control  climate- change 
policy; relevant mandates, responsibilities, 
and constituencies are spread over differ-
ent  ministries.  Yet  few  governments  have 
an agency capable of enforcing carbon bud-
gets. In addition, the time frames of climate 
impacts  and  required  responses  go  well 
beyond those of any elected administration. 
And bureaucracies are not quick learners.53 
Because  of  the  novelty  of  climate  change 
as a public policy domain and because of 
the urgency of action, policy makers need 
to prepare for a degree of failure—and to 
learn  from  it.  These  problems  have  been 
identified in the literature as the main driv-
ers of failures to act in organizations.54

Government effectiveness will be critical 
to leveraging the impact of adaptation fund-
ing.  As  chapter  6  notes,  most  adaptation 
activities today are implemented through 
stand- alone  and  disconnected  projects. 
Fragmented  adaptation  finance  hampers 
mainstreaming  and  scaling  up  in  plan-
ning and development processes, increases 
transaction costs for recipients and donors, 
and diverts the time and attention of politi-
cians and government officials away from 
domestic  priorities  to  manage  aid- related 
activities.  The  tens  of  billions  of  dollars 
required for adaptation may put additional 

Figure 8.6      Effective governance goes hand in hand with good environmental performance

Environmental performance
100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

0
Low

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

Governance effectiveness

1.0
High

Sources: Kaufman, Kraay, and Mastruzzi 2007; Esty and others 2008.
Note: Environmental performance is measured by an environmental performance index (http://epi.yale.edu/). 
Governance effectiveness ranges between 0 and 1 and is derived using log transformation of the governance 
effectiveness indicator from the World Governance Indicators database for 212 countries for 1996–2007. It 
combines the views of a large number of enterprise, citizen, and expert survey respondents in high-income 
and developing countries.

pressure on developing countries’ already 
limited  absorptive  capacity.  Many  of  the 
developing countries most in need of adap-
tation support are those with weaker capac-
ity to manage and absorb funding. When 
a  recipient’s  capacity  to  manage  funds  is 
limited, donors engage in tighter controls 
of funds and project- based modalities, put-
ting further strains on country systems and 
leading to vicious cycles of lower capacities, 
fiscal shortfalls, and fragmentation.55

Enhancing the capacity of central 
government 
When political leaders take an active inter-
est, focusing the minds of officials, public 
opinion, and external stakeholders, coun-
tries move forward. Conversely, when lead-
ers  fail  to  act,  countries  lag  behind.  This 
is  hardly  surprising.  Decision  makers  are 
individuals,  and  the  failures  in  the  way 
individuals make decisions also affect the 
way organizations, including governments, 
work.56 however, leadership is not just an 
individual issue; it is also institutional and 
has to do with the way responsibility, coor-
dination,  and  accountability  for  climate 
policy are organized (figure 8.6).

Assigning responsibility for climate policy.    
In most countries climate change is still the 
preserve of the environment ministry. But 
climate policy spills over into domains that 
transcend the boundaries of environmental 
protection and include trade, energy, trans-
port, and fiscal policy. Environment agen-
cies are normally weaker than departments 
such as treasury, commerce, or economic 
development.  They  tend  to  have  fewer 
resources and to be represented in cabinets 
by junior politicians.

Although  there  is  no  single  recipe  for 
assigning the climate remit, reconsolidat-
ing responsibility is key (box 8.7). Bureau-
cratic consolidation—based on budgetary 
independence,  expert  personnel,  and  the 
authority  to  propose  and  enforce  legisla-
tion—concentrates  authority  and  avoids 
diffusion of responsibility that can lead to 
failures to act. The creation of ministerial-
 level  agencies  led  by  senior  cabinet  min-
isters,  or  the  inclusion  of  climate  policy 
on  the  agenda  of  already- established  key 

 

Overcoming Behavioral and Institutional Inertia 

333

agencies are signs of a trend toward bureau-
cratic consolidation.

Facilitating  integration  and  interagency 
coordination.      Bureaucratic consolidation, 
though  important,  may  not  be  enough. 
And the mere creation of a separate agency 
might  even  be  counterproductive.  Policy 
coherence  throughout  an  administra-
tion requires integrating climate planning 
across government. here, the challenge is 
the typical compartmentalization of gov-
ernment  work  and  the  tendency  to  treat 
multidimensional  problems  in  organiza-
tional  silos.  Approaches  for  integration 
include establishing climate units in each 
ministry or agency complemented by sec-
toral plans at national and local levels for 
mitigation and adaptation. In addition to a 
revision of their mandates, relevant public 
agencies—such as those involved in public 
health, energy, forestry and land- use plan-
ning, and natural resource management—
can  coordinate  their  work  under  a  lead 
climate- change agency. Achieving this type 
of coordination is likely to require rethink-
ing the role of hydrometeorological services 
(see chapter 7). 

New  coordination  bodies—a  cabinet 
committee on climate change, one explic-
itly linking climate with an already recog-
nized and critical issue area such as energy, 
or  an  intragovernmental  coordinating 
committee chaired by the lead agency—can 
bring together officials working on climate 
change across government. Coordination of 
climate policy can also be the prime min-
ister’s remit—say, by creating an advisory 
function directly within the prime minis-
ter’s office. 

For both integration and coordination, 
particular attention should go to develop-
ing sector policies and strategies. As chapter 
4 shows, energy policy in many countries 
emphasizes  market  reform  and  pricing, 
introducing competition to the energy sec-
tor, and developing regulatory institutions 
to deliver low prices and reliable supplies to 
consumers.57 Until very recently, mitigation 
was not even a tangential preoccupation of 
energy policy. As climate change moves up 
the political agenda, the mandates of energy 
agencies  and  the  policies  and  strategies 

Box 8.7      China’s and India’s path to institutional reform 
for climate action 

China shows how responsibility for 
climate policy has moved from the 
fringes to the core of government 
activity. The government initially set 
up special institutions to address 
climate change in 1990. Recogniz-
ing the relevance and intersectoral 
nature of the issue, it established a 
National Coordination Committee on 
Climate Change in 1998. 

In 2007 the committee was trans-

formed into the National Leading 
Group to Address Climate Change. 
Headed by the Chinese premier, the 
leading group coordinates strate-
gies, policies, and measures among 
28 member units within government 
agencies. During the 2008 govern-
ment reform, the general office of the 
leading group was placed within the 
National Development and Reform 
Commission, which undertakes the 
general work on climate change, 
supported by an expert committee 
providing scientific information to 
inform decision making. 

India is another developing-country 

example. Its Council on Climate 
Change is chaired by the Prime 
Minister. It developed the National 
Action Plan on Climate Change and is 
responsible for monitoring its imple-
mentation. The Plan encompasses 
eight National Missions that span 
sectoral ministries since they include 
Solar Energy, Enhanced Energy Effi-
ciency, Sustainable Habitat, Conserv-
ing Water, Sustaining the Himalayan 
Ecosystem, the creation of a “Green 
India,” Sustainable Agriculture, and the 
establishment of a Strategic Knowl-
edge Platform for Climate Change. 
The vision of the National Action Plan 
is a graduated shift from fossil fuels to 
non-fossil fuels and renewable sources 
of energy. 

Similar institutional reform measures 
have already been adopted by a range 
of other countries, developed and 
developing.

Source: WDR team.

guiding  them  will  be  updated  to  include 
low- carbon supply and energy- efficiency as 
core responsibilities. 

Strategy  documents  can  increase  the 
coordination of adaptation activities. Con-
sider the National Adaptation Programs of 
Action (NAPAs) of least developed coun-
tries.  Born  as  a  technical  priority- setting 
exercise,  NAPAs  determine  country-
 specific impacts and design locally tailored 
responses  by  engaging  different  agencies 
and levels of government as well as broad 
constituencies of business and civil society 
actors. In this sense, they can provide an 
institutional framework for placing adapta-
tion at the center of government’s priorities. 
But to consolidate their strategic function, 
they will require more attention from inter-
nal and external stakeholders (box 8.8).

Reinforcing  government  accountability.    
Governments  can  fail  to  act  on  specific 
policy issues when accountability lines are 
not clear, either because of the nature of the 

334 

WOrL D   D E V E LO P M E N T  rE P Or T   2 0 1 0

Box 8.8      National adaptation programs of action

National Adaptation Programs of Action 
(NAPAs), the most prominent national 
efforts by the least developed countries 
to identify priority areas for adapting to 
climate change, have been subjected to 
three criticisms. First, the NAPA process 
puts in place similar projects across differ-
ent countries, without paying attention to 
their specific adaptation needs. Second, 
many adaptation projects are difficult to 
distinguish from standard development 
projects. Third, the NAPA process fails to 
involve the major ministries and decision 
makers in the country or to pay enough 
attention to subnational and local institu-
tional requirements. 

In light of these criticisms, the World 
Development Report team sponsored 
two meetings of high- level NAPA offi-
cials in Asian and African countries, one 
in Bangkok in October 2008 and one in 
Johannesburg in November 2008. The 
meetings showed a more complicated 
picture and suggested that some criti-
cisms may be misplaced.

Although adaptation needs and proj-

ects may appear similar when viewed 
collectively, they vary substantially across 
countries depending on the climate 
hazards and threats identified as most 
relevant. The standard NAPA guidelines 
explain some of the similarities in the 
language used to defend the identified 
projects as the most urgent adaptation 
needs. The preponderance of agricultural, 
natural resource, and disaster manage-
ment projects reflects the fact that the 
impacts of climate change will be felt first 
in sectors related to primary goods and 
disaster management. Finally, the NAPAs 
were prepared on a shoestring, so the 
planning could not extend beyond the 
national level or across multiple ministries 
and decision makers. 

But there is another side to the criticisms—

the way the least developed countries 
view the NAPAs that they have prepared. 

Little financial support: The total cost 
of all projects identified as urgent in 38 
NAPA documents is less than $2 billion. 

Despite this low price tag, little financial 
support has been available, raising valid 
concerns about donor assistance and 
widening the trust gap. 

Poor architecture: Institutional arrange-

ments for adaptation need to be more 
permanent and better linked to different 
ministries with support from ministries 
of finance and planning and stronger 
connections to provinces and districts. A 
dedicated body can do the planning, but 
implementation will have to be under-
taken through existing institutional and 
governmental structures because many 
projects are sectoral. 

Low capacity: Capacity for adaptation 
planning and implementation continues 
to be very low in most of the least devel-
oped countries. Improvements are needed 
in technical capacity, knowledge, training, 
equipment, and modeling; some capac-
ity in these areas could be gained from 
experts in universities and civil society.

Source: WDR team.

issue or because of institutional flaws. Take 
responses to natural disaster. Unless a coun-
try is regularly hit by severe weather events, 
disaster  avoidance  and  response  usually 
fall through the cracks of the government 
agenda.  Leaders  find  it  unlikely  they  will 
be scrutinized, rewarded, or sanctioned for 
actions that the public did not even know 
their  governments  were  supposed  to  take 
(avoiding  disasters).  If  the  relationship 
between efforts and outcomes is not clear 
to the public, governments lack clear incen-
tives for action. 

Government accountability for climate 
policy  can  be  enhanced  by  making  line 
agencies more accountable to core govern-
ment ministries, such as the treasury or the 
prime minister—and by making the entire 
government  more  accountable  to  parlia-
ment, the public, and autonomous bodies 
(box 8.9). Parliaments can conduct hear-
ings,  monitor  performance,  educate  the 
public, and require government to engage 
in regular reporting on climate objectives, 
policy,  and  achievements.  Inscribing  cli-
mate policy targets and objectives into law 

can be a potent tool for greater government 
accountability—and  to  ensure  continu-
ity of action beyond a government’s short 
time frame. An independent expert advi-
sory body can make recommendations to 
government and report to parliament. 

Leveraging local government action
Local and regional governments can pro-
vide  political  and  administrative  space 
closer to the sources of emissions and the 
impacts  of  climate  change.  Charged  with 
implementing  and  articulating  national 
policies, they have policy- making, regula-
tory, and planning functions in sectors key 
to mitigation (transportation, construction, 
public  service  provision,  local  advocacy) 
and adaptation (social protection, disaster 
risk  reduction,  natural  resource  manage-
ment). Closer to citizens, subnational gov-
ernments  can  raise  public  awareness  and 
mobilize nonstate actors. And because they 
are at the intersection of government and 
the  public,  they  become  the  space  where 
government accountability for appropriate 
responses plays out.58 

 

Overcoming Behavioral and Institutional Inertia 

335

Probably for these reasons, local author-
ities often precede national governments in 
taking climate action. As chapter 2 shows, 
the regional and local levels are often more 
appropriate for the design and implementa-
tion of adaptation measures in agriculture, 
infrastructure  planning,  training,  and 
water management. But local governments 
can also lead in mitigation. States on both 
U.S. coasts have developed locally owned 
strategies and targets and then coalesced to 
pilot regional carbon markets (box 8.10). 
Cities  worldwide  have  their  own  climate 
action plans and strategies, adopting Kyoto 
targets  to  compensate  for  the  inaction  of 
national governments and becoming active 
members of national and transnational city 
initiatives, such as the C40 network of the 
world’s largest cities committed to tackling 
climate change.

The  relevance  of  local  governments 
requires their inclusion in climate policy. 
Decentralizing  climate  policy  has  pros 
and cons, and its optimal level and scope 
are  context  specific.59  Local  governments 
suffer  from  the  same  limitations  as  cen-
tral  governments,  though  usually  more 
severely.  The  climate  policy  remit  at  the 
local level is usually with an environment 
unit,  with  integration  and  coordination 
problems.  Subnational  governments  usu-
ally face resource and skill gaps and have 
less fiscal power, which prevents them from 
using  environmental  taxes.  Despite  their 
proximity  to  citizens,  local  governments 
often lack the same legitimacy as national 
governments,  because  of  low  turnouts  in 
local elections and weak electoral mandates 
or weak capacities to deliver. All this makes 
devolution  of  climate  policy  particularly 
tricky.

To  enhance  vertical  collaboration, 
national  governments  can  engage  in 
enabling, provision, and authority measures. 
Enabling  measures  include  transferring 
knowledge and best practice. Of interest are 
benchmarking initiatives linked to compe-
tition  and  awards  for  the  best- performing 
local authorities—the provincial competi-
tiveness index in Vietnam is a good example 
of such subnational benchmarking. Provi-
sion  measures  include  performance- based 
public sector agreements that link funding 

Box 8.9      Enhancing government accountability for climate 
change in the United Kingdom 

By restructuring and establishing the 
institutional machinery for climate 
action, the United Kingdom has also 
deployed measures that increase the 
government’s accountability for deliv-
ering results. The United Kingdom
•	 Passed	a	climate	change	bill	that	
provided a statutory foundation 
for the official UK CO2 emissions 
targets in the short, medium, and 
long terms, through five- year car-
bon budgets that set annual levels 
for permissible emissions. Three 
budgets spanning 15 years will be 
active at any given time, present-
ing a medium- term perspective for 
the evolution of carbon emissions 
throughout the economy. 

•	 Designated	a	lead	agency	for	cli-

mate change—the Department of 
Energy and Climate Change. 

•	 Formalized	in	Public	Sector	Agree -
ment 27 the accountability of the 

Department of Energy and Climate 
Change to the Treasury for various 
policy objectives and set delivery 
targets to measure performance in 
implementing them. The targets 
include specific steps to reduce 
the total U.K. emissions, increase 
the sustainable withdrawal of 
water, reduce the CO2 intensity of 
the U.K. economy. 

•	 Established	a	committee	on	climate	

change as an independent expert 
advisory body that can recommend 
to government ways to achieve tar-
gets. The committee reports annu-
ally to Parliament, and government 
is required to reply formally. Every 
five years the committee will offer 
a comprehensive assessment of the 
country’s overall progress toward 
the long- term targets.

Source: WDR team.

not only to the number of inhabitants and 
geographical coverage of the authority but 
also to the achievement of targets. Author-
ity measures include national laws requiring 
local governments to develop strategic plans 
in relevant sectors or regulation schemes to 
make  local  government  officials  account-
able to central government, as with land- use 
planning. 

Thinking politically about  
climate policy 
Shaping  the  design  and  outcomes  of  any 
public policy are the strength, density, and 
extent of civil society; the bureaucratic cul-
ture and budget laws; and the factors driv-
ing  the  articulation  and  organization  of 
political interests.60 Fossil fuels, in addition 
to  powering  the  economies  of  developed 
and developing countries, feed some of the 
special  interests  driving  their  politics.  In 
many developing countries, carbon is not 
only  unpriced,  it  is  subsidized  (see  chap-
ter 4). At the end of 2007 roughly a fifth of 
countries  were  subsidizing  gasoline,  and 

336 

WOrL D   D E V E LO P M E N T  rE P Or T   2 0 1 0

Box 8.10      Green federalism and climate change policy 

Subnational jurisdictions in federalist 
systems have long been recognized as 
laboratories of policy experimentation 
and reform.a State, provincial, and local 
governments have had varying degrees 
of success when it comes to efficiency 
and effectiveness of “green federalism” 
policies—those environmental policies 
where subnational governments take the 
lead.b 

Arguments supporting green federal-

ism include the ability of lower- level 
governments to tailor policies to their 
unique resources and demographics, as 
well as the opportunity to drive slower-
 moving national policy with innova-
tive subnational experimentation and 
learning.c Critics of green federalism cite 
risks of carbon leakage, as well as the 
incentive for businesses to relocate in 

less restrictive jurisdictions. This process 
is often termed the race to the bottom, 
since it reduces environmental quality 
and underprovides public goods and 
services.d 

But for climate policy, green federal-

ism has shown promising results. One of 
the most visible examples is the United 
States (box map). Despite the national 
government’s decision not to ratify the 

IBRD 37096
September 2009
Box 8.12

Green federalism in the United States: State and regional action

Mandatory renewable portfolio standards

State renewable goal

State adaptation plans in progress

Adaptation plans recommended
in Climate Action Program

Regional Greenhouse Gas
Initiative (RGGI)

RGGI observer

Midwestern Regional GHG
Reduction Accord (MRGRA)

MRGRA observer

Western Climate Initiative (WCI)

WCI observer

Individual state cap–and–trade program

The Climate Registry

The Climate Registry + mandatory reporting

Independent voluntary registries

(continues)

 

Overcoming Behavioral and Institutional Inertia 

337

Box 8.10      continued

Kyoto Protocol, and in the absence of 
overarching federal climate- change 
policy, subnational governments have 
taken the lead.e Many regions have 
greenhouse gas monitoring and register-
ing programs as well as emissions reduc-
tion goals. And dozens of individual 
states have crafted and implemented 
mitigation and adaptation plans or 
instituted renewable portfolio stan-
dards and reduction targets. Cities and 

municipalities have also initiated com-
prehensive climate change auditing and 
planning programs, setting emissions 
reduction goals of their own. 

These actions add up to significant 
reductions, and some claim that such 
efforts have led to a race to the top.f If 
the handful of states with firm emissions 
targets achieve their 2020 goals, U.S. 
national emissions could be stabilized at 
2010 levels by 2020.g

Source: State actions are tracked by the  
Pew Center on Global Climate Change 
(www.pewclimate.org).
a. Osborne 1988.
b. Oats and Portney 2003.
c. Lutsey and Sperling 2008.
d. Kunce and Shogren 2005.
e. Rabe 2002.
f. Rabe 2006.
g. Lutsey and Sperling 2008.

slightly  more  than  a  third  were  subsidiz-
ing  diesel  fuel.  More  than  two- thirds  of 
low-   and  lower- middle- income  countries 
were subsidizing kerosene.61 Clearly, coun-
tries with large fossil- based energy sectors 
or highly energy- intensive economies face 
major resistance to change.62 The result is 
that worldwide the sources and drivers of 
carbon emissions are often tied to govern-
ments’ political legitimacy. 

Each political system presents advantages 
and obstacles in addressing climate change. 
Take  democracy.  Strong  evidence  shows 
that democracies outperform autocracies in 
environmental policy.63 Political freedoms 
improve environmental performance, par-
ticularly in poorer nations.64 Greater civil 
liberties are linked with better air and water 
quality, such as reduced sulfur dioxide and 
particulates in air and lower coliform and 
dissolved oxygen levels in water.65 Democ-
racies are more likely to join international 
environmental  regimes  and  treaties,  are 
generally faster at ratifying them, and have 
a track record of solving global commons 
problems such as ozone depletion.66 

Yet democracies sometimes do better in 
policy outputs (signing up to international 
commitments) than policy outcomes (actual 
emission  reductions),  as  with  Kyoto.67  As 
with  individual  consumers  and  voters, 
democracies prove more responsive in com-
mitting to solving a problem than in actually 
solving it, with the “green gap” in consumer 
attitudes  translating  into  a  words- deeds 
gap in government behavior (figure 8.7).68 
There  are  several  reasons  for  this.  Despite 
rising public concern about climate change, 

politicians  keep  fearing  the  electorate, 
assuming that voters are likely to be less sup-
portive of climate action once policies affect 
them personally through direct and visible 
personal  costs  (carbon  and  energy  taxes, 
price  increases,  job  losses).69  This  might 
explain why it is harder to achieve emissions 
reductions through restrictions that affect 
individual choices. Intervening in personal 
mobility choices is politically tougher than 
targeting power plants.70 

In political terms, climate action faces a 
“proximity limit.” People’s tendency to first 
address visible and direct concerns translates 
into a political bias favoring the solution of 
local  environmental  problems  (sanitation 
infrastructure, water and air quality, risks 
associated  with  toxic  releases,  and  local 
habitat  protection)  over  transboundary 
issues (such as biodiversity loss, overfishing, 
or  climate  change).71  The  proximity  limit 
has  a  temporal  dimension  too.  Problems 
with long time horizons, particularly those 
involving public goods, are tricky to resolve. 
Climate change is no exception.72 Intergen-
erational problems require long- term policy 
frameworks at odds with government time 
frames and electoral cycles.

When  policy  issues  are  left  without  a 
public  to  champion  them,  shortsighted-
ness  can  produce  perverse  incentives. 
Disaster risk management is an example of 
how standard adaptation measures can fail 
because the public (the voter) often fails 
to think in preventive terms. So decision 
makers neglect prevention and prepared-
ness because these issues do not win votes. 
In turn, decision makers’ realization that 

338 

WOrL D   D E V E LO P M E N T  rE P Or T   2 0 1 0

Figure 8.7      Democracies do better in climate policy outputs than policy outcomes

Output: policies, laws, and international agreements
1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

1

2

Outcome: emission reductions
1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

1

2

3

3

4

Democracy Index

4

Democracy Index

5

5

6

6

7

7

Source: Bättig and Bernauer 2009.
Note: Output is an index of cooperative behavior in climate change policy, spanning ratification of agreements, reporting, and financing—it ranges between 0 and 1, with higher 
values indicating more cooperation. Outcome is an index of cooperative behavior in climate change policy, spanning emission trends and emission levels—it ranges between 
0 and 1, with higher values indicating more cooperation. The Political Rights Index by Freedom House is a measure of democracy encompassing the degree of freedom in the 
electoral process, political pluralism and participation, and functioning of government. Numerically, Freedom House rates political rights on a scale of 1 to 7, with 1 representing 
the most free and 7 representing the least free. However, in this figure the scale of original data has been inverted and higher values indicate a higher level of democracy. Data 
are 1990–2005 averages. The figure shows that there is a positive relationship between output and level of democracy, as represented by the Freedom House political rights index; 
democratic countries have, in general, better output. Conversely no significant relationship has been found between level of democracy and climate outcomes in the form of emis-
sion reductions (using emissions reductions in 2003 compared to 1990 levels). 

disaster relief has higher political payoffs 
than preparedness closes the circle of moral 
hazard.  This  is  far  from  purely  theoreti-
cal. If the costs of disasters have increased 
dramatically, it is partly because govern-
ments  realize  that  providing  compensa-
tion to groups and areas struck by severe 
weather  events  provides  major  electoral 
benefits.73 This realization works against 
policy change and reinforces bad policies. 

Government crop insurance reduces farm-
ers’  incentives  to  avoid  weather  damage. 
Disaster relief leads citizens and local gov-
ernments  to  expect  compensation  as  an 
entitlement  rather  than  take  preventive 
measures.74

Climate  reforms  depend  on  political 
support. Any policy change generally meets 
resistance, particularly when it involves vis-
ible costs to large and diverse actors. Climate 

 

Overcoming Behavioral and Institutional Inertia 

339

policy is a perfect example, because its costs 
are going to be clearly visible to various eco-
nomic groups and the population at large. 
Building public support for climate policy 
can take many avenues. 

Devise interventions that a maximum 
number of (key) political actors can 
agree on

Design  policies  that  yield  co- benefits.    
Countries  abiding  by  and  implementing 
international  environmental  obligations 
tend  do  so  because  of  local  incentives: 
air  pollution,  water  quality  degradation, 
direct and visible environmental threats.75 
Individuals  contribute  to  public  goods 
more easily when they see a direct benefit. 
Actively  seeking  overlapping  goals  and 
benefits should be a core part of a politi-
cally sustainable climate policy.76 Not all 
climate- smart  development  policies  are 
climate  specific,  and  a  range  of  actions 
can  overcome  the  (perceived)  tradeoffs 
between  economic  development  and  cli-
mate action. The challenge is to frame cli-
mate action in terms of local, private, and 
near-term goals and co- benefits—such as 
energy  security,  energy  efficiency,  public 
health, pollution abatement, and disaster 
risk reduction. 

Target key constituencies.      The co- benefits 
of  climate  policy  can  win  over  oppos-
ing  vested  interests.  Take  labor.  Where 
the  short- term  employment  effect  of  cli-
mate policy is negative, offsetting payoffs 
for organized labor should be made clear. 
Unions can be brought round by demon-
strating to them how a low- carbon economy 
is more labor intensive than a conventional 
one; how energy savings can be turned into 
higher, labor- intensive expenditures; how 
investments  in  technology  development 
and deployment will create jobs; and how 
the revenues from energy taxes can offset 
taxes on labor, increasing the demand for 
workers. It is important to carefully assess 
whether policies are perceived to be unduly 
favorable  to  one  key  group  or  the  other. 
Support for climate policy is strong among 
groups that see a low- carbon economy as a 
business opportunity, but legacy industries 
remain opposed. Grandfathering emission 

permits is often cited as a strategic measure 
to get the longer- term buy- in of business, 
but the scheme also generates public resis-
tance (box 8.11).

Rely on consensus processes and instruments.    
Obtaining the prior agreement of the main 
stakeholders on specific measures can reduce 
political damage. In addition to identifying 
co- benefits,  consensus  policies  involve  set-
ting up consultative systems and voluntary 
schemes that bind key actors such as indus-
try groups to the principles of climate policy. 
Consultative  political  systems  seem  to  be 
more effective in environmental policy.77

Increase the public’s acceptance of 
reforms

Pursue equity, fairness, and inclusion.      A 
decision  maker’s  aversion  to  inequity  is  a 
product of both ethics and politics, because 
redistributional outcomes normally lead to 
political payoffs or sanctions by voters. The 
public is more likely to accept policy change 
if it is seen as tackling a severe problem and 
if its costs and benefits are perceived as equi-
tably  distributed.  This  calls  for  designing 
progressive  and  equitable  climate  policies 
involving  transparent  compensatory  mea-
sures for the poorest. Green fiscal policies 
can be progressive and play a strong equity 
role.78 revenue recycling from carbon taxes 
or auctioned permits can support tax cuts 
and provide economic stimulus. Earmark-
ing the proceeds of carbon permits and taxes 
for social protection schemes can increase 

Box 8.11      Garnering support for cap- and- trade

The European Union recently cre-
ated an emissions trading system to 
meet its Kyoto obligations. Overall, 
the system has many good features. 
One peculiarity is that EU countries 
are required to grandfather credits 
(give them freely) to firms despite 
the potentially huge rents associated 
with them and the clear economic 
gains to be had from auctioning 
credits. In part because of this 
grandfathering rule and the implicit 
recognition of the large rents 
associated with it, the allocation 

mechanism is set only for five- year 
periods.

These short allocation periods avoid 
giving away too much wealth through 
rent creation and capture. But the 
massive windfalls for major polluters 
drew media attention and alienated 
the public. The five- year system also 
created perverse incentives for strate-
gic behavior to influence the next allo-
cation rule and was protested by firms 
aiming to enter the industry.

Source: WDR team.

340 

WOrL D   D E V E LO P M E N T  rE P Or T   2 0 1 0

the acceptance of energy- pricing reforms. In 
several European countries revenues raised 
from charges on air pollutants, hazardous 
wastes, and toxic chemicals reduce income 
taxes and social security contributions.

Lead by example.      Policy makers can set 
social norms by changing the behavior of 
government. The greening of government 
can play an important communication role 
in  addition  to  providing  immediate  ben-
efits in reducing emissions and catalyzing 
research and investments in new technolo-
gies. Where feasible, government can also 
revise instruments such as public procure-
ment to support green objectives.

Use  weather- related  natural  disasters  as 
teaching moments.      Disasters can provide 
“focusing events” that lead to rapid policy 
change, although the window of opportu-
nity is usually short.79 The 2003 heat wave in 
Europe, hurricane Katrina in 2005, and Aus-
tralia’s 2009 wildfires all increased attention 
to climate change. Such events can provide 
an opening for government to take actions 
unpopular in normal times.80 Postdisaster 
reconstruction also provides opportunities 
to depart from past practices and build more 
resilient communities and societies.

Increase the acceptability of policies.      Swift 
and sudden government actions can circum-
vent groups that want to maintain the status 
quo and create a feeling of inevitability, if 
momentum  is  maintained.81  But  gradual-
ism  can  also  increase  the  acceptability  of 
policies, because incremental policy changes 
usually draw less attention and resistance. 
This  could  explain  why  major  economies 
have been slow in starting to reduce emis-
sions. Small, incremental changes can estab-
lish platforms for advancing larger changes 
later on. here, establishing predictability—
setting the long- term orientation of govern-
ment  policy—allows  stakeholders  (in  and 
outside government) to identify the incen-
tives they need to reorient their activities.82

Improve communication.      Well- designed 
communication  strategies  not  only  can 
help  change  behaviors—they  can  also 
mobilize political support for reform. Pub-

lic  information  campaigns  have  been  key 
to successful subsidy reforms, even where 
groups  capturing  the  subsidies  were  bet-
ter organized and more powerful than the 
beneficiaries  of  reform  (consumers  and 
taxpayers). Communication should focus 
on filling the knowledge gap and addressing 
what can be rationally based opposition to 
reforms. For instance, demystifying some 
of the unsubstantiated perceptions of the 
negative sides of climate policies can reduce 
uncertainty  and  opposition.  research 
shows  that  fears  of  racing  to  the  bottom 
and losing competitiveness are exaggerated 
and that investing in new green technology 
can lead to the development of markets for 
environmental goods and services.83 Simi-
larly, stressing that environmental taxes are 
not simply a source of revenue for the state 
but a key to changing behavior is central to 
enhancing public acceptability.

Address structural deficiencies of 
political systems 
Reinforce political pluralism.      Vested inter-
ests, including those that fear climate poli-
cies would harm their business or industry, 
may have a stake in limiting the scope and 
impact of climate policy. Measures to reduce 
interest group activity aimed at capturing or 
hijacking climate policy include reinforcing 
political  pluralism.  This  can  have  varying 
impacts on policy change. A large number of 
veto players can produce a policy gridlock.84 
But  political  pluralism  generally  reduces 
behind- closed- door  lobbying  and  corrup-
tion by giving access and voice to counter-
vailing interests.85 Environmental interests 
have overwhelmed business interests trying 
to curtail the stringency of environmental 
policies in food safety, renewable portfolio 
standards, and waste regulation.86 Political 
pluralism can also foster coalitions of envi-
ronmental and business interests as drivers 
of change. 

Promote transparency.      Clarifying the cost 
of energy and its components (production, 
imports, distribution subsidies, and taxes) 
can build support for reform of energy mar-
kets. In mitigation policy one major advan-
tage of transparent reporting of the cost of 
energy is that the additional cost of carbon is 

 

Overcoming Behavioral and Institutional Inertia 

341

Box 8.12      The private sector is changing practices even without national legislation

Private sector actors have stepped up 
their actions to reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions, even in countries lacking com-
prehensive climate- change legislation. An 
increasing number of firms have developed 
voluntary emissions targets and reporting 
standards. In 2008 a record 57 climate-
 related shareholder resolutions were filed in 
U.S. boardrooms—double the number five 
years earlier. Support for these measures 
averaged more than 23 percent among 
shareholders—another all-time high. 

Carbon- intensive firms have also come 

together to discuss strategy for mitigat-
ing climate change. In early 2009 the U.S. 
Climate Action Partnership, an alliance of 
more than two dozen major greenhouse-

 gas- emitting companies and several non-
governmental organizations, put forth a 
unified plan for federal legislative action 
that calls for an 80 percent reduction of 
2005 emission levels by 2050. The Busi-
ness Roundtable, an association of lead-
ing U.S. companies, has mapped ways 
to improve conservation, efficiency, and 
domestic energy production between 
now and 2025. The Prince of Wales Inter-
national Business Leaders Forum, an 
independent organization that supports 
more than 100 of the world’s leading 
businesses, launched the Business and 
the Environment program in recognition 
of the impact of climate change on busi-
ness operations and liabilities. 

This drive is pushing entire industries 

to shift their practices. In March 2009 the 
U.S. insurance association implemented a 
first- of- its- kind requirement that all insur-
ers must evaluate the climate- change 
risks posed to the companies they insure 
and disclose their plans for managing 
such risks. These include direct risks 
posed by climate- change impacts and 
indirect risks posed by policy initiatives 
to mitigate climate change. Similarly, the 
financial investment industry is moving to 
increase the disclosure of climate risks in 
publicly traded companies, while promot-
ing climate- smart investments.

Source: WDR team. 

put in relative terms. Transparency has been 
particularly useful in raising public aware-
ness  about  the  costs  of  energy  subsidies, 
assessing the tradeoffs, and identifying win-
ners and losers. Some countries have subsidy 
reporting systems to enhance public under-
standing of their costs and benefits.87

Make it difficult to reverse policy.      Politi-
cal and institutional arrangements can help 
avoid  shifting  action  on  climate  change 
from the living to the unborn by making 
it difficult to reverse climate policy. Such 
arrangements could include constitutional 
amendments  and  climate- change  laws.88 
But  they  can  also  involve  the  establish-
ment of independent institutions that take 
a  longer- term  view,  in  the  same  way  that 
monetary institutions control inflation.

Climate- smart development  
starts at home
The quest for appropriate responses to cli-
mate change has long focused on the need 
for  an  international  agreement—a  global 
deal. Although important, a global deal is 
only a part of the answer. Climate change 
is certainly a global market failure, but one 
articulated  according  to  locally  defined 
causes and effects and mediated by context-
 specific circumstances.

This  means  that  climate  policy—for 
both mitigation and adaptation—has local 

determinants.  A  study  on  the  adoption 
of  renewable  portfolio  standards  across 
U.S. states shows that political liberalism, 
renewable energy potential, and concentra-
tions of local air pollutants all increase the 
probability that a state will adopt such stan-
dards.  On  the  other  hand,  carbon  inten-
sity  tends  to  decrease  this  probability.89 
International  regimes  influence  domestic 
policies, but the reverse also holds. A coun-
try’s behavior in shaping, adhering to, and 
implementing  a  climate  deal  depends  on 
domestic incentives. Political norms, insti-
tutional  structures,  and  vested  interests 
influence  the  translation  of  international 
norms  into  domestic  political  dialogue 
and policy, while shaping the international 
regime  by  driving  the  national  actions.90 
A country’s wealth, its energy mix, and its 
economic  preferences—such  as  the  pro-
pensity  for  state- driven  or  market- driven 
responses—will  shape  mitigation  policy. 
Cultural and political traditions are added 
to economic and administrative consider-
ations in choosing taxes or cap- and- trade. 
And because of the lack of an international 
sanctioning mechanism, the incentives for 
meeting  global  commitments  need  to  be 
found domestically, through concentrated 
local benefits such as cleaner air, technol-
ogy transfer, and energy security. 

Climate  action  is  already  taking  place. 
Countries  have  shown  different  levels  of 

342 

WOrL D   D E V E LO P M E N T  rE P Or T   2 0 1 0

commitment  and  performance  in  reduc-
ing  emissions.  Small  countries—which  in 
theory should have incentives to free ride, 
given their negligible role in global emission 
reductions—have  so  far  undertaken  more 
aggressive  actions  than  the  big  players.  In 
some  countries  subnational  measures  and 
homegrown  policy  responses  are  already 
affecting national policy and the position of 
countries in the international arena. And the 
private sector is showing that old practices 
can give way to new visions (box 8.12).

reversing the institutional inertia that 
constrains  climate  policy  requires  fun-
damental  changes  in  interpreting  infor-
mation  and  making  decisions.  A  range 
of  actions  can  be  taken  domestically  by 
national and subnational governments as 
well  as  by  the  private  sector,  the  media, 
and  the  scientific  community.  Although 
establishing an effective international cli-
mate regime is a justified preoccupation, it 
should not lead to a wait- and- see attitude, 
which can only add to the inertia and con-
strain the response.

Notes

1. North 1990. 
2. Soderholm 2001.
3. Sehring 2006.
4. Foa 2009.
5. Gardner and Stern 2008.
6. Gardner and Stern 2008.
7. Bannon and others 2007; Leiserowitz 2007; 

Brechin 2008; Sternman and Sweeney 2007.

8. IPPr 2008; retallack, Lawrence, and Lock-

wood 2007.

9. Wimberly 2008; Accenture 2009.
10. Norgaard 2006; Jacques, Dunlap, and Free-

man 2008.

11. Bulkeley 2000.
12. Kellstedt, Zahran, and Vedlitz 2008.
13. Immerwahr 1999.
14. Krosnick and others 2006.
15. Boykoff and Mansfield 2008.
16. Oreskes 2004; Krosnick 2008.
17. Miller 2008.
18. Bostrom and others 1994.
19. Bazerman 2006.
20. Sternman and Sweeney 2007.
21. Ornstein and Ehrlich 2000; Weber 2006.
22. repetto 2008.
23. Moser and Dilling 2007; Nisbet and Myers 

2007.

24. Maslow 1970.
25. Olson 1965; hardin 1968; Ostrom 2009.
26. Irwin 2009.
27. Winter and Koger 2004.
28. Sandvik 2008.
29. O’Connor and others 2002; Kellstedt, Zah-
ran, and Vedlitz 2008; Norgaard 2006; Moser and 
Dilling 2007; Dunlap 1998.

30. Norgaard 2009.
31. Ward 2008.
32. Krosnick 2008.
33. Kallbekken, Kroll, and Cherry 2008.
34. Swallow and others 2007.
35. Clifford Chance 2007.
36. romm and Ervin 1996.
37. roland- holst 2008.
38. Laitner and Finman 2000.
39. Cialdini and Goldstein 2004; Griskevicius 

2007.

40. A.  Corner,  “Barack  Obama’s  hopes  of 
Change  Are  All  in  the  Mind.”  The  Guardian, 
November 27, 2008.

41. Irwin 2009.
42. Irwin 2009.
43. Layard 2005.
44. Sterner 2003.
45. World Bank 1992; World Bank 1997; World 

Bank 2002.

46. Wade 1990.

“Ever think of emigration outside the world? To the Moon, Mars, or Venus? But 

our Earth is known to be the most beautiful planet of all. I still want to live in this 

wonderful place—with birds singing everywhere, the aroma of flowers in the air, 

green mountains, and blue icebergs. So everybody, please start to work together to 

conserve the beauty of Mother Earth. Join me now in making the world better.” 

—Giselle Lau Ching Yue, China, age 9

 

Overcoming Behavioral and Institutional Inertia 

343

47. Stern 2006.
48. haites 2008.
49. Janicke 2001.
50. Giddens 2008.
51. Bernauer and Koubi 2006.
52. Meadowcroft 2009. 
53. Birkland 2006.
54. Bazerman 2006.
55. OECD 2003.
56. Bazerman 2006.
57. Doern and Gattinger 2003.
58. Alber and Kern 2008.
59. Estache 2008.
60. Kunkel, Jacob, and Busch 2006. 
61. IMF 2008.
62. Kunkel, Jacob, and Busch 2006.
63. Congleton 1992; Congleton 1996.
64. Barrett and Graddy 2000.
65. Torras and Boyce 1998.
66. Congleton  2001;  Schneider,  Leifeld,  and 

Malang 2008.

67. rowell 1996; Vaughn- Switzer 1997.
68. Bättig and Bernauer 2009.
69. Compston and Bailey 2008.
70. Bättig and Bernauer 2009.
71. Bättig and Bernauer 2009.
72. Sprinz 2008.
73. Schmidtlein, Finch, and Cutter 2008; Gar-

rett and Sobel 2002.

74. Birkland 2006.
75. Dolsak 2001.
76. Agrawala and Fankhauser 2008.
77. Compston and Bailey 2008.
78. Ekins and Dresner 2004.
79. Birkland 2006.
80. Compston and Bailey 2008.
81. Kerr 2006.
82. “A Major Setback for Clean Air,” New York 

Times, July 16, 2008.
83. Janicke 2001.
84. Tsebelis 2002.
85. Dolsak 2001.
86. Vogel  2005;  Bernauer  and  Caduff  2004; 

Bernauer 2003.

87. IMF 2008.
88. Kydland and Prescott 1977; Sprinz 2008.
89. Matisoff 2008.
90. Davenport 2008; Kunkel, Jacob, and Busch 

2006; Dolsak 2001; Cass 2005.

References
Accenture. 2009. Shifting the Balance from Inten-
tion to Action: Low Carbon, High Opportunity, 
High Performance. New York: Accenture.

Agrawala, S., and S. Fankhauser. 2008. Economic 

Aspects of Adaptation to Climate Change: 
Costs, Benefits and Policy Instruments. Paris: 

Organisation for Economic Co- operation and 
Development.

Alber, G., and K. Kern. 2008. “Governing Cli-

mate Change in Cities: Modes of Urban Cli-
mate Governance in Multi- level Systems.” 
Paper presented at the OECD Conference 
on Competitive Cities and Climate Change, 
Milan, October 9–10.

Anderson, M. G., and E. A. holcombe. 2007. 

“reducing Landslide risk in Poor hous-
ing Areas of the Caribbean: Developing a 
New Government- Community Partnership 
Model.” Journal of International Development 
19: 205–21.

Bannon, B., M. DeBell, J. A. Krosnick, r. Kopp, 
and P. Aldous. 2007. “Americans’ Evaluations 
of Policies to reduce Greenhouse Gas Emis-
sions.” Technical paper, Stanford University, 
Palo Alto, CA.

Barrett, S., and K. Graddy. 2000. “Freedom, 

Growth and the Environment.” Environment 
and Development Economics 5 (4): 433–56.

Bättig, M. B., and T. Bernauer. 2009. “National 

Institutions and Global Public Goods: Are 
Democracies More Cooperative in Climate 
Change Policy?” International Organization 
63 (2): 1–28.

Bazerman, M. 2006. “Climate Change as a Pre-

dictable Surprise.” Climatic Change 77: 179–93.
Bernauer, T. 2003. Genes, Trade, and Regulation: 

The Seeds of Conflict in Food Biotechnology. 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Bernauer, T., and L. Caduff. 2004. “In Whose 

Interest? Pressure Group Politics, Economic 
Competition and Environmental regulation.” 
Journal of Public Policy 24 (1): 99–126.

Bernauer, T., and V. Koubi. 2006. “States as Pro-

viders of Public Goods: how Does Govern-
ment Size Affect Environmental Quality?” 
Working Paper 14, Center for Comparative 
and International Studies, Zurich.

Birkland, T. A. 2006. Lessons from Disaster: Policy 
Change after Catastrophic Events. Washington, 
DC: Georgetown University Press.

Bostrom, A., M. G. Morgan, B. Fischhoff, and 

D. read. 1994. “What Do People Know about 
Global Climate Change? Mental Models.” Risk 
Analysis 14 (6): 959–70.

Boykoff, M., and M. Mansfield. 2008. “Ye Olde 

hot Aire: reporting on human Contribu-
tions to Climate Change in the U.K. Tabloid 
Press.” Environmental Research Letters 3: 1–8.
Brechin, S. r. 2008. “Ostriches and Change: A 

response to Global Warming and Sociology.” 
Current Sociology 56 (3): 467–74.

344 

WOrL D   D E V E LO P M E N T  rE P Or T   2 0 1 0

BTS (Bureau of Transportation Statistics). 2008. 
Key Transportation Indicators November 2008. 
Washington, DC: U. S. Department of Trans-
portation.

Bulkeley, h. 2000. “Common Knowledge? Pub-

lic Understanding of Climate Change in 
Newcastle, Australia.” Public Understanding of 
Science 9: 313–33.

Cass, L. 2005. “Measuring the Domestic Salience 

of International Environmental Norms: Cli-
mate Change Norms in German, British, and 
American Climate Policy Debates.” Paper pre-
sented at the International Studies Associa-
tion, honolulu.

Cialdini, r. B., and N. J. Goldstein. 2004. “Social 

Influence: Compliance and Conformity.” 
Annual Review Psychology 55: 591–621.

Clifford Chance. 2007. Climate Change: A Busi-
ness Response to a Global Issue. London: Clif-
ford Chance.

Compston, h., and I. Bailey. 2008. Turning 

Down the Heat: The Politics of Climate Policy 
in Affluent Democracies. Basingstoke, UK: Pal-
grave Macmillan.

Congleton, r. D. 1992. “Political regimes and 
Pollution Control.” Review of Economics and 
Statistics 74: 412–21.

———. 1996. The Political Economy of Environ-
mental Protection. Ann Arbor, MI: University 
of Michigan Press.

———. 2001. “Governing the Global Environ-

mental Commons: The Political Economy 
of International Environmental Treaties 
and Institutions.” In Globalization and the 
Environment, ed. G. G. Schulze and h. W. 
Ursprung. New York: Oxford University 
Press.

Davenport, D. 2008. “The International Dimen-
sion of Climate Policy.” In Turning Down the 
Heat: The Politics of Climate Policy in Affluent 
Democracies, ed. h. Compston and I. Bailey. 
Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Macmillan.

Ekins, P., and S. Dresner. 2004. Green Taxes and 

Charges: Reducing their Impact on Low- income 
Households. York, UK: Joseph rowntree 
Foundation.

EPA (Environmental Protection Agency). 2009. 
Draft Inventory of U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emis-
sions and Sinks: 1990- 2007. Washington, DC: 
EPA.

Estache, A. 2008. “Decentralized Environmental 
Policy in Developing Countries.” World Bank, 
Washington, DC.

Esty, D. C., M. A. Levy, C. h. Kim, A. de Sherbi-
nin, T. Srebotnjak, and V. Mara. 2008. Envi-
ronmental Performance Index. New haven, CT: 
Yale Center for Environmental Law and Policy.

Foa, r. 2009. “Social and Governance Dimen-
sions of Climate Change: Implications for 
Policy.” Policy research Working Paper 4939, 
World Bank, Washington, DC.

Gardner, G. T., and P. C. Stern. 2008. “The Short 

List: The Most Effective Actions U.S. house-
holds Can Take to Curb Climate Change.” 
Environment Magazine. 

Garrett, T. A., and r. S. Sobel. 2002. “The Politi-

cal Economy of FEMA Disaster Payments.” 
Working Paper 2002- 01 2B, Federal reserve 
Bank of St. Louis.

Gautier, C., K. Deutsch, and S. rebich. 2006. 

“Misconceptions about the Greenhouse 
Effect.” Journal of Geoscience Education 54 (3): 
386–95.

Giddens, A. 2008. The Politics of Climate Change: 

National Responses to the Challenge of Global 
Warming. Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.
Griskevicius, V. 2007. “The Constructive, 

Destructive, and reconstructive Power of 
Social Norms.” Psychological Science 18 (5): 
429–34.

haites, E. 2008. “Investment and Financial Flows 

Needed to Address Climate Change.” Break-
ing the Climate Deadlock Briefing Paper, The 
Climate Group, London.

Doern, G. B., and M. Gattinger. 2003. Power 

hardin, G. 1968. “The Tragedy of the Com-

Switch: Energy Regulatory Governance in the 
21st Century. Toronto: University of Toronto 
Press.

Dolsak, N. 2001. “Mitigating Global Climate 

Change: Why Are Some Countries More 
Committed than Others?” Policy Studies Jour-
nal 29 (3): 414–36.

Dunlap, r. E. 1998. “Lay Perceptions of Global 

risk: Public Views of Global Warming in 
Cross- National Context.” International Sociol-
ogy 13: 473–98.

EIA (Energy Information Administration). 

2009. Annual Energy Outlook 2009. Washing-
ton, DC: EIA.

mons.” Science 162: 1243–48.

hungerford, h., and T. Volk. 1990. “Changing 

Learner Behavior through Environmental 
Education.” Journal of Environmental Educa-
tion 21: 8–21.

ICCT (International Council on Clean Trans-

portation). 2007. Passenger Vehicle Greenhouse 
Gas and Fuel Economy Standard: A Global 
Update. Washington, DC: San Francisco: 
ICCT.

IMF (International Monetary Fund). 2008. Fuel 

and Food Price Subsidies: Issues and Reform 
Options. Washington, DC: IMF.

 

Overcoming Behavioral and Institutional Inertia 

345

Immerwahr, J. 1999. Waiting for a Signal: Public 

Krosnick, J., A. holbrook, L. Lowe, and P. Vis-

Attitudes toward Global Warming, the Envi-
ronment and Geophysical Research. New York: 
Public Agenda.

IPPr (Institute for Public Policy research). 

2008. Engagement and Political Space for Poli-
cies on Climate Change. London: IPPr.
Irwin, T. 2008. “Implications for Climate 

Change Policy of research on Cooperation 
in Social Dilemma.” Policy research Working 
Paper 5006, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Jacques, P., r. Dunlap, and M. Freeman. 2008. 
“The Organisation of Denial: Conservative 
Think Tanks and Environmental Skepticism.” 
Environmental Politics 17 (3): 349–85.

Janicke, M. 2001. “No Withering Away of the 
Nation State: Ten Theses on Environmen-
tal Policy.” In Global Environmental Change 
and the Nation State: Proceedings of the 2001 
Berlin Conference on the Human Dimen-
sions of Global Environmental Change, ed. 
F. Biermann, r. Brohm, and K. Dingwert. 
Berlin: Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact 
research.

Kahneman, D., and A. Tversky. 1979. “Prospect 
Theory: An Analysis of Decision under risk.” 
Econometrica 47: 263–91.

Kallbekken, S., S. Kroll, and T. L. Cherry. 2008. 

“Do You Not Like Pigou, or Do You Not 
Understand him? Tax Aversion and Earmark-
ing in the Lab.” Paper presented at the Oslo 
Seminars in Behavioral and Experimental 
Economics, Department of Economics, Uni-
versity of Oslo.

Kastens, K. A., and M. Turrin. 2006. “To What 
Extent Should human/Environment Inter-
actions Be Included in Science Education?” 
Journal of Geoscience Education 54 (3): 
422–36.

Kaufman, D., A. Kraay, and M. Mastruzzi. 2007. 
World Governance Indicators 2007. Washing-
ton, DC: World Bank.

Kellstedt, P., S. Zahran, and A. Vedlitz. 2008. 

“Personal Efficacy, the Information Environ-
ment, and Attitudes toward Global Warming 
and Climate Change in the United States.” 
Risk Analysis 28 (1): 113–26.

Kerr, S. 2006. “The Political Economy of Struc-

tural reform in Natural resource Use: Obser-
vations from New Zealand.” Paper presented 
at the National Economic research Organiza-
tions meeting, Paris.

Krosnick, J. 2008. “The American Public’s Views 

of Global Climate Change and Potential 
Amelioration Strategies.” World Development 
Report 2010 Seminar Series, presentation, 
World Bank, Washington, DC.

ser. 2006. “The Origins and Consequences of 
Democratic Citizen’s Policy Agendas: A Study 
of Popular Concern about Global Warming.” 
Climate Change 77: 7–43.

Kunce, M., and J. F. Shogren. 2005. “On Inter-

jurisdictional Competition and Environ-
mental Federalism.” Journal of Environmental 
Economics and Management 50: 212–24.

Kunkel, N., K. Jacob, and P.- O. Busch. 2006. 

“Climate Policies: (The Feasibility of) a Sta-
tistical Analysis of their Determinants.” Paper 
presented at the human Dimensions of 
Global Environmental Change, Berlin.

Kydland, F. E., and E. C. Prescott. 1977. “rules 
rather than Discretion: The Inconsistency of 
Optimal Plan.” Journal of Political Economy 85 
(3): 473–91.

Laitner, J., and h. Finman. 2000. Productiv-

ity Benefits from Industrial Energy Efficiency 
Investments. Washington, DC: EPA Office of 
the Atmospheric Programs.

Layard, r. 2005. Happiness: Lessons from a New 

Science. London: Penguin.

Leiserowitz, A. 2007. “Public Perception, Opin-
ion and Understanding of Climate Change: 
Current Patterns, Trends and Limitations.” 
Occasional Paper for the Human Development 
Report 2007/2008, United Nations Develop-
ment Programme, New York.

Lorenzoni, I., S. Nicholson- Cole, and L. Whit-

marsh. 2007. “Barriers Perceived to Engaging 
with Climate Change among the UK Public 
and Their Policy Implications.” Global Envi-
ronmental Change 17: 445–59.

Lutsey, N., and D. Sperling. 2008. “America’s 

Bottom- up Climate Change Mitigation Pol-
icy.” Energy Policy 36: 673–85.

Maslow, A. h. 1970. Motivation and Personality. 

New York: harper & row.

Matisoff, D. C. 2008. “The Adoption of State 

Climate Change Policies and renewable Port-
folio Standards.” Review of Policy Research 25: 
527–46.

Meadowcroft, J. 2009. “Climate Change Gover-
nance.” Policy research Working Paper 4941, 
World Bank, Washington, DC.

Miller, D. 2008. “What’s Wrong with Consump-

tion?” University College London, London. 

Moser, S. C., and L. Dilling. 2007. Creating a 

Climate for Change: Communicating Climate 
Change and Facilitating Social Change. New 
York: Cambridge University Press.

Moxnes, E., and A. K. Saysel. 2009. “Mispercep-

tions of Global Climate Change: Informa-

346 

WOrL D   D E V E LO P M E N T  rE P Or T   2 0 1 0

tion Policies.” Climatic Change 93 (1–2): 
15–37.

Nisbet, M. C., and T. Myers. 2007. “Twenty Years 

of Public Opinion about Global Warming.” 
Public Opinion Quarterly 71 (3): 444–70.

Norgaard, K. M. 2006. “People Want to Protect 

Themselves a Little Bit: Emotions, Denial, 
and Social Movement Nonparticipation.” 
Sociological Inquiry 76: 372–96.

———. 2009. “Cognitive and Behavioral Chal-

lenges in responding to Climate Change.” 
Policy research Working Paper 4940, World 
Bank, Washington, DC.

North, D. C. 1990. Institutions, Institutional 
Change and Economic Performance. Cam-
bridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Oats, W. E., and P. r. Portney. 2003. “The Politi-

cal Economy of Environmental Policy.” In 
Handbook of Environmental Economics, ed. 
K. G. Maler and J. r. Vincent. Amsterdam: 
Elsevier Science B.V.

O’Connor, r., r. J. Bord, B. Yarnal, and N. 

Wiefek. 2002. “Who Wants to reduce Green-
house Gas Emissions?” Social Science Quar-
terly 83 (1): 1–17.

OECD (Organisation for Economic Co- 

operation and Development). 2003. Har-
monizing Donor Practices for Effective Aid 
Delivery. Paris: OECD.

Olson, M. 1965. The Logic of Collective Action. 
Cambridge, MA: harvard University Press.

Oreskes, N. 2004. “Beyond the Ivory Tower: The 
Scientific Consensus on Climate Change.” Sci-
ence 306 (5702): 1686.

Ornstein, r., and P. Ehrlich. 2000. New World, 
New Mind: Moving toward Conscious Evolu-
tion. Cambridge, MA: Malor Books.

Osborne, D. 1988. Laboratories of Democracy: 
A New Breed of Governor Creates Models for 
National Growth. Boston: harvard Business 
School Press.

Ostrom, E. 2009. “A Polycentric Approach for 
Coping with Climate Change.” Background 
paper for the WDr 2010.

dards. Arlington, VA: Pew Center on Global 
Climate Change.

repetto, r. 2008. “The Climate Crisis and the 
Adaptation Myth.” Yale School of Forestry 
and Environmental Studies Working Paper 
13, Yale University, New haven, CT.

retallack, S., T. Lawrence, and M. Lockwood. 

2007. Positive Energy: Harnessing People Power 
to Prevent Climate Change. London: Institute 
for Public Policy research.

roland- holst, D. 2008. Energy Efficiency, Inno-
vation, and Job Creation in California. Berke-
ley, CA: Center for Energy, resources, and 
Economic Sustainability, University of Cali-
fornia at Berkeley.

romm, J. J., and C. A. Ervin. 1996. “how Energy 

Policies Affect Public health.” Public Health 
Reports 111 (5): 390–99.

rowell, A. 1996. Green Backlash: Global Subver-

sion of the Environmental Movement. London: 
routledge.

Sandvik, h. 2008. “Public Concern over Global 
Warming Correlates Negatively with National 
Wealth.” Climatic Change 90 (3): 333–41.

Schmidtlein, M. C., C. Finch, and S. L. Cutter. 

2008. “Disaster Declarations and Major haz-
ard Occurrences in the United States.” Profes-
sional Geographer 60 (1): 1–14.

Schneider, V., P. Leifeld, and T. Malang. 2008. 
“Coping with Creeping Catastrophes: The 
Capacity of National Political Systems in the 
Perception, Communication and Solution of 
Slow- moving and Long- term Policy Prob-
lems.” Paper presented at the Berlin Confer-
ence on the human Dimensions of Global 
Environmental Change: “Long- Term Policies: 
Governing Social- Ecological Change,” Berlin, 
Feb. 22–23.

Sehring, J. 2006. “The Politics of Water Insti-

tutional reform: A Comparative Analysis of 
Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan.” Paper presented at 
the Berlin Conference on the human Dimen-
sions of Global Environmental Change: 
“resource Policies: Effectiveness, Efficiency 
and Equity,” Berlin, November 17–18.

Patt, A. G., and D. Schröter. 2008. “Climate risk 

Soderholm, P. 2001. “Environmental Policy in 

Perception and Challenges for Policy Imple-
mentation: Evidence from Stakeholders in 
Mozambique.” Global Environmental Change 
18: 458–67.

Transition Economies: Will Pollution Charges 
Work?” Journal of Environment Development 
10 (4): 365–90.

Sprinz, D. F. 2008. “responding to Long- term 

rabe, B. G. 2002. Greenhouse and Statehouse: 
The Evolving State Government Role in Cli-
mate Change. Arlington, VA: Pew Center on 
Global Climate Change.

———. 2006. Race to the Top: The Expanding 
Role of U.S. State Renewable Portfolio Stan-

Policy Challenges: Sugar Daddies, Air-
bus Solution or Liability?” Ökologisches 
Wirtschaften 2: 16–19.

Stern, N. 2006. The Economics of Climate 

Change: The Stern Review. Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge University Press.

 

Overcoming Behavioral and Institutional Inertia 

347

Sterner, T. 2003. Policy Instruments for Environ-
mental and Natural Resources Management. 
Washington, DC: resources for the Future. 

Sternman, J. D., and L. B. Sweeney. 2007. 

“Understanding Public Complacency about 
Climate Change: Adults’ Mental Models of 
Climate Change Violate Conservation of 
Matter.” Climatic Change 80 (3–4): 213–38.

Swallow, B., M. van Noordwijk, S. Dewi, D. Mur-

diyarso, D. White, J. Gockowski, G. hyman, 
S. Budidarsono, V. robiglio, V. Meadu, A. 
Ekadinata, F. Agus, K. hairiah, P. Mbile, D. J. 
Sonwa, and S. Weise. 2007. Opportunities for 
Avoided Deforestation with Sustainable Bene-
fits. Nairobi: ASB Partnership for the Tropical 
Forest Margins.

Torras, M., and J. K. Boyce. 1998. “Income, 

Inequality and Pollution: A reassessment of 
the Environmental Kuznets Curve.” Ecological 
Economics 25 (2): 147–60.

Tsebelis, G. 2002. Veto Players: How Political 

Institutions Work. Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press.

Tversky, A., and D. Kahneman. 1974. “Judgment 

under Uncertainty: heuristics and Biases.” 
Science 211: 1124–31.

Vaughn- Switzer, J. 1997. Environmental Politics. 

London: St. Martin’s Press.

Vogel, D. 2005. The Market for Virtue: The 
Potential and Limits of Corporate Social 

Responsibility. Washington, DC: Brookings 
Institution Press.

Wade, r. 1990. Governing the Market. Princeton, 

NJ: Princeton University Press.

Ward, B. 2008. Communicating on Climate 

Change: An Essential Resource for Journalists, 
Scientists, and Educators. Narragansett, rI: 
Metcalf Institute for Marine and Environ-
mental reporting, University of rhode Island 
Graduate School of Oceanography.

Weber, E. U. 2006. “Experience- Based and 

Description- Based Perceptions of Long- Term 
risk: Why Global Warming Does Not Sare Us 
(Yet).” Climatic Change 77: 103–20.

Wimberly, J. 2008. Climate Change and Consum-

ers: The Challenge Ahead. Washington, DC: 
EcoAlign.

Winter, D. D., and S. M. Koger. 2004. The Psy-

chology of Environmental Problems. Mahwah, 
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

World Bank. 1992. World Development Report 

1992. Development and the Environment. New 
York: Oxford University Press.

———. 1997. World Development Report 1997. 
The State in a Changing World. Washington, 
DC: World Bank.

———. 2002. World Development Report 2002. 
Building Institutions for Markets. Washington, 
DC: World Bank.

Bibliographical note 

Many people inside and outside the World Bank gave com-
ments to the team. Valuable comments, guidance and con-
tributions  were  provided  by  Shardul  Agrawala,  Montek 
Singh  Ahluwalia,  Nilufar  Ahmad,  Kulsum  Ahmed,  Sadiq 
Ahmed, Ahmad Ahsan, Ulrika Åkesson, Mehdi Akhlaghi, 
Mozaharul  Alam,  Vahid  Alavian,  Harold  Alderman,  Sara 
Amiri, David Anderson, Simon Anderson, Ken Andrasko, 
Juliano  Assunçao,  Giles  Atkinson,  Varadan  Atur,  Jessica 
Ayers,  Abdulhamid  Azad,  Sushenjit  Bandyopadhyay,  Ian 
Bannon, Ellysar Baroudy, Rhona Barr, Scott Barrett, Wim 
Bastiaanssen,  Daniel  Benitez,  Craig  Bennett,  Anthony 
Bigio, Yvan Biot, Jeppe Bjerg, Brian Blankespoor, Melinda 
Bohannon,  Jan  Bojo,  Benoît  Bosquet,  Aziz  Bouzaher, 
Richard  Bradley,  Milan  Brahmbhatt,  Carter  Brandon, 
Gernot Brodnig, Marjory-Anne Bromhead, Andrew Burns, 
Anil  Cabraal,  Duncan  Callaway,  Simon  Caney,  Karan 
Capoor,  Jean-Christophe  Carret,  Rafaello  Cervigni,  Rita 
E.  Cestti,  Muyeye  Chambwera,  Vandana  Chandra,  David 
Chapman,  Joelle  Chassard,  Flávia  Chein  Feres,  Ashwini 
Chhatre, Kenneth Chomitz, David A. Cieslikowski, Hugh 
Compston,  Luis  Constantino,  Jonathan  Coony,  Charles 
Cormier,  Christophe  Crepin,  Richard  Damania,  Stephen 
Danyo, Michael Davis, Melissa Dell, Shantayanan Devarajan, 
Charles E. Di Leva, William J. Dick, Simeon Djankov, Carola 
Donner, Diletta Doretti, Krystel Dossou, Navroz Dubash, 
Hari Bansha Dulal, Mark Dutz, Jane Olga Ebinger, M. Willem 
van Eeghen, Nada Eissa, Siri Eriksen, Antonio Estache, James 
Warren  Evans,  Mandy  Ewing,  Pablo  Fajnzylber,  Charles 
Feinstein,  Gene  Feldman,  Erick  C.  M.  Fernandes,  Daryl 
Fields, Christiana Figueres, Cyprian F. Fisiy, Ariel Fiszbein, 
Richard Fix, Paolo Frankl, Vicente Fretes Cibils, Alan Gelb, 
Francis Ghesquiere, Dolf Gielen, Indermit S. Gill, Habiba 
Gitay,  Barry  Gold,  Itzhak  Goldberg,  Jan  von  der  Goltz, 
Bernard E. Gomez, Arturo Gomez Pompas, Christophe de 
Gouvello,  Chandrasekar  Govindarajalu,  Margaret  Grosh, 
Michael Grubb, Arnulf Grübler, José Luis Guasch, Eugene 
Gurenko,  Stéphane  Hallegatte,  Tracy  Hart,  Marea  Eleni 
Hatziolos,  Johannes  Heister,  Rasmus  Heltberg,  Fernando 
L.  Hernandez,  Jason  Hill,  Ron  Hoffer,  Daniel  Hoornweg, 
Chris Hope, Nicholas Howard, Rafael de Hoyos, Veronika 
Huber, Vijay Iyer, Michael Friis Jensen, Peter Johansen, Todd 

Johnson, Torkil Jonch-Clausen, Benjamin F. Jones, Ben Jones, 
Frauke Jungbluth, John David Kabasa, Ravi Kanbur, Tom 
Karl, Benjamin S. Karmorh, George Kasali, Roy Katayama, 
Andrzej K˛edziora, Michael Keen, Kieran Kelleher, Claudia 
Kemfert,  Karin  E.  Kemper,  Qaiser  Khan,  Euster  Kibona, 
Richard Klein, Masami Kojima, Auguste Tano Kouamé, Jarl 
Krausing, Holger A. Kray, Alice Kuegler, Norman Kuring, 
Yevgeny Kuznetsov, Christina Lakatos, Julian A. Lampietti, 
Perpetua  Latasi,  Judith  Layzer,  Danny  Leipziger,  Robert 
Lempert, Darius Lilaoonwala, James A. Listorti, Feng Liu, 
Bertrand  Loiseau,  Laszlo  Lovei,  Magda  Lovei,  Susanna 
Lundstrom,  Kathleen  Mackinnon,  Marília  Magalhães, 
Olivier Mahul, Ton Manders, McKinsey & Company (Jeremy 
Oppenheim, Jens Dinkel, Per-Anders Enkvist, and Biniam 
Gebre),  Marília  Telma  Manjate,  Michael  Mann,  Sergio 
Margulis,  Will  Martin,  Ursula  Martinez,  Michel  Matera, 
J. M. Mauskar, Siobhan McInerney-Lankford, Robin Mearns, 
Malte Meinshausen, Abel Mejía, Stephen Mink, Rogerio de 
Miranda, Lucio Monari, Paul Moreno López, Roger Morier, 
Richard Moss, Valerie Müller, Robert Muir-Wood, Enrique 
Murgueitio Restrepo, Siobhan Murray, Everhart Nangoma, 
Mudit  Narain,  John  Nash,  Vikram  Nehru,  Dan  Nepstad, 
Michele de Nevers, Ken Newcombe, Brian Ngo, Carlo del 
Ninno, Andy Norton, Frank Nutter, Erika Odendaal, Ellen 
Olafsen,  Ben  Olken,  Sanjay  Pahuja,  Alessandro  Palmieri, 
Gajanand  Pathmanathan,  Nicolas  Perrin,  Chris  Perry, 
Djordjija Petkoski, Tanyathon Phetmanee, Henry Pollack, 
Joanna Post, Neeraj Prasad, Tovondriaka Rakotobe, Nithya 
Ramanathan, V. Ramanathan, Nicola Ranger, Dilip Ratha, 
Keywan Riahi, Richard Richels, Brian Ricketts, Jeff Ritchie, 
Konrad von Ritter, David Rogers, Mattia Romani, Joyashree 
Roy, Eduardo Paes Saboia, Claudia Sadoff, Salman Salman, 
Jamil  Salmi,  Klas  Sandler,  Apurva  Sanghi,  Shyam  Saran, 
Ashok Sarkar, John Scanlon, Hartwig Schäfer, Imme Scholz, 
Sebastian Scholz, Claudia Sepúlveda, Diwesh Sharan, Bernard 
Sheahan,  Susan  Shen,  Xiaoyu  Shi,  Jas  Singh,  Emmanuel 
Skoufias, Leopold Some, Richard Spencer, Frank Sperling, 
Sir Nicholas Stern, Thomas Sterner, Andre Stochniol, Rachel 
Strader, Charlotte Streck, Ashok Subramanian, Vivek Suri, 
Joanna  Syroka,  Mark  Tadross,  Patrice  Talla  Takoukam, 
Robert P. Taylor, Dipti Thapa, Augusto de la Torre, Jorge E. 

349

350 

B I B L I O G R A P H I C A L   N O T E

Uquillas Rodas, Maria Vagliasindi, Hector Valdes, Rowena 
A. Valmonte-Santos, Trond Vedeld, Victor Vergara, Walter 
Vergara,  Tamsin  Vernon,  Juergen  Voegele,  Paul  Waide, 
Alfred Jay Watkins, Kevin Watkins, Charlene Watson, Sam 
Wedderburn, Bill Westermeyer, David Wheeler, Johannes 
Woelcke,  Henning  Wuester,  Winston  Yu,  Shahid  Yusuf, 
N. Robert Zagha, Sumaya Ahmed Zakieldeen, and Jürgen 
Zattler.

We are grateful to persons in locations across the world 
who participated in consultations and provided comments. 
In addition, we thank guest bloggers and members of the 
public  who  commented  on  our  blog,  “Development  in  a 
Changing Climate.”

Other  valuable  assistance  was  provided  by  Gytis 
Kanchas,  Polly  Means,  Nacer  Mohamed  Megherbi,  Swati 
Mishra, Prianka Nandy, Rosita Najmi, and Kaye Schultz. 
Anita Gordon, Merrell J. Tuck-Primdahl, and Kavita Watsa 
assisted the team with consultations and dissemination.

Despite efforts to compile a comprehensive list, some who 
contributed may have been inadvertently omitted. The team 
apologizes for any oversights and reiterates its gratitude to 
all who contributed to this Report.

This Report draws on a wide range of World Bank docu-
ments and on numerous outside sources. Background papers 
commissioned  for  the  Report  are  available  either  on  the 
World Wide Web www.worldbank.org/wdr2010 or through 
the World Development Report office. The views expressed 
in these papers are not necessarily those of the World Bank 
or of this Report.

Background papers 
Atkinson, Giles, Kirk Hamilton, Giovanni Ruta, and Dominique 

van der Mensbrugghe. “Trade in ‘Virtual Carbon’: Empirical 
Results and Implications for Policy.”

Barnett, Jon, and Michael Webber. “Accommodating Migration to 

Promote Adaptation to Climate Change.”

Benitez, Daniel, Ricardo Fuentes Nieva, Tomas Serebrisky, and 
Quentin Wodon. “Assessing the Impact of Climate Change 
Policies in Infrastructure Service Delivery: A Note on 
Affordability and Access.”

Brown, Casey, Robyn Meeks, Yonas Ghile, and Kenneth Hunu. 
“An Empirical Analysis of the Effects of Climate Variables on 
National Level Economic Growth.”

Caney, Simon. “Ethics and Climate Change.”
Dubash, Navroz. “Climate Change Through a Development Lens.”
Figueres, Christiana, and Charlotte Streck. “Great Expectations: 

Enhanced Financial Mechanisms for Post-2012 Mitigation.”
Foa, Roberto. “Social and Governance Dimensions of Climate 

Change: Implications for Policy.”

Hallegatte, Stéphane, Patrice Dumas, and Jean-Charles Hourcade. 

“A note on the economic cost of climate change and the ratio-
nale to limit it below 2°K.”

Hourcade, Jean-Charles, and Franck Nadaud. “Long-run Energy 

Forecasting in Retrospect.”

Irwin, Tim. “Implications for Climate-change Policy of Research 

on Cooperation in Social Dilemmas.”

Liverani, Andrea. “Climate Change and Individual Behavior: 

Considerations for Policy.”

MacCracken, Mike. “Beyond Mitigation: Potential Options 
for Counter-Balancing the Climatic and Environmental 
Consequences of the Rising Concentrations of Greenhouse 
Gases.”

Meadowcroft, James. “Climate Change Governance.”
Mechler, Reinhard, Stefan Hochrainer, Georg Pflug, Keith Williges, 

and Alexander Lotsch. “Assessing Financial Vulnerability to 
Climate-Related Natural Hazards.”

Norgaard, Kari. “Cognitive and Behavioral Challenges in 

Responding to Climate Change.”

Ostrom, Elinor. “A Polycentric Approach for Coping with Climate 

Change.”

Ranger, Nicola, Robert Muir-Wood, and Satya Priya. “Assessing 

Extreme Climate Hazards and Options for Risk Mitigation and 
Adaptation in the Developing World.”

Shalizi, Zmarak, and Franck Lecocq. “Climate Change and the 

Economics of Targeted Mitigation in Sectors with Long-lived 
Capital Stock.”

Strand, Jon. “‘Revenue Management’ Effects of Climate Policy-

Related Financial Flows.”

Thornton, Philip. “The Inter-linkages between Rapid Growth in 

Livestock Production, Climate Change, and the Impacts on 
Water Resources, Land Use, and Deforestation.”

Watson, Charlene, and Samuel Fankhauser. “The Clean 

Development Mechanism: Too Flexible to Produce Sustainable 
Development Benefits?”

Background notes
Benitez, Daniel, and Natsuko Toba. “Transactional Costs and 
Marginal Abatement Costs.” “Review of Energy Efficiency 
Policies.” “Promoting Energy Efficiency: Issues and Lessons 
Learned.”

Beringer, Tim, and Wolfgang Lucht. “Second Generation 

Bioenergy Potential.”

Estache, Antonio. “Public Private Partnerships for Climate Change 
Investments: Learning from the Infrastructure PPP Experience.”
———. “What Do We Know Collectively about the Need to Deal 

with Climate Change?”

———. “How Should the Nexus between Economic and 

Environmental Regulation Work for Infrastructure Services?”

Füssel, Hans-Martin. “Review and Quantitative Analysis of Indices 
of Climate Change Exposure, Adaptive Capacity, Sensitivity, and 
Impacts.” 

———. “The Risks of Climate Change: A Synthesis of New 

Scientific Knowledge Since the Finalization of the IPCC Fourth 
Assessment Report.”

Gerten, Dieter, and Stefanie Rost. “Climate Change Impacts on 

Agricultural Water Stress and Impact Mitigation Potential.”

Haberl, Helmut, Karl-Heinz Erb, Fridolin Krausmann, Veronika 

Gaube, Simone Gingrich, and Christof Plutzar. “Quantification 

 

Bibliographical note 

351

of the Intensity of Global Human Use of Ecosystems for 
Biomass Production.”

Meinzen-Dick, Ruth. “Community Action and Property Rights in 

Land and Water Management.”

Hamilton, Kirk. “Delayed Participation in a Global Climate 

Müller, Christoph, Alberte Bondeau, Alexander Popp, Katharina 

Agreement.” 

Harris, Nancy, Stephen Hagen, Sean Grimland, William Salas, 

Sassan Saatchi, and Sandra Brown. “Improvement in Estimates 
of Land-Based Emissions.”

Heyder, Ursula. “Ecosystem Integrity Change as Measured by 

Biome Change.”

Hoornweg, Daniel, Perinaz Bhada, Mila Freire, and Rutu Dave. “An 

Urban Focus—Cities and Climate Change.”

Houghton, Richard. “Emissions of Carbon from Land 

Management.” 

Imam, Bisher. “Waters of the World.”
Lotze-Campen, Hermann, Alexander Popp, Jan Philipp Dietrich, 

and Michael Krause. “Competition for Land between Food, 
Bioenergy, and Conservation.”

Louati, Mohamed El Hedi. “Tunisia’s Experience in Water 

Resource Mobilization and Management.”

Waha, and Marianela Fader. “Climate Change Impacts on 
Agricultural Yields.”

Rabie, Tamer, and Kulsum Ahmed. “Climate Change and Human 

Health.”

Ramanathan, N., I. H. Rehman, and V. Ramanathan. “Project 
Surya: Mitigation of Global and Regional Climate Change: 
Buying the Planet Time by Reducing Black Carbon, Methane, 
and Ozone.”

Rogers, David. “Environmental Information Services and 

Development.”

Vagliasindi, Maria. “Climate Change Uncertainty, Regulation and 

Private Participation in Infrastructure.”

Westermeyer, William. “Observing the Climate for Development.”

Glossary

Abatement / see mitigation 

Adaptation:  Adjustment  in  natural  or 
human  systems,  in  response  to  actual  or 
expected climatic stimuli or their effects, 
which moderates harm or exploits benefi-
cial opportunities. Various types of adap-
tation  can  be  distinguished,  including 
anticipatory and reactive, autonomous and 
planned, public and private.

Adaptation  Fund:  The  Adaptation  Fund 
was established to finance concrete adap-
tation  projects  and  programs  in  develop-
ing countries that are Parties to the Kyoto 
Protocol. The Fund is financed with a share 
of proceeds from the Clean Development 
Mechanism  (CDM)  and  receives  funds 
from other sources.

Adaptive capacity: The ability of a system 
to adjust to climate change (including cli-
mate variability and extremes) in order to 
take  advantage  of  opportunities,  moder-
ate  potential  damages,  or  cope  with  the 
consequences.

Adaptive management: A systematic pro-
cess  for  continually  improving  manage-
ment  policies  and  practices  by  learning 
from the outcomes of previously employed 
policies and practices, through an explicitly 
experimental approach.

Additionality:  In  the  CDM  context  this 
refers to whether the carbon offsets gener-
ated by a project are backed up by emission 
reductions additional to those that other-
wise would occur without the financial and 
technical  incentive  of  the  CDM  mecha-
nism. An activity’s emissions as they would 
have been in the absence of the CDM proj-
ect  constitute  the  baseline  against  which 
additionality is measured. The creation and 

sale of offsets from a CDM project lacking 
additionality  may  lead  to  an  increase  in 
emissions  to  the  atmosphere,  relative  to 
the emissions released if the potential pur-
chaser of the offset instead directly reduced 
their own emissions at home.

Afforestation:  Planting  a  new  forest  on 
land that has either never or not recently 
been forested.

Annex I parties:  Annex  I  parties  include 
the industrial countries that were members 
of the OECD (Organization for Economic 
Co-operation and Development) in 1992, 
plus countries with economies in transition 
(the  EIT  Parties),  including  the  Russian 
Federation,  the  Baltic  states,  and  several 
Central and Eastern European states. They 
have committed to limit their greenhouse 
gas  emissions.  Non-Annex-I  parties:  The 
group  of  primarily  developing  countries 
without such commitments, which instead 
have acknowledged general obligations to 
formulate  and  implement  national  pro-
grams on mitigation and adaptation.

Anthropogenic: Directly caused by human 
actions. For example, burning fossil fuels 
to  supply  energy  leads  to  anthropogenic 
GHG  emissions,  whereas  natural  decay 
of  vegetation  leads  to  non-anthropogenic 
emissions.

Assigned amount units (AAUs): The total 
volume  greenhouse  gases—measured  in 
tons CO2e—that each Annex I country is 
allowed to emit during the first phase of the 
Kyoto Protocol. 

Bali  Action  Plan:  The  two  year  plan 
launched at the 2007 United Nations Cli-
mate Change Conference in Bali, Indonesia 
to negotiate long-term cooperative action 

353

354 

G LO S S A RY

on  climate  change  beyond  2010  and  to 
reach  an  agreed  outcome  in  Denmark  in 
late 2009. The plan has four pillars: mitiga-
tion, adaptation, finance, and technology.

Biodiversity: Biodiversity is the variety of 
all forms of life, including genes, popula-
tions, species, and ecosystems.

Biofuel: A fuel produced from organic mat-
ter or combustible oils produced by plants. 
Examples of biofuel include alcohol, black 
liquor from the paper-manufacturing pro-
cess, wood, and soybean oil. Second-gener-
ation biofuels: Products such as ethanol and 
biodiesel derived from woody material by 
chemical or biological processes.

Cap and trade: An approach to controlling 
pollution emissions that combines market 
and regulation. An overall emissions limit 
(cap) is set for a specific time period and 
individual  parties  receive  permits  (either 
through grant or auction) giving them the 
legal right to emit pollution up to the quan-
tity of permits they hold. Parties are free to 
trade emission permits, and there will be 
gains  from  trade  if  different  parties  have 
different  marginal  pollution  abatement 
costs.

Carbon capture and storage (CCS): A pro-
cess consisting of separation of CO2 from 
industrial  and  energy-related  sources, 
transport to a storage location, and long-
term isolation from the atmosphere.

Carbon dioxide (CO2): A naturally occur-
ring gas that is also a by-product of burning 
fossil fuels (fossil carbon deposits such as 
oil, gas, and coal), of burning biomass, of 
land-use changes, and of several industrial 
processes. It is the principal anthropogenic 
greenhouse gas that affects the Earth’s radi-
ative balance. It is the reference gas against 
which other greenhouse gases are measured 
and therefore has a Global Warming Poten-
tial of 1.

Carbon dioxide equivalent (CO2e): A way 
of expressing the quantity of a mixture of 
different greenhouse gases. Equal amounts 
of the different greenhouse gases produce 
different contributions to global warming; 
for example, an emission of methane to the 
atmosphere has about 20 times the warm-
ing effect as the same emission of carbon 

dioxide. CO2e expresses the quantity of a 
mixture  of  greenhouse  gases  in  terms  of 
the  quantity  of  CO2  that  would  produce 
the same amount of warming as would the 
mixture of gases.  Both emissions (flows) 
and concentrations (stocks) of greenhouse 
gases can be expressed in CO2e. A quantity 
of greenhouse gases can also be expressed 
in terms of its carbon equivalent, by multi-
plying the quantity of CO2e by 12/44.

Carbon fertilization: The enhancement of 
the growth of plants as a result of increased 
atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) concen-
tration. Depending on their mechanism of 
photosynthesis, certain types of plants are 
more sensitive to changes in atmospheric 
CO2 concentration.

Carbon footprint: The amount of carbon 
emissions  associated  with  a  particular 
activity or all the activities of a person or 
organization. The carbon footprint can be 
measured in many ways, and may include 
indirect emissions generated in the whole 
chain  of  production  of  inputs  into  an 
activity. 

Carbon  intensity:  Typically,  the  amount 
of  economywide  emissions  of  carbon  or 
CO2e per unit of GDP, that is, the carbon 
intensity of GDP. May also refer to the car-
bon emitted per dollar of gross production 
or dollar of value added by a given firm or 
sector. Also used to describe the amount of 
carbon emitted per unit of energy or fuels 
consumed,  that  is,  the  carbon  intensity 
of  energy,  which  depends  on  the  energy 
sources,  fuel  mix,  and  efficiency  of  tech-
nologies.  The  carbon  intensity  of  GDP  is 
simply  the  product  of  the  economywide 
average  carbon-intensity  of  energy  and 
energy-intensity of GDP.

Carbon  lock-in:  Actions  which  perpetu-
ate a given level of carbon emissions. For 
example, expansion of roads and highways 
will tend to lock in carbon emissions from 
fossil  fuels  for  decades  unless  there  are 
countervailing policies to limit fuel use or 
control vehicle use.

Carbon  sink:  Any  process,  activity  or 
mechanism  which  removes  carbon  diox-
ide from the atmosphere. Forests and other 
vegetation  are  considered  sinks  because 

 

Glossary 

355

they  remove  carbon  dioxide  through 
photosynthesis.

Clean Development Mechanism (CDM): 
A  mechanism  under  the  Kyoto  Protocol 
through  which  developed  countries  may 
finance greenhouse-gas emission reduction 
or  removal  projects  in  developing  coun-
tries, and thereby receive credits for doing 
so which they may apply towards meeting 
mandatory limits on their own emissions. 
The CDM allows greenhouse gas emission 
reduction projects to take place in countries 
that  are  signatories  but  have  no  emission 
targets under the Kyoto Protocol.

Climate sensitivity: The change in global 
mean  surface  temperature  in  response  to 
a doubling of the atmospheric CO2e con-
centration.  A  key  parameter  for  translat-
ing projected emissions into projections of 
warming and thus impacts.

Consumptive use of water: Water removed 
from available supplies without return to a 
water resources system (for example, water 
used  in  manufacturing,  agriculture,  and 
food preparation that is not returned to a 
stream, river, or water treatment plant).

Coping  capacity:  The  ability  of  people, 
organizations  and  systems,  using  avail-
able skills and resources, to face and man-
age  adverse  conditions,  emergencies  or 
disasters.  Refers  to  short-term  capacity 
in response to an event, whereas adaptive 
capacity refers to the long-term ability to 
make  systematic  changes  to  reduce  the 
impact of climate change.

Damage function:  In  the  climate  change 
context,  the  relation  between  changes  in 
the climate and reductions in production or 
consumption, or losses of assets (potentially 
including ecosystems or human health). 

Deadweight loss: A cost that generates no 
benefit.

climate- projection models or data analyses. 
Dynamic downscaling uses high resolution 
models for a particular region run within a 
large-scale global model; statistical down-
scaling  uses  statistical  relationships  that 
link the large-scale atmospheric variables 
with local or regional climate variables. 

Early  warning  system:  A  mechanism  to 
generate and disseminate timely and mean-
ingful warning information to enable indi-
viduals,  communities  and  organizations 
threatened by a hazard to prepare and to 
act appropriately and in sufficient time to 
reduce the possibility of harm or loss. 

Ecosystem  services:  The  ecosystem  pro-
cesses  or  functions  that  have  value  to 
individuals  or  society,  for  example,  the 
provision of food, water purification, and 
recreational opportunities.

Evapotranspiration: An important part of 
the water cycle, it is the combined process 
of  evaporation  from  the  Earth’s  surface 
(from sources such as the soil and bodies 
of water) and transpiration from vegetation 
(loss of water as vapor from plants, primar-
ily through their leaves).

Forest degradation: The reduction in forest 
biomass through unsustainable harvest or 
land-use practices including logging, fire, 
and other anthropogenic disturbances. 

Geoengineering:  Geoengineering  is  the 
large-scale engineering of our environment 
to combat or to counteract the effects of cli-
mate  change.  Proposed  measures  include 
injecting  particles  into  the  upper  atmo-
sphere to reflect sunlight and the fertiliza-
tion  of  the  oceans  with  iron  to  increase 
uptake of CO2 by algae.

Gini coefficient: A  commonly  used  mea-
sure  of  inequality  of  income  or  wealth 
distribution,  varying  between  0  (perfect 
equality) and 1. 

Discount rate: The rate at which individu-
als or enterprises trade off present versus 
future consumption or wellbeing, usually 
expressed as a percentage.

Downscaling:  A  method  that  derives 
local-  to  regional-scale  (10  to  100  km) 
information from larger-scale (200+ km) 

Green tax: A tax that aims to increase envi-
ronmental quality by taxing actions which 
harm the environment. 

Greenhouse gas (GHG): Any of the atmo-
spheric  gases  that  cause  climate  change 
by  trapping  heat  from  the  sun  in  Earth’s 
atmosphere—producing  the  greenhouse 

356 

G LO S S A RY

effect. The most common greenhouse gases 
are carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4), 
nitrous oxide (N2O), ozone (O3), and water 
vapor (H2O).

Innovation:  The  creation,  assimilation, 
or  exploitation  of  a  new  or  significantly 
improved  good  or  service,  process,  or 
method.

Institutions: Structures and mechanisms 
of social order and cooperation governing 
the behavior of a set of individuals.

Integrated assessment: A method of analy-
sis that combines results and models from 
the physical, biological, economic and social 
sciences, and the interactions between these 
components, in a consistent framework, to 
project the consequences of climate change 
and the policy responses to it.

Intellectual property rights (IPRs): Legal 
property rights over artistic and commer-
cial creations of the mind, including patents 
on new technologies, and the correspond-
ing fields of law.

Intergovernmental  Panel  on  Climate 
Change (IPCC): Established in 1988 by the 
World  Meteorological  Organization  and 
the United Nations Environment Program, 
the IPCC surveys worldwide scientific and 
technical  literature  and  publishes  assess-
ment reports that are widely recognized as 
the most credible existing sources of infor-
mation on climate change. The IPCC also 
prepares  methodologies  and  responds  to 
specific requests from the subsidiary bodies 
of the  United Nations Framework Conven-
tion on Climate Change (UNFCCC). The 
IPCC is independent of the UNFCCC. 

Kyoto Protocol: An agreement under the 
United  Nations  Framework  Convention 
on  Climate  Change  (UNFCCC)  that  was 
adopted  in  1997  in  Kyoto,  Japan,  by  the 
parties to the UNFCCC. It contains legally 
binding commitments to reduce greenhouse 
gas emissions by developed countries.

Leakage:  In  the  climate  change  context, 
the process whereby emissions outside of a 
mitigation project area increase as a result 
of emission reduction activities inside the 
project area, thus reducing the effectiveness 
of the project. 

Land use, land-use change, and forestry 
(LULUCF):  A  set  of  activities  including 
human-induced land use, land-use change, 
and forestry activities which lead to both 
emissions  and  removals  of  greenhouse 
gases from the atmosphere. A category used 
in reporting greenhouse gas inventories. 

Maladaptation:  Activities  or  actions  that 
increase vulnerability to climate change. 

Market-pull:  The  allocation  of  research 
and  development  (R&D)  resources  based 
on  market  demand  for  products  and  ser-
vices, rather than scientific interest or top-
down government policies.

Mitigation:  A  human  intervention  to 
reduce the emissions or enhance the sinks 
of greenhouse gases. 

National Adaptation Programs of Action 
(NAPAs):  Documents  prepared  by  least 
developed countries (LDCs) identifying the 
activities to address urgent and immediate 
needs for adapting to climate change. 

No regrets project: In the climate change 
context, a project that would generate net 
social and/or economic benefits irrespective 
of whether the project affects the climate or 
whether the climate affects the project.

Polluter pays principle: A principle in envi-
ronmental law whereby the polluter must 
bear the cost of the pollution. Thus the pol-
luter is responsible for the cost of measures 
to prevent and control pollution. 

Positive feedback: When one variable in a 
system triggers changes in a second variable 
that in turn affect the original variable; a 
positive  feedback  intensifies  the  initial 
effect, and a negative feedback reduces the 
effect.

Precautionary principle: A principle that 
holds that, in the absence of scientific cer-
tainty  that  serious  or  irreversible  harm 
would  not  occur  as  a  result  of  an  action 
or  policy,  the  burden  of  proof  lies  with 
those  that  favor  the    action  or  policy.  In 
the United Nations Framework on Climate 
Change (UNFCCC), it is a provision under 
Article 3 stipulating that the parties should 
take precautionary measures to anticipate, 
prevent, or minimize the causes of climate 

 

Glossary 

357

change and mitigate its adverse effects, and 
that a lack of full scientific certainty about 
possibly  serious  or  irreversible  damages 
should not be used as a reason to postpone 
such  measures—taking  into  account  that 
policies and measures to deal with climate 
change should be cost-effective in order to 
ensure global benefits at the lowest possible 
cost.

Public good: A good whose consumption 
is non-exclusive (so that it is impossible to 
prevent anyone from enjoying the benefit) 
and non-rival (so that the enjoyment of the 
benefit by one individual does not diminish 
the quantity of benefits available to others). 
Climate  change  mitigation  is  an  example 
of a public good as it would be impossible 
to prevent any one individual or state from 
enjoying the benefit of a stabilized climate, 
and the enjoyment of this stabilized climate 
by one individual or state would not dimin-
ish the ability of others to benefit from it.

RDD&D: Research, development, demon-
stration, and deployment of new methods, 
technologies, equipment, and products.

Reduced  Emissions  from  Deforestation 
and  forest  Degradation  (REDD):  REDD 
refers to a suite of actions aimed at reduc-
ing greenhouse gas emissions from forested 
land.  Financial  incentives  for  REDD  are 
potentially a part of the policy response to 
climate change. 

Reforestation: Planting of forests on lands 
that were previously forested but that have 
been converted to another use. 

Reinsurance: The transfer of a portion of 
primary insurance risks to a secondary tier 
of insurers (reinsurers); essentially “insur-
ance for insurers.”

Resilience: The ability of a social or eco-
logical system to absorb disturbances while 
retaining the same basic structure and ways 
of functioning, the capacity for self-organi-
zation, and the capacity to adapt to stress 
and change.

Return period: The average time between 
occurrences of a defined event.

Risk  assessment:  A  standardized  meth-
odology  consisting  of  risk  identification, 

risk quantification, risk reduction, and risk 
mitigation.

Robust  decision  making:  In  the  face  of 
uncertainty, choosing not the measure or 
policy  that  would  be  optimal  under  the 
most likely future world, but the one that 
would be acceptable across a range of possi-
ble futures. The process involves evaluating 
options to minimize expected regret across 
a variety of models, assumptions, and loss 
functions, rather than to maximize returns 
under a unique likely future.

Safety net: Mechanisms that aim to protect 
people from the impact of shocks such as 
flood, drought, unemployment, illness, or 
the death of a household’s primary income 
earner.

Sequestration: In the climate context, the 
process of removing carbon from the atmo-
sphere and storing it in reservoirs such as 
new  forests,  soil  carbon  or  underground 
storage.  Biological  sequestration:  The 
removal of CO2 from the atmosphere and 
storing it in organic matter through land-
use  change,  afforestation,  reforestation, 
carbon  storage  in  landfills,  and  practices 
that enhance soil carbon in agriculture. 

Social learning: Social learning is the pro-
cess  by  which  people  learn  new  behavior 
through  overt  reinforcement  or  punish-
ment, or via observing other social actors in 
their environment. If people observe posi-
tive, desired outcomes for others exhibiting 
a particular behavior, they are more likely 
to model, imitate, and adopt the behavior 
themselves.

Social norms: Implicit  or  explicit  values, 
beliefs, and rules adopted by a group to self-
regulate  behavior  through  peer  pressure; 
the yardstick individuals use to assess what 
is acceptable or unacceptable behavior. 

Social protection: The set of public inter-
ventions  aimed  at  supporting  the  poorer 
and more vulnerable members of society, 
as  well  as  helping  individuals,  families, 
and communities manage risk—for exam-
ple,  unemployment  insurance  programs, 
income support, and social services.

Solar  photovoltaics  (PV):  The  field  of 
technology  and  research  related  to  the 

358 

G LO S S A RY

conversion of sunlight, including ultra vio-
let  radiation,  directly  into  electricity;  the 
technology applied in the creation and use 
of solar cells, which make up solar panels.

SRES  scenarios:  A  set  of  descriptions  or 
storylines  of  possible  futures  used  in  cli-
mate change related modeling developed for 
the IPCC. The scenarios are used to project 
future  emissions  based  on  assumptions 
about  changes  in  population,  technology, 
and  societal  development.  Four  scenario 
families  comprise  the  SRES  scenario  set: 
A1, A2, B1 and B2. A1 represents a future 
world of very rapid economic growth, global 
population that peaks in mid-century and 
declines thereafter, and rapid introduction 
of new and more efficient technologies. A2 
represents a very heterogeneous world with 
continuously increasing global population 
and regionally oriented economic growth 
that is more fragmented and slower than in 
other storylines. B1 represents a convergent 
world with the same global population as 
in the A1 storyline but with rapid changes 
in  economic  structures  toward  a  service 
and  information  economy,  reductions  in 
material intensity, and the introduction of 
clean  and  resource-efficient  technologies. 
Finally, B2 represents a world in which the 
emphasis is on local solutions to economic, 
social,  and  environmental  sustainability, 
with  continuously  increasing  population 
(lower than A2) and intermediate economic 
development.

Stationarity:  The  idea  that  natural  sys-
tems  f luctuate  within  an  unchanging 
envelope of variability, delimited by the 
range of past experiences.

Supplementarity: The Kyoto Protocol states 
that emissions trading and Joint Implemen-
tation activities are to be supplemental to 
domestic  policies  (e.g.  energy  taxes,  fuel 
efficiency  standards)  taken  by  developed 
countries to reduce their GHG emissions. 
Under  some  proposed  definitions  of  sup-
plementarity, developed countries could be 
required to achieve a given share of their 
reduction  targets  domestically.  This  is  a 
subject for further negotiation and clarifi-
cation by the parties. 

Technology transfer: The process of shar-
ing of skills, knowledge, technologies, and 

methods of manufacture to ensure that sci-
entific and technological developments are 
accessible to a wider range of users.

Technology-push: The allocation of R&D 
resources  motivated  largely  by  inher-
ent  scientific  interest,  rather  than  market 
demand. 

Threshold:  In  the  climate  change  con-
text, the level above which sudden or rapid 
change occurs. 

Transaction  costs:  Costs  associated  with 
the exchange of goods or services that are 
additional  to  the  monetary  cost  or  price 
of  the  good  or  service.  Examples  include 
search  and  information  costs  or  policing 
and enforcement costs.

Uncertainty: An expression of the degree 
to which a value (such as the future state 
of the climate system) is unknown. Uncer-
tainty can result from lack of information 
or from disagreement about what is known 
or even knowable. It may have many types 
of sources, from quantifiable errors in the 
data  to  uncertain  projections  of  human 
behavior.  Uncertainty  can  therefore  be 
represented  by  quantitative  measures,  for 
example,  a  range  of  values  calculated  by 
various  models,  or  by  qualitative  state-
ments, for example, reflecting expert judg-
ment. However, in economics, uncertainty 
refers  to  Knightian  uncertainty,  which  is 
immeasurable. This is in contrast to risk, 
wherein  the  occurrence  of  certain  events 
is  associated  with  a  knowable  probability 
distribution. 

United  Nations  Framework  Convention 
on Climate Change (UNFCCC): A conven-
tion adopted in May 1992 with the ultimate 
objective of the “stabilization of greenhouse 
gas concentrations in the atmosphere at a 
level that would prevent dangerous anthro-
pogenic  interference  with  the  climate 
system.”

Virtual water: The amount of water that is 
directly or indirectly consumed in the pro-
duction of a good or service.

Vulnerability (also climate vulnerability): 
The  degree  to  which  a  system  is  suscep-
tible to, and unable to cope with, adverse 
effects of climate change, including climate 

 

Glossary 

359

variability and extremes. Vulnerability is a 
function of the character, magnitude, and 
rate  of  climate  change  and  variability  to 
which  a  system  is  exposed,  as  well  as  the 
system’s sensitivity and adaptive capacity.

Weather  derivatives:  Financial  instru-
ments to reduce risk associated with adverse 
weather conditions by, for example, provid-
ing for payments associated with a specified 
weather event (such as an unusually cool or 
hot month of August). 

Weather-index  insurance:  Insurance 
where the indemnity (or payout) is based 

on the realization of pre-agreed values of an 
index of a specific weather parameter, mea-
sured over a pre-specified period of time, at 
a particular weather station. The insurance 
can be structured to protect against index 
realizations that are either so high or so low 
that they are expected to cause crop losses. 
The indemnity is calculated based on a pre-
agreed sum insured per unit of the index 
(e.g. US$/millimeter of rainfall). 

Win-win-(win): In the Report, this refers 
to measures that are beneficial for adapta-
tion and mitigation (and development).

Selected Indicators

Table A1  Energy-related emissions and carbon intensity
Table A2  Land-based emissions
Table A3  Total primary energy supply
Table A4  Natural disasters
Table A5  Land, water, and agriculture
Table A6  Wealth of nations
Table A7 
Sources and definitions

Innovation, research, and development

Selected world development indicators

Introduction
Classification of economies by region and income, FY2010
Table 1  Key indicators of development
Table 2  Millennium Development Goals: eradicating poverty and improving lives
Table 3  Economic activity
Table 4  Trade, aid, and finance
Table 5  Key indicators for other economies
Technical notes

361

Table A1    Energy-related emissions and carbon intensity

Carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions

Non-CO2 emissions 

(CH4, N2O)

Carbon intensity

Annual total

Change

Per capita

Share of 
annual 

world total

Cumulative 
emissions 
since 1850

Annual total

Energy

Income

Metric tons
(millions)

%

Metric tons

%

Metric tons 
(billions)

Metric tons of CO2  
equivalent (millions)

Metric tons of CO2 per 
ton of oil equivalent

Metric tons of CO2 per 

thousand $ of GDP

2005

1990–2005a

1850–2005

1990
2.86
2.28
2.97
2.31
2.55
2.19
1.40
2.61
2.07
2.30
2.56
1.83
3.14
2.84
2.54
1.92
1.56
2.72
3.18
2.47
1.87
1.46
2.58
3.21
3.00
2.77
2.69
2.38
3.17
3.43
2.43
3.36
3.16
2.24
2.38
2.72
2.36
0.95
1.39
1.40
1.38
3.50
2.30
2.21
2.67
2.50
2.75
3.02
2.16
2.67
2.79
2.28
1.12
1.67
2.72
1.79
2.43
2.38
2.68
2.26
2.63
2.53
2.59
2.56
0.70
2.39w
1.38
2.41
2.44
2.36
2.46

1990
0.44
0.43
0.65
0.28
1.65
0.44
0.18
1.13
0.58
0.37
1.77
0.26
0.92
0.39
0.45
0.47
0.25
0.49
0.34
0.55
0.58
0.41
0.52
..
0.50
0.41
0.30
0.33
2.01
..
0.50
..
..
0.43
0.38
0.29
0.41
0.49
0.22
0.34
0.24
1.14
0.26
..
0.91
1.17
0.54
..
0.39
0.86
0.93
0.27
0.25
0.18
0.85
0.35
0.31
..
1.63
0.60
0.42
0.61
2.93
0.59
0.28
0.57w
0.46
0.80
0.47
0.36
0.47

91 
142 
377 
77 
61 
112 
334 
46 
552 
59 
5,060 
61 
118 
48 
149 
55 
388 
814 
96 
58 
1,149 
349 
431 
99 
44 
60 
454 
1,214 
155 
73 
449 
76 
47 
138 
393 
41 
183 
97 
38 
118 
77 
296 
63 
44 
91 
1,544 
320 
50 
43 
38 
331 
342 
51 
45 
48 
214 
219 
42 
297 
112 
533 
5,841 
110 
150 
81 
26,544t
707
12,631
13,207
3,271
12,946

33.3
35.3
45.0
33.6
–43.8
2.7
70.8
–38.7
27.5
81.7
128.9
34.0
–23.3
–5.9
83.3
0.7
9.3
–15.9
35.6
–18.3
92.6
131.7
142.3
62.0
41.7
78.3
14.0
14.8
–33.6
–35.5
97.6
184.0
28.8
163.9
33.9
111.2
15.6
43.0
27.9
94.1
113.1
–15.3
59.1
202.1
–45.5
–29.6
89.6
–14.3
49.7
–32.8
29.9
64.7
–4.5
9.0
51.6
172.6
70.3
–11.3
–56.4
114.1
–4.4
19.9
–8.4
33.4
376.5
28.3w
28.9
38.0
20.1
4.8
16.4

1990

68 
105 
260 
58 
108 
109 
195 
75 
433 
32 
2,211 
45 
154 
51 
81 
55 
355 
968 
71 
71 
597 
151 
178 
61 
31 
34 
398 
1,058 
233 
114 
227 
27 
37 
52 
293 
20 
158 
68 
30 
61 
36 
349 
40 
14 
167 
2,194 
169 
59 
29 
57 
255 
208 
53 
41 
32 
79 
129 
47 
681 
52 
558 
4,874 
120 
112 
17 
20,693t
549
9,150
10,999
3,122
11,121

1990
2.7
3.2
15.2
7.5
10.6
10.9
1.3
8.6
15.6
2.5
1.9
1.4
14.9
9.9
1.5
11.0
6.3
12.2
6.9
6.8
0.7
0.8
3.3
3.3
8.8
7.2
7.0
8.6
14.3
5.6
5.3
12.7
8.4
2.9
3.5
0.8
10.6
0.7
7.0
0.6
0.6
9.2
4.0
30.8
7.2
14.8
10.3
7.8
9.5
10.8
7.2
5.3
6.2
6.2
2.5
1.4
2.3
12.8
13.1
28.0
9.7
19.5
5.9
5.7
0.3
4.0w
0.7
2.6
11.8
8.6
10.7

2005
0.39
Algeria
0.34
Argentina
0.58
Australia
0.28
Austria
0.73
Belarus
0.34
Belgium
0.21
Brazil
0.64
Bulgaria
0.49
Canada
0.30
Chile
0.95
China
0.23
Colombia
0.57
Czech Republic
0.26
Denmark
0.45
Egypt, Arab Rep. of
0.35
Finland
0.21
France
0.32
Germany
0.29
Greece
0.34
Hungary
0.47
India
0.49
Indonesia
0.67
Iran, Islamic Rep. of
..
Iraq
0.28
Ireland
0.38
Israel
0.28
Italy
0.31
Japan
1.17
Kazakhstan
..
Korea, Dem. Rep. of
0.44
Korea, Rep. of
0.67
Kuwait
0.63
Libya
0.46
Malaysia
0.33
Mexico
0.39
Morocco
0.32
Netherlands
0.39
Nigeria
0.17
Norway
0.35
Pakistan
0.31
Philippines
0.57
Poland
0.30
Portugal
0.77
Qatar
0.45
Romania
0.91
Russian Federation
0.65
Saudi Arabia
0.78
Serbia
0.23
Singapore
0.45
Slovak Republic
0.83
South Africa
0.29
Spain
0.18
Sweden
0.17
Switzerland
0.64
Syrian Arab Republic
0.48
Thailand
0.29
Turkey
..
Turkmenistan
1.13
Ukraine
0.57
United Arab Emirates
0.28
United Kingdom
0.47
United States
2.10
Uzbekistan
0.57
Venezuela, R. B. de
0.45
Vietnam
0.47w
World
0.38
Low income 
0.61
Middle income
0.39
High income
0.28
European Union 15
0.37
OECD
a. Denotes percent change in CO2 emissions between 1990 and 2005.  b. Share of cumulative emissions for Czech Republic and Slovak Republic prior to 1992 were calculated based on their 
share of total combined emissions in during 1992–2006.  c. Share of cumulative emissions for Germany prior to 1991 were calculated based on total for German Democratic Republic and 
the Federal Republic of Germany and were combined with emissions for Germany between 1991 and 2006.  d. Share of cumulative emissions for Belarus, Russian Federation, Kazakhstan, 
Turkmenistan, Ukraine, and Uzbekistan prior to 1992 were calculated based on the share of combined emissions of former Soviet Union countries during 1992–2006.  e. Emissions for the 
Democratic Republic of Korea and the Republic of Korea are based on data for United Korea prior to 1950. Emissions for Pakistan and Bangladesh are based on data for East and West Pakistan 
before 1971. Emissions for Malaysia and include Malaysia’s share of emissions from the Federation of Malaya. Emissions for Vietnam include emissions for the Democratic Republic of Vietnam 
and the Republic of South Vietnam.

2.8
5.6
12.5
4.3
4.0
10.4
8.8
3.0
23.8
1.8
94.3
2.2
10.7b
3.4
3.2
2.3
31.7
117.8c
2.6
4.1
28.6
6.8
8.6
2.2
1.6
1.5
17.9
46.1
9.9d
5.9e
9.0e
1.6
1.3
2.7e
12.5
0.9
8.3
2.3
1.9
2.4e
1.9
22.6
1.7
0.9
6.9
92.5d
7.4
..
1.4
3.2b
14.1
10.0
4.1
2.4
1.2
3.9
5.3
2.1d
22.6d
2.2
68.1
324.9
6.9d
5.3
1.5e
1,169.1s
24.0
395.1
750.1
284.8
764.7

1990
9.6
10.0
27.5
1.4
2.9
2.8
10.9
6.0
41.0
2.4
192.9
5.1
10.9
0.9
8.5
1.4
16.3
47.8
4.6
6.0
53.1
41.2
24.4
4.1
1.3
0.2
16.8
10.0
28.8
26.9
6.6
5.4
..
..
47.9
..
3.3
25.8
0.9
7.5
3.6
23.5
1.1
..
24.5
406.4
2.3
..
0.2
1.7
10.6
5.3
2.1
0.7
..
13.0
26.1
19.7
139.7
20.1
36.9
298.8
28.1
30.5
3.5
1,861.0t
115.5
1,168.3
577.2
142.1
644.6

2005
15.5
19.1
38.8
1.4
3.3
2.4
14.7
4.8
57.8
3.4
218.7
7.1
7.2
1.6
16.0
1.8
13.2
28.9
5.8
5.4
89.2
58.8
64.9
3.3
1.8
0.4
18.5
7.1
13.2
27.3
7.7
9.1
..
..
86.1
..
2.6
66.2
1.7
12.5
2.6
20.9
1.7
..
13.2
206.4
3.9
..
0.8
1.6
12.5
6.6
2.2
0.6
..
19.2
56.6
46.4
118.4
40.0
27.0
242.8
40.3
46.3
4.9
1,978.9t
256.4
1,279.4
557.1
115.7
651.4

2005
2.8
3.7
18.5
9.4
6.2
10.7
1.8
6.0
17.1
3.6
3.9
1.4
11.5
8.8
2.0
10.6
6.4
9.9
8.6
5.7
1.1
1.6
6.2
3.5
10.5
8.6
7.7
9.5
10.2
3.1
9.3
30.1
7.9
5.4
3.8
1.4
11.2
0.7
8.2
0.8
0.9
7.8
6.0
54.6
4.2
10.8
13.8
6.8
10.1
7.1
7.1
7.9
5.7
6.1
2.6
3.4
3.0
8.6
6.3
27.3
8.8
19.7
4.2
5.6
1.0
4.2w
0.6
3.0
12.7
8.5
11.1

2005
0.34
0.54
1.42
0.29
0.23
0.42
1.26
0.17
2.08
0.22
19.06
0.23
0.44
0.18
0.56
0.21
1.46
3.06
0.36
0.22
4.33
1.31
1.62
0.37
0.16
0.23
1.71
4.57
0.58
0.28
1.69
0.29
0.18
0.52
1.48
0.16
0.69
0.36
0.14
0.45
0.29
1.11
0.24
0.16
0.34
5.81
1.21
0.19
0.16
0.14
1.25
1.29
0.19
0.17
0.18
0.81
0.82
0.16
1.12
0.42
2.01
22.00
0.41
0.56
0.31

2.66
47.59
49.75
12.32
48.77

100.00w

2005
2.63
2.24
3.12
2.27
2.26
1.81
1.54
2.30
2.02
1.99
2.94
2.12
2.61
2.43
2.43
1.61
1.41
2.36
3.08
2.07
2.14
1.98
2.73
3.31
2.89
2.83
2.44
2.30
2.73
3.42
2.11
2.71
2.65
2.09
2.22
3.08
2.22
0.92
1.15
1.55
1.76
3.19
2.32
2.71
2.37
2.35
2.28
3.13
1.39
2.03
2.59
2.36
0.98
1.67
2.62
2.13
2.56
2.51
2.07
2.45
2.27
2.49
2.34
2.48
1.58
2.35w
1.26
2.49
2.32
2.11
2.33

 

Selected indicators 

363

Table A2    Land-based emissions
Table  A2a  CO2 emissions from deforestation

Annual average

Total emissions

Per capita

Average share of total

Metric tons (millions)

Rank

1990–2005a

1990–2005a

Metric tons

1990–2005a

Rank

1990–2005a

%

1990–2005a

Argentina
Bolivia
Brazil
Cambodia
Cameroon
Canada
China
Congo, Dem. Rep. of
Ecuador
Guatemala
Honduras
Indonesia
Malaysia
Mexico
Myanmar
Nigeria
Papua New Guinea
Peru
Philippines
Russian Federation
Tanzania
Turkey
Venezuela, R. B. de
Zambia
Zimbabwe
a. Data are an average for the period 1990–2005.

33
139
1,830
84
70
70
57
176
84
62
48
1,459
139
40
158
158
44
70
70
58
51
34
187
106
40

25
7
1
10
12
12
18
4
10
16
20
2
7
23
5
5
21
12
12
17
19
24
3
9
22

0.9
15.2
9.8
6.0
3.9
2.2
0.0
3.0
6.5
4.9
7.0
6.6
5.4
0.4
3.3
1.1
7.2
2.6
0.8
0.4
1.3
0.5
7.0
9.3
3.1

48
1
5
13
18
29
83
24
12
17
10
11
15
63
20
40
8
27
50
61
35
58
9
6
22

0.6
2.5
32.4
1.5
1.2
1.2
1.0
3.1
1.5
1.1
0.8
25.9
2.5
0.7
2.8
2.8
0.8
1.2
1.2
1.0
0.9
0.6
3.3
1.9
0.7

Table  A2b  Non-CO2 emissions (Methane (CH4), Nitrous Oxide (N2O)) from agriculture

Annual total

Share of total

Per capita

Metric tons of CO2 equivalent (millions)

Argentina
Australia
Bangladesh
Bolivia
Brazil
Canada
China
Colombia
Congo, Dem. Rep. of
Ethiopia
France
Germany
India
Indonesia
Mexico
Myanmar
Nigeria
Pakistan
Russian Federation
Thailand
Turkey
United Kingdom
United States
Venezuela, R. B. de
Vietnam

1990
114
97
60
22
426
57
905
61
36
39
110
110
330
106
67
50
75
58
222
79
80
54
427
47
48

2005
139
110
80
46
591
73
1,113
89
75
55
103
84
403
132
77
78
115
79
118
89
76
48
442
52
65

%

2005
2.3
1.8
1.3
0.8
9.7
1.2
18.3
1.5
1.2
0.9
1.7
1.4
6.6
2.2
1.3
1.3
1.9
1.3
1.9
1.5
1.3
0.8
7.3
0.9
1.1

Metric tons of CO2 equivalent

Rank

1990
3.5
5.7
0.5
3.3
2.9
2.1
0.8
1.8
0.9
0.8
1.9
1.4
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.2
0.8
0.5
1.5
1.4
1.4
0.9
1.7
2.4
0.7

2005
3.6
5.4
0.5
5.0
3.2
2.3
0.9
2.1
1.3
0.7
1.7
1.0
0.4
0.6
0.7
1.6
0.8
0.5
0.8
1.4
1.1
0.8
1.5
1.9
0.8

1990
6
4
77
7
8
15
62
19
53
60
18
32
84
73
61
38
63
76
25
27
29
57
20
11
67

2005
7
4
70
5
8
10
48
11
21
58
15
37
83
66
57
16
52
73
50
18
31
54
17
12
55

364 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 0

Table A3    Total primary energy supply

Total primary energy supply (TPES)

Electricity consumption

Share of fossil fuels in TPES

Annual total

Tons of oil equivalent 

(millions)

1990
2.7
23.9
6.3
46.1
7.9
87.7
25.1
26.1
4.8
12.8
42.3
49.7
1.7
2.8
7.0
1.3
140.0
1.8
28.8
0.0
5.0
209.5
14.1
863.2
10.7
24.7
11.9
0.8
2.0
4.4
9.1
16.8
1.6
49.0
17.9
4.1
6.1
32.0
2.5
..
9.6
15.0
28.7
227.6
1.2
12.3
355.6
5.3
22.2
4.5
1.6
2.4
28.6
2.2
319.9
102.8
68.8
19.1
10.3
12.1
148.1
2.9
443.9
3.5
73.6
11.2
33.2
93.4
8.0
7.6
7.9
2.3
11.5
16.2
3.5

2006
2.3
36.7
10.3
69.1
2.6
122.5
34.2
14.1
8.8
25.0
28.6
61.0
2.8
5.8
5.4
2.0
224.1
2.8
20.7
5.0
7.1
269.7
29.8
1,878.7
18.2
30.2
17.5
1.2
4.6
7.3
9.0
10.6
2.6
46.1
20.9
7.8
11.2
62.5
4.7
0.7
4.9
22.3
37.4
272.7
1.8
3.3
348.6
9.5
31.1
8.2
2.6
4.3
27.6
4.3
565.8
179.1
170.9
32.0
15.5
21.3
184.2
4.6
527.6
7.2
61.4
17.9
21.7
216.5
25.3
2.8
4.6
4.8
17.8
8.5
4.7

Coal

2006
1.1
1.9
0.0
1.1
0.0
43.9
11.8
0.0
0.0
1.4
0.1
7.8
0.0
0.0
62.4
32.5
5.7
0.0
34.1
0.0
0.0
10.2
13.3
64.2
38.6
8.2
1.5
0.0
0.9
0.0
7.0
0.2
1.4
45.2
26.2
6.4
0.0
1.4
0.0
0.0
57.0
0.0
13.7
4.8
0.0
0.3
23.6
0.0
27.0
4.8
0.0
2.7
11.1
1.8
39.4
15.5
0.7
0.0
11.0
36.0
9.1
0.5
21.3
0.0
49.3
0.4
86.9
24.3
0.0
18.3
1.8
2.8
0.0
3.1
2.3

% of total

Natural 

gas

2006
0.6
65.2
6.4
49.3
53.1
19.1
21.8
63.5
75.4
46.6
60.3
24.6
0.0
27.5
5.9
0.0
7.8
73.1
14.0
0.0
0.0
29.5
21.9
2.5
13.2
20.3
0.0
1.6
0.0
18.8
26.2
8.3
0.0
16.4
21.7
3.5
5.0
44.4
0.0
0.0
16.5
0.0
10.4
14.5
5.8
41.3
22.8
0.0
8.8
0.0
0.0
0.0
41.5
0.0
5.5
18.6
51.5
8.9
26.0
8.8
37.6
0.0
14.7
28.0
30.6
0.0
0.0
13.3
38.3
22.9
30.5
0.0
29.4
28.7
26.2

Oil

2006
66.8
32.6
27.5
38.0
15.2
31.6
42.0
34.4
24.6
17.8
31.5
40.1
37.1
55.5
22.3
36.6
40.2
26.9
24.7
28.4
16.3
35.3
38.3
18.3
44.9
45.0
3.1
35.2
47.6
16.9
51.5
79.5
96.4
21.4
39.4
70.4
83.2
50.0
44.0
26.9
15.1
8.8
28.2
33.3
33.4
23.5
35.4
31.7
57.3
39.7
23.3
50.6
27.6
22.9
24.1
33.0
46.3
90.5
54.8
52.4
44.1
88.7
45.6
70.0
18.8
20.2
3.3
43.2
61.7
20.8
31.9
91.5
69.7
30.3
63.3

Share of renewable energy 

in TPES

% of total

Share of 
nuclear in 

TPES

Per capita

Electrification 

rate

Hydro, solar, 
wind, and 
geothermal

Biomass 
and waste % of total

kilowatt-

hours

2006
19.1
0.1
2.2
4.7
6.1
1.3
9.6
1.5
0.0
0.5
0.0
0.1
0.0
3.2
9.3
0.0
13.4
0.0
1.9
0.1
4.5
11.4
9.9
2.2
0.0
12.2
3.9
2.7
35.8
1.8
5.8
0.1
1.7
0.5
2.6
1.5
5.5
1.9
24.4
0.0
0.2
1.3
2.7
1.9
4.5
14.0
1.4
5.1
2.5
4.0
0.9
5.1
0.4
75.3
1.9
3.7
0.9
0.1
1.3
3.4
4.6
0.3
2.1
1.4
1.1
5.9
5.0
0.2
0.0
45.5
5.1
1.4
0.0
0.4
0.4

2006
10.1
0.2
63.9
3.7
0.0
4.1
13.1
0.0
0.0
33.7
4.9
5.9
61.1
13.8
3.4
23.2
29.6
0.0
3.9
71.3
79.2
4.7
15.9
12.0
0.3
14.9
92.4
57.5
15.5
63.8
4.1
11.9
0.5
4.0
12.9
18.0
5.2
2.3
31.6
73.1
10.7
90.0
20.4
4.4
56.4
19.3
4.6
63.3
3.3
51.6
75.8
41.5
4.3
0.1
28.3
29.2
0.5
0.1
1.4
0.0
2.6
10.5
1.3
0.0
0.1
73.6
4.8
1.1
0.0
0.1
25.9
2.7
0.9
8.8
1.3

2006
0.0
0.0
0.0
2.9
26.6
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
19.9
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.6
0.0
24.6
0.0
0.0
9.5
0.0
0.8
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
14.8
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
15.9
43.0
0.0
0.0
12.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
12.8
0.0
0.9
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
15.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
17.9
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
27.0
0.0

2006
961
870
153
2,620
1,612
11,309
8,090
2,514
12,627
146
3,322
8,688
69
485
2,295
1,419
2,060
8,173
4,315
88
186
16,766
3,207
2,040
5,883
923
96
155
1,801
182
3,635
1,231
5,746
6,511
6,864
1,309
759
1,382
721
49
5,890
38
17,178
7,585
1,083
1,549
7,175
304
5,372
529
37
642
3,883
31,306
503
530
2,290
1,161
6,500
6,893
5,762
2,450
8,220
1,904
4,293
145
797
8,063
16,314
2,015
2,876
2,142
3,688
3,232
16,402

% change % of population

1990–2006a

2000–2006b

84.0
60.6
155.5
100.7
–40.7
34.6
32.5
–2.7
92.1
221.2
–24.2
36.2
104.5
76.9
–24.6
96.0
41.5
87.7
–9.3
..
–3.1
3.8
157.3
299.1
40.8
11.6
–19.9
–8.2
65.7
21.3
21.5
1.6
78.9
16.6
15.5
242.1
58.5
100.2
95.9
..
0.0
91.5
37.6
26.9
13.9
–42.1
8.0
–1.1
69.0
136.8
–36.2
72.2
13.2
94.0
82.3
228.3
134.9
–7.6
72.1
65.1
39.0
178.8
26.7
81.2
–27.3
16.3
–36.1
239.8
101.2
–12.9
–15.1
354.9
130.1
–19.7
20.1

..
98
15
95
..
100
100
..
99
32
..
100
22
64
..
39
97
99
..
20
47
100
99
99
..
86
6
20
99
..
..
96
..
..
100
93
90
98
80
20
..
15
100
100
48
..
100
49
100
79
36
62
..
100
56
54
97
15
100
97
100
87
100
100
..
14
22
100
100
..
..
100
97
..
100

Albania
Algeria
Angola
Argentina
Armenia
Australia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Belarus
Belgium
Benin
Bolivia
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Botswana
Brazil
Brunei Darussalam
Bulgaria
Cambodia
Cameroon
Canada
Chile
China
   Hong Kong, China
Colombia
Congo, Dem. Rep. of
Congo, Rep. of
Costa Rica
Côte d’Ivoire
Croatia
Cuba
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt, Arab Rep. of
El Salvador
Eritrea
Estonia
Ethiopia
Finland
France
Gabon
Georgia
Germany
Ghana
Greece
Guatemala
Haiti
Honduras
Hungary
Iceland
India
Indonesia
Iran, Islamic Rep. of
Iraq
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Jamaica
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kenya
Korea, Dem. Rep. of
Korea, Rep.
Kuwait
Kyrgyz Republic
Latvia
Lebanon
Libya
Lithuania
Luxembourg

 

Selected indicators 

365

Total primary energy supply (TPES)

Electricity consumption

Share of fossil fuels in TPES

Share of renewable energy 

in TPES

Annual total

% of total

% of total

Share of 
nuclear in 

TPES

Per capita

Electrification 

rate

Tons of oil equivalent 

(millions)

Coal

Natural 

gas

Oil

Hydro, solar, 
wind, and 
geothermal

Biomass 
and waste % of total

kilowatt-

hours

2006
6.0
4.1
0.0
4.6
2.2
3.8
3.2
81.6
72.1
12.7
86.2
3.3
0.0
6.0
52.2
79.6
5.1
0.0
34.9
17.4
52.0
17.4
26.1
5.5
11.9
0.0
8.1
1.1
0.0
39.6
4.7
0.0
2.6
6.5
10.5
3.6
54.3
77.5
18.4
7.2
0.0
0.0
91.0
16.6
84.5
0.2
13.3
5.5
0.0
0.4
0.0
1.7
3.4
14.9
0.0
0.9
46.4
1.1
78.2
63.3
9.8w
53.8
12.3
3.4
5.0
3.8

2006
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.6
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.8
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
3.7
6.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
25.4
19.9
2.4
10.8
0.0
0.0
34.0
25.8
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
17.1
0.0
8.5
9.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
6.3w
0.1
2.0
11.0
15.1
11.1

2006
3,496
3,388
4,975
1,993
1,516
1,297
685
461
93
1,545
80
7,057
5,651
9,746
426
116
24,295
4,457
480
1,506
900
899
578
3,586
4,799
17,188
2,401
6,122
7,079
150
4,026
8,363
5,136
7,123
4,810
6,213
400
95
15,230
8,279
1,466
2,241
59
2,080
98
5,008
1,221
2,053
2,123
3,400
14,569
6,192
13,515
2,042
1,691
3,175
598
190
730
900

2,750w

311
1,647
9,675
7,058
8,413

% change % of population

1990–2006a

2000–2006b

25.3
187.5
79.1
50.3
–44.4
–19.1
85.8
1,040.4
104.5
..
129.2
35.2
59.2
14.5
44.7
32.6
4.0
107.3
73.6
76.4
78.4
64.1
60.7
9.3
89.0
75.7
–17.9
–8.3
77.8
52.3
13.9
72.1
–7.3
39.9
8.5
76.3
159.5
91.5
–3.8
11.7
117.6
–33.0
15.0
181.4
12.6
87.0
91.2
130.2
–7.4
–29.0
66.2
15.6
15.6
63.9
–29.1
28.9
511.2
58.9
–3.2
4.5
29.6w
18.7
58.2
27.5
25.5
24.4

..
98
..
..
..
65
85
6
11
34
33
100
..
100
69
46
100
96
54
85
86
72
81
..
100
71
..
..
97
33
..
100
..
..
70
100
66
30
100
100
90
..
11
99
17
99
99
..
..
..
92
100
100
95
..
99
84
36
19
34
..
..
..
..
..
..

Macedonia, FYR
Malaysia
Malta
Mexico
Moldova
Mongolia
Morocco
Mozambique
Myanmar
Namibia
Nepal
Netherlands
Netherlands Antilles
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Nigeria
Norway
Oman
Pakistan
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Qatar
Romania
Russian Federation
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Serbia
Singapore
Slovak Republic
Slovenia
South Africa
Spain
Sri Lanka
Sudan
Sweden
Switzerland
Syrian Arab Republic
Tajikistan
Tanzania
Thailand
Togo
Trinidad and Tobago
Tunisia
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Ukraine
United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom
United States
Uruguay
Uzbekistan
Venezuela, R. B. de
Vietnam
Yemen, Rep. of
Zambia
Zimbabwe
World
Low income 
Middle income
High income
European Union 15
OECD
a. Denotes percent change in value of the variable within the given period.  b. Data are for the most recent year available.

2006
2.8
68.3
0.9
177.4
3.4
2.8
14.0
8.8
14.3
1.5
9.4
80.1
1.7
17.5
3.5
105.1
26.1
15.4
79.3
2.8
4.0
13.6
43.0
97.7
25.4
18.1
40.1
676.2
146.1
3.0
17.1
30.7
18.7
7.3
129.8
144.6
9.4
17.7
51.3
28.2
18.9
3.6
20.8
103.4
2.4
14.3
8.7
94.0
17.3
137.4
46.9
231.1
2,320.7
3.2
48.5
62.2
52.3
7.1
7.3
9.6
11,525.2t
575.5
5,348.7
5,659.1
1,542.8
5,537.4

1990
2.7
23.3
0.8
123.0
9.9
3.4
7.2
6.0
10.7
..
5.8
67.1
1.5
13.8
2.1
70.9
21.4
4.6
43.4
1.5
3.1
10.0
26.2
99.9
17.2
6.5
62.5
878.9
61.3
1.8
19.5
13.4
21.3
5.6
91.2
91.2
5.5
10.7
47.6
24.8
11.7
5.6
9.8
43.9
1.3
6.0
5.1
52.9
19.6
253.8
23.2
212.3
1,926.3
2.3
46.4
43.9
24.3
2.6
5.5
9.4
8,637.3t
400.2
3,797.2
4,479.4
1,324.2
4,521.8

2006
5.5
0.9
0.0
4.8
0.2
0.0
1.1
14.4
2.0
8.8
2.4
0.3
0.0
24.0
8.7
0.6
39.6
0.0
3.5
11.1
116.5
14.0
22.9
0.2
5.1
0.0
4.0
2.3
0.0
0.7
5.5
0.0
2.1
4.3
0.3
3.0
4.2
0.7
10.5
10.1
1.8
39.1
0.6
0.7
0.3
0.0
0.1
5.5
0.0
0.8
0.0
0.3
1.6
9.7
1.1
11.0
3.9
0.0
11.0
5.0
2.8w
3.1
3.2
2.5
2.4
2.8

2006
35.0
38.8
100.0
56.8
19.4
24.0
63.3
6.6
12.7
65.4
8.6
40.4
100.0
39.4
39.0
11.2
34.0
32.4
23.9
71.7
30.5
50.3
31.8
24.1
53.8
17.8
25.3
20.6
63.3
55.7
27.5
79.0
18.3
36.5
12.4
49.0
40.7
21.8
28.5
46.0
71.2
44.7
6.6
44.4
13.4
12.1
47.2
33.4
29.4
10.8
28.0
36.3
40.4
64.6
10.9
50.6
23.4
98.9
9.7
7.1
35.7w
7.8
29.9
43.7
40.9
39.7

2006
45.4
12.0
0.0
4.9
2.5
71.7
27.8
0.0
0.8
1.9
2.7
9.7
0.0
11.9
0.0
0.0
2.7
0.0
5.4
0.0
0.0
5.9
13.4
58.5
13.0
0.0
23.5
15.7
0.0
3.4
51.0
0.0
23.9
20.3
71.7
12.4
0.7
0.0
4.7
0.6
0.0
1.3
0.2
12.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
28.1
0.0
29.1
0.0
17.9
23.7
0.1
2.2
0.1
16.8
0.0
1.4
22.2
26.6w
7.3
35.8
13.9
20.5
20.5

2006
2.4
44.4
0.0
27.4
66.7
0.0
3.4
0.3
12.4
0.0
0.0
42.7
0.0
18.7
0.0
8.6
18.2
67.6
31.6
0.0
0.0
12.3
5.8
12.7
14.3
82.2
36.4
53.0
36.7
0.3
11.7
20.9
28.8
12.4
2.9
21.5
0.0
0.0
1.7
9.6
27.0
13.4
1.5
25.8
0.0
87.7
39.4
27.6
71.3
42.4
72.0
35.1
21.6
3.2
85.8
37.6
9.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
21.0w
19.1
19.2
22.9
24.5
21.9

366 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 0

Table A4    Natural disasters

Mortality

People affected

Economic losses

Droughts

Floods and 

storms

Droughts

Floods and 

storms

Share of 
population Droughts

Floods and 

storms

Largest per 
event loss

Coastline

Population in 
low-elevation 
coastal zones

Area in  

low-elevation 
coastal zones

Number of people

Number of people 

(thousands)

%

$ (thousands)

% of GDP

kilometers

%

%

1971–2008a

1971–2008a 1971–2008a 1971–2008a 1971–2008a 1971–2008a 1971–2008a 1961–2008b

2000
0.3
Angola
1.9
Argentina
1.6
Australia
93.2
Bahamas, The
40.0
Bangladesh
15.6
Belize
1.6
Benin
0.0
Bolivia
1.4
Brazil
7.4
Cambodia
0.0
Chad
2.0
China
3.5
Costa Rica
21.1
Cuba
0.0
Czech Republic
1.9
Djibouti
4.5
Dominica
4.7
Dominican Republic
3.2
Ecuador
0.0
Ethiopia
10.6
Fiji
2.2
Georgia
1.0
Ghana
6.5
Grenada
2.1
Guatemala
3.7
Guyana
5.1
Haiti
5.6
Honduras
2.5
India
9.3
Indonesia
1.6
Iran, Islamic Rep. of
6.3
Italy
6.9
Jamaica
0.0
Jordan
0.4
Kenya
3.8
Korea, Dem. Rep. of
5.0
Korea, Rep. of
0.0
Lao PDR
1.6
Lebanon
2.7
Madagascar
0.0
Malawi
6.2
Malaysia
6.1
Mauritius
0.0
Mongolia
3.2
Mozambique
0.0
Nepal
6.2
Nicaragua
0.0
Niger
2.8
Pakistan
0.5
Peru
7.7
Philippines
10.8
Puerto Rico
1.7
Russian Federation
8.4
Samoa
7.5
Senegal
0.1
South Africa
1.3
Spain
8.3
Sri Lanka
4.1
St. Lucia
0.1
Sudan
0.0
Swaziland
0.0
Tajikistan
0.3
Tanzania
6.9
Thailand
3.3
Tunisia
2.6
United States
7.4
Vanuatu
3.6
Venezuela, R. B. de
20.2
Vietnam
Zimbabwe
0.0
a. Denotes annual average values for variables during the period 1971–2008.  b. Denotes largest per-event loss in the period 1961–2008.  c. Data prior to 1990 are based on detailed EM-DAT 
disaster information in Yugoslavia, Czechoslovakia, and the Soviet Union.

263
229,348
390,461
67,116
445,576
14,862
214
43,050
157,849
8,634
30
4,791,624
19,668
287,436
122,263c
151
7,412
71,240
40,972
424
18,078
15,259
882
23,803
48,434
16,692
21,707
130,421
1,055,375
62,572
202,133
597,289
68,304
26
588
622,156
391,754
8,657
4,342
55,337
837
28,039
16,352
2,376
22,846
25,804
46,256
295
120,942
1,916
164,362
82,789
147,461c
13,858
1,168
50,502
245,471
12,049
29,731
14,505
1,426
12,037c
179
132,709
8,889
12,104,146
5,395
84,697
157,603
7,308

0
3,158
262,447
0
0
0
17
25,411
124,289
3,632
2,184
522,350
632
4,819
0c
0
0
0
0
2,411
789
5,263
3
0
632
763
0
447
61,608
4,216
86,842
21,053
158
0
39
0
0
26
0
0
0
0
4,605
0
1,316
263
474
0
6,500
7,526
1,696
53
0c
0
9,863
26,316
280,526
0
0
0
46
1,500c
0
11,166
0
187,763
0
0
17,082
67,105

2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
93
0
0
0c
0
0
0
0
10,536
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
8
35
0
0
0
0
5
0
0
0
0
5
13
0
0
0
2,633
0
0
0
4
0
0
0
0c
0
0
0
0
0
0
3,947
13
0c
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

18
355
108
1
8,751
8
56
62
384
251
18
53,460
39
331
8c
18
3
111
43
59
26
1
94
2
24
12
131
109
22,314
206
101
2
56
0
56
314
76
123
3
231
50
15
26
53
328
87
53
10
1,163
75
2,743
5
58c
7
18
22
21
282
2
155
24
19c

22
929
7
672
6
20
1,749
9

2008
1,600
4,989
25,760
3,542
580
386
121
0
7,491
443
0
14,500
1,290
3,735
0
314
148
1,288
2,237
0
1,129
310
539
121
400
459
1,771
820
7,000
54,716
2,440
7,600
1,022
26
536
2,495
2,413
0
225
4,828
0
4,675
177
0
2,470
0
910
0
1,046
2,414
36,289
501
37,653
403
531
2,798
4,964
1,340
158
853
0
0
1,424
3,219
1,148
19,924
2,528
2,800
3,444
0

..
0.8
3.2
9.8
9.8
200.2
..
18.7
1.2
9.2
..
2.9
2.4
..
3.2
..
100.8
36.4
3.3
..
17.1
26.8
4.5
205.1
3.9
56.3
62.6
72.9
2.5
9.3
3.5
2.7
26.1
7.5
..
..
1.2
22.8
2.8
14.8
..
0.9
21.3
145.3
9.9
24.6
27.7
..
10.5
5.2
11.0
3.2
6.9
248.4
13.6
0.7
2.4
3.7
365.0
1.1
10.7
15.7
..
..
7.8
1.0
139.9
3.3
..
29.3

7
13
10
1
5,673
2
3
22
102
30
8
1,304
5
6
2c
6
1
75
21
51
8
3
7
1
73
1
225
621
2,489
182
102
8
7
1
23
49
116
5
1
54
16
12
1
5
65
137
105
3
273
55
743
15
32c
1
6
34
22
45
2
19
1
39c
15
95
8
272
3
801
393
4

69
0
186
0
658
0
58
92
993
172
62
9,642
0
22
0c
26
0
0
1
1,361
8
18
329
0
5
16
55
19
25,294
121
974
0
0
9
960
0
0
112
0
74
518
0
0
12
455
121
15
335
58
87
172
0
26c
0
199
460
158
165
0
611
43
100c
210
618
1
0
0
0
161
365

2.2
1.1
4.8
0.2
9.1
3.6
5.3
2.4
1.4
5.8
6.0
5.2
1.0
3.1
0.1c
8.5
3.5
1.6
0.5
6.6
4.8
0.8
8.1
1.6
0.2
5.7
2.8
2.9
7.2
0.3
4.8
0.1
2.4
0.2
9.7
1.4
0.2
6.3
0.1
3.6
12.3
0.1
2.9
3.7
13.8
2.0
1.4
13.2
1.3
0.7
4.5
0.1
0.1c
4.6
11.3
1.1
2.5
3.1
1.9
6.0
18.3
2.9c
2.0
2.2
0.1
0.1
4.4
0.1
3.0
10.7

2000
5.3
10.9
12.1
87.6
45.6
40.3
21.0
0.0
6.7
23.9
0.0
11.4
2.4
13.3
0.0
40.6
6.7
3.3
14.0
0.0
17.6
6.2
3.7
6.4
1.4
54.6
9.2
4.6
6.3
19.6
2.1
9.3
7.9
0.0
0.9
10.2
6.2
0.0
13.7
5.5
0.0
23.5
9.4
0.0
11.8
0.0
2.1
0.0
2.9
1.8
17.7
18.4
2.4
23.6
31.5
1.0
7.7
11.8
4.3
0.6
0.0
0.0
2.3
26.3
14.8
8.1
4.5
6.8
55.1
0.0

 

Selected indicators 

367

Table A5    Land, water, and agriculture

Arable land

hectares 
(millions)

Share  

irrigated land

Aquaculture 
production

Change in 
temperature

Change in heat 
wave duration

Precipitation

Precipitation 

intensity

Agricultural 

output

Agricultural 

yield

% of cropland

$ (millions)

°C

number  
of days

% change

% change

Projected physical impacts by 2050

Projected agricultural impacts

Algeria
Argentina
Australia
Bangladesh
Belarus
Bolivia
Brazil
Bulgaria
Burkina Faso
Cambodia
Cameroon
Canada
Chile
China
Colombia
Congo, Dem. Rep. of
Côte d’Ivoire
Cuba
Czech Republic
Denmark
Egypt, Arab Rep. of
Ethiopia
Finland
France
Germany
Ghana
Greece
Hungary
India
Indonesia
Iran, Islamic Rep. of
Iraq
Italy
Japan
Kazakhstan
Kenya
Korea, Dem. Rep. of
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mexico
Morocco
Mozambique
Myanmar
Nepal
Niger
Nigeria
Pakistan
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Romania
Russian Federation
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
South Africa
Spain
Sudan
Sweden
Syrian Arab Republic
Tanzania
Thailand
Togo
Turkey
Uganda
Ukraine
United Kingdom
United States
Uzbekistan
Venezuela, R. B. de
Vietnam
Zambia
Zimbabwe
a. Denotes percentage change in the value of the variable within the given period.

2007
0.9
16.7
478.8
1,522.6
1.8
2.0
598.0
18.2
0.9
7.6
0.8
788.2
5,314.5
44,935.2
277.2
7.4
2.2
35.0
49.5
11.4
1,192.6
..
63.8
757.2
191.1
2.5
533.3
4.6
4,383.5
2,854.9
451.1
35.8
757.4
4,279.9
0.9
6.3
32.6
47.5
3.6
0.6
535.5
6.9
4.6
1,862.4
43.7
0.9
24.8
214.2
271.8
1,371.4
15.0
22.5
326.1
186.4
0.2
33.3
384.2
3.8
21.4
24.8
0.1
2,432.8
12.0
64.6
115.7
76.9
927.9
944.6
2.4
65.8
4,544.8
8.7
5.1

2005
7.5
28.5
49.4
8.0
5.5
3.1
59.0
3.2
4.8
3.7
6.0
45.7
2.0
143.3
2.0
6.7
3.5
3.7
3.0
2.2
3.0
13.1
2.2
18.5
11.9
4.2
2.6
4.6
159.7
23.0
16.5
5.8
7.7
4.4
22.4
5.3
2.8
3.0
2.6
4.8
25.0
8.5
4.4
10.1
2.4
14.5
32.0
21.3
3.7
5.7
12.1
9.3
121.8
3.5
2.6
14.8
13.7
19.4
2.7
4.9
9.2
14.2
2.5
23.8
5.4
32.5
5.7
174.4
4.7
2.7
6.6
5.3
3.2

2003
6.9
..
5.0
56.1
2.0
4.1
4.4
16.6
0.5
7.0
0.4
1.5
81.0
35.6
24.0
0.1
1.1
19.5
0.7
9.0
100.0
2.5
2.9
13.3
4.0
0.5
37.9
3.1
32.9
12.4
47.0
58.6
25.8
35.1
15.7
1.8
50.3
30.6
2.2
4.9
22.8
15.4
2.6
17.0
47.1
0.5
0.8
82.0
27.8
14.5
..
5.8
3.7
42.7
4.8
9.5
20.3
10.2
4.3
24.3
1.8
28.2
0.3
20.0
0.1
6.6
3.0
12.5
84.9
16.9
33.7
2.9
5.2

2000–2050

2000–2050

2000–2050a

2000–2050a

2000–2080a

2000–2050a

1.9
1.2
1.5
1.4
1.7
1.6
1.5
1.7
1.4
1.2
1.3
2.1
1.2
1.7
1.4
1.4
1.3
1.1
1.7
1.4
1.6
1.4
2.1
1.5
1.5
1.3
1.7
1.9
1.6
1.2
1.8
1.8
1.5
1.4
1.8
1.2
1.7
1.2
1.4
1.7
1.6
2.1
1.3
1.3
1.7
1.6
1.3
1.8
1.5
1.2
1.7
1.7
2.2
1.8
1.6
1.5
1.6
1.6
1.8
1.7
1.3
1.2
1.3
1.7
1.3
1.7
1.1
1.8
1.7
1.6
1.2
1.5
1.5

22.2
5.9
10.9
8.7
28.8
16.4
13.5
27.2
5.7
4.0
2.0
28.2
4.9
16.1
4.0
2.0
1.9
2.0
20.3
11.0
14.7
3.1
29.6
12.3
14.8
1.3
16.0
25.0
10.8
0.4
19.9
22.3
12.3
4.0
28.5
2.5
10.0
2.1
7.5
16.1
16.8
21.1
5.9
8.6
21.8
16.1
4.1
19.8
5.0
1.3
21.6
28.9
29.5
13.9
6.0
9.5
15.2
9.5
22.0
23.4
2.3
8.1
1.5
24.3
1.7
28.5
5.1
24.4
21.5
10.3
7.3
8.1
12.3

–4.9
0.7
–1.4
1.4
2.7
–0.9
–2.0
–4.3
0.3
3.3
0.9
8.5
–3.5
4.5
1.2
0.8
–0.3
–12.0
0.3
5.0
–7.0
2.4
5.6
–3.5
2.4
–1.0
–10.9
–1.3
1.9
1.8
–15.6
–13.3
–7.0
0.5
5.6
7.5
6.0
–4.1
–0.1
8.4
–7.2
–16.8
–2.7
1.9
3.6
5.6
0.6
–3.0
1.2
2.1
1.8
–4.2
8.8
–10.5
–1.9
–4.5
–11.9
–0.6
5.1
–13.6
4.4
2.7
–2.0
–10.2
3.4
–0.7
2.5
2.7
–0.1
–6.4
3.6
0.6
–3.7

7.2
3.5
2.1
5.4
4.9
2.5
3.0
3.0
0.0
1.7
3.0
4.9
1.2
5.4
2.4
3.1
–0.2
–0.9
4.6
5.8
–1.6
5.0
4.4
3.2
5.0
0.8
1.8
6.5
2.7
2.5
4.2
6.1
4.6
3.8
5.0
8.0
7.0
1.1
2.4
3.8
1.6
5.3
1.4
3.7
4.9
2.5
1.1
3.5
3.3
1.7
4.4
5.3
5.5
1.8
3.1
1.4
0.9
–0.1
5.3
3.7
6.0
2.2
–0.5
1.0
6.6
4.0
3.7
4.0
3.4
1.1
1.7
3.9
4.8

–36.0
–11.1
–26.6
–21.7
..
..
–16.9
..
–24.3
–27.1
–20.0
–2.2
–24.4
–7.2
–23.2
–14.7
–14.3
–39.3
..
..
11.3
–31.3
..
–6.7
–2.9
–14.0
–7.8
..
–38.1
–17.9
–28.9
–41.4
–7.4
–5.7
11.4
–5.5
–7.3
–26.2
–31.3
–35.6
–35.4
–39.0
–21.7
–39.3
–17.3
–34.1
–18.5
–30.4
–30.6
–23.4
–4.7
–6.6
–7.7
–21.9
–51.9
–33.4
–8.9
–56.1
..
–27.0
–24.2
–26.2
..
–16.2
–16.8
–5.2
–3.9
–5.9
–12.1
–31.9
–15.1
–39.6
–37.9

–6.7
–13.8
–16.4
8.9
29.6
–13.7
–16.1
–7.0
–4.4
–19.3
–6.6
19.5
47.7
8.4
–3.3
–7.0
–12.9
–18.1
14.3
16.1
–27.9
0.5
15.7
–2.6
9.5
–10.1
–3.5
–10.8
–12.2
–17.7
–7.3
–18.5
–2.7
0.6
7.7
6.1
–0.7
–0.5
–3.0
–9.6
–0.5
–25.2
–10.4
–15.4
–10.6
–1.7
–9.9
–32.9
0.6
–14.3
16.7
–8.1
11.0
–28.3
–19.3
–5.2
–1.3
–7.0
19.8
–4.5
–2.0
–15.9
–14.0
–1.0
–5.0
–7.4
3.2
–1.7
–2.8
–9.8
–11.4
1.3
–10.6

368 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 0

Table A6    Wealth of nations

Total wealth

Produced 
capital and 
urban land

Intangible 

capital

Natural 
capital

Pastureland

Cropland

Protected 

areas

Non-timber 

forest 

resources

Timber 
resources

Subsoil 
assets

$ per capita

$ per capita

$ per capita

$ per capita

$ per capita

$ per capita

$ per capita

$ per capita

$ per capita

$ per capita

Algeria
Argentina
Australia
Austria
Bangladesh
Belgium
Bolivia
Brazil
Bulgaria
Burkina Faso
Cameroon
Canada
Chad
Chile
China
Colombia
Côte d’Ivoire
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt, Arab Rep. of
Ethiopia
France
Germany
Ghana
Greece
Guatemala
Haiti
Hungary
India
Indonesia
Iran, Islamic Rep. of
Italy
Japan
Kenya
Korea, Rep. of
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Mali
Mexico
Morocco
Mozambique
Nepal
Netherlands
Niger
Nigeria
Pakistan
Peru
Philippines
Portugal
Romania
Russian Federation
Rwanda
Senegal
South Africa
Spain
Sri Lanka
Sweden
Syrian Arab Republic
Thailand
Tunisia
Turkey
United Kingdom
United States
Venezuela, R. B. de
Zambia
Zimbabwe
World
Low income
Middle income
High income (OECD)

2000
18,491
139,232
371,031
493,080
6,000
451,714
18,141
86,922
25,256
5,087
10,753
324,979
4,458
77,726
9,387
44,660
14,243
33,410
33,745
21,879
1,965
468,024
496,447
10,365
236,972
30,480
8,235
77,072
6,820
13,869
24,023
372,666
493,241
6,609
141,282
5,020
5,200
46,687
5,241
61,872
22,965
4,232
3,802
421,389
3,695
2,748
7,871
39,046
19,351
207,477
29,113
38,709
5,670
10,167
59,629
261,205
14,731
513,424
10,419
35,854
36,537
47,859
408,753
512,612
45,196
6,564
9,612
95,860
7,532
27,616
439,063

2000
8,709
19,111
58,179
73,118
817
60,561
2,110
9,643
5,303
821
1,749
54,226
289
10,688
2,956
4,872
997
5,723
2,841
3,897
177
57,814
68,678
686
28,973
3,098
601
15,480
1,154
2,382
3,336
51,943
150,258
868
31,399
395
542
13,065
621
18,959
3,435
478
609
62,428
286
667
975
5,562
2,673
31,011
8,495
15,593
549
975
7,270
39,531
2,710
58,331
3,292
7,624
6,270
8,580
55,239
79,851
13,627
694
1,377
16,850
1,174
5,347
76,193

2000
–3,418
109,809
288,686
412,789
4,221
388,123
11,248
70,528
16,505
3,047
4,271
235,982
2,307
56,094
4,208
33,241
10,125
24,511
17,788
14,734
992
403,874
423,323
8,343
203,445
24,411
6,840
56,645
3,738
8,015
6,581
316,045
341,470
4,374
107,864
2,944
3,873
24,520
2,463
34,420
17,926
2,695
1,964
352,222
1,434
–1,959
5,529
29,908
15,129
172,837
16,110
5,900
3,055
7,920
48,959
217,300
11,204
447,143
–1,598
24,294
26,328
35,774
346,347
418,009
4,342
4,091
6,704
74,998
4,434
18,773
353,339

2000
13,200
10,312
24,167
7,174
961
3,030
4,783
6,752
3,448
1,219
4,733
34,771
1,861
10,944
2,223
6,547
3,121
3,176
13,117
3,249
796
6,335
4,445
1,336
4,554
2,971
793
4,947
1,928
3,472
14,105
4,678
1,513
1,368
2,020
1,681
785
9,103
2,157
8,493
1,604
1,059
1,229
6,739
1,975
4,040
1,368
3,575
1,549
3,629
4,508
17,217
2,066
1,272
3,400
4,374
817
7,950
8,725
3,936
3,939
3,504
7,167
14,752
27,227
1,779
1,531
4,011
1,925
3,426
9,531

2000
426
2,754
5,590
2,008
52
2,161
541
1,311
1,108
191
179
1,631
316
1,001
146
978
72
386
1,065
0
197
2,091
1,586
43
573
218
112
1,131
192
50
611
1,083
316
529
275
345
45
24
295
721
453
57
111
3,090
187
78
448
341
45
934
1,154
1,342
98
196
637
971
84
1,676
730
96
736
861
1,291
1,665
581
98
258
536
189
407
1,552

2000
859
3,632
4,365
1,298
810
575
1,550
1,998
1,650
547
2,748
2,829
787
2,443
1,404
1,911
2,568
1,980
5,263
1,705
353
2,747
1,176
855
3,424
1,697
668
2,721
1,340
1,245
1,989
2,639
710
361
1,241
955
474
1,369
1,420
1,195
993
261
767
1,035
1,598
1,022
549
1,480
1,308
1,724
1,602
1,262
1,849
608
1,238
2,806
485
1,120
1,255
2,370
1,546
2,270
583
2,752
1,086
477
350
1,496
1,143
1,583
2,008

2000
161
350
1,421
2,410
9
0
232
402
217
100
187
5,756
80
1,095
27
253
11
461
1,057
0
167
1,026
1,113
7
57
181
3
366
122
167
109
543
364
113
441
36
26
161
44
176
7
9
81
527
152
6
94
98
59
385
175
1,317
27
78
51
360
166
1,549
0
855
8
86
495
1,651
1,793
78
70
322
111
129
1,215

2000
16
219
551
144
2
20
1,426
724
102
142
357
1,264
366
231
29
266
102
37
193
0
16
77
39
76
101
57
3
42
14
115
26
51
56
129
30
171
56
188
276
128
24
392
38
7
28
24
4
570
17
107
65
1,228
9
147
46
105
24
908
6
55
12
34
14
238
464
716
341
104
48
120
183

2000
68
105
748
829
4
254
100
609
126
239
348
4,724
311
986
106
134
367
27
335
0
63
307
263
290
82
517
8
152
59
346
0
0
38
235
0
174
184
438
121
199
22
340
233
27
9
270
7
153
90
438
290
292
81
238
310
81
58
2,434
0
92
27
64
44
1,341
0
276
211
252
109
169
747

2000
11,670
3,253
11,491
485
83
20
934
1,708
244
0
914
18,566
0
5,188
511
3,006
2
286
5,205
1,544
0
87
269
65
318
301
0
536
201
1,549
11,370
361
28
1
33
0
0
6,922
0
6,075
106
0
0
2,053
1
2,639
265
934
30
41
1,222
11,777
2
4
1,118
50
0
263
6,734
469
1,610
190
4,739
7,106
23,302
134
301
1,302
325
1,089
3,825

 

Selected indicators 

369

Table A7    Innovation, research, and development

Research and 
development 
expenditure

% of GDP

2005–2006a

per million 

people

2005–2006a

Researchers  

in R&D 

Triadic patent 

families

Knowledge 
Economy Index

Availability 

of latest 

technologies

Firm-level 
technology 
absorption

per million 

people

Index

Index

Index

2008–2009a

2007–2009a

Austria
Belgium
Canada
China
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
India
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Japan
Korea, Rep. of
Kuwait
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia, FYR
Netherlands
New Zealand
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Russian Federation
Singapore
Slovak Republic
Slovenia
South Africa
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Tunisia
Ukraine
United Kingdom
United States
Note: The 40 countries shown in the table were chosen based on availability of data for at least four out of six variables.
a. Data are for the most recent year available.

3,473
3,188
..
..
2,371
5,202
2,478
7,545
3,353
3,359
1,744
1,574
7,287
..
2,797
..
1,407
5,512
3,756
74
2,230
4,877
547
2,477
4,207
4,668
1,627
2,007
3,227
5,497
2,027
2,627
361
2,528
6,095
..
1,450
..
2,995
4,651

2.4
1.9
2.0
1.3
1.4
2.5
0.9
3.5
2.1
2.5
0.5
0.9
2.8
..
1.3
4.5
1.1
3.3
3.0
..
0.8
1.6
0.2
1.7
1.2
1.5
0.1
..
1.1
2.4
0.5
1.5
0.9
1.1
3.9
..
1.0
1.0
1.8
2.6

6.2
6.1
6.2
4.2
5.1
6.5
5.8
6.6
6.2
6.2
4.7
4.7
6.7
5.2
5.5
6.1
4.7
6.2
5.8
5.4
5.0
5.7
3.6
6.2
..
6.4
4.4
5.7
3.9
6.2
5.1
5.1
5.4
5.2
6.6
6.4
5.4
4.2
6.2
6.5

2005
39.7
34.4
24.0
0.3
..
42.2
..
53.0
39.4
76.4
..
4.1
..
0.1
15.0
60.3
12.3
117.2
58.4
..
..
50.5
..
66.9
15.3
25.6
..
..
0.4
24.3
..
..
0.6
4.5
81.0
107.6
..
..
27.4
53.1

2008
8.9
8.7
9.2
4.4
7.8
9.6
8.3
9.4
8.5
8.9
7.4
7.9
8.9
3.1
8.9
8.2
7.9
8.6
7.7
6.0
7.7
8.7
5.3
9.3
8.9
9.3
7.4
7.5
5.4
8.2
7.3
8.3
5.6
8.2
9.5
9.2
4.7
5.8
9.1
9.1

6.2
5.5
5.6
5.1
5.4
6.2
5.5
6.1
5.6
6.0
4.4
4.7
6.6
5.5
5.5
6.0
4.6
6.3
5.8
5.5
5.0
5.5
3.4
5.5
5.5
6.1
4.7
5.4
4.1
6.0
5.4
4.9
5.5
5.0
6.2
6.2
5.4
4.5
5.6
6.3

370 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 0

Definitions and notes
Table A1  Energy-related emissions
Column

Indicator
Carbon dioxide emissions
 

 

1, 2

2, 3

4, 5

6

7

8, 9

annual total  
(million metric tons)

 

 

 

change  
(%)
per capita  
(metric tons)
share of world total  
(%)
cumulative since 1850  
(billion metric tons)

Annual total non-CO2 
emissions  
(million tons of CO2 equivalent)

10, 11

12, 13

Carbon intensity of energy 
(metric tons of CO2 per ton of 
oil equivalent)
Carbon intensity of income 
(metric tons of CO2 per 
thousand PPP $ of GDP)

Table A2  Land-based emissions
Table A2.a  CO2 emissions from deforestation 
Column
1, 2

Indicator
Annual average CO2 emissions 
(million metric tons) and rank

3, 4

5

Per capita CO2 emissions 
(metric tons) and rank

Average share of world total 
(%)

Notes

Total CO2 emissions from the energy sector, including electricity and heat production, manufacturing and 
construction, gas flaring, transportation, and other industries from WRI (2008). Emissions from industrial 
processes (primarily cement production) that amount to approximately 4% of global energy-related 
CO2 emissions are not included. Annual CO2 emissions in 2005 were used to truncate the table to the 65 
economies that account for 96% of annual global CO2 emissions in the energy sector. Aggregates are based 
on full 210-country list.
Percentage change in energy-related CO2 emissions between 1990 (base year) and 2005.

Annual emissions divided by midyear population (World Bank 2009) expressed in tons of CO2 per person.

Share of world’s total energy-related CO2 emissions attributed to a given country, income group, or region.

Cumulative CO2 emissions between 1850 and 2005 from DOE (2009). Sources of emissions include 
combustion of solid, liquid, and gaseous fuels, as well as cement production and gas flaring. For historical 
consistency, data on fuel-production was used rather than fuel consumption. CO2 emissions do not include 
emissions from waste, agriculture, land-use change, or bunker fuels used in international transportation. 
Cumulative emissions are based on data availability—data coverage for the majority of the largest 25 
emitters starts in 1850 and for smaller countries and island nations starts between 1900 and 1950.
Total methane (CH4) and nitrous oxide (N2O) emissions in CO2 equivalent from the energy sector based 
on WRI (2008). This indicator includes emissions from biomass combustion, oil and natural gas systems, 
coal mining and other stationary and mobile sources. CO2 equivalent expresses the quantity of a mixture 
of greenhouse gases in terms of the quantity of CO2 that would produce the same amount of warming as 
would the mixture of gases (see Glossary).
The ratio of carbon dioxide emissions to energy production. This ratio measures the greenness of energy 
production and is expressed in tons of CO2 (WRI 2008) per ton of oil equivalents (IEA 2008a, 2008b). 

The ratio of carbon dioxide emissions to gross domestic product. This measure is an indicator of the 
greenness of the economy and is expressed in tons of CO2 per 1000 PPP dollars of GDP. Emissions are from 
WRI (2008), GDP data is from World Bank (2009).

Notes
CO2 emission estimates due to deforestation are based on Houghton (2009) and are derived from estimates 
of tropical forest cover change by the 2005 UN Forest Resources Assessment (FAO 2005). Estimates of CO2 
emissions from deforestation vary across time and also as a result of uncertain data: There is variation 
among estimates of deforestation rates and estimates of carbon stocks in the forests converted to other 
uses. To account for year-to-year trends and measurement uncertainty, the numbers reported here are 
based on average annual emissions between 1990 and 2005. The 25 largest contributors to CO2 emissions 
from deforestation in 2005, shown in the table, account for approximately 95% of the world total. Net 
deforestation from high-income countries is estimated to be close to zero or slightly negative. The rank is 
based on the average annual emission for the period 1990-2005.
Annual average emissions from deforestation divided by midyear population expressed in tons of CO2 per 
person. Population numbers are from World Bank (2009). The ranking of per capita emissions is based on 
186 countries (see chapter 1, Figure 1.1).
Share of CO2 emissions based on average annual emissions between 1990 and 2005 as a percentage of 
global emissions due to deforestation.

 

Selected indicators 

371

Table A2.b  Non-CO2 emissions from agriculture
Column
1, 2

Indicator
Annual emissions  
(million metric tons of CO2 
equivalent)

3
4–7

Share of world total (%)
Per capita emissions (million 
metric tons of CO2 equivalent) 
and rank

Table A3  Total primary energy supply
Column
1, 2

Indicator
Annual total primary energy 
supply (million metric tons of 
oil equivalent)

3–5

6, 7

8

9, 10

Share of fossil fuels in TPES 
(%)

Share of renewable energy 
in TPES  
(%)

Share of nuclear in TPES  
(%)
Electricity consumption per 
capita  
(kilowatt-hours)

11

Electrification rate  
(%)

Notes
Total methane and nitrous oxide emissions from the agriculture sector measured in CO2 equivalent from 
WRI (2008). CO2 equivalent expresses the quantity of a mixture of greenhouse gases in terms of the quantity 
of CO2 that would produce the same amount of warming as would the mixture of gases (see Glossary). 
Emissions in the agricultural sector result primarily from rice cultivation, agricultural soils, manure 
management and enteric fermentation (belching) from livestock. Consistent with IPCC categories for 
carbon sources and sinks, CO2 associated with fuel combustion in the agricultural sector is included under 
the energy, not the agricultural sector. The 25 largest contributors to agricultural emissions shown in the 
table account for approximately 70 percent of the global total. 
Share of world’s total emissions from the agriculture sector attributed to a given country or a region.
Annual emissions from the agriculture sector divided by midyear population in 1990 and 2005 (World Bank 
2009) expressed in tons of CO2 equivalent per person. Per capita emissions rank is based on the full set of 
more than 200 countries.

Notes
Total primary energy supply (TPES) is a measure of commercial energy consumption. TPES is the sum of 
indigenous production, imports, and stock changes, minus exports and international marine bunkers. A 
lower share of fossil fuels and higher share of renewable sources in TPES is an indicator of countries’ path 
toward a green economy. Data for 135 OECD and non-OECD countries are from IEA (2008a) and IEA (2008b), 
respectively.
Share of total primary energy derived from fossil fuels, including coal, oil, and natural gas. Share of 
coal includes coal and coal products (IEA 2008a, 2008b). Share of oil includes crude, natural gas liquids, 
feedstocks, and petroleum products. Share of natural gas includes natural gas only.
Share of total primary energy derived from hydropower, solar, wind, geothermal, biomass, and waste (IEA 
2008a, 2008b). Biomass, also referred to as traditional fuel, is comprised of animal and plant materials 
(wood, vegetal waste, ethanol, animal materials/wastes, and sulphite lyes). Waste is comprised of 
municipal waste (wastes produced by the residential, commercial, and public service sectors that are 
collected by local authorities for disposal in a central location for the production of heat and/or power) and 
industrial waste.
Share of total energy derived from nuclear power (IEA 2008a, 2008b).

Electricity consumption per capita measures the average kilowatt-hours (kWh) of electrical power 
generated per person in a particular country or region from IEA (2008c) and IEA (2008d). It includes public 
and private electricity plants, and combined heat and power plants as well as production by nuclear and 
hydro (excluding pumped storage production), geothermal, hydro, wind, solar, and other renewables. 
Electricity produced by heat from chemical processes is not included here. Electricity consumption equals 
the sum of production and imports minus exports and distribution losses.
The share of population with access to electricity between 2000 and 2006 from IEA (2002, 2006).

372 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 0

Table A4  Natural disasters
Column
1, 2

Indicator
Mortality  
(number of people)

3–5

6, 7

8

9
10

11

People affected  
(thousands of people)

Economic losses  
(thousands of $)
Largest per-event loss  
(% of GDP)

Coastline (kilometers)
Population in low-elevation 
coastal zones (%)
Area in low-elevation coastal 
zones (%)

Notes
Number of people confirmed as dead and persons missing and presumed dead (official figures when 
available) during a disaster event (includes droughts, floods, and storms) based on CRED (2009). Numbers 
are annual averages for the period from 1971–2008.
People injured, homeless and requiring immediate assistance during a disaster (includes droughts, floods, 
and storms); it can also include displaced or evacuated people based on CRED (2009). Numbers are annual 
averages for the period from 1971–2008. 
Estimated damage cause by the disaster event in $ based on CRED (2009). Numbers are annual average 
damages for the period from 1971–2008.
Estimates of total damage caused by the single largest loss due to a slow or fast onset event between 
1961 and 2008 (Mechler and others 2009). The table lists economies that had a at least one per-event loss 
exceeding 0.8% of GDP during this period. Event type includes droughts, floods, storms, cold waves and 
forest fires. The largest per-event loss is defined as the total loss from an event expressed in $ (CRED 2009) 
divided by the total GDP (World Bank 2009).
The total length of the boundary between the land area (including islands) and the sea from CIA (2009).
Share of total population living in low-elevation coastal zones (defined as land areas contiguous with the 
coast and 10 meters or less in elevation) from CIESIN (2006).
Share of total area in low-elevation coastal zones (defined as land areas contiguous with the coast and 10 
meters or less in elevation) from CIESIN (2006).

Table A5  Land, water and projected impacts of climate change
Column
1

Indicator
Arable land  
(million hectares)
Share of irrigated land  
(% of cropland)
Aquaculture production 
(millions $)

2

3

Notes
Arable land is land fit for cultivation of crops that are replanted after each harvest like wheat, maize, and 
rice. From World Bank (2009).
Share of total cropland under irrigation from World Bank (2009).

Aquaculture production includes farming of aquatic organisms including fish, molluscs, crustaceans, 
and aquatic plants in brackish water, freshwater, or marine environment; both in inland waters and 
marine areas. Aquaculture production specifically refers to output from aquaculture activities, which are 
designated for final harvest for consumption. Data is from FAO (2009).
Projected physical impacts of climate change by the middle of the 21st century. Selected indicators include 
change in average annual temperature, change in precipitation and precipitation intensity, and change in 
heat wave duration. These projections estimates represent an ensemble mean of 19 general circulation 
models used for the IPCC Fourth Assessment (IPCC 2007). The changes are estimated for the future time 
period 2030–2049 relative to 1980–1999. Indicators are spatially-weighted averages for each country.
Percentage change in agricultural output (defined as revenue per hectare) between 2000 and 2080 
based on “preferred estimates” from Cline (2007). Impacts in agricultural yield are defined as an average 
percentage change in crop yields between 2000 and 2050 for wheat, rice, maize, millet, field pea, sugar 
beet, sweet potato, soybean, groundnut, sunflower, and rapeseed based on Müller and others (2009).

4–7

Projected physical impacts

8, 9

Projected agricultural impacts

 

Selected indicators 

373

Table A6  Wealth of nations
Column
1

Indicator
Total wealth  
($ per capita)

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Produced capital  
($ per capita)
Intangible capital  
($ per capita)

Natural capital  
($ per capita)

Pastureland  
($ per capita)

Cropland  
($ per capita)

Protected areas  
($ per capita)
Nontimber forest resources  
($ per capita)

Timber resources  
($ per capita)

10

Subsoil assets  
($ per capita)

Notes
The aggregate wealth nations have produced in the past, reflecting the value of all goods, resources, and 
services, including natural, produced, and intangible capital. Sub-categories of natural capital include 
forest, soil, and agricultural resources, which are indicative of a country’s reliance on natural resources 
and vulnerability to climate change. All indicators are expressed in per capita US$ value obtained after 
dividing the total value by midyear population (World Bank 2005). 
Produced capital includes machinery, equipment, and structures and urban land. 

Intangible capital includes raw labor, human capital, social capital, and other factors such as the quality of 
institutions. It is calculated as a residual, the difference between total wealth and the sum of produce and 
natural capital. 
Natural capital includes energy resources (oil, natural gas, hard coal, and lignite), mineral resources 
(bauxite, copper, gold, iron, lead, nickel, phosphate, silver, tin, and zinc), timber resources, nontimber forest 
resources, cropland, pastureland, and protected areas. 
Natural capital associated with pastureland reflects the annual value of pastureland for production 
of goods. Returns to pastureland are assumed to be 45 percent of output value, which is based on the 
production of beef, lamb, milk, and wool valued at international prices.
Natural capital associated with cropland reflects the annual value of agricultural production based on 
available cropland. Return to cropland is computed as the difference between the market value of crops 
and crop-specific production costs.
Natural capital associated with protected area reflects the annual value of benefits associated with 
protected areas including recreational value, tourism and other existence values.
Nontimber forest benefits include minor forest products, hunting, recreation, and watershed protection. 
Annual benefits were derived assuming that one-tenth of the forest area in each country is accessible with 
benefits ranging from $190 per hectare in developed countries to $145 per hectare in developing countries.
Timber resources are based on coniferous and non-coniferous roundwood (wood in the rough) production. 
Since market values are used to estimate the value of standing timber a distinction is made between forests 
available and forests not available for wood supply. The area of forest available for wood supply is defined 
as within 50 kilometers of infrastructure.
Subsoil assets are proven reserves of mineral deposits located on or below the earth’s surface that are 
economically exploitable, given current technology and relative prices.

Table A7 
Column
1

2

3

4

5

6

Innovation, research, and development

Indicator
Research and development 
expenditure  
(% of GDP)

Researchers in R&D  
(per million people)
Triadic patent families  
(per million people)

Knowledge Economy Index

Availability of latest 
technologies

Firm-level technology 
absorption index

Notes
Expenditures for research and development (R&D) are current and capital expenditures (both public 
and private) on creative work undertaken systematically to increase knowledge, including knowledge of 
humanity, culture, and society, and the use of knowledge for new applications. R&D covers basic research, 
applied research, and experimental development. Share of R&D expenditures is total R&D expenditures 
divided by GDP for a given year. Data are from the World Bank. 
Number of researchers in R&D is expressed as a number per million people.

Defined as a set of patents, for a single invention, granted by the European Patent Office, the Japan Patent 
Office, and the United States Patent and Trademark Office. It is a good indicator of the number of patents 
filed and patents per capita (OECD 2008). 
Knowledge Economy Index (World Bank 2008) is an aggregate index based on the World Bank Knowledge 
Assessment Methodology 2008 (KAM) and represents the overall preparedness of a country or region for 
the knowledge economy. The KEI is constructed as the simple average of 4 sub-indexes, which represent 
the following 4 pillars of the knowledge economy: (1) Economic Incentive and Institutional Regime, (2) 
Education and Training, (3) Innovation and Technological Adoption, and (4) Information and Communications 
Technologies Infrastructure.
Index defining the availability of latest technologies in the country. The index ranges between 1 
(technologies are not widely available and used) and 7 (technologies are widely available and used). For a 
full list of countries see the World Economic Forum (2009).
Index defining the country’s capacity to absorb new technologies. It ranges between 1 (not able to absorb 
technology) and 7 (aggressive in absorbing new technology). For a full list of countries see the World 
Economic Forum (2009).

374 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 0

Symbols and aggregates
.. 

 Denotes that data are not available or that aggre-
gates cannot be calculate because of missing data 
in the years shown.

0 or 0.0  Denotes zero or less than half the unit shown.

Aggregate  measures  for  regions  and  income  groups  are 
calculated by simple addition when they are expressed in 
levels. Aggregate rates and ratios are computed as weighted 
averages.

Summary  measures  are  either  totals  (indicated  by  t  if 
the aggregates include estimates for missing data and non-
reporting countries or by an s for simple sums of the data 
available),  weighted  averages  (w),  or  median  values  (m) 
calculated for groups of economies. Data for the countries 
excluded from the main tables have been included while cal-
culating the summary measures.

References
CIA. 2009. “The World Factbook 2009.” Washington, DC: Central 

Intelligence Agency. Available at https://www.cia.gov/library/
publications/the-world-factbook/index.html (accessed July 
2009). 

CIESIN. 2006. “Low Elevation Coastal Zone (LECZ) Urban-Rural 

Estimates, Global Rural-Urban Mapping Project (GRUMP), 
Alpha Version.” Palisades, NY: Socioeconomic Data and Applica-
tions Center (SEDAC), Columbia University. Available at http://
sedac.ciesin.columbia.edu/gpw/lecz (accessed July 2009). 

Cline, W. R. 2007. Global Warming and Agriculture: Impact Esti-

mates by Country. Washington, DC: Center for Global Develop-
ment and Peterson Institute for International Economics.

CRED. 2008. “EM-DAT: The OFDA/CRED International Emer-

gency Disaster Database.” Brussels, Belgium: Centre for 
Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters (CRED), Université 
Catholique de Louvain - Ecole de Santé Publique. 

DOE (U.S. Department of Energy). 2009. “Carbon Dioxide Infor-

mation Analysis Center (CDIAC).” DOE, Oak Ridge, TN. 

FAO. 2009. “Global Aquaculture Production 1950–2007.” Rome, 

Italy: UN Food and Agriculture Organization Fisheries and 
Aquaculture Department. Available at http://www.fao.org/ 
fishery/statistics/global-aquaculture-production/query/en 
(accessed July 2009). 

Houghton, R. A. 2009. “Emissions of Carbon from Land Manage-

ment.” Background note for the WDR 2010.

IEA (International Energy Agency). 2002. World Energy Outlook 

2002. Paris: IEA.

———. 2006. World Energy Outlook 2006. Paris: IEA.
———. 2008a. Energy Balances of Non-OECD Countries—2008 

Edition. Paris: IEA.

———. 2008b. Energy Balances of OECD Countries—2008 Edition. 

Paris: IEA.

———. 2008c. Energy Statistics of Non-OECD Countries—2008 

Edition. Paris: IEA.

———. 2008d. Energy Statistics of OECD Countries—2008 Edition. 

Paris: IEA.

Mechler, R., S. Hochrainer, G. Pflug, K. Williges, and A. Lotsch. 

2009. “Assessing the Financial Vulnerability to Climate-Related 
Natural Hazards.” Background paper for the WDR 2010.

Müller, C., A. Bondeau, A. Popp, K. Waha, and M. Fader. 2009. 

“Climate Change Impacts on Agricultural Yields.” Background 
note for the WDR 2010.

OECD. 2008. Compendium of Patent Statistics 2008. Paris: Organi-

sation for Economic Co-operation and Development.

———. 2009. “OECD Science and Technology Database - Main 

Science and Technology Indicators.” Paris, Organisation for Eco-
nomic Co-operation and Development. Available at http://www 
.sourceoecd.org (accessed July 2009). 

World Bank. 2005. Where is the Wealth of Nations? Measuring Cap-

ital for the 21st Century. Washington, DC: World Bank.

———. 2008. “Knowledge Assessment Methodology - Knowledge 

Economy Index (KEI).” Washington, DC: World Bank. Avail-
able at http://info.worldbank.org/etools/kam2/KAM_page5.asp 
(accessed August 2009). 

———. 2009. World Development Indicators 2009. Washington, 

DC: World Bank.

World Economic Forum. 2009. Global Information Technol-

ogy Report 2008–2009. Geneva, Switzerland: World Economic 
Forum.

WRI. 2008. “Climate Analysis Indicators Tool (CAIT).” Washing-

ton, DC: World Resources Institute. 

Selected World Development 
Indicators 2010

In this year’s edition, development data are presented in 

six tables presenting comparative socioeconomic data 
for more than 130 economies for the most recent year 
for which data are available and, for some indicators, 
for an earlier year. An additional table presents basic indica-
tors for 78 economies with sparse data or with populations 
of less than 3 million. 

The indicators presented here are a selection from more 
than 800 included in World Development Indicators 2009. 
Published annually, World Development Indicators (WDI) 
reflects a comprehensive view of the development process. 
The WDI’s six sections recognize the contribution of a wide 
range of factors: progress on the Millennium Development 
Goals and human capital development, environmental sus-
tainability,  macroeconomic  performance,  private  sector 
development  and  the  investment  climate,  and  the  global 
links that influence the external environment for develop-
ment. Note that this year’s poverty table (table 2) includes 
poverty estimates using the international poverty lines of 
$1.25 a day and $2 a day that are based on new purchasing 
power parity (PPP) estimates benchmarked to 2005. 

World Development Indicators is complemented by a sep-
arately published database that gives access to more than 
800 time- series indicators for 227 economies and regions. 
This database is available through an electronic subscription 
(WDI Online) or as a CD-ROM. 

Data sources and methodology
Socioeconomic  and  environmental  data  presented  here 
are drawn from several sources: primary data collected by 
the World Bank, member country statistical publications; 
research institutes; and international organizations such as 
the United Nations (UN) and its specialized agencies, the 
International Monetary Fund (IMF), and the Organisation 
for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) (see 
the Data Sources following the Technical notes for a com-
plete listing). Although international standards of cover-
age,  definition,  and  classification  apply  to  most  statistics 
reported by countries and international agencies, there are 
inevitably differences in timeliness and reliability arising 

from differences in the capabilities and resources devoted 
to basic data collection and compilation. For some topics, 
competing sources of data require review by World Bank 
staff members to ensure that the most reliable data available 
are presented. In some instances, where available data are 
deemed too weak to provide reliable measures of levels and 
trends or do not adequately adhere to international stan-
dards, the data are not shown.

The data presented are generally consistent with those in 
World Development Indicators 2009. However, data have been 
revised and updated wherever new information has become 
available. Differences may also reflect revisions to historical 
series and changes in methodology. Thus data of different 
vintages may be  published in different  editions of  World 
Bank publications. Readers are advised not to compile data 
series from different publications or different editions of 
the same publication. Consistent time- series data are avail-
able on World Development Indicators 2009 CD-ROM and 
through WDI Online. 

All dollar figures are in current U.S. dollars unless other-
wise stated. The various methods used to convert from national 
currency figures are described in the Technical notes.

Because  the  World  Bank’s  primary  business  is  provid-
ing lending and policy advice to its low- and middle-income 
members, the issues covered in these tables focus mainly on 
these economies. Where available, information on the high-
income economies is also provided for comparison. Readers 
may wish to refer to national statistical publications and pub-
lications of the OECD and the European Union (EU) for more 
information on the high-income economies.

Classification of economies and  
summary measures
The  summary  measures  at  the  bottom  of  most  tables 
include economies classified by income per capita and by 
region. gross national income (GNI) per capita is used to 
determine the following income classifications: low-income, 
$975 or less in 2008; middle-income, $976 to $11,905; and 
high-income, $11,906 or more. A further division at GNI 
per  capita  $3,855  is  made  between  lower-middle-income 

375

376 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 0

and upper-middle-income economies. The classification of 
economies based on per capita income occurs annually, so 
the country composition of the income groups may change 
annually.  When  these  changes  in  classification  are  made 
based on the most recent estimates, aggregates based on the 
new income classifications are recalculated for all past peri-
ods to ensure that a consistent time series is maintained. 
See the table on classification of economies at the end of 
this volume for a list of economies in each group (including 
those with populations of less than 3 million).

Summary  measures  are  either  totals  (indicated  by  t  if 
the aggregates include estimates for missing data and non-
reporting countries or by an s for simple sums of the data 
available),  weighted  averages  (w),  or  median  values  (m) 
calculated for groups of economies. Data for the countries 
excluded from the main tables (those presented in table 6) 
have been included in the summary measures, where data 
are available, or by assuming that they follow the trend of 
reporting countries. This gives a more consistent aggregated 
measure by standardizing country coverage for each period 
shown. Where missing information accounts for a third or 
more of the overall estimate, however, the group measure is 
reported as not available. The section on Statistical meth-
ods in the Technical notes provides further information on 
aggregation methods. Weights used to construct the aggre-
gates are listed in the technical notes for each table.

Terminology and country coverage
The term country does not imply political independence but 
may refer to any territory for which authorities report sepa-
rate social or economic statistics. Data are shown for econo-
mies as they were constituted in 2008, and historical data are 
revised to reflect current political arrangements. Through-
out the tables, exceptions are noted. Unless otherwise noted, 
data for China do not include data for Hong Kong, China; 
Macao, China; or Taiwan, China. Data for Indonesia include 
Timor-Leste through 1999 unless otherwise noted. Monte-
negro declared independence from Serbia and Montenegro 
on June 3, 2006. When available, data for each country are 
shown separately. However, some indicators for Serbia con-
tinue to include data for Montenegro through 2005; these 
data are footnoted in the tables. Moreover, data for most 
indicators  from  1999  onward  for  Serbia  exclude  data  for 
Kosovo, which in 1999 became a territory under interna-
tional  administration  pursuant  to  UN  Security  Council 
Resolution 1244 (1999); any exceptions are noted. 

Technical notes
Because  data  quality  and  intercountry  comparisons  are 
often problematic, readers are encouraged to consult the 
Technical notes, the table on Classification of Economies by 
Region and Income, and the footnotes to the tables. For 
more  extensive  documentation,  see  World  Development 
Indicators 2009.

Symbols
..  means that data are not available or that aggregates can-
not be calculated because of missing data in the years 
shown. 

0  or  0.0  means  zero  or  small  enough  that  the  number 
would round to zero at the displayed number of decimal 
places.
in dates, as in 2003/04, means that the period of time, usu-
ally 12 months, straddles two calendar years and refers to 
a crop year, a survey year, or a fiscal year.

/ 

$  means current U.S. dollars unless otherwise noted.
>  means more than.
<  means less than.

Data presentation conventions
•	 A blank means not applicable or, for an aggregate, not 

analytically meaningful.
•	 A billion is 1,000 million.
•	 A trillion is 1,000 billion.
•	 Figures in italics refer to years or periods other than those 
specified or to growth rates calculated for less than the 
full period specified.

•	 Data for years that are more than three years from the 

range shown are footnoted.

Readers may find more information on the WDI 2009, and 
orders can be made online, by phone, or fax as follows:

For  more  information  and  to  order  online:  http://www 
.worldbank.org/data/wdi2009/index.htm. 
To order by phone: 1-800-645-7247 or 703-661-1580; or by 
fax: 703-661-1501
To order by mail: The World Bank, P.O. Box 960, Herndon, VA 
20172-0960, U.S.A.

 

Selected World Development Indicators 2010 

377

Classification of economies by region and income, FY2010

Latin America and the Caribbean
Argentina
Belize
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Costa Rica
Cuba
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador
Grenada
Guatemala
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
St. Kitts and Nevis
St. Lucia
St. Vincent and the Grenadines
Suriname
Uruguay
Venezuela, R. B. de

Middle East and North Africa
Algeria
Djibouti
Egypt, Arab Rep. of
Iran, Islamic Rep. of
Iraq
Jordan
Lebanon
Libya
Morocco
Syrian Arab Rep.
Tunisia
West Bank and Gaza
Yemen, Republic of

UMC
LMC
LMC
UMC
UMC
UMC
UMC
UMC
UMC
UMC
LMC
LMC
UMC
LMC
LMC
LIC
LMC
UMC
UMC
LMC
UMC
LMC
UMC
UMC
UMC
UMC
UMC
UMC
UMC

UMC
LMC
LMC
LMC
LMC
LMC
UMC
UMC
LMC
LMC
LMC
LMC
LIC

East Asia and the Pacific
American Samoa
Cambodia
China
Fiji
Indonesia
Kiribati
Korea, Dem. People’s Rep.
Lao PDR
Malaysia
Marshall Islands
Micronesia, Federated  
  States of
Mongolia
Myanmar
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Philippines
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Thailand
Timor-Leste
Tonga
Vanuatu
Vietnam

Europe and Central Asia 
Albania
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Georgia
Kazakhstan
Kosovo
Kyrgyz Republic
Latvia
Lithuania
Macedonia, FYR
Moldova
Montenegro
Poland
Romania
Russian Federation
Serbia
Tajikistan
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Ukraine
Uzbekistan

UMC
LIC
LMC
UMC
LMC
LMC
LIC
LIC
UMC
LMC
LMC
LMC
LIC
UMC
LMC
LMC
LMC
LMC
LMC
LMC
LMC
LMC
LIC

LMC
LMC
LMC
UMC
UMC
UMC
LMC
UMC
LMC
LIC
UMC
UMC
UMC
LMC
UMC
UMC
UMC
UMC
UMC
LIC
UMC
LMC
LMC
LIC

South Asia 
Afghanistan
Bangladesh
Bhutan
India
Maldives
Nepal
Pakistan
Sri Lanka

Sub-Saharan Africa 
Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon
Cape Verde
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros
Congo, Dem. Rep. of
Congo, Rep. of
Côte d’Ivoire
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Gabon
Gambia, The
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mayotte
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
São Tomé and Principe
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Somalia
South Africa
Sudan
Swaziland
Tanzania
Togo
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe

LIC
LIC
LMC
LMC
LMC
LIC
LMC
LMC

LMC
LIC
UMC
LIC
LIC
LMC
LMC
LIC
LIC
LIC
LIC
LMC
LMC
LIC
LIC
UMC
LIC
LIC
LIC
LIC
LIC
LMC
LIC
LIC
LIC
LIC
LIC
UMC
UMC
LIC
UMC
LIC
LMC
LIC
LMC
LIC
UMC
LIC
LIC
UMC
LMC
LMC
LIC
LIC
LIC
LIC
LIC

High-income OECD
Australia
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Czech Republic
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Korea, Rep. of
Luxembourg
Netherlands
New Zealand
Norway
Portugal
Slovak Republic
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
United Kingdom
United States

Other high income
Andorra
Antigua and Barbuda
Aruba
Bahamas, The
Bahrain
Barbados
Bermuda
Brunei Darussalam
Cayman Islands
Channel Islands
Croatia
Cyprus
Equatorial Guinea
Estonia
Faeroe Islands
French Polynesia
Greenland
Guam
Hong Kong, China
Isle of Man
Israel
Kuwait
Liechtenstein
Macao, China
Malta
Monaco
Netherlands Antilles
New Caledonia
Northern Mariana Islands
Oman
Puerto Rico
Qatar
San Marino
Saudi Arabia
Singapore
Slovenia
Taiwan, China
Trinidad and Tobago
United Arab Emirates
Virgin Islands (U.S.)

This table classifies all World Bank member economies and all other economies with populations of more than 30,000. Economies are divided among income groups according to 2008 GNI per 
capita, calculated using the World Bank Atlas method. The groups are low income (LIC), $975 or less; lower middle income (LMC), $976–3,855; upper middle income (UMC), $3,856–11,905; and 
high income, $11,906 or more.
Source: World Bank data.

378 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 0

Table 1  Key indicators of development

Population 

composition  

age 

%

Density 
people 

per sq. km 

ages 0–14

2008

2008

$  

billions

2008

$  

billions

2008

$  

per capita

2008

Gross national 
income (GNI)a

PPP gross national 

income (GNI)b

Gross 

domestic 
product 
per capita 
% growth 
2007–08

Life expectancy 

at birth

Male 
Years 
2007

Female 
Years 
2007

Adult 
literacy 
rate  

% ages 15 
and older

2007

Population

Average 
annual % 
growth 
2000–08

Millions

2008

..
3
34
18
40
3
21
8
9
160
10
11
9
10
4
192
8
15
8
15
19
33
4
11
17
1,326
7
45
64
4
5
21
4
10
5
10
13
82
6
5
81
5
62
4
82
23
11
14
10
10
7
10
1,140
228
72
..
4
7
60
128
6
16
39
49
5
6
4
4
6
3
19
14
27
13
3

..
0.3
1.5
2.9
1.0
0.0
1.4
0.5
0.9
1.6
–0.4
0.5
3.3
1.9
0.3
1.2
–0.7
3.1
2.8
1.7
2.2
1.0
1.7
3.4
1.0
0.6
0.6
1.4
3.0
2.2
1.8
2.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
1.5
1.1
1.9
0.4
3.8
2.6
0.3
0.7
–1.0
0.0
2.2
0.4
2.5
2.0
1.6
1.9
–0.2
1.4
1.3
1.5
..
2.0
1.9
0.6
0.1
2.6
0.6
2.6
0.4
1.0
1.7
1.2
3.7
2.0
–0.5
2.8
2.6
1.9
3.0
2.8

 

Afghanistan
Albania
Algeria
Angola
Argentina
Armenia
Australia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Bangladesh
Belarus
Belgium
Benin
Bolivia
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Brazil
Bulgaria
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cambodia
Cameroon
Canada
Central African Republic
Chad
Chile
China
  Hong Kong, China
Colombia
Congo, Dem. Rep. of
Congo, Rep. of
Costa Rica
Côte d’Ivoire
Croatia
Czech Republic
Denmark
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt, Arab Rep. of
El Salvador
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Ghana
Greece
Guatemala
Guinea
Haiti
Honduras
Hungary
India
Indonesia
Iran, Islamic Rep. of
Iraq
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kenya
Korea, Rep. of
Kyrgyz Republic
Lao PDR
Lebanon
Liberia
Libya
Lithuania
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Mali
Mauritania

..
115
14
14
15
109
3
101
105
1,229
47
354
78
9
74
23
70
56
314
83
41
4
7
9
22
142
6,696
40
28
11
89
65
79
135
130
203
49
82
296
49
81
17
113
63
236
103
87
126
40
355
65
112
383
126
44
..
65
338
204
350
67
6
68
492
28
27
405
39
4
54
33
152
82
10
3

..
24
28
45
25
21
19
15
25
32
15
17
43
37
16
26
13
46
39
34
41
17
41
46
23
21
13
30
47
41
26
41
15
14
18
32
31
32
33
42
44
17
18
17
14
39
14
42
43
37
38
15
32
27
24
..
21
28
14
13
35
24
43
17
30
38
26
43
30
15
43
46
30
44
40

9.8
12.1
146.4
62.1
287.2
10.3
862.5
386.0
33.2
82.6
52.1
474.5
6.0
14.1
17.0
1,411.2
41.8
7.3
1.1
8.9
21.8
1,390.0
1.8
5.9
157.5
3,899.3
219.3
207.4
9.8
7.1
27.5
20.3
60.2
173.2
325.1
43.2
49.1
146.9
21.4
1.5
22.7
255.7
2,702.2e
10.8
3,485.7
15.7
322.0
36.6
3.7
6.5
13.0
128.6
1,215.5
458.2
251.5
..
221.2
180.5
2,109.1
4,879.2
19.5
96.2
29.5
1,046.3
3.9
4.7
26.3
0.6
72.7
39.9
7.8
4.1
188.1
7.4
2.6

$  
per 
capita
2008
..c
3,840
4,260
3,450
7,200
3,350
40,350
46,260
3,830
520
5,380
44,330
690
1,460
4,510
7,350
5,490
480
140
600
1,150
41,730
410
530
9,400
2,940
31,420
4,660
150
1,970
6,060
980
13,570
16,600
59,130
4,390
3,640
1,800
3,480
300
280
48,120
42,250e
2,470
42,440
670
28,650
2,680
390
660
1,800
12,810
1,070
2,010
3,540
..f
49,590
24,700
35,240
38,210
3,310
6,140
770
21,530
740
750
6,350
170
11,590
11,870
410
290
6,970
580
840

30.6 d
25.0
272.8d
90.5
559.2
19.4
727.5
314.5
67.4
230.6
117.6
372.1
12.7
40.1
32.5
1,932.9
91.1
17.6
3.1
26.8
41.3
1,206.5
3.2
12.9
222.4
7,984.0
306.8
379.1
18.4
11.2
49.6d
32.6
81.7
237.6
205.0
77.6d
104.7
445.4
40.9d
3.1d
70.2
189.5
2,134.4
21.2
2,952.4
33.4
320.0
64.2d
11.7
11.5d
28.0d
178.6
3,374.9
875.1
769.7
..
166.6
200.6
1,810.6
4,497.7
32.7
152.0
60.9
1,366.9
11.3
12.8
45.0
1.1
98.1d
61.1
19.9
11.9
370.8
13.9
6.3

..
7,950
7,940d
5,020
14,020
6,310
34,040
37,680
7,770
1,440
12,150
34,760
1,460
4,140
8,620
10,070
11,950
1,160
380
1,820
2,180
36,220
730
1,160
13,270
6,020
43,960
8,510
290
3,090
10,950d
1,580
18,420
22,790
37,280
7,890d
7,760
5,460
6,670d
630d
870
35,660
34,400
4,850
35,940
1,430
28,470
4,690d
1,190
1,180d
3,870d
17,790
2,960
3,830
10,840
..
37,350
27,450
30,250
35,220
5,530
9,690
1,580
28,120
2,130
2,060
10,880
300
15,630d
18,210
1,040
830
13,740
1,090
2,000

..
5.6
1.5
11.8
6.0
6.6
1.9
1.5
9.6
4.7
10.2
0.4
1.8
4.3
6.2
4.1
6.5
1.5
1.4
3.4
1.9
–0.6
0.9
–3.1
2.2
8.4
1.6
1.3
3.2
3.7
1.5
–0.1
2.4
2.3
–1.8
4.1
5.4
5.1
2.1
–1.2
8.5
0.4
–0.2
2.8
1.5
4.0
2.5
1.5
6.0
–0.5
2.2
0.8
5.7
4.9
4.2
..
–4.4
2.3
–1.8
–0.7
2.3
1.9
0.9
1.9
6.2
5.6
6.9
2.4
5.0
3.6
4.1
7.0
2.9
1.9
–0.6

..
73
71
45
72
70
79
77
64
65
65
77
60
63
72
69
69
51
49
57
50
78
43
49
75
71
79
69
45
53
76
56
72
74
76
69
72
68
67
56
54
76
78
67
77
56
77
67
56
59
67
69
63
69
69
..
77
79
79
79
71
61
53
76
64
63
70
57
72
65
59
48
72
52
62

..
80
74
49
79
77
84
83
71
67
76
83
62
68
78
76
76
54
52
62
51
83
46
52
82
75
85
77
48
55
81
59
79
80
81
75
78
72
76
60
56
83
85
75
82
57
82
74
60
63
74
77
66
73
73
..
82
83
84
86
74
72
55
82
72
66
74
59
77
77
62
48
77
57
66

..
99
75
..
98
99
..
..
100
53
100
..
41
91
..
90
98
29
..
76
..
..
..
32
97
93
..
93
..
..
96
..
99
..
..
89
84
66
82
..
..
..
..
..
..
65
97
73
..
..
84
99
66
92
82
..
..
..
99
..
91
100
..
..
99
73
90
56
87
100
..
72
92
26
56

 

Selected World Development Indicators 2010 

379

Table 1  Key indicators of development

Population

Average 
annual % 
growth 
2000–08

Millions

2008

 

Population 

composition  

age 

%

Density 
people 

per sq. km 

ages 0–14

2008

2008

Gross national 
income (GNI)a

PPP gross national 

income (GNI)b

$  

billions

2008

$  
per 
capita
2008

$  

billions

2008

$  

per capita

2008

Gross 

domestic 
product 
per capita 
% growth 
2007–08

Life expectancy 

at birth

Male 
Years 
2007

Female 
Years 
2007

Adult 
literacy 
rate  

% ages 15 
and older

2007

Mexico
Moldova
Morocco
Mozambique
Myanmar
Nepal
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria
Norway
Pakistan
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russian Federation
Rwanda
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Serbia
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Slovak Republic
Somalia
South Africa
Spain
Sri Lanka
Sudan
Sweden
Switzerland
Syrian Arab Rep.
Tajikistan
Tanzania
Thailand
Togo
Tunisia
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Uganda
Ukraine
United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom
United States
Uruguay
Uzbekistan
Venezuela, R. B. de
Vietnam
West Bank and Gaza
Yemen, Republic of
Zambia
Zimbabwe
World
Low income
Middle income
  Lower middle income
  Upper middle income
Low and middle income
  East Asia & Pacific
  Europe & Central Asia
 

 Latin America &  
 
the Caribbean

  Middle East & North Africa
  South Asia
  Sub-Saharan Africa
High income

106
4
31
22
49
29
16
4
6
15
151
5
166
3
6
6
29
90
38
11
22
142
10
25
12
7
6
5
5
9
49
46
20
41
9
8
21
7
42
67
6
10
74
5
32
46
4
61
304
3
27
28
86
4
23
13
12
6,692s
973
4,651
3,702
948
5,624
1,931
441
565

325
1,543
818
1,069

1.0
–1.5
1.2
2.2
0.9
2.0
0.4
1.3
1.3
3.5
2.4
0.8
2.3
1.8
2.3
1.9
1.3
1.9
–0.1
0.5
–0.5
–0.4
2.5
2.2
2.6
–0.3
3.4
2.3
0.0
3.0
1.3
1.5
0.9
2.1
0.5
0.8
3.1
1.3
2.7
1.0
2.6
1.0
1.3
1.4
3.2
–0.8
4.0
0.5
0.9
0.1
1.3
1.7
1.3
3.4
3.0
2.3
0.0
1.2w
2.1
1.1
1.2
0.8
1.3
0.8
0.1
1.2

1.9
1.6
2.5
0.7

55
111
70
28
75
200
485
16
47
12
166
16
215
46
14
16
23
303
124
116
94
9
394
11
63
83
78
7,024
112
14
40
91
310
17
22
191
116
49
48
132
119
66
96
11
161
80
54
254
33
19
64
32
278
638
44
17
32
52w
52
60
119
21
59
122
19
28

38
323
35
32

29
17
29
44
27
37
18
21
36
50
43
19
37
30
40
34
31
34
15
15
15
15
42
33
44
18
43
17
16
45
31
15
24
40
17
16
35
38
45
22
40
24
27
30
49
14
19
18
20
23
30
30
27
45
44
46
40
27w
38
27
28
25
29
23
19
29

31
33
43
18

1,061.4
5.3g
80.5
8.1
..
11.5
824.6
119.3
6.1
4.8
175.6
415.3
162.9
21.0
6.5
13.6
115.0
170.4
453.0
218.4
170.6
1,364.5
4.0
374.3
11.8
41.9
1.8
168.2
78.6
..
283.3
1,456.5
35.9
46.5
469.7
498.5
44.4
4.1
18.4h
191.7
2.6
34.0
690.7
14.3
13.3
148.6
..
2,787.2
14,466.1
27.5
24.7
257.8
77.0
..
21.9
12.0
..
57,637.5t
509.6
15,159.6
7,691.9
7,471.9
15,683.1
5,080.5
3,274.0
3,833.0

1,052.9
1,521.6
885.3
42,041.4

9,980
1,470g
2,580
370
..c
400
50,150
27,940
1,080
330
1,160
87,070
980
6,180
1,010
2,180
3,990
1,890
11,880
20,560
7,930
9,620
410
15,500
970
5,710
320
34,760
14,540
..c
5,820
31,960
1,790
1,130
50,940
65,330
2,090
600
440h
2,840
400
3,290
9,340
2,840
420
3,210
..i
45,390
47,580
8,260
910
9,230
890
..f
950
950
..

1,517.2
11.7
135.3
16.7
63.1 d
32.1
685.1
107.1
14.9d
10.0
293.1
279.0
448.8
39.5d
12.9d
30.0
230.0
352.4
659.7
234.6
290.3
2,216.3
9.9
554.4
21.5
81.9
4.2
232.0
115.2
..
476.2
1,418.7
89.9
79.8
352.0
354.5
92.4
12.7
52.1
403.4
5.3
73.0
1,017.6
31.2d
36.1
333.5
..
2,218.2
14,282.7
41.8
72.6d
358.6
232.9
..
50.9
15.5
..
8,613w 69,309.0t
1,368.8
28,619.5
17,001.7
11,663.5
29,971.3
10,425.9
5,393.2
5,827.4

524
3,260
2,078
7,878
2,789
2,631
7,418
6,780

14,270
3,210
4,330
770
1,290 d
1,120
41,670
25,090
2,620d
680
1,940
58,500
2,700
11,650
2,000
4,820
7,980
3,900
17,310
22,080
13,500
15,630
1,010
22,950
1,760
11,150
750
47,940
21,300
..
9,780
31,130
4,480
1,930
38,180
46,460
4,350
1,860
1,230
5,990
820
7,070
13,770
6,210d
1,140
7,210
..
36,130
46,970
12,540
2,660d
12,830
2,700
..
2,210
1,230
..

10,357w
1,407
6,154
4,592
12,297
5,330
5,398
12,219
10,309

3,242
986
1,082
39,345

2,330.6
4,217.6
1,628.3
39,686.3

7,308
2,734
1,991
37,141

0.8
8.2
4.6
4.5
11.7
3.6
1.7
–2.5
2.2
6.0
3.0
0.7
3.7
7.5
3.7
4.0
8.6
2.0
4.8
–0.2
9.4
7.5
8.2
2.1
–0.2
6.1
2.4
–4.1
6.2
..
1.3
–0.3
5.8
5.9
–1.0
0.5
1.6
6.2
4.4
2.0
–1.4
4.1
2.5
8.4
6.0
2.7
5.7
0.1
0.2
8.6
7.2
3.1
4.7
..
0.9
3.4
..
0.8w
4.1
5.0
6.3
3.8
4.9
7.2
5.2
3.2

3.9
5.3
2.5
0.0

73
65
69
42
59
63
78
78
70
58
46
78
65
73
55
70
71
70
71
75
69
62
48
71
54
71
46
78
71
47
49
78
69
56
79
79
72
64
55
66
61
72
69
59
52
63
77
77
75
72
64
71
72
72
61
45
43
67w
57
67
66
68
65
70
65
70

68
63
51
77

77
72
73
42
65
64
82
82
76
56
47
83
66
78
60
74
76
74
80
82
76
74
52
75
57
76
49
83
78
49
52
84
76
60
83
84
76
69
56
72
64
76
74
68
53
74
81
82
81
80
70
77
76
75
64
46
44
71w
60
71
70
75
69
74
74
76

72
66
53
82

93
99
56
44
..
57
..
..
78
29
72
..
54
93
58
95
90
93
99
95
98
100
..
85
42
..
38
94
..
..
88
98
91
..
..
..
83
100
72
94
..
78
89
100
74
100
90
..
..
98
..
95
..
94
59
71
91
84w
64
83
81
93
81
93
98
91

73
63
62
99

a. Calculated using the World Bank Atlas method. b. PPP is purchasing power parity; see Technical notes. c. Estimated to be low income ($975 or less). d.The estimate is based on regression; 
others are extrapolated from the latest International Comparison Program benchmark estimates. e. The GNI and GNI per capita estimates include the French overseas departments of French 
Guiana, Guadeloupe, Martinique, and Réunion. f. Estimated to be lower middle income ($976 to $3,855). g. Excludes data for Transnistria. h. Data refers to mainland Tanzania only. i. Estimated to 
be high income ($11,906 or more). 

380 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 0

Table 2  Poverty

National poverty line

International poverty line

Population below national poverty line

Survey
year

National

%

Survey
year

National

%

Survey
year

Population 

below
$1.25 
a day

%

2007
2002
1988

1998

1998–99

1995
2000
2002

1999
1999

2001–02

1998
1997
1998
1998
1994
1996

1995–96

1996
1998

1995

2004–05

2005
1989

2002

2000
1998

1995–96

1995

1993–94
1995–96

2002

1998–99

1989
1994
1987

1998–99

1993

1993–94

1996

1997
2001
1994

2003

1997–98

1997

1990–91

1989
1998
1996
2002
2001

1990–91
1996–97

42.0
25.4
12.2
..
28.8b
55.1
..
..
68.1
48.9
30.5
..
29.0
62.0
19.5

22.0
36.0
54.6
68.0
47.0
53.3
..
..

43.4
19.9
4.6
..
60.0
71.3
42.3
31.7
..
11.2
..
..
27.7
46.0
22.9
50.6
53.0
45.5
..
..
52.1
..
39.5
..
57.9
40.0
65.0
52.5
14.5
36.0
17.6
..
..
..
..
..
..
21.3
17.6
40.0
..
49.9
38.6
..
..
..
..
73.3
54.0
15.5
63.8
50.0
20.3
62.4
13.1
69.4
..

2005
1995

2002
2001

2001
2005
2004

2003
2002

2002–03

2001
2003

2004
2001

1998
2004

1999

2004

2004

2004
2001

2002

1999–2000

1999–2000

2003

2005–06

2000

1995
2004
1997

2005

1999–2000

2002
2002
1997

2005

2002–03

1999

1997–98

2000
2004
2002

1998–99
2002–03

..
18.5
22.6
..
53.0b
50.9
..
..
49.6
40.0
17.4
..
39.0
64.6
..

21.5
12.8
46.4
..
35.0
40.2
..
..

..
17.0
2.8
..
64.0
..
..
23.9
..
11.1
..
..
42.2
45.2
16.7
37.2
..
44.2
..
..
54.5
..
28.5
..
56.2
..
66.0g
50.7
17.3
28.6
16.0
..
..
..
..
..
..
14.2
15.4
52.0
..
43.1
33.0
..
..
..
..
71.3
65.3
..
..
46.3
17.6
48.5
19.0
54.1
..

2002a
1988a

2002b,c
2002a

2001a
2000a
2002a

2002c
2001a

2005c
2001a
1998a
1998a

1993–94a,e

1996a

1993a

2003c
2002a

2003c

2003c
1998a
2001a
1993c

2003c
2005c

2003c

1999–2000a

1999–2000a

2002a

1998–99a

2002c
1994a

2005c
2002a

1993–94a

1998a

2002–03a

2002a
1997a

2002a

1997–98a

1997–98a

1995–96a

2002a
2001a

1997c
2001a

2004a
2002a
2000a

1996–97a

..
<2.0
6.6
..
9.9
15.0
..
..
6.3
57.8d
<2.0
..
..
22.8
<2.0

7.8
2.6
70.0
86.4
48.6
51.5
..
82.8

..
<2.0
28.4f
..
15.4
..
..
5.6
24.1
<2.0
<2.0
..
6.1
9.8
<2.0
14.3
..
55.6
..
..
15.1
..
39.1
..
16.9
36.8
..
22.2
<2.0
49.4f
..
<2.0
..
..
..
..
..
<2.0
5.2
19.6
..
34.0
49.3d
..
..
..
<2.0
76.3
83.1
<2.0
61.2
23.4
2.8
17.1
6.3
81.3
..

Poverty
gap at
$1.25 
a day

%

..
<0.5
1.8
..
2.9
3.1
..
..
1.1
17.3d
<0.5
..
..
12.4
<0.5

1.6
<0.5
30.2
47.3
13.8
18.9
..
57.0

..
<0.5
8.7f
..
6.1
..
..
2.4
6.7
<0.5
<0.5
..
1.5
3.2
<0.5
6.7
..
16.2
..
..
4.7
..
14.4
..
6.5
11.5
..
10.2
<0.5
14.4f
..
<0.5
..
..
..
..
..
<0.5
0.9
4.6
..
8.8
14.9d
..
..
..
<0.5
41.4
46.0
<0.5
25.8
7.1
1.4
4.0
0.9
42.0
..

Population 

below
$2 a day

%

..
8.7
23.8
..
19.7
46.7
..
..
27.1
85.4d
<2.0
..
..
34.2
<2.0

18.3
7.8
87.6
95.4
77.8
74.4
..
90.7

..
5.3
51.1f
..
26.3
..
..
11.5
49.1
<2.0
<2.0
..
16.3
20.4
19.3
25.3
..
86.4
..
..
34.2
..
63.3
..
29.8
63.8
..
34.8
<2.0
81.7f
..
8.3
..
..
..
..
..
11.0
21.5
42.7
..
66.6
79.9d
..
..
..
<2.0
88.7
93.5
6.8
82.0
48.3
7.0
40.3
24.3
92.9
..

Survey
year

2005a
1995a
2000a
2005b,c
2003a

2005a
2005a
2005a

2003a
2005a
2004a

2007c
2003a
2003a
2006a
2004a
2001a

2003a

2002–03a

2006c
2005a

2006c

2005–06a

2005a
2005c
2002a
2005a
1996c

2005c
2007c

2004–05a

2005c

2005a

2005a

2006a

2006c

2002–03a

2001c
2006c
2004a

2004–05a

2005a

2006a
2003a

2005–06a

2004a

2002–03a

2007a

2004a
2005a

2004–05a,h
2004–05c

2006a
2000a
2006a
2004a
2007a

2002–03a

Population 

below
$1.25 
a day

%

..
<2.0
6.8
54.3
4.5
10.6
..
..

<2
49.6d
<2.0
..
47.3
19.6
<2.0

5.2
<2.0
56.5
81.3
40.2
32.8
..
62.4

61.9
<2.0
15.9f
..
16.0
59.2
54.1
2.4
23.3
<2.0
<2.0
..
5.0
4.7
<2.0
11.0
..
39.0
..
..
13.4
..
30.0
..
11.7
70.1
54.9
18.2
<2.0
41.6f
..
<2.0
..
..
..
..
..
<2.0
3.1
19.7
..
21.8
44.0d
..
83.7
..
<2.0
67.8
73.9
<2.0
51.4
21.2
<2.0
8.1
2.5
74.7
..

Poverty
gap at
$1.25 
a day

%

..
<0.5
1.4
29.9
1.0
1.9
..
..
<0.5
13.1d
<0.5
..
15.7
9.7
<0.5

1.3
<0.5
20.3
36.4
11.3
10.2
..
28.3

25.6
<0.5
4.0f
..
5.7
25.3
22.8
<0.5
6.8
<0.5
<0.5
..
0.9
1.2
<0.5
4.8
..
9.6
..
..
4.4
..
10.5
..
3.5
32.2
28.2
8.2
<0.5
10.8f
..
<0.5
..
..
..
..
..
<0.5
<0.5
6.1
..
4.4
12.1d
..
40.8
..
<0.5
26.5
32.3
<0.5
18.8
5.7
<0.5
1.7
0.5
35.4
..

Population 

below
$2 a day

%

..
7.8
23.6
70.2
11.3
43.4
..
..
<2.0
81.3d
<2.0
..
75.3
30.3
<2.0

12.7
<2.0
81.2
93.4
68.2
57.7
..
81.9

83.3
2.4
36.3f
..
27.9
79.5
74.4
8.6
46.8
<2.0
<2.0
..
15.1
12.8
18.4
20.5
..
77.5
..
..
30.4
..
53.6
..
24.3
87.2
72.1
29.7
<2.0
75.6f
..
8.0
..
..
..
..
..
3.5
17.2
39.9
..
51.9
76.8d
..
94.8
..
<2.0
89.6
90.4
7.8
77.1
44.1
4.8
28.9
14.0
90.0
..

Afghanistan
Albania
Algeria
Angola
Argentina
Armenia
Australia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Bangladesh
Belarus
Belgium
Benin
Bolivia
Bosnia and 

Herzegovina

Brazil
Bulgaria
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cambodia
Cameroon
Canada
Central African 

Republic

Chad
Chile
China
  Hong Kong, China
Colombia
Congo, Dem. Rep. of
Congo, Rep. of
Costa Rica
Côte d’Ivoire
Croatia
Czech Republic
Denmark
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt, Arab Rep. of
El Salvador
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Ghana
Greece
Guatemala
Guinea
Haiti
Honduras
Hungary
India
Indonesia
Iran, Islamic Rep. of
Iraq
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kenya
Korea, Rep. of
Kyrgyz Republic
Lao PDR
Lebanon
Liberia
Libya
Lithuania
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Mali
Mauritania
Mexico
Moldova
Morocco
Mozambique
Myanmar

 

Table 2  Poverty

Nepal
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria
Norway
Pakistan
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russian Federation
Rwanda
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Serbia
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Slovak Republic
Somalia
South Africa
Spain
Sri Lanka
Sudan
Sweden
Switzerland
Syrian Arab Rep.
Tajikistan
Tanzania
Thailand
Togo
Tunisia
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Uganda
Ukraine
United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom
United States
Uruguay
Uzbekistan
Venezuela, R. B. de
Vietnam
West Bank and Gaza
Yemen, Republic of
Zambia
Zimbabwe

Selected World Development Indicators 2010 

381

National poverty line

International poverty line

Population below national poverty line

Survey
year

1995–96

1998

1989–93

1985

1993
1997
1996
1990
2001
1994
1996

1995
1998
1993

1992

1989

2004

1995–96

1999
1991
1994

1990
1994

1987–89

1999–2000

2000

1994

2000–01

1989
1998

1998
1998

1990–91

National

%

41.8
..
..
47.9
63.0
43.0
..
28.6
37.3
37.5
20.5i
54.3
32.1
14.6
..
25.4
31.4
51.2
..
33.4
..
82.8
..
16.8
..
..
..
25.0
..
..
..
..
74.9
38.6
9.8
32.3
7.4
28.3
..
33.8
31.5
..
..
..
20.2b
31.5
31.3
37.4
..
41.8
72.9
25.8

Survey
year

2003–04

2001

1992–93

1998–99

2004
1997
2001

2002
2002

1999–2000

2003–04

2002

2003

2000–01

1998

1995
2002

2002–03

2003

1998
2003

1997–99

2002

2004

1995–96

National

%

30.9
..
..
45.8
..
34.1
..
32.6
..
..
..
53.1
25.1
14.8
..
28.9
19.6
60.3
..
..
..
70.2
..
..
..
..
..
22.7
..
..
..
..
44.4
35.7
13.6
..
7.6
27.0
..
37.7
19.5
..
..
..
24.7b
27.2
52.0
28.9
..
..
68.0
34.9

Survey
year

1995–96a

2001c
1994a

1996–97a

2001–02a

2004c

2005c
2005c
2003a
2002a

2002a
2002a

1984–85a

2001a

1989–90a

1992c

1995a

1995–96a

2003a

1991–92a

2002a

1995a
2002a
1993c
2002a
2002a

2005b,c
2002a
2003c
2004a

1998a

2002–03a

Population 

below
$1.25 
a day

%

68.4
..
..
19.4
78.2
68.5
..
35.9
9.2
..
9.3
8.2
22.0
<2.0
..
2.9
<2.0
63.3
..
44.2
..
62.8
..
<2.0
..
21.4
..
16.3
..
..
..
..
36.3
72.6
<2.0
..
6.5
2.0
63.5
57.4
<2.0
..
..
..
<2.0
42.3
18.4
24.2
..
12.9
64.6
..

Poverty
gap at
$1.25 
a day

%

26.7
..
..
6.7
38.6
32.1
..
7.9
2.7
..
3.4
2.0
5.5
<0.5
..
0.8
<0.5
19.7
..
14.3
..
44.8
..
<0.5
..
5.2
..
3.0
..
..
..
..
10.3
29.7
<0.5
..
1.3
<0.5
25.8
22.7
<0.5
..
..
..
<0.5
12.4
8.8
5.1
..
3.0
27.1
..

Population 

below
$2 a day

%

88.1
..
..
37.5
91.5
86.4
..
73.9
18.0
..
18.4
19.4
43.8
<2.0
..
13.0
3.7
88.4
..
71.3
..
75.0
..
<2.0
..
39.9
..
46.7
..
..
..
..
68.8
91.3
15.1
..
20.4
9.6
85.7
79.8
3.4
..
..
..
4.5
75.6
31.7
52.5
..
36.3
85.1
..

Population 

below
$1.25 
a day

%

55.1
..
..
15.8
65.9
64.4
..
22.6
9.5
35.8
6.5
7.9
22.6
<2.0
..
<2.0
<2.0
76.6
..
33.5
..
53.4
..
<2.0
..
26.2
..
14.0
..
..
..
..
21.5
88.5
<2.0
38.7
2.6
2.7
24.8
51.5
<2.0
..
..
..
<2.0
46.3
3.5
21.5
..
17.5
64.3
..

Poverty
gap at
$1.25 
a day

%

19.7
..
..
5.2
28.1
29.6
..
4.4
3.1
12.3
2.7
1.9
5.5
<0.5
..
<0.5
<0.5
38.2
..
10.8
..
20.3
..
<0.5
..
8.2
..
2.6
..
..
..
..
5.1
46.8
<0.5
11.4
<0.5
0.9
7.0
19.1
<0.5
..
..
..
<0.5
15.0
1.2
4.6
..
4.2
32.8
..

Survey
year

2003–04a

2005c
2005a

2003–04a

2004–05a

2006c
1996a
2007c
2006c
2006a
2005a

2005a
2005a
2000a

2005a

2002–03a

1996c

2000a

2002a

2004a

2000–01a

2004a
2006a
2000a
2005a
1998a
2005a
2005a

2006b,c
2003a
2006c
2006a

2005a

2004–05a

Population 

below
$2 a day

%

77.6
..
..
31.8
85.6
83.9
..
60.3
17.8
57.4
14.2
18.5
45.0
<2.0
..
3.4
<2.0
90.3
..
60.3
..
76.1
..
<2.0
..
42.9
..
39.7
..
..
..
..
50.8
96.6
11.5
69.3
12.8
9.0
49.6
75.6
<2.0
..
..
..
4.2
76.7
10.2
48.4
..
46.6
81.5
..

a. Expenditure base. b. Covers urban area only. c. Income base. d. Adjusted by spatial consumer price index information. e. Due to security concerns, the survey covered only 56 percent of 
rural villages and 65 percent of the rural population. f. Weighted average of urban and rural estimates. g. Covers rural area only. h. Due to change in survey design, the most recent survey is not 
strictly comparable with the previous one. i. Survey covers Asunción metropolitan area.

Table 3  Millennium Development Goals: eradicating poverty and improving lives

Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger

Achieve 
universal
primary 
education

Promote 
gender
equality

Reduce 
child

mortality

Improve 
maternal 
health

Combat HIV/AIDS
and other diseaes

Ensure environmental

sustainability

Develop a

global

partnership 

for

development

Share of 
poorest 
quintile in 
national 

consumption 
or income  

% 

employment 

1990–2007b

Vulnerable 
employment 

% of  

2007

Prevalence 

of child 

malnutrition 
% of children 

under 5 
2000–07b

Primary 

completion 

rate  
%
2007

Ratio of 

girls to boys 
enrolllments 
in primary 

and 

secondary 
school  

%
2007

Afghanistan
Albania
Algeria
Angola
Argentina
Armenia
Australia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Bangladesh
Belarus
Belgium
Benin
Bolivia
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Brazil
Bulgaria
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cambodia
Cameroon
Canada
Central African Republic
Chad
Chile
China
  Hong Kong, China
Colombia
Congo, Dem. Rep. of
Congo, Rep. of
Costa Rica
Côte d’Ivoire
Croatia
Czech Republic
Denmark
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt, Arab Rep. of
El Salvador
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Ghana
Greece
Guatemala
Guinea
Haiti
Honduras
Hungary
India
Indonesia
Iran, Islamic Rep. of
Iraq
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kenya
Korea, Rep. of
Kyrgyz Republic
Lao PDR
Lebanon
Liberia
Libya
Lithuania
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Mali
Mauritania
382 

..
7.8c
6.9c
2.0c
3.4d,e
8.6c
5.9e
8.6e
13.3c
9.4c
8.8c
8.5e
6.9c
1.8c
6.9c
3.0e
8.7c
7.0c
9.0c
7.1c
5.6c
7.2e
5.2c
6.3c
4.1e
5.7c
5.3e
2.3e
5.5c
5.0c
4.2e
5.0c
8.7c
10.2e
8.3e
4.0e
3.4e
9.0c
3.3e
..
9.3c
9.6e
7.2e
5.4c
8.5e
5.2c
6.7e
3.4e
5.8c
2.5e
2.5e
8.6c
8.1c
7.1c
6.4c
..
7.4e
5.7e
6.5e
10.6e
7.2c
7.4c
4.7c
7.9e
8.1c
8.5c
..
6.4c
..
6.8c
6.2c
7.0c
6.4e
6.5c
6.2c

..
..
..
..
20 f
..
9
9
53
85
..
10
..
..
..
27
8
..
..
..
..
10f
..
..
25
..
7
41
..
..
20
..
16
12
..
43
34 f
25
36
..
52 f
..
6
62
..
..
28
..
..
..
..
7
..
63
43
..
11
7
22
11
..
..
..
25
47
..
..
..
..
..
86
..
22
..
..

32.9
17.0
10.2
27.5
2.3
4.2
..
..
14.0
39.2
1.3
..
21.5
5.9
1.6
2.2
1.6
35.2
38.9
28.4
15.1
..
21.8
33.9
0.6
6.8
..
5.1
33.6
11.8
..
16.7
..
2.1
..
4.2
6.2
5.4
6.1
34.5
34.6
..
..
..
..
13.91
..
17.7
22.5
18.9
8.6
..
43.5
24.4
..
7.1
..
..
..
..
3.6
4.9
16.5
..
2.7
36.4
..
20.4
..
..
36.8
18.4
..
27.9
30.4

38
96
95
..
99
98
..
102
113
56
92
86
64
98
..
106
98
37g
39
85
55
96
30g
30
95
101
102
107
51
72
91
45
101
93
101
91g
106
98
91
46
46
98
..
92
103
78g
101
77
64
..
89
92
86
105
105
75
97
102
102
..
102
104g
93
102
95
77
83g
55g
..
95
62
55
96
52
59

58
97
99
..
104
104
97
97
97
107
101
98
73
99
99
103
97
84g
90
90
85
99
..
64
99
100
98
104
73
91
102
..
102
101
102
103g
100
95
101
78
83
102
100
98
99
95g
97
93
76
..
106
99
91
98
105
78
103
101
99
100
102
99g
95
96
100
86
103g
..
105
100
96
100
104
76
103

Under-
five 

mortality 
rate per 
1,000
2007

Maternal 
mortality 
rate per 
100,000  

live 
births
2005

257
15
37
158
16
24
6
4
39
61
13
5
123
57
14
22
12
191
180
91
148
6
172
209
9
22
..
20
161
125
11
127
6
4
4
38
22
36
24
70
119
4
4
30
4
115
4
39
150
76
24
7
72
31
33
44
4
5
4
4
24
32
121
5
38
70
29
133
18
8
112
111
11
196
119

1,800
92
180
1,400
77
76
4
4
82
570
18
8
840
290
3
110
11
700
1,100
540
1,000
7
980
1,500
16
45
..
130
1,100
740
30
810
7
4
3
150
210
130
170
450
720
7
8
66
4
560
3
290
910
670
280
6
450
420
140
300
1
4
3
6
62
140
560
14
150
660
150
1,200
97
11
510
1,100
62
970
820

prevalence

HIV 

% of 

population 
ages 15–49

2007

Carbon 
dioxide 
emissions 
per capita
 metric 
tons
2005

Incidence of
tuberculosis
per 100,000 

people
2007

Access to 
improved 
sanitation 
facilities  

population

% of 

2006

..
..
0.1
2.1
0.5
0.1
0.2
0.2
0.2
..
0.2
0.2
1.2
0.2
<0.1
0.6
..
1.6
2.0
0.8
5.1
0.4
6.3
3.5
0.3
0.1h
..
0.6
..
3.5
0.4
3.9
<0.1
..
0.2
1.1
0.3
..
0.8
1.3
2.1
0.1
0.4
0.1
0.1
1.9
0.2
0.8
1.6
2.2
0.7
0.1
0.3
0.2
0.2
..
0.2
0.1
0.4
..
..
0.1
..
<0.1
0.1
0.2
0.1
1.7
..
0.1
0.1
11.9
0.5
1.5
0.8

168
17
57
287
31
72
6
12
77
223
61
12
91
155
51
48
39
226
367
495
192
5
345
299
12
98
62
35
392
403
11
420
40
9
8
69
101
21
40
95
378
6
14
84
6
203
18
63
287
306
59
17
168
228
22
56
13
8
7
21
7
129
353
90
121
151
19
277
17
68
251
346
103
319
318

..
1.1
4.2
0.5
3.9
1.4
18.1
8.9
4.4
0.3
6.5
9.8
0.3
1.0
6.9
1.7
5.7
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.2
16.6
0.1
0.0
4.1
4.3
5.7
1.4
0.0
0.6
1.7
0.5
5.2
11.7
8.5
2.0
2.2
2.2
1.1
0.2
0.1
10.1
6.2
1.1
9.5
0.3
8.6
0.9
0.1
0.2
1.1
5.6
1.3
1.9
6.5
..
10.2
9.2
7.7
9.6
3.8
11.9
0.3
9.4
1.1
0.2
4.2
0.1
9.5
4.1
0.2
0.1
9.3
0.0
0.6

30
97
94
50
91
91
100
100
80
36
93
..
30
43
95
77
99
13
41
28
51
100
31
9
94
65
..
78
31
20
96
24
99
99
100
79
84
66
86
5
11
100
..
93
100
10
98
84
19
19
66
100
28
52
..
76
..
..
..
100
85
97
42
..
93
48
..
32
97
..
12
60
94
45
24

Internet 
users
per 100 
peoplea
2008

1.9
15.1
10.3
3.1
28.1
5.6
55.7
59.3
10.8
0.3
29.0
65.9
1.8
10.5
34.7
35.5
30.9
0.9
0.8
0.5
3.0
72.8
0.4
1.2
32.6
22.5
59.1
38.4
0.5
4.3
33.6
3.2
50.6
48.3
84.2
26.0
9.7
15.4
12.5
3.0
0.4
78.8
51.2
8.2
76.1
4.3
32.3
10.1
0.9
10.4
9.1
54.8
7.2
11.1
32.0
0.9
63.5
27.9
48.6
69.0
25.4
12.3
8.7
77.1
14.3
1.6
38.3
0.6
4.7
52.9
1.7
2.2
62.6
1.0
1.4

Table 3  Millennium Development Goals: eradicating poverty and improving lives

Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger

Achieve 
universal
primary 
education

Promote 
gender
equality

Reduce 
child

mortality

Improve 
maternal 
health

Combat HIV/AIDS
and other diseaes

Ensure environmental

sustainability

Develop a

global

partnership 

for

development

Share of 
poorest 
quintile in 
national 

consumption 
or income  

% 

employment 

1990–2007b

Vulnerable 
employment 

% of  

2007

Prevalence 

of child 

malnutrition 
% of children 

under 5 
2000–07b

Primary 

completion 

rate  
%
2007

Ratio of 

girls to boys 
enrolllments 
in primary 

and 

secondary 
school  

%
2007

4.6c
7.3c
6.5c
5.4c
..
6.1c
7.6e
6.4e
3.8e
5.9c
5.1c
9.6e
9.1c
2.5e
4.5c
3.4e
3.9e
5.6c
7.3c
5.8e
8.2c
6.4c
5.3c
..
6.2c
8.3c,i
6.1c
5.0e
8.8e
..
3.1c
7.0e
6.8c
..
9.1e
7.6e
..
7.7c
7.3c
6.1c
7.6c
5.9c
5.2c
6.0c
6.1
9.0c
..
6.1e
5.4e
4.5e
7.1c
4.9e
7.1c
..
7.2c
3.6c
4.6c

Mexico
Moldova
Morocco
Mozambique
Myanmar
Nepal
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria
Norway
Pakistan
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russian Federation
Rwanda
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Serbia
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Slovak Republic
Somalia
South Africa
Spain
Sri Lanka
Sudan
Sweden
Switzerland
Syrian Arab Rep.
Tajikistan
Tanzania
Thailand
Togo
Tunisia
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Uganda
Ukraine
United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom
United States
Uruguay
Uzbekistan
Venezuela, R. B. de
Vietnam
West Bank and Gaza
Yemen, Republic of
Zambia
Zimbabwe
World
Low income
Middle income
  Lower middle income
  Upper middle income
Low and middle income
  East Asia & Pacific
  Europe & Central Asia
  Latin America & the Caribbean
  Middle East & North Africa
  South Asia
  Sub-Saharan Africa
High income

29
32
52
..
..
..
..
12
45
..
..
6
62
28
..
47
40f
45
19
18
32
6
..
..
..
23
..
10
10
..
3
12
41f
..
..
10
..
..
88 f
53
..
..
36
..
..
..
..
..
..
25
..
30
..
36
..
..
..
..w
..
..
..
24
..
..
19
31
37
..
..
..

3.4
3.2
9.9
21.2
29.6
38.8
..
..
7.8
39.9
27.2
..
31.3
..
..
..
5.2
20.7
..
..
3.5
..
18.0
..
14.5
1.8
28.3
3.3
..
32.8
..
..
22.8
38.4
..
..
..
14.9
16.7
7.0
..
..
3.5
..
19.0
4.1
..
..
1.3
6.0
4.4
..
20.2
..
..
23.3
14.0
23.1w
27.8
22.7
25.8
..
24.0
12.6
..
4.5
..
40.9
26.5
..

105
93
83
46
..
78g
..
..
74
40
72
97
63
99
..
95
104
94
96
104
120
93
35
93
50
..
81
..
94
..
84
99
104
50
95
88
114
95
112g
101
57
100
97
..
54
101
105
..
96
104
97
95g
..
83
60
88
..
87w
65
91
90
98
86
100
98
97
91
79
63
98

99
102
88
85
..
98g
98
102
103
71
84
99
80
101
..
99
102
102
99
101
99
98
100
94
94
102
86
..
100
..
100
103
..
88
99
97
96
89
..
104g
75
104
90
..
98
100
101
102
100
98
98
102g
..
104
66
96
97
95w
91
96
94
100
95
100
97
101
93
90
88
99

Under-
five 

mortality 
rate per 
1,000
2007

Maternal 
mortality 
rate per 
100,000  

live 
births
2005

35
18
34
168
103
55
5
6
35
176
189
4
90
23
65
29
20
28
7
4
15
15
181
25
114
8
262
3
8
142
59
4
21
109
3
5
17
67
116
7
100
21
23
50
130
24
8
6
8
14
41
19
15
27
73
170
90
68w
120
58
65
25
74
27
23
26
38
78
146
7

60
22
240
520
380
830
6
9
170
1,800
1,100
7
320
130
470
150
240
230
8
11
24
28
1,300
18
980
..
2,100
14
6
1,400
400
4
58
450
3
5
130
170
950
110
510
100
44
130
550
18
37
8
11
20
24
57
150
..
430
830
880
400w
790
320
370
110
440
150
45
130
200
500
900
10

prevalence

HIV 

% of 

population 
ages 15–49

2007

Carbon 
dioxide 
emissions 
per capita
 metric 
tons
2005

Incidence of
tuberculosis
per 100,000 

people
2007

Access to 
improved 
sanitation 
facilities  

population

% of 

2006

0.3
0.4
0.1
12.5
0.7
0.5
0.2
0.1
0.2
0.8
3.1
0.1
0.1
1.0
1.5
0.6
0.5
..
0.1
0.5
0.1
1.1
2.8
..
1.0
0.1
1.7
0.2
<0.1
0.5
18.1
0.5
..
1.4
0.1
0.6
..
0.3
6.2
1.4
3.3
0.1
..
<0.1
5.4
1.6
..
0.2
0.6
0.6
0.1
..
0.5
..
..
15.2
15.3
0.8w
2.3
0.6
0.4
1.5
0.9
0.2
0.6
0.5
0.1
0.3
5.0
0.3

20
141
92
431
171
173
8
7
49
174
311
6
181
47
250
58
126
290
25
30
115
110
397
46
272
32
574
27
17
249
948
30
60
243
6
6
24
231
297
142
429
26
30
68
330
102
16
15
4
22
113
34
171
20
76
506
782
139w
275
138
147
105
162
136
84
50
41
174
369
16

4.1
2.1
1.6
0.1
0.2
0.1
7.7
7.2
0.7
0.1
0.8
11.4
0.9
1.8
0.7
0.7
1.3
0.9
7.9
5.9
4.1
10.5
0.1
16.5
0.4
6.5j
0.2
13.2
6.8
0.1
8.7
7.9
0.6
0.3
5.4
5.5
3.6
0.8
0.1
4.1
0.2
2.2
3.5
8.6
0.1
6.9
30.1
9.1
19.5
1.7
4.3
5.6
1.2
..
1.0
0.2
0.9
4.5w, k
0.5
3.1
2.6
5.1
2.7
3.6
7.0
2.5
3.6
1.1
0.9
12.6

81
79
72
31
82
27
100
..
48
7
30
..
58
74
45
70
72
78
..
99
72
87
23
99
28
92
11
100
100
23
59
100
86
35
100
100
92
92
33
96
12
85
88
..
33
93
97
..
100
100
96
..
65
80
46
52
46
60w
38
58
52
82
55
66
89
78
74
33
31
100

Internet 
users
per 100 
peoplea
2008

21.9
19.1
33.0
1.6
0.1
1.4
86.8
69.2
2.8
0.5
7.3
84.8
11.1
22.9
1.8
8.7
24.7
6.0
44.0
41.9
23.9
21.1
3.1
29.2
8.4
32.1
0.3
67.7
51.3
1.1
8.6
57.4
5.7
9.2
79.7
75.2
16.8
7.2
1.2
20.0
5.4
27.1
33.1
1.4
7.9
22.4
86.1
79.4
72.4
40.2
8.8
25.6
21.0
9.6
1.4
5.5
11.4
21.3w
3.7
14.7
11.7
26.6
12.8
23.3
23.4
26.6
24.2
6.6
4.5
67.1

a. Data are from the International Telecommunication Union’s (ITU) World Telecommunication Development Report database. Please cite ITU for third-party use of these data. b. Data are 
for the most recent year available. c. Refers to expenditure shares by percentiles of population, ranked by per capita expenditure. d. Urban data. e. Refers to income shares by percentiles 
of population, ranked by per capita income. f. Limited coverage. g. Data are for 2008. h. Includes Hong Kong, China. i. Includes Montenegro. j. Includes Kosovo and Montenegro. k. Includes 
emissions not allocated to specific countries.
 

 

383

384 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 0

Table 4  Economic activity

Gross domestic 

product

Millions
of dollars

2008

Average 
annual
% growth
2000–08

Agricultural 
productivity

agricultural value 
added per worker

2000 $

Value added as % of GDP

Agriculture

Industry

Services

1990–92

2003–05

2008

2008

2008

General

Household

government 

final 

final

consumption
expenditure

% of GDP

consumption
expenditure

% of GDP

2008

2008

Afghanistan
Albania
Algeria
Angola
Argentina
Armenia
Australia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Bangladesh
Belarus
Belgium
Benin
Bolivia
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Brazil
Bulgaria
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cambodia
Cameroon
Canada
Central African Republic
Chad
Chile
China
  Hong Kong, China
Colombia
Congo, Dem. Rep. of
Congo, Rep. of
Costa Rica
Côte d’Ivoire
Croatia
Czech Republic
Denmark
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt, Arab Rep. of
El Salvador
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Ghana
Greece
Guatemala
Guinea
Haiti
Honduras
Hungary
India
Indonesia
Iran, Islamic Rep. of
Iraq
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kenya
Korea, Rep. of
Kyrgyz Republic
Lao PDR
Lebanon
Liberia
Libya
Lithuania
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Mali
Mauritania

10,170
12,295
173,882
83,383
328,385
11,917
1,015,217
416,380
46,259
78,992
60,302
497,586
6,680
16,674
18,452
1,612,539
49,900
7,948
1,163
9,574
23,396
1,400,091
1,970
8,361
169,458
4,326,187
215,355
242,268
11,588
10,699
29,834
23,414
69,333
216,485
342,672
45,790
52,572
162,818
22,115
1,654
26,487
271,282
2,853,062
12,793
3,652,824
16,123
356,796
38,977
4,266
6,953
14,077
154,668
1,217,490
514,389
385,143
..
281,776
199,498
2,293,008
4,909,272
20,013
132,229
34,507
929,121
4,420
5,431
28,660
870
99,926
47,341
8,970
4,269
194,927
8,740
2,858

..
5.4
4.3
13.7
5.3
12.4
3.3
2.1
18.1
5.9
8.6
2.0
3.9
4.1
5.5
3.6
5.8
5.6
2.9
9.7
3.5
2.5
0.6
10.4
4.4
10.4
5.2
4.9
5.5
4.0
5.5
0.6
4.6
4.6
1.7
5.4
5.0
4.7
2.9
1.3
8.2
3.0
1.7
8.1
1.2
5.6
4.2
3.9
3.1
0.5
5.3
3.6
7.9
5.2
6.0
..
5.0
3.5
0.9
1.6
6.7
9.5
4.6
4.5
4.4
6.9
4.0
–1.1
4.1
7.7
3.8
4.2
5.5
5.2
5.1

..
778
1,911
165
6,767
1,476b
20,839
12,048
1,084b
254
1,977b
..
326
670
..
1,507
2,500
110
108
..
389
28,243
287
173
3,573
258
..
3,080
184
..
3,143
598
5,425b
..
15,190
1,924
1,686
1,528
1,633
..
..
18,818
22,234
2,443b
13,724
293
7,536
2,120
142
..
1,193
4,122
324
484
1,954
..
..
..
11,528
20,445
1,892
1,795b
334
..
675b
360
..
..
..
..
186
72
386
208
574

..
1,449
2,225
174
10,072
3,692
29,908
21,920
1,143
338
3,153
39,243
519
773
8,270
3,119
7,159
173
70
314
648
44,133
381
215
5,309
407
..
2,749
149
..
4,506
795
11,354
5,521
38,441
3,305
1,676
2,072
1,638
71
158
31,276
44,080
1,791
25,657
320
8,818
2,623
190
..
1,483
6,922
392
583
2,561
1,756
17,107
..
23,967
35,668
1,360
1,557
333
11,451
979
459
29,950
..
..
3,790
174
116
525
241
356

37
21
9
10
9
18
..
2
6
19
9
1
..
14
..
7
7
33
..
32
20
..
53
23
4
11
0
9
41
5
7
24
6
2
1
11
7
14
13
24
43
3
2
10
1
32
4
11
8
..
13
4
18
14
10
..
2
..
2
1
4
6
21
3
34
40
5
54
..
4
25
34
10
37
13

25
20
69
86
34
45
..
31
71
29
39
24
..
42
..
28
31
22
..
27
33
..
14
42
47
49
8
34
27
60
29
25
28
38
26
28
36
36
28
19
13
32
21
24
30
26
23
28
35
..
27
29
29
48
45
..
35
..
27
30
32
42
13
37
19
31
22
19
..
33
17
21
48
24
47

38
59
23
4
57
37
..
67
23
52
53
75
..
44
..
65
61
44
..
41
48
..
32
35
49
40
92
57
31
35
64
51
65
60
73
61
57
50
58
56
45
65
77
66
69
42
73
62
58
..
61
66
53
37
45
..
63
..
71
68
64
52
65
60
48
29
73
27
..
63
57
45
42
39
41

98
85
22
37
59
75
55
54
25
79
54
52
..
61
85
61
70
75
91
83
68
56
95
69
55
37
60
64
82
29
69
77
59
48
50
81
67
72
98
86
85
52
57
76
57
81
71
90
85
98
83
67
56
63
45
..
46
58
59
57
108
35
79
55
101
69
91
116
..
66
85
85
46
76
61

11
10
7
..a
13
12
18
18
10
5
16
22
..
12
22
20
16
22
29
3
13
19
3
6
10
14
8
13
11
14
13
8
19
20
26
6
12
11
9
31
11
21
23
21
18
14
17
4
5
..a
14
9
11
8
14
..
16
25
20
18
18
10
11
15
18
8
14
15
..
18
5
11
12
11
20

External
balance

of 

goods and
services
% of GDP

2008

–39
–27
35
50
4
–25
–2
7
42
–8
–6
3
..
12
–30
0
–23
–15
–36
–8
1
3
–9
10
14
7
11
–1
–10
30
–10
5
–8
5
1
–7
–3
–7
–22
–28
–17
5
–2
–28
7
–26
–13
–18
–2
–23
–28
1
–6
1
10
..
11
–2
0
1
–45
20
–14
–1
–45
–15
–25
–51
..
–11
–25
–28
20
–10
–7

Gross
capital
formation
% of GDP

2008

31
32
37
12
24
38
29
21
23
24
35
22
..
16
23
19
37
18
16
21
19
23
10
15
21
43
20
24
17
27
27
10
31
27
23
20
24
24
15
11
21
22
22
31
18
32
26
24
13
26
30
22
39
28
31
..
27
19
21
24
19
35
25
31
26
38
20
20
..
27
36
32
22
23
26

GDP

implicit
deflator
average 
annual
% growth
2000–08

7.1
3.5
9.4
48.1
12.8
4.6
3.8
1.8
10.9
4.8
25.5
2.0
3.3
7.0
3.8
8.1
5.6
2.4
9.6
4.7
2.2
2.0
2.2
8.3
6.6
4.3
–1.7
6.9
28.3
7.0
10.2
3.4
3.8
2.2
2.3
15.0
9.5
7.8
3.7
18.0
8.7
1.1
2.1
7.3
1.1
18.7
3.3
5.2
20.2
16.7
6.5
5.0
4.6
10.9
17.9
..
2.9
1.1
2.6
–1.2
4.2
15.1
6.5
2.2
6.8
9.4
2.2
10.5
22.2
4.0
11.5
19.3
4.4
4.2
11.3

 

Selected World Development Indicators 2010 

385

Table 4  Economic activity

Gross domestic 

product

Millions
of dollars

2008

1,085,951
6,048
86,329
9,735
..
12,615
860,336
130,693
6,592
5,354
212,080
449,996
168,276
23,088
8,168
15,977
127,434
166,909
526,966
242,689
200,071
1,607,816
4,457
467,601
13,209
50,061
1,953
181,948
94,957
..
276,764
1,604,174
40,714
58,443
480,021
488,470
55,204
5,134
20,490
260,693
2,823
40,180
794,228
18,269
14,529
180,355
163,296
2,645,593
14,204,322
32,186
27,918
313,799
90,705
..
26,576
14,314
..
60,587,016t
568,504
16,826,866
8,377,130
8,445,380
17,408,313
5,658,322
3,860,600
4,247,077

1,117,198
1,531,499
987,120
43,189,942

Average 
annual
% growth
2000–08

2.7
6.3
5.0
8.0
..
3.5
1.8
3.0
3.5
4.4
6.6
2.5
5.8
6.6
2.8
3.7
6.0
5.1
4.4
0.9
6.3
6.8
6.7
4.1
4.4
5.7
10.3
5.8
6.3
..
4.3
3.3
5.5
7.4
2.8
1.9
4.4
8.6
6.8
5.2
2.5
4.9
5.9
14.5
7.5
7.2
7.7
2.5
2.5
3.8
6.6
5.2
7.7
–0.9
3.9
5.3
–5.7
3.2w
5.8
6.4
8.3
4.6
6.4
9.1
6.3
3.9

4.7
7.4
5.2
2.3

Mexico
Moldova
Morocco
Mozambique
Myanmar
Nepal
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria
Norway
Pakistan
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russian Federation
Rwanda
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Serbia
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Slovak Republic
Somalia
South Africa
Spain
Sri Lanka
Sudan
Sweden
Switzerland
Syrian Arab Rep.
Tajikistan
Tanzaniac
Thailand
Togo
Tunisia
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Uganda
Ukraine
United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom
United States
Uruguay
Uzbekistan
Venezuela, R. B. de
Vietnam
West Bank and Gaza
Yemen, Republic of
Zambia
Zimbabwe
World
Low income
Middle income
  Lower middle income
  Upper middle income
Low and middle income
  East Asia & Pacific
  Europe & Central Asia
 

 Latin America &  
 
the Caribbean

  Middle East & North Africa
  South Asia
  Sub-Saharan Africa
High income

Agricultural 
productivity

agricultural value 
added per worker

2000 $

Value added as % of GDP

Agriculture

Industry

Services

1990–92

2003–05

2008

2008

2008

General

Household

government 

final 

final

consumption
expenditure

% of GDP

consumption
expenditure

% of GDP

2008

2008

2,256
1,286b
1,430
107
..
191
24,914
19,155
..
152
..
19,500
594
2,363
500
1,596
930
905
1,502b
4,642
2,196
1,825b
167
7,875
225
..
..
22,695
..
..
1,786
9,511
679
414
22,533
19,884
2,344
346b
238
497
312
2,422
1,770
1,222b
155
1,195b
10,454
22,664
20,793
6,304
1,272b
4,483
214
..
271
159
240
731w
222
470
359
1,998
432
295
1,749
2,125

1,583
335
263
15,906

2,793
816
1,746
148
..
207
42,049
27,189
2,071
157b
..
37,039
696
3,904
595
2,052
1,481
1,075
2,182
6,220
4,646
2,519
182
15,780
215
..
..
40,419
5,026
..
2,495
18,619
702
667
35,378
23,588
3,261
409
295
624
347
2,700
1,846
..
175
1,702
25,841
26,942
42,744
8,797
1,800
6,331
305
..
328b
204
222
908w
268
650
499
2,721
577
438
2,076
3,044

2,204
406
279
25,500

4
11
16
28
..
34
2
..
19
..
31
1
20
6
33
23
7
15
4
3
8
5
35
2
15
13
43
0
4
..
3
3
13
26
2
1
20
18
45
12
..
10
10
..
23
8
2
1
1
11
23
..
20
..
..
21
..
3w
25
10
14
6
11
12
7
6

12
18
14
1

37
15
20
26
..
17
24
..
30
..
41
43
27
17
48
20
38
32
30
24
34
38
12
70
23
28
24
28
41
..
31
30
29
34
29
28
35
23
17
46
..
28
28
..
26
37
59
23
22
27
33
..
42
..
..
46
..
28w
29
37
41
33
37
48
34
32

41
29
32
26

59
74
64
46
..
50
74
..
51
..
28
56
53
76
19
57
55
53
65
73
58
57
53
27
62
59
33
72
55
..
66
67
57
40
70
71
45
59
37
43
..
62
62
..
52
55
39
76
77
63
43
..
38
..
..
33
..
69w
46
53
45
61
53
41
60
62

48
53
54
73

66
97
61
75
..
79
47
60
90
..
..
42
80
65
44
69
61
77
66
65
73
45
90
26
82
84
80
39
54
..
61
57
70
59
47
59
75
114
73
51
..
65
71
..
82
64
45
63
70
69
55
53
66
..
..
66
..
61w
75
56
50
61
57
42
60
63

57
61
67
62

10
19
16
12
..
10
25
19
12
..
..
20
9
11
10
9
9
10
15
20
11
19
9
20
10
17
13
11
16
..
20
18
16
16
26
11
12
8
16
13
16
14
13
..
12
17
10
22
16
12
16
10
6
..
..
9
..
17w
9
14
13
15
14
13
15
14

12
11
16
18

GDP

implicit
deflator
average 
annual
% growth
2000–08

8.2
11.6
1.6
8.1
..
6.2
2.2
3.0
8.5
2.6
17.0
4.7
7.3
2.2
7.3
10.5
3.5
5.2
2.6
2.9
17.0
16.5
10.0
8.9
2.9
17.2
9.3
1.5
3.7
..
7.1
3.9
10.6
9.9
1.7
1.0
8.4
21.0
9.4
2.4
1.1
2.9
16.9
12.2
5.1
15.7
7.7
2.7
2.6
8.2
25.5
26.3
7.8
3.4
13.6
17.1
232.0

External
balance

of 

goods and
services
% of GDP

2008

–2
–53
–9
–10
..
–21
8
–1
–34
..
13
16
–10
1
27
3
2
–2
–3
–7
–10
11
–19
35
–22
–24
–12
19
1
..
–4
–7
–13
1
8
8
0
–42
–6
8
–27
–3
–5
11
–18
–6
24
–4
–6
–4
10
14
–13
..
..
3
..
0w

–11
1
1
1
1
6
0
0

3
–7
–3
–1

Gross
capital
formation
% of GDP

2008

26
37
33
23
..
32
20
23
32
..
..
23
22
23
19
20
27
15
23
22
26
25
21
19
30
23
20
31
28
..
22
31
27
24
20
22
14
20
17
28
..
25
22
..
24
25
21
19
20
23
19
23
42
..
..
22
..
22w
27
30
36
23
29
39
24
23

28
36
23
21

a. Data on general government final consumption expenditure are not available separately; they are included in household final consumption expenditure. b. Data for all three years are not 
available. c.  Data refer to mainland Tanzania only. 

386 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 0

Table 5  Trade, aid, and finance

Merchandise trade

Exports

Imports 

$

millions

2008

$

millions

2008

Manufactured

exports
% of total

exports

2007

High

technology

exports

% of

exports

2007

Current
account
balance

$

millions

2008

Foreign
direct

investment
net inflows

$

millions

2007

 Net official
development
assistancea

$

per capita

2007

merchandise

manufactured

External debt

Total

$

millions

2007

Afghanistan
Albania
Algeria
Angola
Argentina
Armenia
Australia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Bangladesh
Belarus
Belgium
Benin
Bolivia
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Brazil
Bulgaria
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cambodia
Cameroon
Canada
Central African Republic
Chad
Chile
China
  Hong Kong, China
Colombia
Congo, Dem. Rep. of
Congo, Rep. of
Costa Rica
Côte d’Ivoire
Croatia
Czech Republic
Denmark
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt, Arab Rep. of
El Salvador
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Ghana
Greece
Guatemala
Guinea
Haiti
Honduras
Hungary
India
Indonesia
Iran, Islamic Rep. of
Iraq
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kenya
Korea, Rep. of
Kyrgyz Republic
Lao PDR
Lebanon
Liberia
Libya
Lithuania
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Mali
Mauritania

680
1,353
78,233
66,300
70,588
1,069
187,428
182,158
31,500
15,369
32,902
476,953
1,050
6,370
5,064
197,942
23,124
620
56
4,290
4,350
456,420
185
4,800
67,788
1,428,488
370,242e
37,626
3,950
9,050
9,675
10,100
14,112
146,934
117,174
6,910
18,511
25,483
4,549
20
1,500
96,714
608,684
1,498
1,465,215
5,650
25,311
7,765
1,300
490
6,130
107,904
179,073
139,281
116,350
59,800
124,158
60,825
539,727
782,337
7,790
71,184
4,972
422,007
1,642
1,080
4,454
262
63,050
23,728
1,345
790
199,516
1,650
1,750

3,350
5,230
39,156
21,100
57,413
4,412
200,272
184,247
7,200
23,860
39,483
469,889
1,990
4,987
12,282
182,810
38,256
1,800
403
6,510
4,360
418,336
310
1,700
61,901
1,133,040
392,962
39,669
4,100
2,850
15,374
7,150
30,728
141,882
112,296
16,400
18,686
48,382
9,755
530
7,600
91,045
707,720
6,058
1,206,213
10,400
77,970
14,545
1,600
2,148
9,990
107,864
291,598
126,177
57,230
31,200
82,774
67,410
556,311
761,984
16,888
37,889
11,074
435,275
4,058
1,390
16,754
865
11,500
30,811
4,040
1,700
156,896
2,550
1,750

..
70
1
..
31
56
19
82
6
91
53
78
9
7
61
47
55
..
21
..
3
53
36
..
10
93
68e
39
..
..
63
18
68
90
66
..
8
19
55
..
13
81
79
45
83
11
52
50
..
..
29
81
64
42
10
0
84
76
84
90
76
13
37
89
35
..
..
..
..
64
57
11
71
3
0

..
12
2
..
7
2
14
11
4
..
3
7c
0
5
3
12
6
..
4
..
3
14
0
..
7
30
19
3
..
..
45
32
9
14
17
..
7
0
4
..
3
21
19
7
14
1
8
3
..
..
1
25
5
11
6
0
28
8
7
19
1
23
5
33
2
..
..
..
..
11
1
2
52
7
..

..
–1,924
..
9,402
7,588
–1,356
–44,040
14,269
16,454
857
–5,050
–12,015
–217
1,800
–2,765
–28,191
–12,577
..
–116
–1,060
–547
27,281
..
..
–3,440
426,107
30,637
–6,761
..
–2,181
–1,578
–146
–6,397
–6,631
6,938
–2,068
1,598
412
–1,119
..
–828
10,121
–52,911
–2,851
243,289
–2,151
–51,313
–1,697
–456
–80
–1,225
–12,980
–9,415
606
..
2,681
–12,686
1,596
–78,029
156,634
–2,776
6,978
–1,102
–6,350
–631
107
–1,395
–211
28,454
–5,692
..
..
28,931
–581
..

288
477
1,665
–893
6,462
699
39,596
30,717
–4,749
653
1,785
72,195
48
204
2,111
34,585
8,974
600
1
867
433
111,772
27
603
14,457
138,413
54,365
9,040
720
4,289
1,896
427
4,916
9,294
11,858
1,698
183
11,578
1,526
–3
223
11,568
159,463
1,728
51,543
970
1,959
724
111
75
816
37,231
22,950
6,928
755
383
26,085
9,664
40,040
22,180
1,835
10,189
728
1,579
208
324
2,845
132
4,689
2,017
997
55
8,456
360
153

..
97
12
14
2
114
..
..
26
10
9
..
56
50
117
2
..
63
59
46
104
..
41
33
7
1
..
17
20
36
12
8
37
..
..
13
16
14
14
32
31
..
..
87
..
50
..
34
23
73
65
..
1
4
1
..
..
..
..
..
88
13
34
..
52
65
229
192
3
..
48
53
8
82
117

2,041
2,776
5,541
12,738
127,758
2,888
..
..
3,021
22,033
9,470
..
857
4,947
6,479
237,472
32,968
1,461
1,456
3,761
3,162
..
973
1,797
58,649
373,635
..
44,976
12,283
5,156
7,846
13,938
48,584
..
..
10,342
17,525
30,444
8,809
875
2,634
..
..
2,292
..
4,479
..
6,260
3,268
1,598
3,260
..
220,956
140,783
20,577
..
..
..
..
..
8,368
96,133
7,355
..
2,401
3,337
24,634
2,475
..
..
1,661
870
53,717
2,018
1,704

Domestic

credit
provided

by 

banking
sector
% of GDP

2008

0
68
–12
10
24
17
151
129
17
60
31
115
15
48
59
102
67
16
35
16
6
191
18
–3
83
126
125
43
5
–19
54
20
75
58
210
39
18
78
45
125
47
88
126
33
126
33
109
37
..
23
50
81
70
37
51
..
194
81
133
293
122
34
35
113
14
7
177
161
–47
64
9
16
115
13
..

Net

migration
thousands
2000–05b

..
–100
–140
175
–100
–100
641
220
–100
–700
20
196
99
–100
62
–229
–41
100
192
10
–12
1,089
–45
219
30
–2,058
113
–120
–237
4
84
–339
–13
67
46
–148
–400
–291
–340
229
–340
33
761
–309
930
12
154
–300
–425
–140
–150
70
–1,540
–1,000
–993
..
230
115
1,750
82
104
–200
25
–65
–75
–115
100
62
14
–36
–5
–30
150
–134
30

Present
value
% of 
GNI
2007
18d
22
4
32
63
38
..
..
14
22
25
..
12d
24d
42
25
100
14d
97d
46
5d
..
48d
19d
45
13
..
28
111d
93d
35
67d
109
..
..
33
50
25
50
41d
8d
..
..
20
..
22d
..
21
64d
20d
21d
..
20
43
8
..
..
..
..
..
54
131
26
..
43d
84
111
978d
..
..
21d
9d
34
16d
85d

 

Selected World Development Indicators 2010 

387

Table 5  Trade, aid, and finance

Merchandise trade

Exports

Imports 

$

millions

2008

$

millions

2008

Manufactured

exports
% of total

exports

2007

High

technology

exports

% of

exports

2007

Current
account
balance

$

millions

2008

Foreign
direct

investment
net inflows

$

millions

2007

 Net official
development
assistancea

$

per capita

2007

merchandise

manufactured

External debt

Total

$

millions

2007

Mexico
Moldova
Morocco
Mozambique
Myanmar
Nepal
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria
Norway
Pakistan
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russian Federation
Rwanda
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Serbia
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Slovak Republic
Somalia
South Africa
Spain
Sri Lanka
Sudan
Sweden
Switzerland
Syrian Arab Rep.
Tajikistan
Tanzania
Thailand
Togo
Tunisia
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Uganda
Ukraine
United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom
United States
Uruguay
Uzbekistan
Venezuela, R. B. de
Vietnam
West Bank and Gaza
Yemen, Republic of
Zambia
Zimbabwe
World
Low income
Middle income
  Lower middle income
  Upper middle income
Low and middle income
  East Asia & Pacific
  Europe & Central Asia
 

 Latin America &  
 
the Caribbean

  Middle East & North Africa
  South Asia
  Sub-Saharan Africa
High income

291,807
1,597
20,065
2,600
6,900
1,100
633,974
30,586
1,489
820
81,900
167,941
20,375
1,180
5,700
4,434
31,529
49,025
167,944
55,861
49,546
471,763
250
328,930
2,390
10,973
220
338,176e
70,967
..
80,781
268,108
8,370
12,450
183,975
200,387
14,300
1,406
2,870
177,844
790
19,319
131,975
10,780
2,180
67,049
231,550
457,983
1,300,532
5,949
10,360
93,542
62,906
..
9,270
5,093
2,150

323,151
4,899
41,699
4,100
4,290
3,570
573,924
34,366
4,287
1,450
41,700
89,070
42,326
9,050
3,550
10,180
29,981
59,170
203,925
89,753
82,707
291,971
1,110
111,870
5,702
22,999
560
319,780
73,321
..
99,480
402,302
14,008
9,200
166,971
183,491
18,320
3,270
6,954
178,655
1,540
24,612
201,960
4,680
4,800
84,032
158,900
631,913
2,165,982
8,933
5,260
49,635
80,416
..
9,300
5,070
2,900
16,129,607t 16,300,527t
239,464
4,547,215
2,376,905
2,164,216
4,786,667
1,762,013
1,146,612
896,683

167,308
4,905,095
2,627,173
2,276,454
5,072,412
2,081,208
1,141,248
873,299

418,183
225,882
336,637
11,060,159

315,621
380,660
296,944
11,522,679

72
32
65
6
..
..
60
25
10
6
1
18
79
11
..
14
12
51
80
74
80
17
5
9
36
66
..
76e
87
..
51f
75
70
0
77
91
32
..
17
76
62
70
81
..
21
74
3
74
77
30
..
5
51
..
1
13
48
72w
44
61
71
52
60
77
45
54

16
66
30
75

17
5
9
2
..
..
26
10
4
14
8
18
1
0
..
6
2
54
4
9
4
7
16
1
4
4
..
46
5
..
6
5
2
1
16
22
1
..
1
27
0
5
0
..
11
4
1
20
28
3
..
3
6
..
1
2
3
18w
4
19
23
13
19
31
6
12

4
5
8
18

–15,957
–1,009
–122
–975
802
6
65,391
–11,317
–1,475
–314
21,972
83,497
–8,295
–2,792
..
–345
1,505
4,227
–29,029
–29,599
–24,642
102,331
–147
95,080
–1,311
–15,989
–181
39,106
–4,103
..
–20,981
–154,184
–3,775
–3,268
40,317
41,214
920
–495
–1,856
15,755
–340
–904
–41,685
..
–1,088
–12,933
..
–78,765
–673,261
–1,119
..
39,202
–6,992
..
–1,508
–505
..

24,686
493
2,807
427
428
6
123,609
2,753
382
27
6,087
3,788
5,333
1,907
96
196
5,343
2,928
22,959
5,534
9,492
55,073
67
–8,069
78
3,110
94
24,137
3,363
141
5,746
60,122
603
2,426
12,286
49,730
600
360
647
9,498
69
1,620
22,195
804
484
9,891
..
197,766
237,541
879
262
646
6,700
..
917
984
69
2,139,338s
19,975
501,721
232,806
268,916
521,696
175,340
151,521
107,270

28,905
29,926
28,734
1,617,642

1
73
35
83
4
21
..
..
149
38
14
..
14
–40
50
18
9
7
..
..
..
..
75
–5
71
113
99
..
..
44
17
..
29
52
..
..
4
33
68
–5
19
30
11
6
56
9
..
..
..
10
6
3
29
504
10
85
37
16w
37
9
9
9
19
4
13
12

55
7
44
0

178,108
3,203
20,255
3,105
7,373
3,645
..
..
3,390
972
8,934
..
40,680
9,862
2,245
3,570
32,154
65,845
195,374
..
85,380
370,172
496
..
2,588
26,280
348
..
..
2,944
43,380
..
14,020
19,126
..
..
..
1,228
5,063
63,067
1,968
20,231
251,477
743
1,611
73,600
..
..
..
12,363
3,876
43,148
24,222
..
5,926
2,789
5,293
..s
156,551
3,260,910
1,228,986
2,031,924
3,417,461
741,471
1,214,038
825,697

136,448
304,713
195,094

Present
value
% of 
GNI
2007

20
72
29
15d
46
22d
..
..
31d
12d
6
..
25
70
42
35
42
51
53
..
67
39
8d
..
21d
86
10d
..
..
..
19
..
42
93d
..
..
..
30
15d,g
29
80d
65
47
7
9d
66
..
..
..
69
20
26
35
..
23
7d
121

Domestic

credit
provided

by 

banking
sector
% of GDP

2008

37
40
98
14
..
53
198
151
66
6
26
..
46
86
26
22
19
46
60
185
41
27
..
10
25
38
14
84
54
..
88
213
43
17
136
185
37
28
17
136
25
73
51
..
12
82
67
215
220
33
..
20
95
..
11
19
..

158w
46
74
98
53
74
117
42
62

Net

migration
thousands
2000–05b
–2,702
–320
–550
–20
–1,000
–100
110
103
–206
–29
–170
84
–1,239
8
0
–45
–525
–900
–200
291
–270
964
6
285
–100
–339
336
139
10
–200
700
2,504
–442
–532
186
200
300
–345
–345
1,411
–4
–81
–71
–25
–5
–173
577
948
5,676
–104
–400
40
–200
11
–100
–82
–700

..wh

–3,728
–14,512
–11,119
–3,393
–18,240
–3,722
–2,138
–5,738

48
69
41
191

–1,850
–3,181
–1,611
18,091

a. The distinction between official aid, for countries on the Part II list of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development Development Assistance Committee (DAC), and official development 
assistance was dropped in 2005. Regional aggregates include data for economies not listed in the table. World and income group totals include aid not allocated by country or region. b. Total for the five-year 
period. c. Includes Luxembourg. d. Data are from debt sustainability analysis for low-income countries. e. Includes reexports. f. Data on total exports and imports refer to South Africa only. Data on export 
commodity shares refer to the South African Customs Union (Botswana, Lesotho, Namibia, and South Africa). g. GNI refers to mainland Tanzania only.  h. World total computed by the UN sums to zero, but 
because the aggregates shown here refer to World Bank definitions, regional and income group totals do not equal zero.

388 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 0

Table 6  Key indicators for other economies 

Population

Average 
annual
% growth
2000–08

 

Thousands

2008

density
people 

per

sq. km
2008

Population

composition

age 

%

ages
0–14
2008

American Samoa
Andorra
Antigua and Barbuda
Aruba
Bahamas, The
Bahrain
Barbados
Belize
Bermuda
Bhutan
Botswana
Brunei Darussalam
Cape Verde
Cayman Islands
Channel Islands
Comoros
Cuba
Cyprus
Djibouti
Dominica
Equatorial Guinea
Estonia
Faeroe Islands
Fiji
French Polynesia
Gabon
Gambia, The
Greenland
Grenada
Guam
Guinea-Bissau
Guyana
Iceland
Isle of Man
Jamaica
Kiribati
Korea, Dem. People’s Rep. of
Kosovo
Kuwait
Latvia
Lesotho
Liechtenstein
Luxembourg
Macao, China
Macedonia, FYR
Maldives
Malta
Marshall Islands
Mauritius
Mayotte
Micronesia, Federated States
Monaco
Mongolia
Montenegro
Namibia
Netherlands Antilles
New Caledonia
Northern Mariana Islands
Oman
Palau
Puerto Rico
Qatar
Samoa
San Marino
São Tomé and Principe

66
84
86
105
335
767
255
311
64
687
1,905
397
499
54
149
644
11,247
864
848
73
659
1,341
49
839
266
1,448
1,660
57
106
175
1,575
763
317
81
2,689
97
23,858
..
2,728
2,266
2,017
36
488
526
2,038
310
411
60
1,269
191
111
33
2,632
622
2,114
194
246
85
2,785
20
3,954
1,281
182
31
161

1.7
3.7c
1.3
1.9
1.3
2.1
0.2
2.7
0.4
2.5
1.2
2.2
1.6
3.7
0.2
2.2
0.1
1.2
1.9
0.3
2.8
–0.3
0.7
0.6
1.5
2.0
3.0
0.1
0.6
1.5
2.4
0.1
1.5
0.6
0.5
1.7
0.5
..
2.7
–0.6
0.8
1.1
1.4
2.2
0.2
1.6
0.7
1.9
0.8
2.9l
0.5
0.3c
1.2
–0.7
1.5
0.9
1.8
2.3c
1.8
0.7
0.4
9.1
0.6
1.3m
1.7

331
178
194
586
33
1,080
594
14
1,284
15
3
75
124
209
787
346
102
93
37
98
24
32
35
46
73
6
166
0i
310
325
56
4
3
141
248
119
198
..
153
36
66
222
188
18,659
80
1,035
1,286
331
625
511
159
16,821
2
45
3
242
13
186
9
44
446
116
64
517
168

..
..
..
20
26
27
18
36
..
31
34
27
37
..
16
38g
18
18
37
..
41
15
..
32
26
37
42
..
28
28
43
30
21
..
30
..
22
..
23
14
39
..
18
13
18
29
16
..
23
40
37
..
27
20
37
21
26
..
32
..
21
16
40
..
41

..
..
1,165
..
..
..
..
1,186
..
1,302
12,328
10,211
1,561
..
10,241
483
..
19,617h
957
349
9,875
19,131
..
3,300
..
10,490
653
..
603
..
386
1,081
12,702
3,516
13,098
193
..
..
99,865
26,883
2,179
..
41,406
18,142
8,432
1,126
6,825
195
8,122
..
260
..
4,411
4,008
8,880
..
..
..
32,755
175
..
..
504
1,430
164

Gross national
income (GNI)a

PPP

gross national
income (GNI) b

$ 

millions

2008

Life

expectancy

at birth

Male
years
2007

Female
years
2007

Adult
literacy

rate

% ages
15 and 
older
2007

..
..
..
72
71
74
74
73
76
64
50
75
68
..
77
63
76
77
54
..
49
67
77
67
72
59
54
..
67
73
46
64
79
..
70
59
65
..
76
66
43
..
76
79
72
68
77
..
69
..
68
..
64
72
52
71
72
..
74
66
74
75
69
79
64

..
..
..
77
76
77
80
79
82
68
51
80
74
..
81
67
80
82
56
..
51
79
81
71
77
62
57
..
70
78
49
70
83
..
75
63
69
..
80
77
42
..
82
83
77
69
82
..
76
..
69
..
70
76
53
79
80
..
77
72
83
77
75
85
67

..
..
..
98
..
89
..
..
..
53
83
95
84
99
..
75
100
98
..
..
..
100
..
..
..
86
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
86
..
..
..
94
100
..
..
..
94
97
97
92
..
87
..
..
..
97
..
88
96
96
..
84
..
..
93
99
..
88

Gross

domestic
product
per capita
% growth
2007–08

..
..
1.6
..
–0.2
..
..
0.9
4.3
12.0
–2.2
–1.3
4.5
..
5.7
–1.4
..
3.3
2.1
2.9
8.4
–3.6
..
–0.3
..
0.2
3.0
..
2.2
..
0.5
3.1
–1.6
7.3
–1.8
1.8
..
..
3.7
–4.2
3.4
..
–2.5
10.4
5.0
4.0
3.1
–0.8
4.7
..
–1.3
..
7.9
6.9
1.0
..
..
..
5.1
–1.6
..
..
–3.6
3.1
3.9

Per 
capita
dollars
2008
..d
..e
13,620
..e
..e
..e
..e
3,820
..e
1,900
6,470
26,740
3,130
..e
68,640
750
..d
22,950 h
1,130
4,770
14,980
14,270
..e
3,930
..e
7,240
390
..e
5,710
..e
250
1,420
40,070
43,710
4,870
2,000
..j
..k
38,420
11,860
1,080
..e
84,890
35,360
4,140
3,630
16,680
3,270
6,400
..d
2,340
..e
1,680
6,440
4,200
..e
..e
..e
12,270
8,650
..e
..e
2,780
46,770
1,020

$ 

millions

2008

..
..
1,760f
..
..
..
..
1,875f
..
3,349
24,964
19,540
1,720
..
..
754
..
20,549
1,972
607f
14,305
25,848
..
3,578
..
17,766
2,130
..
850f
..
832
1,916f
7,993
..
19,785f
353f
..
..
136,748
37,943
4,033
..
31,372
26,811
20,266
1,639
9,192
..
15,841
..
334f
..
9,158
8,661
13,248
..
..
..
55,126
..
..
..
789f
..
286

Per 
capita
dollars
2008

..
..
20,570f
..
..
..
..
6,040f
..
4,880
13,100
50,200
3,450
..
..
1,170
..
24,040
2,330
8,300f
21,700
19,280
..
4,270
..
12,270
1,280
..
8,060f
..
530
2,510f
25,220
..
7,360f
3,660f
..
..
52,610
16,740
2,000
..
64,320
52,260
9,950
5,280
22,460
..
12,480
..
3,000f
..
3,480
13,920
6,270
..
..
..
20,650
..
..
..
4,340f
..
1,780

 

Selected World Development Indicators 2010 

389

Table 6  Key indicators for other economies 

 

Thousands

2008

Seychelles
Slovenia
Solomon Islands
St. Kitts and Nevis
St. Lucia
St. Vincent and the Grenadines
Suriname
Swaziland
Timor-Leste
Tonga
Trinidad and Tobago
Vanuatu
Virgin Islands (U.S.)

86
2,039
507
49
170
109
515
1,168
1,098
104
1,338
231
110

Population

Average 
annual
% growth
2000–08

0.8
0.3
2.5
1.3
1.1
0.1
1.2
1.0
3.7
0.6
0.4
2.5
0.1

Population

composition

age 

%

ages
0–14
2008

density
people 

per

sq. km
2008

$ 

millions

2008

188
101
18
189
279
280
3
68
74
144
261
19
314

..
14
39
..
27
27
29
40
45
37
21
39
21

889
48,973
598
539
940
561
2,570
2,945
2,706
265
22,123
539
..

Gross national
income (GNI)a

PPP

gross national
income (GNI) b

Life

expectancy

at birth

Male
years
2007

Female
years
2007

Adult
literacy

rate

% ages
15 and 
older
2007

69
74
63
..
73
69
65
46
60
69
68
68
76

78
82
64
..
76
74
73
45
62
75
72
72
82

..
100
..
..
..
..
90
..
..
99
99
78
..

Gross

domestic
product
per capita
% growth
2007–08

1.3
2.5
4.9
8.8
1.1
0.9
6.0
1.1
9.6
0.7
3.0
4.2
..

Per 
capita
dollars
2008

10,290
24,010
1,180
10,960
5,530
5,140
4,990
2,520
2,460
2,560
16,540
2,330
..e

$ 

millions

2008
1,707f
54,875
1,309f
746f
1,561f
957f
3,674f
5,852
5,150f
402f
32,033f
910f
..

Per 
capita
dollars
2008
19,770f
26,910
2,580f
15,170f
9,190f
8,770f
7,130f
5,010
4,690f
3,880f
23,950f
3,940f
..

a. Calculated using the World Bank Atlas method. b. PPP is purchasing power parity; see technical notes. c. Data are for 2003–07. d. Estimated to be upper middle ($3,856–$11,905). e. Estimated to be high 
income ($11,906 or more). f. The estimate is based on regression; others are extrapolated from the latest International Comparison Program benchmark estimates. g. Includes Mayotte. h. Excludes Turkish 
Cypriot side. i. Less than 0.5. j. Estimated to be low income ($975 or less). k. Estimated to be lower middle income ($976–$3,855). l. Data are for 2002–07.  m. Data are for 2004–07. 

390 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 0

Technical notes
These technical notes discuss the sources and methods used 
to compile the indicators included in this edition of Selected 
World Development Indicators. The notes follow the order 
in which the indicators appear in the tables. 

Sources
The  data  published  in  the  Selected  World  Development 
Indicators  are  taken  from  World  Development  Indicators 
2009.  Where  possible,  however,  revisions  reported  since 
the closing date of that edition have been incorporated. In 
addition, newly released estimates of population and GNI 
per capita for 2008 are included in table 1 and table 6.

The World Bank draws on a variety of sources for the sta-
tistics published in the World Development Indicators. Data on 
external debt for developing countries are reported directly 
to the World Bank by developing member countries through 
the Debtor Reporting System. Other data are drawn mainly 
from the United Nations and its specialized agencies, from 
the IMF, and from country reports to the World Bank. Bank 
staff estimates are also used to improve currentness or con-
sistency. For most countries, national accounts estimates are 
obtained from member governments through World Bank 
economic missions. In some instances these are adjusted by 
staff numbers to ensure conformity with international defi-
nitions and concepts. Most social data from national sources 
are drawn from regular administrative files, special surveys, 
or periodic censuses. 

For more detailed notes about the data, please refer to the 

World Bank’s World Development Indicators 2009.

Data consistency and reliability
Considerable effort has been made to standardize the data, 
but  full  comparability  cannot  be  assured,  and  care  must 
be taken in interpreting the indicators. Many factors affect 
data availability, comparability, and reliability: statistical 
systems in many developing economies are still weak; sta-
tistical methods, coverage, practices, and definitions differ 
widely; and cross- country and intertemporal comparisons 
involve  complex  technical  and  conceptual  problems  that 
cannot be unequivocally resolved. Data coverage may not 
be complete because of special circumstances or for econo-
mies experiencing problems (such as those stemming from 
conflicts) affecting the collection and reporting of data. For 
these reasons, although the data are drawn from the sources 
thought to be most authoritative, they should be construed 
only as indicating trends and characterizing major differ-
ences among economies rather than offering precise quan-
titative measures of those differences. Discrepancies in data 
presented in different editions reflect updates by countries 
as well as revisions to historical series and changes in meth-
odology. Thus readers are advised not to compare data series 
between  editions  or  between  different  editions  of  World 

Bank publications. Consistent time series are available from 
the  World  Development  Indicators  2009  CD-ROM  and  in 
WDI Online.

Ratios and growth rates
For ease of reference, the tables usually show ratios and rates 
of growth rather than the simple underlying values. Values 
in their original form are available from the World Devel-
opment Indicators 2009 CD-ROM. Unless otherwise noted, 
growth rates are computed using the least- squares regres-
sion method (see Statistical methods). Because this method 
takes into account all available observations during a period, 
the resulting growth rates reflect general trends that are not 
unduly  influenced  by  exceptional  values.  To  exclude  the 
effects of inflation, constant price economic indicators are 
used in calculating growth rates. Data in italics are for a year 
or period other than that specified in the column heading—
up to two years before or after for economic indicators and 
up to three years for social indicators, because the latter tend 
to be collected less regularly and change less dramatically 
over short periods. 

Constant price series
An economy’s growth is measured by the increase in value 
added produced by the individuals and enterprises operat-
ing in that economy. Thus, measuring real growth requires 
estimates of GDP and its components valued in constant 
prices.  The  World  Bank  collects  constant  price  national 
accounts series in national currencies and recorded in the 
country’s original base year. To obtain comparable series 
of constant price data, it rescales GDP and value added by 
industrial origin to a common reference year, 2000 in the 
current version of the World Development Indicators. This 
process gives rise to a discrepancy between the rescaled GDP 
and the sum of the rescaled components. Because allocating 
the discrepancy would give rise to distortions in the growth 
rate, it is left unallocated.

Summary measures
The summary measures for regions and income groups, pre-
sented at the end of most tables, are calculated by simple 
addition when they are expressed in levels. Aggregate growth 
rates and ratios are usually computed as weighted averages. 
The summary measures for social indicators are weighted 
by population or subgroups of population, except for infant 
mortality, which is weighted by the number of births. See 
the notes on specific indicators for more information. 

For summary measures that cover many years, calcula-
tions are based on a uniform group of economies so that 
the  composition  of  the  aggregate  does  not  change  over 
time. Group measures are compiled only if the data avail-
able for a given year account for at least two- thirds of the 
full group, as defined for the 2000 benchmark year. As long 

 

Selected World Development Indicators 2010 

391

as this criterion is met, economies for which data are miss-
ing are assumed to behave like those that provide estimates. 
Readers should keep in mind that the summary measures 
are estimates of representative aggregates for each topic and 
that nothing meaningful can be deduced about behavior at 
the country level by working back from group indicators. In 
addition, the estimation process may result in discrepancies 
between subgroup and overall totals. 

Table 1. Key indicators of development
Population is based on the de facto definition, which counts 
all residents, regardless of legal status or citizenship, except 
for refugees not permanently settled in the country of asy-
lum, who are generally considered part of the population of 
the country of origin. The values shown are midyear esti-
mates. (Eurostat, United Nations Population Division, and 
World Bank)

Average annual population growth rate is the exponen-
tial rate of change for the period (see the section on Sta-
tistical  methods).  (Eurostat,  United  Nations  Population 
Division, and World Bank)

Population  density  is  midyear  population  divided  by 
land area in square kilometers. Land area is a country’s total 
area, excluding area under inland water bodies. (Eurostat, 
United Nations Population Division, and World Bank)

Population age composition, ages 0–14 refers to the per-
centage of the total population that is ages 0–14. (Eurostat, 
United Nations Population Division, and World Bank)

Gross national income (GNI) is the broadest measure 
of  national  income.  It  measures  total  value  added  from 
domestic  and  foreign  sources  claimed  by  residents.  GNI 
comprises GDP plus net receipts of primary income from 
foreign sources. Data are converted from national currency 
to current U.S. dollars using the World Bank Atlas method. 
This involves using a three- year average of exchange rates to 
smooth the effects of transitory exchange rate fluctuations. 
(See the section on Statistical methods for further discus-
sion of the Atlas method.) (World Bank)

GNI per capita is GNI divided by midyear population. It 
is converted into current U.S. dollars by the Atlas method. 
The World Bank uses GNI per capita in U.S. dollars to clas-
sify  economies  for  analytical  purposes  and  to  determine 
borrowing eligibility. (World Bank)

PPP gross national income is GNI converted into inter-
national dollars using purchasing power parity (PPP) con-
version factors, is included. Because exchange rates do not 
always reflect differences in price levels between countries, 
this table converts GNI and GNI per capita estimates into 
international  dollars  using  PPP  rates.  PPP  rates  provide 
a standard measure allowing comparison of real levels of 
expenditure between countries, just as conventional price 
indexes  allow  comparison  of  real  values  over  time.  The 
PPP conversion factors used here are derived from the 2005 

round of price surveys covering 146 countries conducted by 
the International Comparison Program. For OECD coun-
tries,  data  come  from  the  most  recent  round  of  surveys, 
completed in 2005. Estimates for countries not included in 
the surveys are derived from statistical models using avail-
able data. For more information on the 2005 International 
Comparison Program, go to www.worldbank.org/data/icp. 
(World Bank, Eurostat/OECD)

PPP GNI per capita is PPP GNI divided by midyear pop-

ulation. (World Bank, Eurostat/OECD)

Gross domestic product per capita growth is based on 
GDP measured in constant prices. Growth in GDP is con-
sidered a broad measure of the growth of an economy. GDP 
in constant prices can be estimated by measuring the total 
quantity of goods and services produced in a period, valuing 
them at an agreed set of base year prices, and subtracting the 
cost of intermediate inputs, also in constant prices. See the 
section on Statistical methods for details of the least- squares 
growth rate. (World Bank, Eurostat/OECD)

Life expectancy at birth is the number of years a new-
born baby would live if patterns of mortality prevailing at its 
birth were to stay the same throughout its life. Data are pre-
sented for males and females separately. (Eurostat, United 
Nations Population Division, World Bank)

Adult literacy rate is the percentage of persons aged 15 
and older who can, with understanding, read and write a 
short, simple statement about their everyday life. In practice, 
literacy is difficult to measure. To estimate literacy using 
such a definition requires census or survey measurements 
under controlled conditions. Many countries estimate the 
number of literate people from self- reported data. Some use 
educational attainment data as a proxy but apply different 
lengths of school attendance or level of completion. Because 
definition and methodologies of data collection differ across 
countries,  data  need  to  be  used  with  caution.  (UNESCO 
Institute for Statistics) 

Table 2. Poverty
The World Bank periodically prepares poverty assessments 
of countries in which it has an active program, in close col-
laboration  with  national  institutions,  other  development 
agencies, and civil society groups, including poor people’s 
organizations. Poverty assessments report the extent and 
causes of poverty and propose strategies to reduce it. Since 
1992  the  World  Bank  has  conducted  about  200  poverty 
assessments, which are the main source of the poverty esti-
mates using national poverty lines presented in the table. 
Countries report similar assessments as part of their Poverty 
Reduction Strategies.

The World Bank also produces poverty estimates using 
international poverty lines to monitor progress in poverty 
reduction  globally.  The  first  global  poverty  estimates  for 
developing countries were produced for World Development 

392 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 0

Report 1990: Poverty using household survey data for 22 
countries (Ravallion, Datt, and van de Walle 1991). Since 
then there has been considerable expansion in the number 
of countries that field household income and expenditure 
surveys. 

National and international poverty lines.      National poverty 
lines are used to make estimates of poverty consistent with 
the country’s specific economic and social circumstances 
and are not intended for international comparisons of pov-
erty rates. The setting of national poverty lines reflects local 
perceptions of the level of consumption or income needed 
not to be poor. The perceived boundary between poor and 
not poor rises with the average income of a country and so 
does not provide a uniform measure for comparing pov-
erty rates across countries. Nevertheless, national poverty 
estimates  are  clearly  the  appropriate  measure  for  setting 
national policies for poverty reduction and for monitoring 
their results. 

International  comparisons  of  poverty  estimates  entail 
both  conceptual  and  practical  problems.  Countries  have 
different definitions of poverty, and consistent comparisons 
across countries can be difficult. Local poverty lines tend to 
have higher purchasing power in rich countries, where more 
generous standards are used, than in poor countries. Inter-
national poverty lines attempt to hold the real value of the 
poverty line constant across countries, as is done when mak-
ing comparisons over time, regardless of average income of 
countries. 

Since World Development Report 1990 the World Bank 
has  aimed  to  apply  a  common  standard  in  measuring 
extreme poverty, anchored to what poverty means in the 
world’s poorest countries. The welfare of people living in 
different countries can be measured on a common scale by 
adjusting for differences in the purchasing power of cur-
rencies. The commonly used $1 a day standard, measured 
in 1985 international prices and adjusted to local currency 
using PPPs, was chosen for World Development Report 1990 
because it was typical of the poverty lines in low- income 
countries at the time. Later this $1 a day line was revised to 
be $1.08 a day measured in 1993 international prices. More 
recently, the international poverty lines were revised using 
the new data on PPPs compiled by the 2005 round of the 
International Comparison Program, along with data from 
an expanded set of household income and expenditure sur-
veys. The new extreme poverty line is set at $1.25 a day in 
2005 PPP terms, which represents the mean of the poverty 
lines found in the poorest 15 countries ranked by per capita 
consumption.  The  new  poverty  line  maintains  the  same 
standard for extreme poverty—the poverty line typical of 
the  poorest  countries  in  the  world—but  updates  it  using 

the latest information on the cost of living in developing 
countries.

Quality and availability of survey data.      Poverty estimates 
are  derived  using  surveys  fielded  to  collect,  among  other 
things, information on income or consumption from a sam-
ple of households. To be useful for poverty estimates, sur-
veys must be nationally representative and include sufficient 
information to compute a comprehensive estimate of total 
household consumption or income (including consumption 
or income from own production), from which it is possible 
to construct a correctly weighted distribution of consump-
tion or income per person. Over the past 20 years there has 
been considerable expansion in the number of countries that 
field surveys and in the frequency of the surveys. The quality 
of their data has improved greatly as well. The World Bank’s 
poverty monitoring database now includes more than 600 
surveys representing 115 developing countries. More than 
1.2 million randomly sampled households were interviewed 
in these surveys, representing 96 percent of the population 
of developing countries.

Measurement  issues  using  survey  data.      Besides  the  fre-
quency and timeliness of survey data, other data issues arise 
in measuring household living standards. One relates to the 
choice  of  income  or  consumption  as  a  welfare  indicator. 
Income is generally more difficult to measure accurately, 
and consumption comes closer to the notion of standard 
of living. And income can vary over time even if the stan-
dard of living does not. But consumption data are not always 
available: the latest estimates reported here use consump-
tion for about two- thirds of countries. Another issue is that 
even similar surveys may not be strictly comparable because 
of differences in number of consumer goods they identify, 
a difference in the length of the period over which respon-
dents must recall their expenditures, or differences in the 
quality and training of enumerators. Selective nonresponse 
are also a concern in some surveys.

Comparisons of countries at different levels of develop-
ment also pose a potential problem because of differences 
in the relative importance of the consumption of nonmar-
ket  goods.  The  local  market  value  of  all  consumption  in 
kind  (including  own  production,  particularly  important 
in underdeveloped rural economies) should be included in 
total  consumption  expenditure,  but  may  not  be.  Surveys 
now  routinely  include  imputed  values  for  consumption 
in- kind from own- farm production. Imputed profit from 
the production of nonmarket goods should be included in 
income, but is not always done (such omissions were a big-
ger problem in surveys before the 1980s). Most survey data 
now include valuations for consumption or income from 
own production, but valuation methods vary.

 

Selected World Development Indicators 2010 

393

Definitions
Survey year is the year in which the underlying data were 
collected. 

Population below national poverty line, National is the 
percentage of the population living below the national poverty 
line. National estimates are based on population- weighted 
subgroup estimates from household surveys. (World Bank)

Population below $1.25 a day and population below $2 
a day are the percentages of the population living on less 
than $1.25 a day and $2 a day at 2005 international prices. 
As a result of revisions in PPP exchange rates, poverty rates 
for individual countries cannot be compared with poverty 
rates reported in earlier editions. (World Bank)

Poverty gap is the mean shortfall from the poverty line 
(counting the nonpoor as having zero shortfall), expressed 
as a percentage of the poverty line. This measure reflects the 
depth of poverty as well as its incidence. (World Bank)

Table 3. Millennium Development Goals: eradicating 
poverty and improving lives
Share  of  poorest  quintile  in  national  consumption  or 
income is the share of the poorest 20 percent of the popula-
tion in consumption or, in some cases, income. It is a distribu-
tional measure. Countries with more unequal distributions 
of consumption (or income) have a higher rate of poverty for 
a given average income. Data are from nationally representa-
tive household surveys. Because the underlying household 
surveys differ in method and type of data collected, the dis-
tribution data are not strictly comparable across countries. 
The World Bank staff have made an effort to ensure that the 
data are as comparable as possible. Wherever possible, con-
sumption has been used rather than income. (World Bank)

Vulnerable  employment  is  the  sum  of  unpaid  family 
workers and own- account workers as a percentage of total 
employment. The proportion of unpaid family workers and 
own- account workers in total employment is derived from 
information on status in employment. Each status group 
faces different economic risks, and unpaid family workers 
and  own- account  workers  are  the  most  vulnerable—and 
therefore the most likely to fall into poverty. They are the 
least likely to have formal work arrangements, are the least 
likely  to  have  social  protection  and  safety  nets  to  guard 
against economic shocks, and are often incapable of gener-
ating sufficient savings to offset these shocks. (International 
Labour Organization)

Prevalence of child malnutrition  is  the  percentage  of 
children under five whose weight for age is less than minus 
two standard deviations from the median for the interna-
tional  reference  population  ages  0–59  months.  The  table 
presents data for the new child growth standards released 
by the World Health Organization (WHO) in 2006. Esti-
mates of child malnutrition are from national survey data. 

The proportion of children who are underweight is the most 
common  indicator  of  malnutrition.  Being  underweight, 
even mildly, increases the risk of death and inhibits cogni-
tive development in children. Moreover, it perpetuates the 
problem from one generation to the next, as malnourished 
women  are  more  likely  to  have  low- birth weight  babies. 
(WHO)

Primary completion rate is the percentage of students 
completing the last year of primary school. It is calculated by 
taking the total number of students in the last grade of pri-
mary school, minus the number of repeaters in that grade, 
divided by the total number of children of official gradua-
tion age. The primary completion rate reflects the primary 
cycle as defined by the International Standard Classification 
of Education (ISCED), ranging from three or four years of 
primary education (in a very small number of countries) to 
five or six years (in most countries) and seven (in a small 
number of countries). Because curricula and standards for 
school completion vary across countries, a high rate of pri-
mary completion does not necessarily mean high levels of 
student learning. (UNESCO Institute for Statistics)

Ratio of girls to boys enrollments in primary and sec-
ondary school is the ratio of the female gross enrollment 
rate  in  primary  and  secondary  school  to  the  male  gross 
enrollment rate.

Eliminating gender disparities in education would help 
to increase the status and capabilities of women. This indi-
cator is an imperfect measure of the relative accessibility 
of schooling for girls. School enrollment data are reported 
to the UNESCO Institute for Statistics by national educa-
tion authorities. Primary education provides children with 
basic reading, writing, and mathematics skills along with an 
elementary understanding of such subjects as history, geog-
raphy, natural science, social science, art, and music. Sec-
ondary education completes the provision of basic education 
that began at the primary level and aims at laying founda-
tions for lifelong learning and human development by offer-
ing more subject-  or skill- oriented instruction using more 
specialized teachers. (UNESCO Institute for Statistics)

Under- five mortality rate is the probability per 1,000 that 
a newborn baby will die before reaching age five, if subject 
to current age- specific mortality rates. The main sources of 
mortality  data  are  vital  registration  systems  and  direct  or 
indirect estimates based on sample surveys or censuses. To 
make under- five mortality estimates comparable across coun-
tries and over time and to ensure consistency across estimates 
by different agencies, UNICEF and the World Bank developed 
and adopted a statistical method that uses all available infor-
mation to reconcile differences. The method fits a regression 
line  to  the  relationship  between  mortality  rates  and  their 
reference dates using weighted least-squares. (Inter- agency 
Group for Child Mortality Estimation) 

394 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 0

Maternal mortality rate is the number of women who 
die  from  pregnancy- related  causes  during  pregnancy  and 
childbirth per 100,000 live births. The values are modeled 
estimates. The modeled estimates are based on an exercise by 
WHO, United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), United 
Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), and World Bank. For 
countries with complete vital registration systems with good 
attribution of cause of death information, the data are used 
as reported. For countries with national data, either from 
complete vital registration systems with uncertain or poor 
attribution of cause of death information, or from household 
surveys, reported maternal mortality was adjusted usually 
by a factor of underenumeration and misclassification. For 
countries  with  no  empirical  national  data  (about  35  per-
cent of countries), maternal mortality was estimated with a 
regression model using socioeconomic information, includ-
ing fertility, birth attendants, and GDP. (WHO, UNICEF, 
UNFPA, World Bank)

Prevalence of HIV is the percentage of people ages 15–49 
who  are  infected  with  HIV.  Adult  HIV  prevalence  rates 
reflect the rate of HIV infection in each country’s popula-
tion. Low national prevalence rates can be very misleading, 
however.  They  often  disguise  serious  epidemics  that  are 
initially concentrated in certain localities or among specific 
population groups and threaten to spill over into the wider 
population. In many parts of the developing world, most 
new infections occur in young adults, with young women 
especially vulnerable. (Joint United Nations Programme on 
HIV/AIDS [UNAIDS] and WHO) 

Incidence  of  tuberculosis  is  the  estimated  number  of 
new  tuberculosis  cases  (pulmonary,  smear  positive,  and 
extrapulmonary). Tuberculosis is one of the main causes of 
death from a single infectious agent among adults in devel-
oping countries. In high- income countries tuberculosis has 
reemerged largely as a result of cases among immigrants. 
The  estimates  of  tuberculosis  incidence  in  the  table  are 
based on a approach in which reported cases are adjusted 
using the ratio of case notifications to the estimated share of 
cases detected by panels of 80 epidemiologists convened by 
the WHO. (WHO)

Carbon dioxide emissions are those stemming from the 
burning of fossil fuels and the manufacture of cement and 
include  carbon  dioxide  produced  during  consumption  of 
solid, liquid, and gas fuels and gas flaring divided by midyear 
population (Carbon Dioxide Information Analysis Center, 
World Bank). 

Access to improved sanitation facilities is the percent-
age of the population with at least adequate access to excreta 
disposal facilities (private or shared, but not public) that can 
effectively prevent human, animal, and insect contact with 
excreta (facilities do not have to include treatment to render 
sewage outflows innocuous). Improved facilities range from 

simple but protected pit latrines to flush toilets with a sewer-
age connection. To be effective, facilities must be correctly 
constructed and properly maintained. (WHO and UNICEF)
Internet users are people with access to the worldwide 

network. (International Telecommunications Division)

Table 4. Economic activity
Gross domestic product is gross value added, at purchas-
ers’ prices, by all resident producers in the economy plus 
any  taxes  and  minus  any  subsidies  not  included  in  the 
value of the products. It is calculated without deducting for 
depreciation of fabricated assets or for depletion or degra-
dation of natural resources. Value added is the net output 
of an industry after adding up all outputs and subtracting 
intermediate inputs. The industrial origin of value added is 
determined by the International Standard Industrial Clas-
sification (ISIC) revision 3. The World Bank conventionally 
uses the U.S. dollar and applies the average official exchange 
rate reported by the IMF for the year shown. An alterna-
tive conversion factor is applied if the official exchange rate 
is judged to diverge by an exceptionally large margin from 
the rate effectively applied to transactions in foreign cur-
rencies and traded products. (World Bank, OECD, United 
Nations)

Gross domestic product average annual growth rate is 
calculated from constant price GDP data in local currency. 
(World Bank, OECD, United Nations)

Agricultural  productivity  is  the  ratio  of  agricultural 
value added, measured in 2000 U.S. dollars, to the num-
ber of workers in agriculture. Agricultural productivity is 
measured  by  value  added  per  unit  of  input.  Agricultural 
value added includes that from forestry and fishing. Thus 
interpretations of land productivity should be made with 
caution. (FAO)

Value added is the net output of an industry after add-
ing up all outputs and subtracting intermediate inputs. The 
industrial origin of value added is determined by the ISIC 
revision 3. (World Bank)

Agriculture value added corresponds to ISIC divisions 

1–5 and includes forestry and fishing. (World Bank)

Industry value added comprises mining, manufactur-
ing, construction, electricity, water, and gas (ISIC divisions 
10–45). (World Bank, OECD, United Nations)

Services value added correspond to ISIC divisions 50–99. 

(World Bank, OECD, United Nations)

Household final consumption expenditure is the market 
value of all goods and services, including durable products 
(such as cars, washing machines, and home computers), pur-
chased by households. It excludes purchases of dwellings but 
includes imputed rent for owner- occupied dwellings. It also 
includes payments and fees to governments to obtain per-
mits and licenses. Here, household consumption expenditure 

 

Selected World Development Indicators 2010 

395

includes the expenditures of nonprofit institutions serving 
households, even when reported separately by the country. 
In practice, household consumption expenditure may include 
any statistical discrepancy in the use of resources relative to 
the supply of resources. (World Bank, OECD)

General  government  final  consumption  expenditure 
includes all government current expenditures for purchases 
of goods and services (including compensation of employ-
ees). It also includes most expenditures on national defense 
and  security,  but  excludes  government  military  expendi-
tures that are part of government capital formation. (World 
Bank, OECD)

Gross capital formation consists of outlays on additions 
to the fixed assets of the economy plus net changes in the 
level of inventories and valuables. Fixed assets include land 
improvements (fences, ditches, drains, and so on); plant, 
machinery, and equipment purchases; and the construction 
of buildings, roads, railways, and the like, including com-
mercial and industrial buildings, offices, schools, hospitals, 
and private dwellings. Inventories are stocks of goods held 
by firms to meet temporary or unexpected fluctuations in 
production or sales, and “work in progress.” According to 
the 1993 SNA, net acquisitions of valuables are also consid-
ered capital formation. (World Bank, OECD)

External  balance  of  goods  and  services  is  exports  of 
goods and services less imports of goods and services. Trade 
in  goods  and  services  comprise  all  transactions  between 
residents of a country and the rest of the world involving 
a change in ownership of general merchandise, goods sent 
for processing and repairs, non monetary gold, and services. 
(World Bank, OECD)

GDP implicit deflator  reflects  changes  in  prices  for  all 
final demand categories, such as government consumption, 
capital  formation,  and  international  trade,  as  well  as  the 
main component, private final consumption. It is derived as 
the ratio of current to constant price GDP. The GDP deflator 
may also be calculated explicitly as a Paasche price index in 
which the weights are the current period quantities of output. 
(National accounts indicators for most developing countries 
are collected from national statistical organizations and cen-
tral banks by visiting and resident World Bank missions. Data 
for high- income economies come from the OECD.)

Table 5. Trade, aid, and finance
Merchandise trade exports show the free on board (f.o.b.) 
value of goods provided to the rest of the world valued in U.S. 
dollars. 

Merchandise trade imports show the c.i.f. value of goods 
(the cost of the goods including insurance and freight) pur-
chased  from  the  rest  of  the  world  valued  in  U.S.  dollars. 
(Data on merchandise trade come from the World Trade 
Organization (WTO) in its annual report.)

Manufactured  exports  comprise  the  commodities  in 
Standard  Industrial  Trade  Classification  (SITC)  sections 
5 (chemicals), 6 (basic manufactures), 7 (machinery and 
transport equipment), and 8 (miscellaneous manufactured 
goods),  excluding  division  68  (United  Nations  Statistics 
Division Commodity Trade statistics database).

High technology exports are products with high R&D 
intensity. They include high- technology products such as in 
aerospace,  computers,  pharmaceuticals,  scientific  instru-
ments, and electrical machinery. (United Nations Statistics 
Division Commodity Trade statistics database)

Current account balance is the sum of net exports of goods 

and services, net income, and net current transfers. (IMF)

Foreign direct investment net inflows (FDI) is net inflows 
of investment to acquire a lasting management interest (10 
percent or more of voting stock) in an enterprise operating in 
an economy other than that of the investor. It is the sum of 
equity capital, re investment of earnings, other long- term cap-
ital, and short- term capital, as shown in the balance of pay-
ments. (Data on FDI are based on balance of payments data 
reported by the IMF, supplemented by World Bank staff esti-
mates using data reported by the United Nations Conference 
on Trade and Development and official national sources.)

Net  official  development  assistance  (ODA)  from  the 
high- income members of the OECD is the main source of 
official external finance for developing countries, but ODA 
is also disbursed by some important donor countries that 
are not members of OECD’s DAC. DAC has three criteria for 
ODA: it is undertaken by the official sector; it promotes eco-
nomic development or welfare as a main objective; and it is 
provided on concessional terms, with a grant element of at 
least 25 percent on loans (calculated at a 10 percent discount 
rate).

Official  development  assistance  comprises  grants  and 
loans,  net  of  repayments,  that  meet  the  DAC  definition 
of ODA and are made to countries and territories on the 
DAC list of aid recipients. The new DAC list of recipients 
is  organised  on  more  objective  needs- based  criteria  than 
its predecessors and includes all low- and middle-income 
countries, except those that are members of the G8 or the 
European Union (including countries with a firm date for 
EU admission). (OECD DAC)

Total external debt is debt owed to nonresidents repayable 
in foreign currency, goods, or services. It is the sum of public, 
publicly guaranteed, and private non guaranteed long- term 
debt, use of IMF credit, and short- term debt. Short- term debt 
includes all debt having an original maturity of one year or 
less and interest in arrears on long- term debt. (World Bank)

Present value of external debt is the sum of short- term 
external debt plus the discounted sum of total debt service 
payments due on public, publicly guaranteed, and private non-
guaranteed long- term external debt over the life of existing 

396 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 0

loans. (Data on external debt are mainly from reports to the 
World Bank through its Debtor Reporting System from mem-
ber countries that have received International Bank for Recon-
struction  and  Development  (IBRD)  loans  or  International 
Development Association (IDA) credits, with additional infor-
mation from the files of the World Bank, the IMF, the Afri-
can Development Bank and African Development Fund, the 
Asian Development Bank and Asian Development Fund, and 
the Inter American Development Bank. Summary tables of the 
external debt of developing countries are published annually 
in the World Bank’s Global Development Finance.)

Domestic credit provided by banking sector includes all 
credit to various sectors on a gross basis, with the exception 
of credit to the central government, which is net. The banking 
sector includes monetary authorities, deposit money banks, 
and  other  banking  institutions  for  which  data  are  avail-
able (including institutions that do not accept transferable 
deposits but do incur such liabilities as time and savings 
deposits). Examples of other banking institutions include 
savings and mortgage loan institutions and building and 
loan associations. (Data are from the IMF’s International 
Finance Statistics.)

Net migration  is  the  net  total  of  migrants  during  the 
period. It is the total number of immigrants less the total 
number of emigrants, including both citizens and nonciti-
zens. Data are five- year estimates. (Data are from the United 
Nations Population Division’s World Population Prospects: 
The 2008 Revision.)

Table 6. Key indicators for other economies
See Technical notes for Table 1. Key indicators of development.

Statistical methods
This  section  describes  the  calculation  of  the  least- squares 
growth rate, the exponential (endpoint) growth rate, and the 
World Bank’s Atlas methodology for calculating the conver-
sion factor used to estimate GNI and GNI per capita in U.S. 
dollars.

Least- squares growth rate
Least- squares growth rates are used wherever there is a suf-
ficiently long-time series to permit a reliable calculation. No 
growth rate is calculated if more than half the observations 
in a period are missing. 

The least- squares growth rate, r, is estimated by fitting a 
linear regression trendline to the logarithmic annual values 
of the variable in the relevant period. The regression equa-
tion takes the form 

ln Xt = a + bt,

which is equivalent to the logarithmic transformation of the 
compound growth equation,

Xt = Xo (1 + r)t.

In this equation, X is the variable, t is time, and a = log Xo 
and b = ln (1 + r ) are the parameters to be estimated. If b* is 
the least- squares estimate of b, the average annual growth rate, 
r, is obtained as [exp(b* )–1] and is multiplied by 100 to express 
it as a percentage. 

The calculated growth rate is an average rate that is repre-
sentative of the available observations over the entire period. 
It does not necessarily match the actual growth rate between 
any two periods. 

Exponential growth rate
The  growth  rate  between  two  points  in  time  for  certain 
demographic data, notably labor force and population, is 
calculated from the equation 

r = ln (pn/p1)/n,

where pn and p1 are the last and first observations in the 
period, n is the number of years in the period, and ln is the 
natural logarithm operator. This growth rate is based on 
a model of continuous, exponential growth between two 
points in time. It does not take into account the intermediate 
values of the series. Note also that the exponential growth 
rate does not correspond to the annual rate of change mea-
sured at a one- year interval which is given by

(pn – pn–1)/pn–1.

World Bank Atlas method
In calculating GNI and GNI per capita in U.S. dollars for 
certain operational purposes, the World Bank uses the Atlas 
conversion factor. The purpose of the Atlas conversion factor 
is to reduce the impact of exchange rate fluctuations in the 
cross-country comparison of national incomes. The Atlas 
conversion factor for any year is the average of a country’s 
exchange rate (or alternative conversion factor) for that year 
and its exchange rates for the two preceding years, adjusted 
for the difference between the rate of inflation in the country 
and that in Japan, the United Kingdom, the United States, 
and the Euro area. A country’s inflation rate is measured by 
the change in its GDP deflator. The inflation rate for Japan, 
the United Kingdom, the United States, and the Euro area, 
representing  international  inflation,  is  measured  by  the 
change in the special drawing right (SDR) deflator. (SDRs 
are the IMF’s unit of account.) The SDR deflator is calcu-
lated as a weighted average of these countries’ GDP defla-
tors in SDR terms, the weights being the amount of each 
country’s currency in one SDR unit. Weights vary over time 
because both the composition of the SDR and the relative 
exchange rates for each currency change. The SDR deflator 
is calculated in SDR terms first and then converted to U.S. 
dollars using the SDR to dollar Atlas conversion factor. The 
Atlas conversion factor is then applied to a country’s GNI. 
The resulting GNI in U.S. dollars is divided by the midyear 
population to derive GNI per capita.

 

Selected World Development Indicators 2010 

397

When official exchange rates are deemed to be unreliable 
or unrepresentative of the effective exchange rate during a 
period, an alternative estimate of the exchange rate is used 
in the Atlas formula (see below). 

The following formulas describe the calculation of the 

Atlas conversion factor for year t :

e

*
t

=

1
3






e

−

2

t




p
t
p
t

−

2

/

$

s
p
t
s
$
p
−
t

2


 +

e

−
1

t




p
t
p
t

−
11

/

$

s
p
t
s
p
t

$
−
1


 +

e

t






and the calculation of GNI per capita in U.S. dollars for year t:

Yt

$ = (Yt/Nt)/et*

where et* is the Atlas conversion factor (national currency to 
the U.S. dollar) for year t, et is the average annual exchange 
rate (national currency to the U.S. dollar) for year t, pt is the 
S$ is the SDR deflator in U.S. dollar 
GDP deflator for year t, pt
$ is the Atlas GNI per capita in U.S. dollars 
terms for year t, Yt

in year t, Yt  is current GNI (local currency) for year t, and Nt 
is the midyear population for year t.

Alternative conversion factors 
The World Bank systematically assesses the appropriateness 
of official exchange rates as conversion factors. An alterna-
tive  conversion  factor  is  used  when  the  official  exchange 
rate is judged to diverge by an exceptionally large margin 
from the rate effectively applied to domestic transactions 
of foreign currencies and traded products. This applies to 
only a small number of countries, as shown in primary data 
documentation table in World Development Indicators 2009. 
Alternative conversion factors are used in the Atlas meth-
odology and elsewhere in the Selected World Development 
Indicators as single- year conversion factors.

Index

Boxes, figures, maps, notes, and tables are indicated by b, f, m, n, and t following page numbers.

A
AAUs. See assigned amount units
accountability of government, 264, 333–34, 335b
acid rain, 81n11, 191, 206, 236
action now. See mitigation actions
“activity-based” approach to emission reductions, 25b
Adaptation Fund under Kyoto Protocol, 23, 107, 233, 247, 257, 

262–63, 266

adaptative management, 14–18, 14f, 89–90

capacity to adapt, 278, 280b
characteristics of, 90b
community resilience and, 105
costs and financing, 257, 259–63, 260t, 261b, 264. See also 

finance

fund allocation, 277–78, 277b
private financing, 275–76
public financing, 332

ecosystem-based adaptation, 4, 7, 19, 70, 91, 128–29
efficiency cost of adaptation funding, 266–69
in energy, 14–16, 14f, 80f, 189
fostering synergies between mitigation and adaptation, 95, 95b
innovation and new technologies for, 18–26, 19b, 288, 289, 291. 

See also innovation and new technologies

knowledge institutions’ role in, 306
in land and water use, 14f, 16–18, 17b, 25b
need for, 44, 60–61, 136–37, 154–56
private finance for, 275–76
UNFCCC and, 246–48
world in 2050 and after, 88

advanced technologies. See innovation and new technologies
advisory services, 135
aerosols. See greenhouse gases
affordability of climate change reduction, 7–10, 191
Africa. See also specific countries and regions

agricultural decrease in productivity due to climate change in, 

5, 5m, 146, 150
aquaculture in, 158f
beef production in, 147
biofuel production in, 147
dams in, 143
diseases in, 95, 97
disproportionate consequences of climate change on, 77f, 168
drought in, 105
floods in, 100, 100f
higher education enrollment in, 305b

hydropower in, 45, 46m
mitigation of greenhouse gases in, 1–2
protected areas for biodiversity in, 152–53
soil carbon in, 25b
water shortages as result of climate change in, 76
weather forecasting in, 162
wildlife conservation programs in, 127

agency for climate change, designation of, 20, 333b
aggregators, role of, 25b, 171
agricultural extension agencies, 18, 25b, 100b, 104, 154, 171,  

304

agricultural soil carbon. See soil carbon
agriculture, 133–37, 145–56. See also food resources; irrigation 

systems

acceleration of productivity, 145–49, 150f

dead zones, proliferation caused by, 149, 150m
without sacrificing soil, water, and biodiversity, 149–51

adaptative management of, 14f, 16–18, 17b, 25b
biofuels. See biofuels
biotech crops, 155, 155b
carbon sequestration and, 169–71
climate-resilient farming requirements, 151–52
“conservation agriculture,” 154
crop choice, factors in, 135
crop insurance, 89–90, 102, 338
crop varieties and diversification, 19b, 151–52, 152b, 155b
decrease in productivity due to climate change, 4–5, 5m, 27n24, 

40–41, 74, 76, 133, 145–46, 145m, 148, 159–60

ecoagriculture, 153, 153f
ecosystems converted for, 150, 151f
fertilizer use. See fertilizer
genetic modification of crops, 155b
inertia in farmer behavior, 11
international cooperation in, 13–14
minimum tillage methods, 154–55, 170
mitigation of climate change, effect of, 146–47
promising practices in, 17b
subsidies from wealthier countries, 134, 172
technological innovation in, 16–18, 17b, 150–51, 154–56, 166, 

166–67f, 293

trade in agricultural commodities, 159–61, 161m
tropical farmers and product/market diversification, 152b
water use and. See water resources
women’s empowerment in, 43b
world in 2050 and after, 88

399

400 

I N D E X

air pollution

advanced technologies for reduction of, 208
clean energy impact on, 192b
as climate change consequence, 79
energy demand and, 79
pricing of, 208

Alexandria, flooding risks and storm exposure, 93b
alternative technologies. See innovation and new technologies
Amazon rain forest, 17b, 78, 88
ancient history and environmental change, 37
Ansari X-Prize, 299
Antarctic. See polar regions
aquaculture, 157–58, 158f
Arab countries. See Middle East and North Africa
Aral Sea, 6b, 45
Arctic warming. See polar regions
Argentina

export controls in, 46, 160
privatization of water services in, 98

Asia. See also specific countries and regions

agricultural innovation in, 17b, 151
aquaculture in, 158, 158f
biofuel production in, 147
car use in, 194
cereal production in, 150
crop yield decline in, 146
fires, emissions from, 146
food pricing in, 168
impact of climate change in, 77f
water shortages as result of climate change in, 76

assigned amount units (AAUs), 24, 270, 278
Aswan Dam (Egypt), 143
auctioning, 24, 270, 278
Australia

cities encouraging energy efficiency in, 21b
climate education in schools in, 329b
emissions reduction in, 192b
greenhouse gases in, 2
impact of climate change in, 77f
tradable water rights in, 141–42, 142b
water pricing in, 141

automobiles

consumer preferences, 212b
emission reductions by switch vehicles, 323f
high-fuel mileage, 299
ownership and usage rates, 194, 196f
plug-in hybrids and electric vehicles, 209b, 211, 222, 292

awareness of climate change, 19–20, 73–76, 322–24, 323f, 324f

B
Bali Action Plan (UNFCCC)

accountability framework, 264
contents of, 233, 234b
on cost of delaying mitigation, 55
“measurable, reportable, and verifiable” (MRV), 242, 244–45
support of developing countries from developed countries, 244
treatment of developed vs. developing countries by, 22, 203, 244

Bangladesh

disproportionate consequences of climate change on, 6b
early warning systems in, 105, 162
engineering education in, 304
protections against climate change effects, 7b, 302b
social protection policies in, 13, 13b

Basel Convention, 253
Battelle Memorial Institute’s Joint Global Change Research 

Institute, 242b

beef production, 146, 147–48, 149f
bee pollination, 153
behavior of individuals. See individual behavior
Benin, mobile phone use to disseminate information in, 291
Berlin Mandate (1995), 244
best practices, sharing of, 12
biochar, 17b, 155, 156b
biodiesel, 148b, 308
biodiversity

activities to protect and maintain, 125–27
changes in biodiversity hotspots and elsewhere, 124, 126m
climate change impact on, 74, 76
community-based conservation, 127
competition from biofuels, 147
conservation reserves, 126–27, 175n113
Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species, 253
economic models and, 49
food production needs and, 17
genetic modification of crops and, 155b
marine, 127
planning and management, 127, 134
protected areas for, 152–54, 153f
women’s participation and, 43b

biofuels

Brazil as leading producer of, 254, 308
corn-based production, costs of, 45, 47f
energy efficiency improvements in, 16
expanding production of, 147, 160, 167–68, 174n70
integration of, 222
second-generation, 147, 204, 205b, 289
tariffs on, 308

biomass, 146, 191, 193f, 200b, 205b, 208, 217, 223n25
biotech crops, 155, 155b
Bolivia, ecosystem protection in, 128b
Bolsa Escola–Bolsa Familia (Brazil), 60, 63n137
Boston’s climate-change strategy, 90
Brazil

agency for climate change in, 20
biofuels in, 45, 254, 308
Bolsa Escola–Bolsa Familia, 60, 63n137
CDM revenues to, 262t, 265
drought in, 42–43
emissions reduction in, 192b
energy-efficiency investment in, 292
energy-efficiency laws in, 213
floods in, 100
greenhouse gas emissions from land-use change in, 194
hurricane in, 12, 100

 

Index 

401

indigenous people and forest management in, 106–7
innovation and new technologies in, 220, 310
in Kyoto negotiations, 238b
palm oil cultivation in, 148b
poverty in, 42f
urban planning and infrastructure in, 93b
weather forecasting in, 162
zero-tillage in, 17b, 154

BRIICS countries, 292
building code enforcement, 12, 104, 213, 214t, 276
building sector and CO2 emissions, 26n5, 203, 213, 223n20, 

224n56, 275, 291

Bulgaria and financing energy efficiency, 216b
bulk water, 141
burden sharing and opportunistic early action, 236–37, 238b
business environment

enabling innovation, 307–10
voluntary programs, 341b

Business Roundtable, 341b

C
Cairo and urban planning, 92
California

energy-efficiency and renewable energy programs in, 15, 192b, 

215b, 329

water resource management in, 140b

Canada

biodiversity management in, 127
climate education in schools in, 329b
emissions reduction in, 192b
timber industry in, 40

carbon cap-and-trade system, 208, 268b, 269, 270, 339b
carbon capture and storage (CSS) technology, 16, 51, 134, 189, 

198, 204, 209b, 289, 298, 299b, 312n4

carbon credits, 23–24, 171, 261
carbon cycle, 71b, 174n54
carbon dioxide (CO2) concentration, 4, 4f, 71, 71b. See also 

greenhouse gases

from burning biomass, 146
cities encouraging carbon neutral behavior, 21b
from coal consumption, 191
economic growth and changing carbon footprints, 44–45, 

61n43

long-term effects of, 10, 11f, 81
loss in consumption relative to non-warming, 8b
low-carbon technologies. See low-carbon technologies

carbon labeling, 253–54, 328
carbon leakage, 253
Carbon Partnership Facility, 302
carbon price and markets, 134, 169–71, 170f, 172b, 271–72, 294, 

306–7

carbon sequestration, 169–71, 172b, 177n231, 274b, 290b
carbon sinks, 71b, 78
carbon tax. See taxation
cardiovascular illness, 41
Caribbean. See Latin America and the Caribbean
Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility, 13, 103, 105b

car ownership. See automobiles
Casablanca, flooding risks in, 93b
cash-for-work options, 101b
cash transfer payments, 108
catastrophic risk, 51–52, 88
CDM. See Clean Development Mechanism
Central America, agriculture in, 17
Central Asia. See Eastern Europe and Central Asia
cereal and grains

experiments in, 151
grain trade, 160, 160b, 161m
pricing, 160, 168, 168f
productivity, 146, 150

C40 Cities Climate Leadership Group, 21b, 210b
CGIAR. See Consultative Group on International Agricultural 

Research

change management. See adaptative management
Chicago Climate Exchange, 25b, 171
children

death rates, 39, 95, 98
disproportionate consequences of climate change on, 105

Chile, tradable water rights in, 141, 142
China

agency for climate change in, 20, 333b
aquaculture in, 157
building stock in, 203
carbon capture and storage technology in, 51
carbon dioxide emissions in, 11, 192b
CDM revenues to, 262t, 265
cities encouraging energy efficiency in, 21b
clean cooking fuel in, 311, 312b
competitive tendering of renewable energy in, 219
crop decrease due to climate change, 40
disproportionate consequences of climate change on, 6b
emissions reduction in, 192b, 291
energy demand reductions in, 202b, 238b
energy-efficiency investment in, 292
energy-efficiency laws in, 213
ESCO industry in, 216
flood information in, 100
Ganges water allocation in, 176n174
government regulation in, 330
greenhouse gas reduction and premature deaths in, 212
green taxes in, 47
innovation and new technologies in, 21, 220, 291, 301, 308,  

310

institutional reform for climate change in, 333b
migration in, 110b
renewable energy patenting in, 292
stimulus packages and green spending in, 59, 59f
transportation by e-bikes in, 307, 307f
transportation collapse due to January 2008 storm in, 45, 45f
water management and monitoring in, 165–66
weather forecasting systems in, 162
wind energy in, 219b, 254, 287

Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, 238b
cinnamon, 152b

402 

I N D E X

cities. See also local government response to climate change
at-risk locations in coastal zones. See coastal zones at risk
energy consumption in, 194
improving urban design, 60, 91–95, 93b, 104

fostering synergies between mitigation and adaptation, 95, 

95b

mitigation and development co-benefits, 210b
smart urban planning, 211
Kyoto Protocol and, 21b, 210b
migration to, 92, 110b
population growth in, 40, 91, 194
response to climate change, 20, 21b, 91–95, 93b, 96b, 96m
water consumption in, 141
world in 2050 and after, 88

Cities for Climate Protection Campaign, 21b
civil liability for climate change, 53b
Clean Development Mechanism (CDM), 21, 23–24, 25b, 245–46, 

254

activity-based, 272–73
administrative improvements to, 273
afforestation and reforestation, coverage of, 274
agricultural soil carbon sequestration projects, 169
assessing co-benefits of, 266b
changes to, 272–73
ecosystem services payments, 128
financing of low-carbon projects, 301
potential regional delivery and carbon revenues of, 261–62, 

262t, 281n6

shortcomings of, 233, 257, 265–66, 272

inefficient contribution to sustainable development, 265
limited scope, 257, 265–66, 301
questionable environmental integrity, 265
weak governance, 265
weakness of incentive, 266
tax levy on, 266–67, 267t, 278
trend-changing market mechanism, 273

clean technology and energy, 21–22, 203, 223n2, 224n65

cooking. See cooking with clean fuels
prize competitions for, 300
tariffs on, 308
trade potential for, 254, 281n8

Clean Technology Fund, 21, 221b, 302
Climate Action Partnership, 341b
Climate Analysis Indicators Tool, 26n9
climate change. See also temperature

awareness of, 19–20, 73–76, 322–24, 323f, 324f, 326f
communicating about, 323b, 327–28, 328b, 340
crossing thresholds of irreversible catastrophe, 78–79
economics of, 7–10, 8b
effect on development and poverty alleviation, 1, 7–10, 26n5, 37
global threat of, 4–7, 75–76, 76f, 78–79
green federalism and, 336–37b
major factors affecting since Industrial Revolution, 72–73, 73f
need for immediate action, 3, 4, 10–11. See also mitigation actions
rate of change, 1, 11f, 40, 70, 71, 73–76
science of, 70–81
temperature changes, 74, 75m
wealth increases, effect on concern about, 327f

Climate Change Partnership (London), 90
climate finance. See finance
climate-friendly products, 254
“climate insurance,” 8b, 9, 27n33, 101–2
Climate Investment Funds, 275
climate regime. See international climate regime
climate shocks, 40, 44, 107, 176n189
climate-smart development policy, 19–20, 44, 88, 95b, 190, 206, 

207f, 207t, 292

climate-smart government, 331–32, 332f
climate-smart technologies, 16, 95, 292–93, 298. See also 
innovation and new technologies; low-carbon 
technologies

climate system, workings of, 70–73
coal consumption, 11, 51, 72, 191, 193f. See also fossil fuel
Coalition for Rainforests, 25b
coastal zones at risk, 91–95, 91m, 93b, 112n30, 158, 302b
co-benefits

CDM, 266b
design policies and, 339
urban mitigation and development, 210b

coffee production, 152b, 153
collective action, 11–14, 161. See also international cooperation
Colombia

integrated land use in, 153, 153f
migration in, 109
stimulus packages and green spending in, 60

Common Agricultural Policy (EU), 172
communicable diseases, 39, 41, 95–98, 97m. See also specific 

diseases

communicating about climate change, 323b, 327–28, 328b, 340
community-based conservation, 127
community involvement. See participatory design and 

implementation

competition and new technologies, 291–92, 299
conditionality and position of developing countries, 239–40
conflicts and migration, 109
“conservation agriculture,” 154
conservation easements, 154, 175n113
Conservation Reserve Program (U.S.D.A.), 170
conservation reserves, 126–27
Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research 

(CGIAR), 305, 306b

consumers and energy efficiency, 322–30, 322f, 323f. See also 

individual behavior

carbon labeling, 253–54, 328
education initiatives, 208, 214t, 216–17
financial incentives, 213–14, 224n78

contingent financing, 104
controlled-release nitrogen, 17b
Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species, 253
Convention on the Law of the Non-Navigational Uses of 

International Watercourses (UN), 158–59

cooking with clean fuels, 48, 191, 273, 311, 312b
Copenhagen, encouraging energy efficiency in, 21b
coral reefs, 76, 78b, 127, 157
Cordillera Blanca in Peru and water management, 137
Costa Rica, agricultural policies protecting biodiversity in, 153

 

Index 

403

cost-benefit analysis, 7, 9, 48–53, 49b, 329

alternative decision-making frameworks for, 54–55
weather forecasting services, 162

costs. See mitigation costs
cost-sharing agreements for technological innovation, 289, 294t, 

297–301

Côte d’Ivoire, weather patterns and education in, 43
credits

carbon credits, 23–24, 171, 261
development of policy-based crediting, 246
renewable energy tax credits, 219b

CSS. See carbon capture and storage (CSS) technology
Cuba, evacuation due to hurricanes in, 92
cultural services, 124b, 125t
Curitibia, Brazil, and urban planning and infrastructure, 93b
cyclones. See storms, intensity of

D
dams, 17–18, 92, 125, 128, 143
dangerous climate change, 27n15, 48, 70, 73
death

child death rates, 39, 95, 98
climate change responsible for, 95, 98f
heat wave (2003) as cause of death in Europe, 40, 41m
natural disasters as cause of, 98, 113n70
premature deaths from greenhouse gases, 212

Dechezleprêtre, A., 266b
decision-making processes. See also cost-benefit analysis; 

information

adaptative management of, 14f, 18, 60–61, 90
alternative frameworks for, 54–55
natural resources management, 134
reversible and flexible options, 89–90, 101
on water availability, 163
weather forecasting and, 162
women’s involvement in, 43b

Declaration of Indigenous Peoples on Climate Change, 128b
deforestation. See also Reduced Emissions from Deforestation and 

Degradation (REDD)

agriculture and, 16
climate change and, 25b, 71, 71b
in Japan, 53
national and multilateral initiatives to reduce, 273t, 275
reduction of, 24, 71b

delay in action. See inertia, effects of
demand side

energy efficiency, 208
tradable green and white certificates schemes, 281n5
utility demand-side management, funding of, 216

democracies, 322, 337, 338f
den Elzen, M. G. J., 8b
Denmark

cities encouraging energy efficiency in, 21b
economic growth while cutting emissions in, 218, 218b

desalination, 18, 143–44, 174n40
developed countries. See high-income countries
developing countries

affordable energy for, 191

agriculture in, 17, 146, 172
assistance for climate change in, 2–3, 22, 257–85. See also 

finance

amount of funding, 257
during disasters, 13
for emissions control promotion, 38, 55–56, 203–4, 221
for national adaptation strategies, 247
for new technology. See innovation and new technologies
support for mitigation efforts of, 244, 245–46

Bali Action Plan’s treatment of, 244
biodiversity management in, 127
carbon footprint in, 44, 61n43
carbon labeling, effect on, 253–54
climate-smart technologies in, 16
cooking with clean fuels in, 191
disaster and emergency communication in, 100b
disproportionate consequences of climate change on, 5, 5m, 6b, 

27n26, 37, 40, 55

economic growth in, 40, 61n19
emission rates in, 1, 2f, 3f, 38, 39f, 146
for emissions control promotion, 38, 55–56, 203–4
emission sources in, 194, 195f
energy demand in, 51, 191, 193–94, 194f, 203, 235
energy-efficient equipment not available in, 212b
energy subsidies in, 15, 47–48
energy transformation in, 190, 195, 203–4, 208, 221, 237, 244
equity issues for. See equity
food insecurity in, 107, 176n194
forest management in, 106
hydropower in, 45
innovation and new technologies in, 21, 45, 51, 220–21, 289, 

292, 293, 303t, 310

insurance availability in, 102, 103f
integrating into global architecture, 240–45
Kyoto Protocol and, 241
land trusts and conservation easements in, 175n112
low-carbon technologies in, 2, 237–38, 239
marine ecosystem management in, 157
middle-class lifestyle in, 44
mitigation costs for, 9, 9t, 12, 56, 57f
in multitrack climate framework, 22, 241–42
population growth in, 40
risk assessment in, 99b
stimulus packages and green spending in, 59

development. See economic growth
development assistance. See aid finance
diarrheal diseases, 41, 70, 95, 112n66
digital maps, use of, 164
disability-adjusted life years, loss of, 41
disaster risk management programs, 20, 43b, 99, 99b
disasters. See natural disasters; specific type of disaster (e.g.,  

floods)

“discounted utilitarianism,” 53b
discount rate in cost-benefit analysis, 48–49, 49b, 53b, 62n69
diseases. See communicable diseases; specific diseases
dislocations of ecosystems, 4
diversification in crops, 19b, 151–52, 152b
Doha Development Agenda (WTO), 162, 251, 254

404 

I N D E X

domestic policy, 19–20, 288. See also local government response to 

climate change

drinking water, 139–40, 142–43. See also water resources
droughts, 4, 41, 78. See also disaster risk management programs

communities adapting to, 105
drought-tolerant maize, 155b
increased frequency of, 73, 79, 137–38, 137–38m
Malawi’s weather-based risk management and, 103–4
thermal and nuclear energy production and, 191
world in 2050 and after, 88

E
early warning systems, 90, 92, 97–98, 99b, 104–5, 162
Earth Fund, 300
East Asia and the Pacific. See also specific countries

aquaculture in, 157
disability-adjusted life years, loss of, 41
disproportionate consequences of climate change on, 6b
Eastern Europe and Central Asia. See also specific countries

crop decrease due to climate change in, 40
disproportionate consequences of climate change on, 6b
financing energy efficiency in, 216b
green taxes in, 47
natural gas in, 220
vector-borne diseases in, 97
e-bike transportation, 307, 307f
eChoupals (India), 164–65
ecoagricultural landscapes, 17, 19b, 25b
economic growth, 1, 7, 7b, 26, 26n5, 37–61

alternative frameworks for decision making and, 54–55
balancing with climate change policies, 44–48
empowerment of women and, 43b
energy policies and, 191
fiscal recovery packages including green initiatives, 26, 29n93, 

58–59, 190b

green spending, 59–60
green taxes and, 47–48
inertia and, 52, 55–58
international climate regime and, 233–40
lifetime earnings, effect of disaster shocks on, 44
losses caused by natural disasters, 98–99
normative choices on aggregation and values, 52–53
reversal due climate change, 39–44
savings from energy efficiency, 209–17
sustainable development, 39–48
tradeoffs, evaluation of, 48–55
uncertainties, accounting for, 51–52, 89

economics of climate change, 7–10, 8b. See also finance; mitigation 

costs

ecosystems

agricultural use of, 150, 151f
carbon cycle and, 71b, 78
developing countries and, 5
economic models and, 49
ecosystem-based adaptation, 4, 7, 19, 70, 91, 128–29
guardrail approach and, 54
marine ecosystems, 78b, 156–57
population growth and, 40

protection of, 17
resilience of, 74
threats to, 16, 70, 74, 76
uncertainty in responses of, 40, 136
world in 2050 and after, 88

ecosystem services, 124–29, 124b, 125t

payment for, 127–28, 128b

education

climate education in schools, 329b
climate shocks and, 43–44, 340
climate-smart practices, teaching of, 95, 208
consumer education on energy efficiency, 208, 214t, 216–17
in engineering, 304, 304f
health information, teaching of, 98
innovation and knowledge infrastructure, 304–6, 305b
technology absorption and, 303, 304

efficiency cost of adaptation funding, 266–69
efficient use of energy. See energy
Egypt

ancient history and environmental change, 37
food, access to markets in, 161
innovation funding to, 302
tariffs on clean energy technology in, 308
urban planning around Cairo, 92
water resources in, 139, 143
electric cars, 209b, 218, 222, 292
electricity. See energy
El Niño Southern Oscillation (ENSO), 79, 162
El Salvador, women’s empowerment in, 43b
emergency preparedness, 96b, 100–101, 291
emission rates. See also greenhouse gases; headings starting with 

“carbon”

advocates of more gradual reduction, 8–9, 8b
carbon labeling and, 253–54
changing from high use, 192b, 193–95, 193f, 198, 198t
in cities, 210b
developing countries and, 1, 2f, 3f, 38, 39f
guardrails and mitigation goals, 54
high-income countries and, 2, 3f, 38, 39f, 192b
increase (1997–2006), 233, 248
inertia’s effect on, 10, 81. See also inertia, effects of
medium-term emission objectives, 239, 289, 335b
multitrack framework for international agreements on, 22
negative emissions, 81, 196, 198, 205b, 223n21

employment guarantee program (Bangladesh), 13b
empowerment

of communities to self-protect, 105–11
of women, 43b

energy, 189–222. See also renewable energy; specific types

adaptative management of, 14–16, 14f, 80f, 189
comparing costs, problems in, 217b
competing objectives of energy policies, 191–95
doubling of consumption, 193–95, 193f
efficiency, 190, 191, 208, 212–17

California programs, 15, 192b, 215b
consumer education, 208, 214t, 216–17
development benefits of efficient and clean energy, 192b
financial incentives, 208, 213–14, 214t, 218–19

 

Index 

405

financing mechanisms, 208, 214t, 216, 216b
institutional reform, 208, 214–16, 214t
market and nonmarket barriers and failures, 211, 212b, 213b
public procurement, 216
regulations, 208, 213, 214t, 294–95
savings from, 209–17
in urban areas, 95b

European Union

Common Agricultural Policy, 172
emissions reduction in, 192b
Emissions Trading Scheme, 274, 339b
energy demand reductions in, 202b, 238b
fuel prices, compared to U.S., 14–15, 28n61, 212
“New Approach” to harmonization, 297

environment and, 191–95. See also emission rates; greenhouse 

gases; headings starting with “carbon”

feed-in laws, 218, 219b
global energy models to stay at 2º warmer world, 200–201b, 

evacuation planning, 90, 92
“excusable ignorance,” 53b
exports. See trade
extension agencies supporting farmers, 18, 25b, 100b, 104, 154, 

223n28

global reduction in demand, 200–201b
innovation and new technologies, 16, 208–9, 220–21. See also 

innovation and new technologies; renewable energy

integration of policies, 222
natural gas, 219–20
nuclear power, 219–20
pricing, 191, 211–12, 223n9

increases in, 168
safety nets to protect poor from high energy prices, 108
U.S. vs. European fuel prices, 14–15, 28n61, 212

security as goal of energy policies, 191, 223n8
subsidies, 14–15, 28n64, 47–48, 211–12
types used (1850–2006), 193, 193f

energy service companies (ESCOs), 214, 216
Energy Star program, 295
engineering, need for education in, 304, 304f
epidemics. See communicable diseases
Equilibrium Fund, 43b
equity

environment and, 235–36, 257
in global dealings, 12, 21, 22, 24, 28n47, 53b
intergenerational equity, 53b
in multitrack approaches, 242b
normative choices on aggregation and values, 52
public acceptance of reform and, 339–40

ESCOs. See energy service companies
ethanol. See biofuels
ethics, 52–53, 53b, 155b
Ethiopia

Productive Safety Net in, 108
rainfall reduction in, 42

Europe. See also specific countries and regions

biofuel production in, 45–46
car use in, 194
crop productivity in, 40
energy prices in, 14–15, 28n61, 212
heat wave

as cause of death in (2003), 40, 41m
energy demand due to (2007), 191

impact of climate change in, 77f
Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution regime, 241
protected areas for biodiversity in, 152, 153
wind energy in, 287

European Commission, 27n15
European Environment Agency (EEA) report on subsidies to 

energy, 28n64

171, 304

F
Fankhauser, S., 266b
Farm Inputs Promotion program (Kenya), 156
farms and farmers. See agriculture
feed-in tariff, 15, 214t, 218, 219b, 221b
fertilizer, 17b, 135, 146, 149, 156, 168
finance, 22–26, 257–85. See also developing countries, subheading: 

assistance for climate change in

Adaptation Fund. See Adaptation Fund under Kyoto Protocol
administrative simplicity and cost, 269
alignment issues and, 264
allocation formulas, 277–78, 277b
auctioning, 24, 270, 278
bilateral and multilateral climate funds, 263t
CDM. See Clean Development Mechanism
conditionality and, 239–40
distributional impacts, 269
existing instruments of climate finance, 258t, 261–62, 281n5
fiscal neutrality, 269, 331
fragmentation of climate finance, 263–65, 263t
future financing needs and sources of funds, 278–81
gap in, 259–63, 260t, 263f

for innovation and new technologies, 292–93, 292f

harmonization issues and, 264
incentives. See incentives
inefficiencies in finance instruments, 263–67. See also Clean 

Development Mechanism (CDM)

infrastructure finance from private sector, 24, 276
innovation and new technologies, 301–2, 304
lessons from aid finance, 22, 28n89
leveraging private finance, 275–76, 306–7
market solutions and, 271–72
mutual accountability and, 264
need for, 259–61, 260t
new sources for, 257–58, 263t, 269–70, 271t
ownership issues and, 264
policy coherence, 269, 269b
from private vs. public sector, 261–62, 280
public finance, 245, 310–11, 332
recession’s effect on. See financial crisis
reserve funds for catastrophes, 103
results agenda for, 264
revolving funds, 216
scaling up climate-change finance, 267–76
transparent, efficient, and equitable use of funds, 276–78

406 

I N D E X

finance (continued)

utility demand-side management, funding of, 216
“vulnerability fund,” World Bank creation of, 58

financial crisis, 3, 26n12, 58

as excuse to delay action, 189–90, 190b, 288
recovery packages including green initiatives, 26, 29n93, 58–60, 

59f, 190b, 291

financial incentives. See incentives
fires, emissions from, 146
fisheries

aquaculture and, 157–58, 158f
biodiversity and, 17
climate change impact on, 19b, 127, 129
food production demand and, 74, 156–58
international cooperation, 159
management of, 106, 127

flexible options in decision making, 89–90, 101
flood insurance, 102
floods, 4, 7b, 12, 70. See also disaster risk management programs

advance warnings of, 162
in Africa, 100, 100f
in Bangladesh, 13b
in Brazil, 100
creating jobs to reduce risk of, 100–101, 101b
increased frequency of, 73
in low-lying areas, 19b
risk information and maps on, 100, 100b
risk management, 325b
in South/Southeast Asia, 94, 94m
urban planning and, 92–93, 93b, 100
world in 2050 and after, 88

Food and Agriculture Organization, 165, 274, 301
food-for-work program (Bangladesh), 13b
food resources. See also agriculture; fisheries; hunger; land use

adaptative management of, 14f, 16–18
aquaculture and, 157–58, 158f
biofuel production and, 45–46
food crises (2008), 107, 160, 168
food production shortfall, 146, 174n58
functional foods, 175n92
global reserve for, 161
international cooperation in, 13–14, 158–62
pricing, 134, 166–73, 168f, 176n189
procurement methods, 161
right to food, 53b
stockpiling, 161
water management and, 144–45
foreign direct investment (FDI), 308
Forest Carbon Partnership Facility (World Bank), 24, 274
forests

carbon, 24, 25b. See also deforestation
climate change and, 74
commons management of, 106
greenhouse gas emissions from, 146, 273
timber industry in Canada, 40
water use and, 141

fossil fuel, 2, 20, 71b, 146, 193, 200b, 335. See also coal 

consumption

Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on 

Climate Change (IPCC), 4, 70

France

energy-efficiency quotas in, 213
in heat wave (2007), 191
Passerelle research program, 301
residential building stock in, 203

functional foods, 175n92
funding. See finance

G
Ganges river, 176n174
gas and oil. See energy
GAVI Alliance, 299–300
GEF. See Global Environment Facility
gender differences in climate-change experiences, 43b
General Electric, 308
genetic modification of crops, 155b
genomics, 19b, 98
geoengineering, 289, 290b
geographic information, use of, 99b, 100, 100b
Georgetown, Guyana, and flooding, 93
geothermal energy, 204, 205b, 217
Germany

biofuel production in, 308
feed-in laws in, 218, 219b
green government procurement in, 311
renewable energy in, 15

Ghana, diseases in, 95
glaciers, disappearance of, 4, 6b, 37, 38m, 78, 79, 90, 93, 129n9, 137
global average temperature, 72–73, 73f
global climate services enterprise (GCS), 296b
global cooperation. See international cooperation
Global Earth Observation System of Systems, 295, 296b
Global Environment Facility (GEF), 21, 216b, 221b, 233, 248n2, 300

innovation funding from, 302
Strategic Priority on Adaptation initiatives, 247

governmental response to climate change, 20, 24, 330–35, 332f. See 

also international cooperation

accountability, 333–34, 335b
climate-smart government, 331–32, 332f
finance. See finance
incentives for resource users, 173
as insurer of last resort, 102, 113n93, 331
interagency coordination, 333
leadership role, 332–34, 340
liquidity for, 103–5
public-private partnerships for sharing climate risks, 102b, 103
weak governance, 265

grain. See cereal and grains
green federalism, 336–37b
green government procurement, 311
Greenhouse Development Rights Framework, 238b
greenhouse gases. See also carbon dioxide concentration; Kyoto 

Protocol

agricultural uses, reducing emissions from, 146–47, 155
beef production and, 147, 149f, 174n69
energy efficiency and, 208

 

Index 

407

goals for, 196, 197f, 198, 198t
guidelines for measuring when land-related, 25b
heat-trapping potential of, 26n8, 71–72
increasing emissions (1970–2004), 71–72, 72f
from land-use change, 146, 194, 224n42, 273
long-term targets for, 81
“natural greenhouse effect,” 71
past benefits of, 53b
premature deaths from, 212
share of emissions, 196
historic and 2005, 3f
by sector, 195f

sources of, 194, 195f
transition costs to lower emissions, 7
types of, 70–71, 72f

Greenland ice sheet, 50b, 70, 73, 74f, 78
Green Revolution, 150–51, 306b
green spending, 59–60, 59f

in government procurement, 311
recovery packages including, 26, 29n93, 58–59

green taxes, 47–48, 330
Grenada and Hurricane Ivan, 13, 103
gross domestic product (GDP). See economic growth
groundwater, 142–43, 163. See also water resources
Group on Earth Observation, 296b
guardrails and mitigation goals, 54
Guatemala, women’s empowerment in, 43b
Gulf of Mexico, 6b
Guyana and urban flooding, 93

H
“habitat banking,” 127, 129n14
Haites, E., 266b
halocarbon compounds, 81n10
harmonization issues, 264, 289, 294–95, 294t, 297
health

air pollution reduction and, 208, 212
climate shocks and, 43–44
diseases. See communicable diseases; specific diseases
system adaptation, 19b, 88, 95–98, 112n66
vaccine program of GAVI Alliance and World Bank, 299–300
women’s empowerment and, 43b

heat waves

as climate change consequence, 70
heat-health warning systems, 95, 96b
impact of, 19b, 40, 41m
thermal and nuclear energy production and, 191

“hedging actions,” 54, 89
high-income countries

energy demands of, 191
impact of climate change on, 6, 7b
innovation and new technologies in, 220, 287, 293, 301, 303t, 308
migration to, 110b
reducing emissions in, 2, 3f, 21, 38, 44, 55, 190, 237

binding targets, 241, 243
in multitrack climate framework, 22, 241–42
stringent targets and offsets, 280, 282n34

relocation of carbon-intensive industries from, 253
stimulus packages and green spending in, 59, 59f
zero-tillage in, 17b

Hof, A. F., 8b
Honduras

hurricane damage (1998) in, 42, 43b
women’s empowerment in, 43b

Hong Kong, car use in, 194
human rights, 53, 53b
Hungary Energy Efficiency Guarantee Fund, 216b
hunger

as development priority, 1
food-for-work program (Bangladesh), 13b
impact of climate change on, 5, 168
malnutrition, 95
vulnerable-group feeding program (Bangladesh), 13b

Hurricane Ivan, 13, 103
Hurricane Katrina, 45, 50b, 102
Hurricane Mitch, 17, 42, 43b, 153
hurricanes, 12, 92, 100, 302b
hybrid approaches, 235
hybrid cars. See automobiles
hydrological cycle, 136f, 137–38
hydropower, 45, 191, 204, 205b, 217
Hyogo Framework of Action (UN), 99

I
IAASTD. See Integrated Assessment of Agricultural Knowledge, 

Science, and Technology for Development

IDA. See International Development Association
IEA. See International Energy Agency
IFC. See International Finance Corporation
Ilo, Peru, and urban planning, 92
IMAGE energy-climate model, 201b, 223–24n28
incandescent light bulbs, 294
incentives

to developing countries for lower carbon paths, 258
for private finance, 276, 304, 306–7
for renewable energy, 218–19
for resource users, 172–73

India

aid to developing countries, 13, 38, 257–85. See also developing 

countries, subheading: assistance for climate change in

Bali Action Plan’s treatment of, 244
carbon footprint in, 21, 44, 61n43
carbon pricing in, 212
criticisms of exempting developing countries from emission 

standards, 253

emission rates in, 1, 2, 2f, 3f, 38, 39f, 44, 61n46
emission sources in, 194, 195f

agency for climate change in, 20, 333b
agriculture in

crop decrease due to climate change, 40–41
eChoupals and soybean crops, 164–65
genetic modification of crops in, 155b
inequality and climatic risk, 43
seed development, 308
zero-tillage, 17b, 154

CDM revenues to, 262t, 265

408 

I N D E X

India (continued)

disaster response in, 291
emissions rates in, 21
emissions reduction in, 192b
energy demand reductions in, 202–3b, 238b
energy-efficiency investment in, 292
energy-efficiency laws in, 213
export controls in, 46, 160
innovation and new technologies in, 21, 220, 301, 308, 310
institutional reform for climate change in, 333b
social protection policies in, 13b
solar energy in, 254
water management in, 17, 142–43, 165, 165f
weather forecasting in, 162
weather-index insurance in, 101
wind energy in, 287
Workfare in, 109b

Indian Tobacco Company (ITC), 164–65
indigenous people and knowledge, 105, 106–7, 106f, 128, 128b, 137
individual behavior, 11, 20, 105, 106, 106f, 208, 322–30, 323f

concern vs. understanding, 322–24, 323b, 324f
encouraging behavioral change, 327–30
end-use technologies and, 289
“proximity limit” and, 337
social norms and, 329–30
understanding vs. action, 324–26, 325b

Indonesia

cash transfer payments in, 108
environmental monitoring in, 304
forest carbon market in, 25b
greenhouse gas emissions from land-use change in, 194
Ministry of Finance on climate change issues, 269b
palm oil cultivation in, 148b
weather forecasting in, 162

industrial emissions, 194, 211, 253, 291
inertia, effects of

on climate negotiations, 26
on climate system, 38, 50–51
costs of delay, 52, 55–58
financial crisis as excuse for, 189–90, 190b
on future generations, 10–11, 11f, 53b, 81
on policy reform, 321
on technological development, 292

infant mortality, 39. See also death
information

critical for world of 2050 and after, 88
on energy efficiency, 212b
geographic information, use of, 99b, 100, 100b
health information, teaching of, 98
for individual behavior change, 327–28
innovative monitoring of, 296b
international cooperation in sharing, 12, 294t, 295–97, 303
remote sensing. See remote-sensing technologies
on resource management and food production, 134, 135, 136, 

162–66

satellite imaging. See satellite imaging, use of
on social norms, 330
on water management, 17, 18, 139, 162–64, 164f

infrastructure, 10–11, 19b, 27n39

delaying in hopes of lower costs, 51
food and agriculture management, 162, 168–69
knowledge infrastructure, 304–6
private infrastructure, 24, 276
urban planning and, 92

Inland Empire Utilities Agency (California), 140b
innovation and new technologies, 287–312

accessibility of, 289–93
for adaptation, 18–26, 19b, 288, 289, 291
agriculture and, 16–18, 17b, 150–51, 154–56, 166, 166–67f, 293
budget gap for development and diffusion of, 292–93, 292f
business environment enabling, 307–10
carbon capture and storage. See carbon capture and storage 

(CSS) technology

for coastal adaptation, 302b
comparing costs, problems in, 217b
competition and, 291–92
complexity of, effect on policy, 295b, 295f
cost-sharing agreements, 289, 294t, 297–301
developing countries and, 21, 51, 220–21, 289, 292, 293
energy changes and, 16, 206, 208–9, 220–21
financial and technological resources, 302–3
financing mechanisms, 301–2
gap in terms of significant mitigation and adaptation, 288
geoengineering, 290b
harmonization issues and, 294–95
health information and diagnostic tools, 98
inertia and, 11
international agreements encouraging, 21–22, 293–303, 294t
international organizations, 301
knowledge infrastructure and, 304–6, 305b
knowledge-sharing and coordination agreements, 294t, 295–97
low-carbon emissions and, 2, 3f, 208–9
market-pull, reward-based agreements, 298–300, 311
monitoring, 296b
national policy priorities for, 303–11, 303t
private sector mobilization and, 298, 306–7
prizes as inducement, 299
public finance for, 310–11
research agreements, 297–98
technology transfer, 254, 266b, 289, 294t, 301, 307–10
urban planning and, 92
water resources and, 16–18, 17b, 143–44, 165, 165f, 298

“Innovation Cities” (Republic of Korea), 92
Instituto de Pesquisa Planejamento Urbano de Curitiba (IPPUC), 

93b

insurance, 12–13, 89–90, 101–3, 103f, 105b, 331. See also “climate 

insurance”

crop insurance, 338
livestock insurance, 101, 102b

integrated approaches. See also multitrack climate framework

adaptation into climate-smart development, 246–48
climate considerations in development strategies, 291
developing-country actions into global architecture, 240–45
energy efficiency, 222
land use, 152–54, 152b, 153f, 175n105
integrated assessment model (FAIR), 8b

 

Index 

409

Integrated Assessment of Agricultural Knowledge, Science, and 

Technology for Development (IAASTD), 154, 168

intellectual property rights, 298, 309–10, 309f. See also patents
interagency coordination, 333
Inter-American Institute for Global Change Research, 297
intergenerational equity, 53b
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)

on black carbon, 312b
on costs of emission reductions, 259
creation and purpose of, 81n1
on dangerous climate change, 27n15
on developing countries’ share of global mitigation, 28n47
Fourth Assessment Report, 4, 70
guidelines for measuring land-related greenhouse gases, 25b
on observed warming, 74, 237
on vulnerability, 277
worst-case scenario projection by, 199

international climate regime, 233–48. See also multitrack climate 

framework

irrigation systems, 17b, 18, 135, 141, 144–45, 149
Israel and venture capital, 301
ITER, 297–98, 298b

J
Japan

car use in, 194
crop decrease due to climate change, 40
deforestation in, 53

job creation. See also stimulus packages and green spending

flood risk, creating jobs to reduce, 100–101, 101b
food-for-work program (Bangladesh), 13b
in renewable energy industry, 192b
Workfare programs, 13b, 108, 109b

Joint Global Change Research Institute (Battelle Memorial 

Institute), 242b

K
Kazakhstan

adaptation efforts, 246–47
burden sharing and opportunistic early action, 236–37,  

effect of climate change in, 146
export controls in, 160

238b

Kenya

environment and equity, 235–36
financing, 239–40
integrated multitrack climate framework, 241–42, 242b
market-based mechanisms, 245–46
predictable climate outcome and unpredictable development 

process, 237–39

agricultural carbon finance in, 171, 172b
Farm Inputs Promotion program in, 156
feed-in laws in, 218
soil carbon pilot project in, 25b

knowledge-sharing, 294t, 295–97, 303. See also information
Korea, Republic of

public finance, 245
tensions between climate and development, 233–40

International Coffee Organization, 152b
International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from 

Energy Management Corporation, 214
green spending in, 59, 59f
“Innovation Cities,” 92
venture capital in, 301

Ships, 241

international cooperation, 20–22, 158–62

fisheries, 159
in food and water security, 13–14, 158–62
importance of, 12, 20, 288–89
in innovation and new technologies, 21–22, 288–89, 293–303
knowledge-sharing and coordination agreements, 295–97
lessons from aid effectiveness and international agreements, 22, 

28n89

“tragedy of the commons” and, 56
treaties, need for, 14
world in 2050 and after, 88

International Development Association (IDA), 277, 277b
International Energy Agency (IEA), 295, 313n22
International Finance Corporation (IFC), 216b, 300
International Research Institute for Climate and Society 

(Columbia University), 305

International Scientific Congress on Climate Change (2009), 

27n15

International Scientific Steering Committee (2005), 27n15
International Strategy for Disaster Reduction (UN), 162
International Union for Conservation of Nature, 127, 152
Inuit adjustment to climate change, 105–6
investments in energy. See mitigation costs
IPCC. See Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
Ireland, competitive tendering of renewable energy in, 219

Kyoto Protocol, 4. See also Clean Development Mechanism  

(CDM)

Adaptation Fund, 23, 107, 233, 247, 257
carbon leakage and, 253
cities and, 21b, 210b
contents of, 234b, 251
land-use, land-use change, and forestry, 273
limits on greenhouse gas emissions, 233, 251
mitigation commitment of, 241
reconciling with UNFCCC, 251
revisions to, 272
U.S. nonparticipation in, 12, 21b
wealthy countries’ reductions, 81

L
labor organizations, 339
land use

adaptative management of, 14f, 16–18, 25b
climate change and, 25b, 55, 62n102, 71
decisions on, 10
ecoagriculture and, 153, 153f
greenhouse gas emissions from land-use change, 146, 194, 

224n42, 273

national and multilateral initiatives to reduce degradation, 

273t, 275

protected areas, 152–54, 153f, 175n112

410 

I N D E X

Latin America and the Caribbean. See also specific countries

agricultural innovation in, 17, 17b, 150, 151
aquaculture in, 158
biofuel production in, 147
Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility, 13, 103, 105b
Caribbean common insurance pool, 101
dengue recurrence in, 97m
disproportionate consequences of climate change on, 6b, 77f
food pricing in, 168
green taxes in, 47
landslide risk reduction in Caribbean, 327b
mitigation of greenhouse gases in, 2
public transit in, 208
stimulus packages and green spending in, 59
urban planning in, 93
women’s empowerment in, 43b

Law of the Sea, 127
laws for energy efficiency, 213, 218, 219b. See also regulations
least-cost allocation and global mitigation, 28n47, 55, 62n105
Lebanon, climate education in schools in, 329b
lessons learned

from aid effectiveness and international agreements, 22, 28n89
from natural disasters, 340

Liberia and flooding, 101b
lifetime earnings, effect of disaster shocks on, 44
lighting, energy efficiency in, 294, 298
livestock production, 146, 147–48, 149f, 174n69, 175nn74–75
local government response to climate change, 20, 21b, 330–35. See 

also cities

climate-smart development at local level, 341–42

London’s climate-change strategy, 20, 90
Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution regime, 241
long-term strategies. See mitigation actions
Louisiana. See Hurricane Katrina
low-carbon technologies

building stocks and, 203
finance policies conducive to, 278, 280
integrated policy and, 222
investment needs for, 190, 191
long-term process in developing countries, 237–38, 240, 272, 

282n27

scaling up, 190, 208, 212, 217–18
status of, 207f, 207t, 293, 293f
supply-side, 208
tailored approaches for different country circumstances, 204t

low-income countries. See developing countries
Luxenbourg and greenhouse gases, 2

M
Madagascar

forest lands in, 154
green taxes in, 47
palm oil cultivation in, 148b

Major Economies Forum on Energy and Climate (July 2009 

meeting), 27n15

Makati City, Philippines, and disaster risk management, 95
Makerere University, 305b
malaria, 41, 95, 97, 304

Malawi and weather-based risk management, 103–4
Malaysia, palm oil cultivation in, 148b
Maldives, disproportionate consequences of climate change on, 6b
malnutrition, 95
mangroves, 45, 129, 158
Maosheng, D., 266b
marine ecosystems, 78b, 127, 156–57. See also fisheries
market-based mechanisms, 245–46. See also Clean Development 

Mechanism (CDM)

market-pull inducements, 298–300, 311
mass procurement of energy-efficient products, 216, 224n83
mass transit. See public transport systems
maya nut trees planted in Latin America, 43b
Mayors’ Climate Protection agreement, 21b
McKinsey and Company, 9, 56
McKinsey Global Institute, 248n11
“measurable, reportable, and verifiable” (MRV), 244–45, 275
Mediterranean Solar Plan, 221, 221b
medium-term emission objectives, 239, 289, 335b
meningitis, 41
men’s experiences in climate change, 43b
Mercy Corps, 101b
Mesopotamian history and environmental change, 37
MESSAGE energy-climate model, 201b, 223n28
methane emissions. See greenhouse gases
Mexico

agency for climate change in, 20
carbon mitigation strategy in, 240
coffee production in, 152b
emissions reduction in, 192b
energy and power capacity in, 211
indigenous people and forest management in, 106–7
innovation funding to, 302
Low Carbon Study, 224n51
market instruments for financial risk management in, 113n96
Progresa–Oportunidades, 60, 63n137
protected areas for biodiversity in, 152
urban development in, 211
wood-fired stoves in, 48

microfinance institutions, 101
Middle East and North Africa. See also specific countries

coastal cities in North Africa, 92, 93b
disproportionate consequences of climate change on, 6b
food imports in, 159
hydropower in, 45
natural gas in, 220
solar power in, 221b

middle-income countries

carbon footprint in, 44, 61n43
emissions in, 2f, 55, 62n102
emission sources in, 195f
energy demands of, 191
energy subsidies in, 108
income change in, 1
innovation and new technologies in, 288–89, 301, 303t, 309f

funding for, 311

research institutions’ role in, 304
risk assessment in, 99b

 

migration

resettlement, 110
in response to climate change, 88, 108–11, 110b, 111m
settlement in vulnerable areas, 109, 111m
of species, 124
urban migration, 92, 110b

“migration hump,” 110b
Millennium Ecosystem Assessment, 124, 124b, 125t
MiniCAM energy-climate model, 201b, 223n28
mitigation actions, 10–18, 190–91

acting now and, 3–4, 10–11, 10f, 48, 52, 58–61, 199–204

on technical and policy fronts, 204–9

adaptation management and, 14–18, 14f, 88. See also adaptative 

management

biodiversity, in support of, 124–25
collective action and, 12, 20, 21
defined, 1
for developing countries, 9, 9t, 12, 244, 245–46
economic growth and, 44, 45–47
fiscal recovery packages including green initiatives, 26, 29n93, 

58–60, 59f

fostering synergies between mitigation and adaptation, 95, 95b
inertia, effects of, 10–11, 11f, 26, 38, 50–51, 189
innovation and new technologies. See innovation and new 

technologies

international cooperation in, 13–14
long-term strategies, 60–61, 81, 90, 237–38, 240, 272, 282n27, 

337

menu or “tool box” of, 243
multitrack approach. See multitrack climate framework
policy-based mitigation track, 241, 242–45
risk management and, 12–13, 13b
widening geographic scope, 90

mitigation costs, 9, 9t, 257

as barriers to mitigation, 211, 212b
benefits of efficient and clean energy, 192b
broader impacts of environmental losses, 49
climate finance and, 22–26, 101–3, 257. See also developing 
countries, subheading: assistance for climate change in

community action and, 106
comparing costs, problems in, 217b
delay costs, 55–58, 57f, 199
equity in distribution of, 12, 28n49, 53b
factors likely to increase, 259–61, 259f, 260t
financing mechanisms, 208, 214t, 216, 216b, 239–40, 261–62, 

281n5. See also finance
flexible options in, 89–90, 101
fund allocation, 276–78
of goals in energy use, 198, 199f, 199t, 204, 224n29
incentives for renewable energy, 218–19
least-cost allocation and global mitigation, 28n47
rebound effect, 211
savings from country announcements on date of instituting 

mitigation policies, 26n11

scaling up and, 190
up front cash, need for, 211, 212b

Index 

411

Moldova Soil Conservation project, 128b
Mongolia, livestock insurance in, 101, 102b
monsoons, 79
Montreal Protocol, 81n10, 297, 302
Morocco

cereal imports in, 160b
irrigation of Oum Er-Rbia river basin in, 135
water management in, 142b, 144, 145, 163

mortality. See death
MoSSaiC, 327b
mountain pine beetle epidemic, 40
Mount Pinatubo eruption (1991), 290b
Mozambique

emergency preparedness in, 100
flood risk management in, 325b

MRV. See “measurable, reportable, and verifiable”
multilateral environmental agreements (MEAs), 253
Multilateral Fund for the Implementation of the Montreal 

Protocol, 22, 302

multitrack climate framework, 22, 241–42, 242b

policy-based track, 241, 242–45
target track, 241

mutual accountability, 264

N
Nairobi Work Program, 247
Nakamura, Shuji, 298
National Adaptation Programs of Action (NAPAs), 233, 246, 247, 

333, 334b

National Environmental Awareness and Education Act of 2008 

(Philippines), 329b

National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (India), 109b
National Water Act (South Africa), 141
natural capital, 19b
natural disasters. See also specific types of disasters

disaster risk management programs, 20, 99b
entitlement view of public relief after, 338
rapid response in times of, 13b
as teaching moments, 340
vulnerability to, 40, 42, 98–101, 98f, 113n70

natural gas, 208, 219–20
natural resource management, 134–37. See also agriculture; 

fisheries; forests

negative emissions, 81, 196, 198, 205b, 223n21
Netherlands

protections against climate change effects, 7b
satellite data, use of, 164

neutrality

carbon-neutral policies and behaviors, 21b
fiscal, 269, 331
technology-neutral requirements, 297

new technologies. See innovation and new technologies
New Zealand, impact of climate change in, 77f
Nicaragua

integrated land use in, 153
women’s empowerment in, 43b

mitigation delay. See inertia
mobile phone use to disseminate information, 291

Niger, farming in, 106f
Nigeria, tariffs on clean energy technology in, 308

412 

I N D E X

Nile, 92
nitrogen, controlled-release, 17b
Nobel Peace prize (2007), 60
nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), 107
nonlinearities and indirect economic effects, 50b
Nordhaus, William, 8b, 27n32
“Nordhaus assumptions,” 8b
normative choices on aggregation and values, 52–53
North Africa. See Middle East and North Africa
North America. See also Canada; United States

biofuel production in, 147
crop productivity in, 40, 149
impact of climate change in, 77f
protected areas for biodiversity in, 153

North Atlantic Oscillation, 79
North-South tensions, 234–35
nuclear power, 204, 208, 219–20, 289

O
oceans. See also sea levels, rise in

coastal cities at risk, 91–95, 91m
impact of climate change on, 4, 6b, 10, 70
protected areas in, 17, 175n96
uptake of carbon by, 6b, 71b, 78b, 156–57, 290b

OECD countries

farm subsidies from, 172
subsidies to biofuel producers in, 308
tariffs on clean energy technology in, 308

oil and gas. See energy
ozone depletion, 206, 236, 290b, 297, 302

P
Pacific Climate Information System, 296b
Pacific Institute, 139
Pacific region. See East Asia and the Pacific
PAGE model, used for Stern Review of Climate Change, 27n26
Pakistan

diseases in, 95
export controls in, 160

palm oil, 148b
Papua New Guinea, palm oil cultivation in, 148b
Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness, 23, 264
participatory design and implementation, 18, 90, 105–7
Passerelle research program (France), 301
patents, 292, 293, 309–10, 309f, 313n19
peatlands, 146
Peru

discounting for farmers in, 328
indigenous people and water management in, 137
urban planning in, 92

Pew Center on Global Climate Change, 242b
Philippines

climate education in schools in, 329b
marine ecosystem management in, 157
urban disaster risk management, 95
weather forecasting in, 162

physical capital, 19b
pilot programs in agriculture, 24, 25b

plug-in hybrids, 209b
polar regions, impact of climate change on, 70, 73, 77f, 78, 81n6, 

82n16, 105–6

policy-based track in multitrack approach, 241, 242–45

process for introducing policy actions, 243–44

policy makers and adaptive policies, 18, 19–20

democracies and, 322, 337, 338f
domestic policy, 19–20, 288
energy policy, 204–9, 214t
fiscal policy, 269, 269b
green federalism and, 336–37b
institutional reform, 214–16
migration and, 109–11
readiness to address climate change, 234
urban planning and, 92

politics of climate change, 337–41
“polluter pays” principle, 53b
population growth, 40, 91, 194
positive feedbacks in climate system, 49, 50b
poverty. See also developing countries

change in global rate of, 1, 39
climate change’s effect on, 42, 42f, 46, 89, 105, 168
energy policies to increase access of poor, 191
extreme poverty, defined, 26n1
green taxes and, 47
urban poor, 92

precipitation

global changes in, 74, 75m, 138m
impact on poverty, 42
increase in, 4, 73, 79, 81–82n14, 146
observable effect, 4, 37
water resource management and, 17
weather forecasting of, 162

precision agriculture techniques, 17b
pricing resources, 135, 166–73

biofuels, 147
carbon, 134, 169–71
energy, 168, 191, 211–12, 212b, 223n9
food, 150, 160, 168f, 176n189
innovation spurred by rising prices, 167–69
water, 141, 166–73

Prince of Wales International Business Leaders Forum, 341b
Prince’s Rainforest Project and the Coalition for Rainforest 

Nations, 275

private finance. See finance
prizes as inducements for innovation, 299–300
Productive Safety Net (Ethiopia), 108
Progresa–Oportunidades (Mexico), 60, 63n137
Project Surya, 312b
property rights, 135
protections against climate change effects, 7b, 12–13, 101–3
provisioning services, 124b, 125t
public buildings and energy efficiency, 59
public opinion on climate change, 60
public-private partnerships for sharing climate risks, 102b,  

103

public procurement of energy-efficient products, 216, 224n83
public transport systems, 194–95, 208

 

Index 

413

R
rainfall. See precipitation
rain forests, 17b, 78, 88, 275
rapid response in times of disaster, 13b
RD&D. See research, development, and deployment
rebound effect, 211
recycled water, 18
Reduced Emissions from Deforestation and Degradation (REDD), 

25b, 127–29, 128b, 129m, 148b

creating financial incentives for, 273–75

reflectiveness of earth’s surface, changes in, 50b
refrigerator efficiency standards, 213, 300b
refugees, 110b. See also migration
regional energy mix to limit warming to 2ºC, 202–3b
regional government. See local government response to climate 

change

regulating services, 124b, 125t
regulations

energy efficiency, 208, 213, 214t, 294–95
negative effect on innovation, 307
niche markets created by, 307
renewable energy, 218–19
trade, 162

reinsurance market, 13
relocation of carbon-intensive industries, 253
relocation programs, 7b, 108–11. See also migration
REMIND energy-climate model, 201b, 223n28
remittances, 58
remote-sensing technologies, 17b, 18, 145, 162–64, 164f, 305b
renewable energy. See also specific types (e.g., hydropower, wind 

energy)

California programs, 215b
competitive tendering, 219
consumption (1850–2006), 215b
developing countries’ lack of development of, 45
emission reductions from, 190, 204, 205b
feed-in laws, 15–16, 218, 219b
financial incentives and regulations, 218–19
fuel price shock and, 191
job creation from, 192b
long-term purchase agreements, 15–16
patenting for, 292, 293
policy interventions for, 214t
renewable portfolio standards, 218, 225n90, 294
scaling up, 217–20
subsidies for, 208
tax credits, 219b
tradable green and white certificates schemes, 281n5

private spending on, 292–93

research institutes, role of, 304–6
reserve for food, 161
reserve funds for catastrophes, 103
residual sinks, 71b
resilience

building resilient communities, 105–7
cities and, 92
disaster risk reduction and, 99b
economic growth and, 7, 7b, 44
farming that is climate-resilient, 151–52
policy making and, 18

retrofits, 51
Reva Electric Car Company, 292
revenue recycling, 47, 331, 339
reversible options in decision making, 89–90
revolving funds, 216
RICE model, 27n26
rice productivity, 40–41, 146, 155
risk management, 12–13, 13b

assessing risk, 99b
disaster risk management programs, 20, 43b, 99, 99b
flood risk management, 325b
information critical for world of 2050 and after, 88
mitigating risk, 99b
risk-sharing by communities, 102b
urban, 95

rivers and river basins. See also floods; water resources

cities on, 91–95, 91m
climate change effects on, 135, 136f
freshwater in, 13, 139, 139f
monitoring of runoff, 162, 163m
transboundary, need to cooperate, 13–14, 158–59, 176n174

Rizhao, China, encouraging energy efficiency in, 21b
robust strategies, 18, 44, 54–55, 89, 137, 140b
Russia

effect of climate change on agriculture in, 146
export controls in, 160

S
safety margins in new investments, 89
safety nets for most vulnerable, 107–8. See also social protection 

policies

satellite imaging, use of, 97, 100, 100b, 163, 164, 296b, 304
scaling up

of climate change finance, 267–68
of community-driven development, 107
of low-carbon technologies, 190, 208, 212, 217–20

Republic of Korea. See Korea, Republic of
research, development, and deployment (RD&D), 2. See also 

innovation and new technologies

in agriculture, 154, 293
bridging commercialization gap (“valley of death”), 300–301, 

300f

government budgets for, 292, 292f, 293f
inertia and, 11, 288
international research agreements, 297–98
natural resources management, 135, 164

schools. See education
science of climate change, 70–81
sea levels, rise in

aquaculture and, 157
observable effect, 4, 27n20, 40, 73
predictions of, 37, 70, 76, 78
temperature lag and eventual effect, 10
world in 2050 and after, 88

second-generation biofuels, 16, 147
“sector no-lose targets,” 24

414 

Senegal

I N D E X

migrants from, 111m
mobile phone use to disseminate information in, 291

Seres, S., 266b
SERVIR, 296b
Shanghai

heat-wave preparedness in, 96b
migration to, 92, 112n32

“shaping actions,” 54
shelter, right to, 53b
“shovel-ready” projects, 13b, 59
“signposts,” 54
slope stabilization, 129
Small Business Innovation Research Program, 301
small countries’ vulnerability, 103, 104m
small islands, impact of climate change on, 77f
smart grids and meters, 205b, 217–18, 305
social capacity for determining severity of climatic impacts, 278, 279b
social learning, 106f, 107
social norms, 329–30
social protection policies, 13, 13b, 89, 107–8
socioeconomic changes, 60–61, 89
soil carbon, 17b, 24, 25b, 135, 169–71, 274b
solar power, 16, 16f, 21b, 27n39, 45, 205b, 217–18, 220b, 221b, 254, 

289
South Africa

carbon mitigation strategy in, 240
Clean Production Demonstration project, 311
emissions reduction in, 192b
feed-in laws in, 218
higher education and R&D collaboration in, 305b
protected areas for biodiversity in, 152
tradable water rights in, 141
water allocations in, 141, 164f, 173n14

South/Southeast Asia. See also specific countries

agricultural decrease in productivity due to climate change in, 

5, 5m, 27n24, 40

cooking with clean fuels in, 191
disability-adjusted life years, loss of, 41
diseases in, 95
disproportionate consequences of climate change on, 6b, 168
flooding in, 94, 94m
water resources in, 93–94
weather forecasting in, 162

South-South technology transfer, 254
Soviet development plan, 44–45
soybeans, 165
Spain

desalination in, 174n40
feed-in laws in, 218
heat waves, preparation for, 96b
renewable energy in, 15

species conservation and extinction, 4, 17, 124–29. See also 

biodiversity

stakeholder role. See participatory design and implementation
state role, 330–35
stationarity, 18
Stellenbosch University, 305b

Stern, Nicholas, 8b
“Stern assumptions,” 8b
Stern Review of Climate Change, 27n26
Stern Review of Economics of Climate Change, 48
stimulus packages and green spending, 26, 29n93, 58–60, 59f, 190b
stockpiling and access to food, 161
storms, intensity of. See also disaster risk management programs

aquaculture and, 157
observable effect, 4, 73
predictions of, 5, 74, 78, 79
weather modification and, 290b
world in 2050 and after, 88

stoves. See cooking with clean fuels
streamflow reduction activity, 141
Sub-Saharan Africa. See also specific countries

aquaculture in, 158
cooking with clean fuels in, 191
crop yield decline in, 146
disability-adjusted life years, loss of, 41
disproportionate consequences of climate change on, 6b, 40, 

278

fertilizer use in, 156
food pricing in, 168
hydropower in, 45, 46m
meningitis epidemics in, 41
recession and, 58

sulfur emissions. See greenhouse gases
Super-Efficient Refrigerator Program, 300b
supply-side energy efficiency, 208
sustainable development in light of climate change, 38, 39–48, 235. 

See also economic growth

agricultural practices, 148, 171, 175n79
CDM benefits to, 266b
insufficient contribution to, 265
marine ecosystems, 157
transformation to sustainable energy, 195–209

sustainable development policies and measures (SD-PAMs), 243
Suzlon (wind turbine manufacturer), 287
Sweden

green government procurement in, 311
tax rebate in, 330

Switzerland and greenhouse gases, 2
Sydney, Australia, encouraging energy efficiency in, 21b

T
Taiwan and venture capital, 301
taxation

border tax adjustments, 253, 255
carbon tax, 47, 170f, 190, 224n71, 252b, 268b, 269, 270, 278
CDM tax levy, 266–67, 267t, 278
on certified emission reductions, 23, 24
earmarking of revenues, 329, 339
fuel taxes, 212, 213
green taxes, 47–48, 330
on international transport emissions, 270, 278
rebates, 330
renewable energy tax credits, 219b

technological innovation. See innovation and new technologies

 

Index 

415

Technology Development Foundation (Turkey), 311
technology transfer, 254, 266b, 289, 294t, 301, 307–10
telemedicine, 19b
temperature

global average, 72–73, 73f
holding change to 2ºC warming, 3, 8, 10, 10f, 27n15, 70, 79–81

effect of failure of, 76–78
energy change needed for, 14–16, 15f, 80f, 189, 196, 199–204
gap to cover costs of, 22, 23f
global change needed for, 200–201b, 204f, 206f, 223n22
innovation and new technology for, 220, 289
regional change needed for, 202–3b

impact of changes in, 74, 75m
world in 2050 and after, 88

Thailand

Department of Alternative Energy Development and Efficiency, 

tropical cyclones. See storms, intensity of
Tunis

antidesertification program in, 43b
flooding risks, 93b

Tunisia and water management, 143b
Turkey

innovation funding to, 302
Technology Development Foundation, 311

U
Uganda

health education in, 305b
mass procurement in, 216

Ukraine

climate change’s effect on, 146
export controls in, 46, 160

214

environmental monitoring in, 304

threshold effects, 49–51, 50b, 62n75
timber industry, 40, 152b
tipping points, 49–51, 50b, 62n75, 78b, 79m, 80t
“tolerable windows” approach, 48
tradable development rights, 154, 175n113
tradable green and white certificates schemes, 281n5
tradable water rights, 135, 141–42, 142b
trade. See also carbon price and markets

agricultural carbon trading, 171
agricultural commodity trading, 159–61, 161m
carbon labeling, effect of, 253–54
climate change and, 251–55
liberalization for climate-friendly goods, 254
mitigation policies and, 46–47
multilateral environmental agreements (MEAs) and, 253
regulation, 162
technology transfer and, 254, 308
virtual carbon tariffs, 252b

tradeoffs for warming and carbon dioxide concentrations, 8–9, 8b, 

48–55, 191, 200–201b

Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS), 310
trade sanctions on environmental grounds, 251–52
“tragedy of the commons,” 56
transition costs to lower carbon emissions, 7
transparency, 276–78, 340–41
transportation. See also automobiles

adaptative management of, 14f
e-bikes, 307, 307f
emissions from, 194

tax on international transport emissions, 270, 278

financing climate-proofing of, 276
public transit, 194–95, 208
weatherproofing of, 161–62

treaties. See international cooperation
trees. See also forests

integrated land use with, 152b, 153, 175n105
species migration, 124

tropical countries

farmers and product/market diversification, 152b
land-use emissions in, 55, 62n102

uncertainties, 40, 51–52, 89, 102, 261b
UN Climate Change Conference (2008), 245
UN Common Fund for Commodities, 152b
UNFCCC. See United Nations Framework Convention on Climate 

Change

unions, 339
United Kingdom

agency for climate change in, 20
carbon tax in, 47
energy-efficiency quotas in, 213
government accountability for climate change in, 335b

United Nations

Convention on the Law of the Non-Navigational Uses of 

International Watercourses, 158–59

Hyogo Framework of Action, 99
International Strategy for Disaster Reduction, 162
World Water Development Report, 139

United Nations Development Programme, 274
United Nations Environment Programme, 274, 301
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 

(UNFCCC), 2, 21b, 233. See also Bali Action Plan; Clean 
Development Mechanism (CDM)

on adaptation costs and funding needs, 259
adaptation efforts under, 246–48
Article 2, 26n3, 70
carbon market and, 171
“common but differentiated responsibilities” in, 55, 239
compensation of developing countries, 55
contents of, 234b, 251
global climate agreement negotiations and, 24, 26
land-use change and forestry accounting, 25b
proposal for new body to take leadership role, 248
reconciling with Kyoto Protocol, 251
REDD scheme, 127–28
U.S. and EU on commitments of developing countries, 249n22

United States

agricultural education in, 305b
biofuel production in, 45–46, 47f, 308
climate education in schools in, 329b
Conservation Reserve Program, 170
emissions reduction in, 192b
energy demand reductions in, 202b

416 

I N D E X

United States (continued)

energy prices in, 14–15, 28n61
fuel prices, compared to EU, 14–15, 28n61, 212
green spending as part of stimulus package in, 59, 59f
Kyoto Protocol, nonparticipation in, 12, 21b
Mayors’ Climate Protection agreement in, 21b
recession in, 58
renewable energy tax credits in, 219b
tradable water rights in, 141
unemployment in, 58
utilities and energy conservation in, 20
wind energy in, 287

universities. See education
University of Alabama at Birmingham, 302b
UN-REDD, 274
urban planning. See cities
U.S. Climate Action Partnership, 341b
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 299, 301, 329b
U.S. Meteorological and Hydrologic Service Centers, 296
utilities and energy conservation, 15, 20, 212b, 213–14, 215b, 218, 

329

V
vaccine program of GAVI Alliance and World Bank, 299–300
values systems, 52–53
van Vuuren, D. P., 8b
vector-borne diseases, 95, 97
vehicles. See automobiles; transportation
venture capitalists, 300–301, 300f
Vietnam

benchmarking in, 335
community self-reliance in, 105
disproportionate consequences of climate change on, 6b
export controls in, 160
mass procurement in, 216

virtual carbon tariffs, 252b
voluntary standards and programs, 297, 341b
vulnerability, 87–111

adaptation management, 40, 42, 89–90. See also adaptative 

management

climate vulnerability

capacity to adapt vs., 278, 280b
social capacity vs., 278, 279b

communicable diseases, 95–98. See also communicable diseases
empowerment of communities to self-protect, 105–11
government initiatives for risk management, 103–5
to natural disasters, 40, 42, 98–101, 98f
need for finance related to, 277
safety nets for most vulnerable, 107–8
of small countries, 103, 104m
urban vulnerability, 91–95, 91m
“vulnerability fund,” World Bank creation of, 58
world in 2050 and after, 87–88, 111, 112n4

vulnerable-group feeding program (Bangladesh), 13b

W
Wales and heat-wave preparedness, 96b
warnings

early warning systems, 90, 92, 97–98, 99b, 104–5

flood early warning systems, 162
heat-health warning systems, 95, 96b

waste management

aquaculture and, 158
in urban areas, 93, 93b, 143b

water-borne diseases, 98
water harvesting, 144
water resources, 137–45. See also oceans; rivers

adaptative management of, 14f, 16–18, 17b, 140–42
bulk water, 141
cities built inland, demand for, 92
climate change’s effect on, 137–38, 137m
drainage systems project, 101b
efficient management of, 133
food production and, 144–45
hydrological cycle, 136f, 137–38
information on water management, 17, 18, 139–40, 162–64, 

164f

innovation and nonconventional technologies for, 16–18, 17b, 

143–44, 165, 165f, 298

international cooperation in sharing, 13–14, 158–59
monitoring and forecasting of, 162, 163m, 164–66, 165f
pricing, 141, 166–73
privatization and disease control, 98
remote sensing technologies and, 17b, 18, 145, 162–64, 164f, 

305b

right to water, 53b
scarcity of, 5, 6b, 7b, 140
storage, 142–43
subsidies from wealthier countries, 172
temperature increases, effect on, 76
tradable water rights, 135, 141–42, 142b

Watson, C., 266b
weather-based risk management, 103–4
weather forecasting systems, 145, 162
weatherizing homes, 59
weather modification, 290b
weatherproofing of transportation, 161–62
weeds, 152, 154
West Africa, droughts in, 78
wetlands

climate change impact on, 6b, 78
restoration, 60
as storm damage buffer, 19b, 88, 129
water resources and, 143b
world of 2050 and after, 88, 91

Whirlpool, 300b
wind energy, 21b, 204, 205b, 217–18, 217b, 219b, 254, 287, 287f, 

288m, 289, 308, 309f

women

disproportionate consequences of climate change on, 105
empowerment of, 43b

Workfare programs, 108, 109b
World Bank

on adaptation costs and funding needs, 9, 259, 261b
BioCarbon Fund, 128b
energy efficiency financing, 216b
Forest Carbon Partnership Facility, 24
forest investment proposal, 275

 

Index 

417

as intermediary for Malawi’s weather-based risk management, 

104

prize competitions for clean technologies, 300
on relocation of carbon-intensive industries, 253
on trade liberalization for climate-friendly goods, 254
vaccine program, 299–300
“vulnerability fund,” creation of, 58

World Health Organization, 41, 301
World Mayors Council on Climate Change, 21b
World Meteorological Organization, 81n9, 162, 296b
World Resource Institute’s CAIT emission indicator database, 

62n102

World Trade Organization, 22, 162, 241, 251, 253, 254, 310
World Water Development Report (UN), 139

Y
Yemen, Republic of, tradable water rights in, 142b

Z
Zambia

agricultural policies protecting biodiversity in, 153
mobile phone use to disseminate information in, 291

zero-tillage, 17b, 154, 170
Zimbabwe

climate shocks’ effect on health and education in, 44
weather forecasting in, 162
women’s empowerment in, 43b
zoning for conservation, 175n113

X
X-Prize Foundation, 299

Eco-Audit

Environmental Benefits Statement

The  World  Bank  is  committed  to  preserving  endangered 
forests  and  natural  resources.  The  Office  of  the  Publisher 
follows the recommended standards for paper usage set by 
the Green Press Initiative, a nonprofit program supporting 
publishers  in  using  fiber  that  is  not  from  endangered 
forests. 

In  the  printing  of  the  World  Development  Report  2010: 
Development  and  Climate  Change,  we  took  the  following 
measures to reduce our carbon footprint: 

•   We  used  paper  containing  100  percent  recycled  fiber 
made  from  post-consumer  waste;  each  pound  of  post-
consumer recycled fiber that replaces a ton of virgin fiber 
prevents the release of 2,108 pounds of greenhouse gas 
emissions and lessens the burden on landfills. 

•   We used paper that is chlorine-free and acid-free. 
•   We  printed  the  World  Development  Report  2010  with 
vegetable-based  inks  that  are  made  from  renewable 
sources  and    that  are  easier  to  remove  in  the  recycling 
process. 

For more information, visit www.greenpressinitiative.org. 

Saved: 

•   845 trees 
•   268 million BTUs of total energy 
•   80,388 lbs. of CO2 equivalent of greenhouse gases 
•    387,166 gallons of wastewater 
•   23,506 lbs. of solid waste 

