The United Nations World Water Development Report 2015   

Report

Water for a 
sustainable 
World

UNDESA, UNECE, 
UNECLAC, UNESCAP, 
UNESCWA

United Nations
Educational, Scientiﬁc and
Cultural Organization

Empowered lives. 
Resilient nations. 

001

WWDR 2015ChapteR titleThe United Nations World Water Development Report 2015   

Water for a 
sustainable 
World

Published in 2015 by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural 
Organization, 7, place de Fontenoy, 75352 Paris 07 SP, France

© UNESCO 2015

This report is published by UNESCO on behalf of UN-Water. The list of UN-Water 
Members and Partners can be found on the following website: http://www.unwater.org

Chapter 11, Europe and North America, by Annukka Lipponen and Nicholas Bonvoisin,  
© United Nations

Chapter 14, Latin America and the Caribbean, © United Nations 2014

ISBN 978-92-3-100071-3
ePub ISBN 978-92-3-100099-7

Suggested citation:
WWAP (United Nations World Water Assessment Programme). 2015. The United Nations 
World Water Development Report 2015: Water for a Sustainable World. Paris, UNESCO.

 
This publication is available in Open Access under the Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 IGO 
(CC-BY-SA 3.0 IGO) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/igo/). By 
using the content of this publication, the users accept to be bound by the terms of use 
of the UNESCO Open Access Repository  
(http://www.unesco.org/open-access/terms-use-ccbysa-en).

The present license applies exclusively to the text content of the publication. For the use 
of any material not clearly identified as belonging to UNESCO, prior permission shall be 
requested from: publication.copyright@unesco.org or UNESCO Publishing, 7, place de 
Fontenoy, 75352 Paris 07 SP France. 

The designations employed and the presentation of material throughout this 
publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of 
UNESCO concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its 
authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.

The ideas and opinions expressed in this publication are those of the authors; they are 
not necessarily those of UNESCO and do not commit the Organization.

The contents of Parts 2, 3 and 4 were contributed by the UN-Water Members and 
Partners listed on the title pages of the chapters therein. UNESCO and the United 
Nations World Water Assessment Programme (WWAP) are not responsible for errors in 
the content provided or for discrepancies in data and content between contributed 
chapters.

WWAP provided the opportunity for individuals to be listed as authors and contributors 
or to be acknowledged in Parts 2, 3 and 4. WWAP is not responsible for any omissions in 
this regard.

Cover and interior design and typesetting by Phoenix Design Aid A/S, an ISO 14001 
(environmental management) and a DS 49001 (corporate social responsibility) certified 
and approved carbon-neutral company.

Printed by Dimensione Grafica (ISO 9001:2008 and FSC-COC), Spello, Umbria, Italy

This publication is printed in vegetable inks on FSC Mixed Sources paper, supporting 
responsible use of forest reserves, 100% recycled, acid-free and chlorine-free.

Printed in Italy

TAblE oF ConTEnTs

Foreword
by ban Ki-moon, secretary-General of the united nations 

Foreword
by irina bokova, director-General of unesCo 

Foreword
by Michel Jarraud, Chair of un-Water and secretary-General of WMo 

Preface
by Michela Miletto, WWaP Coordinator a.i., and richard Connor, lead author 

Acknowledgements 

Executive summary  

Prologue
the future of water — a vision for 2050 

Chapter 1. Unsustainable growth  
1.1   increasing global water demand 
1.2   Potential impacts of increasing demand 
1.3   Water resources: status and availability  
1.4   Constraints on water resources management 
 

 

 

WATER AnD THE THREE DiMEnsions oF sUsTAinAblE DEVEloPMEnT 

PART 1

Chapter 2. Poverty and social equity  
2.1   the water and poverty relationship  
2.2   the equity challenge  
2.3   Key dimensions of poverty reduction  
2.4   targeting gender equality  

Chapter 3. Economic development  
3.1   expanding economic opportunities through water infrastructure  
3.2   facilitating structural change  
3.3   investment challenges  
3.4   economic opportunities from improved water efficiency  
3.5   intersectoral trade-offs  
3.6   Protecting water resources  

Chapter 4. Ecosystems  
4.1   Context  
4.2   Challenges  
4.3.  responses  
 

WWDR 2015

19
19
20
21
22

23
23
23
24
26
27
27

28
28
29
31

iv

v 

vi 

vii 

ix

1

7 

10
10
11 
12
13

i

i

PART 2

ADDREssinG CRiTiCAl DEVEloPMEnTAl CHAllEnGEs 

Chapter 5. Water, sanitation and hygiene  
5.1   return on WasH investments  
5.2   environmental implications  
5.3   reducing disparities and enhancing services  
5.4   towards sustainable WasH services  

Chapter 6. Urbanization  
6.1   Water in a rapidly urbanizing world  
6.2   Challenges  
6.3   responses  

Chapter 7. Food and agriculture  
7.1   improving resource use efficiency  
7.2   Conserving, protecting and enhancing natural resources  
7.3   rural livelihoods and social well-being  
7.4   improving resilience  
7.5   effective governance  

Chapter 8. Energy  
8.1   thirsty energy  
8.2   Challenges: Meeting ever growing demands  
8.3   responses: a water perspective on energy  

Chapter 9. industry  
9.1   Context  
9.2   Challenges  
9.3   responses  

Chapter 10. Adapting to climate variability and change  
10.1  Context  
10.2  Challenges  
10.3  responses and opportunities  

37
38
39
40
41

42
42
42
45

48
49
50
51
52
52

54
54
55
57

58
58
59
61

65
65
65
67

ii

Table of ConTenTs

REGions 

Chapter 11. Europe and north America  
11.1  Coordination between users  
11.2  'Greening' agricultural practices  

Chapter 12. Asia and the Pacific  
12.1  Water-related disasters  
12.2  urban water  
12.3  Groundwater  

Chapter 13. The Arab Region  
13.1  Water scarcity  
13.2  threats to sustainability  
13.3  Progress and perspectives  

Chapter 14. latin America and the Caribbean  
14.1  Water governance  
14.2  drinking water supply and sanitation  

Chapter 15. Africa  
15.1  overview  
15.2  Key water challenges related to sustainable development in africa  
15.3  the way forward  

REsPonsEs AnD iMPlEMEnTATion 

Chapter 16. Framework for implementing The Future We Want  
16.1  Water and the three dimensions of sustainable development  
16.2  the post-2015 development agenda  
16.3  achieving The Future We Want  

Epilogue
Water for a sustainable world  

References  

Abbreviations and acronyms  

boxes, tables and figures  

PART 3

PART 4

71
71
72

74
74
75
76

78
78
79
80

82
83
83

85
85
86
87

93
93
93
97

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

104 

106

119

121

WWDR 2015

iii

FoREWoRD

by Ban Ki-moon
Secretary-General of the United Nations

Water flows through the three pillars of sustainable development – economic, social and environmental. Water resources, and 
the essential services they provide, are among the keys to achieving poverty reduction, inclusive growth, public health, food 
security, lives of dignity for all and long-lasting harmony with earth’s essential ecosystems.
 
Water issues have risen in prominence in recent years, reflecting growing understanding of water’s centrality as well as the 
world’s success in achieving the Millennium development Goal target of halving the proportion of people without sustainable 
access to safe drinking water. between 1990 and 2010, 2.3 billion people gained access to improved drinking water sources, 
such as piped supplies and protected wells.

the publication of the World Water Development Report 2015, “Water for a sustainable World”, comes as Member states 
strive to build on the gains made under the MdG framework, articulate an inspiring post-2015 development agenda and 
reach an ambitious agreement on climate change. the report illustrates the complex linkages between water and critical areas 
such as human health, food and energy security, urbanization, industrial growth and climate change. it also describes the 
status of the world’s water resources, including an overview of the impacts of unsustainable growth on freshwater resources, 
and suggests possible responses to these challenges. 

the World Water Development Report 2015, coordinated by unesCo’s World Water assessment Programme, brings together 
31 un-Water Members and 37 Partners, and offers data and information aimed at policy- and decision-makers, inside and 
outside the water sector. the decisions that determine how water resources are used (or abused) are not made by water 
managers alone. Progress towards sustainable development thus requires engaging a broad range of actors. i appeal to 
Government leaders as well as civil society and the private sector to join forces to protect and share our most precious 
resource, and to build a more sustainable future for all.

ban Ki-moon

iv
iv

iV

foreword

FoREWoRD

by Irina Bokova
Director-General of UNESCO

this report comes at a critical moment, when freshwater resources face rising pressure to provide for the social, economic and 
environmental needs of a growing world population. 2015 is also a year of high expectations and hopes, as the deadline for 
the Millennium development Goals, and when states will define a new global sustainable development agenda to follow.

Water is inextricably linked to the development of all societies and cultures. at the same time, this development also places 
considerable pressure on water resources — agriculture, energy and industry all have impacts on the use and governance of 
water. More than two decades after the first summit on sustainable development, many countries still face the challenges 
of eliminating poverty and promoting economic growth, ensuring health and sanitation, preventing land degradation and 
pollution, and advancing rural and urban development. around 748 million people today still do not have access to an 
improved source of drinking water, and water demand for manufacturing is expected to increase by 400 per cent between 
2000 and 2050 globally.

the 2015 World Water development report sets both an aspirational and a realistic vision for the future of water towards 
2050. Water is essential for promoting inclusive sustainable development, as it supports human communities, maintains the 
functions of ecosystems and ensures economic development. translating this vision into reality requires efforts by all, through 
concrete and interrelated actions that go from establishing the legal and institutional framework to ensure sustainable water 
management and increasing investments and financial support for water development to enhancing and improving access to 
water supply, sanitation and hygiene services.

to these ends, unesCo is deeply committed to ensuring equitable and inclusive quality education and lifelong learning for 
women and men across the world. in many contexts, this calls for freeing women and children from the burden of fetching 
water for hours every day to provide them with opportunities for their empowerment and fulfilment. this is essential for 
advancing respect for human rights and for eliminating poverty. this is why the 2015 report has mainstreamed the needs of 
the most vulnerable, as well as those of minorities, women and children, throughout its approach and analysis.

i am confident that the 2015 World Water development report will contribute significantly to the discussion of the 69th 
united nations General assembly and to shaping an ambitious new global sustainable development agenda, with water at its 
heart. in this respect, i wish to thank all members and partners of un-Water, under the coordination of united nations World 
Water assessment Programme, for their contribution to this report and commitment to the goals we share. i see this as a 
powerful example of the united nations delivering as one on key issues for all member states. the secretariat of the united 
nations World Water assessment Programme has played a particularly important role in coordinating this important work. 
in this respect, i wish to express my gratitude also to the Government of italy and the umbria region for hosting the united 
nations World Water assessment Programme and supporting its work. 

the sustainable use and management of water is vital for welfare of all humanity today, and it is essential for building the 
future we want for all. this is why this report is so important. 

Irina bokova

vV v

WWDR 2015FoREWoRD

by Michel Jarraud
Chair of UN-Water and Secretary-General of WMO

2015 is when the Millennium development Goals will come to term and the new sustainable development agenda will come 
to light. this year we have an unprecedented opportunity to be bold, brave and vigorous when creating the future we want. 

Water is truly at the core of sustainable development. it is inextricably linked to climate change, agriculture, food security, 
health, equality, gender and education, and there is already international agreement that water and sanitation are essential to 
the achievement of many sustainable development goals. 

in my capacity as Chair of un-Water, i am proud of this year’s World Water development report. With a broad and ambitious 
scope, the report provides a thorough understanding of water and sanitation challenges and how to transform them into 
opportunities.

the production of this report was only made possible by the hundreds of hours of inter-agency collaboration that went into 
it. therefore, i would like to sincerely thank all of my un-Water colleagues for their contributions. i would also like to express 
my profound appreciation to the united nations educational, scientific and Cultural organization (unesCo) for its World 
Water assessment Programme, which coordinates the production and publication of the report on behalf of un-Water.

this 2015 report is a must-read to understand the role of water and sanitation in the Post-2015 development agenda and it 
is my hope that this report can inspire strategies, policies and actions for years to come. 

Michel Jarraud

vi

foreword

PREFACE 

by Michela Miletto, WWAP Coordinator a.i.
and Richard Connor, Lead Author

in its 1987 report, Our Common Future, the united nations’ World Commission on environment and development (the 
brundtland Commission) defined ‘sustainable development’ as "development that meets the needs of the present without 
compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs." since then, several other definitions have 
been proposed and debated, and countless papers, articles and books have been published, each seeking to broaden our 
understanding of the concept and the types of actions it implies.

With the 1992 un Conference on environment and development (the rio summit) through to the 2000 united nations 
Millennium declaration and its eight Millennium development Goals (MdGs), sustainable development has become integrated 
into the un system as the organizing principle for sustaining the finite resources necessary to provide for the needs of future 
generations of life on the planet. 2015 marks yet another critical milestone in this evolution. as the MdG cycle draws to a 
close, a new cycle of sustainable development Goals (sdGs) is poised to guide national governments and the international 
community in our common quest to achieve a sustainable world.

as the second in a new series of annually released theme-oriented reports, the 2015 edition of the united nations World 
Water Development Report (WWdr) clearly shows how water is critical to sustainable development. indeed, water is the 
essential primary natural resource upon which nearly all social and economic activities and ecosystem functions depend. 
sustainable development requires that we properly manage our freshwater resources and equitably share its benefits.

the linkages between water and sustainable development are numerous, complex and often subtle. in addition to describing 
the relationship between water and its social, economic and environmental dimensions, this WWdr also examines water’s 
role in addressing several of the most pressing developmental challenges of our time, from food and energy security to 
urbanization and climate change. the report is further enriched by regional perspectives, and provides decision-makers and 
practitioners with specific examples of measures, actions and approaches to addressing these interconnected challenges 
through water.

like its predecessors, the WWdr 2015 is primarily targeted at national-level decision-makers and water resources managers. 
However, it is hoped the report will also be well received by academics and the broader developmental community as well by 
those who care about the common future of our planet.

this latest edition of the WWdr is the result of a concerted effort between WWaP, the ten lead agencies (fao, undesa, 
undP, uneP, unesCo, un-Habitat, uniCef, unido, WHo and WMo) responsible for the thematic part of the report and 
the five regional un economic Commissions who provided geographically-focused perspectives on water and sustainable 
development.

the report has also benefitted to a great extent from the inputs and contributions of several un-Water Members and 
partners, as well as from dozens of scientists, professionals and nGos who provided a wide range of excellent material. the 
members of WWaP’s technical advisory Committee were particularly active and generous in providing their guidance and 
knowledge to the production team. in line with the previous publications of WWaP, this report is gender-mainstreamed 
thanks to the support of un Women, the WWaP advisory Group on Gender and the unesCo division for Gender equality.

vii

WWDR 2015the report begins by describing a world in the not-so-distant future in which water resources and water-related services are 
managed in such a way that the benefits derived from water are maximized and shared equitably throughout the world. this 
vision is not merely a fictional utopian outlook; it is a future that we believe is entirely achievable – a future in which water 
is recognized and managed as the fundamental resource that supports all aspects of sustainable development. this vision 
represents a new and innovative approach to the WWdr which we hope will prompt readers to reflect on how our world 
could be, provided we make appropriate changes to the ways we do things.

although the concept of sustainable development may be straightforward, different stakeholders tend to see the challenges 
and potential solutions from their particular – and often varying – perspectives. We have endeavoured to present a fact-based, 
balanced and neutral account of the current state of knowledge, covering the most recent developments pertaining to water 
and sustainable development. as we move towards a new paradigm of sustainable development, whether via a new set of 
development goals, the decoupling of water and economic growth, or the ‘greening’ of economies, it is our sincere hope that 
this factual report is received as a useful, informative and credible tool that will support and strengthen proactive discussions 
pertaining to our common future, and ultimately help to identify and adopt appropriate responses.

on behalf of WWaP’s secretariat, we extend our deepest appreciation to the un-Water lead agencies and regional 
Commissions, to the members and partners of un-Water, and to the authors, writers, editors and other contributors for 
collectively producing this unique and authoritative report. a special recognition goes to the undP, who provided outstanding 
support from the very beginning of the report’s development through to the final editing process.

a particular thanks goes to Ms irina bokova, director-General of unesCo, for her crucial support for WWaP and the 
production of the WWdr.

We are profoundly grateful to the italian Government for funding the Programme, and to the umbria region for hosting 
the WWaP secretariat in Villa la Colombella in Perugia. their contribution has been instrumental to the production of the 
WWdr.
finally, we extend our most sincere gratitude to all our colleagues at the WWaP secretariat, whose names are listed in the 
acknowledgements. this report could not have been completed without their dedication and professionalism.

Michela Miletto 

                                                          richard Connor

viii

PrefaCe

ACKnoWlEDGEMEnTs

the united nations World Water assessment Programme (WWaP) secretariat would like to extend its sincere thanks to all the 
organizations, institutions and individuals who made the preparation of this report possible. 

WWaP recognizes the valuable contribution, useful revisions and timely endorsements of un-Water members and partners. 
special thanks go to undP for their assistance in developing the structure and main messages of the report, and for hosting 
the WWdr 2015 developmental Workshop in cooperation with stockholm international Water institute.

WWdr 2015 benefitted from the significant reviews, comments and guidance of WWaP’s technical advisory Committee.

We wish to express our earnest thanks to Ms irina bokova, the director-General of unesCo, whose support was instrumental 
in preparing the report. 

We would like to acknowledge the support of Ms blanca Jiménez-Cisneros, director of the division of Water sciences and 
secretary of the international Hydrological Programme (iHP), and colleagues at iHP. 

WWaP is grateful for the generous financial contribution of the italian Government, under the ratified Memorandum of 
understanding for WWaP, and for the facilities provided by the umbria region. 

WWDR 2015

ix

WWDR 2015 team

The United nations World Water Assessment Programme (WWAP)

Content Coordinator
Michela Miletto

Lead Author
richard Connor

Process Coordinator
simone Grego

Data and Indicators Officer 
engin Koncagül

Publications Officers
alice franek/diwata Hunziker

Publications Assistant
Valentina abete 

Copy-editing
PiCa publishing

Design and layout
Phoenix design aid

Donors
Government of italy
Government of the region of umbria, italy

WWAP Technical Advisory Committee 
uri shamir (Chair), dipak Gyawali (deputy Chair), fatma abdel rahman attia, anders 
berntell, elias fereres, Mukuteswara Gopalakrishnan, daniel P. loucks, Henk van schaik, 
Yui liong shie, lászlo somlyody, lucio ubertini and albert Wright

WWAP Advisory Group on Gender Equality
Gülser Çorat and Kusum athukorala (Co-Chairs), Joanna Corzo, irene dankelman, Manal 
eid, atef Hamdy, deepa Joshi, barbara van Koppen, Kenza robinson, buyelwa sonjica and 
theresa Wasike, Marcia brewster and Vasudha Pangare

WWAP Secretariat
Coordinator a.i.: Michela Miletto
Programmes: barbara bracaglia, richard Connor, angela renata Cordeiro ortigara, 
simone Grego, engin Koncagül, lucilla Minelli, daniel Perna, léna salamé and  
laurens thuy
Publications: Valentina abete and diwata Hunziker
Communications: simona Gallese
Gender and Regional Monitoring: francesca Greco
Administration: arturo frascani and lisa Gastaldin
Security: fabio bianchi, Michele brensacchi and francesco Gioffredi
Interns and volunteers: agnese Carlini, lucia Chiodini, Greta di florio, alessio lilli, Jessica 
Pascucci, emma schiavon, Maxime turko and sisira saddhamangala Withanachchi

x

aCknowledgeMenTs

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGESExECUTiVE sUMMARy

Cascata delle Marmore (Marmore waterfalls), Terni, Umbria (Italy)
Photo: antonio Picascia

development, in particular food production and energy. 
the competition for water − between water ‘uses’ and 
water ‘users’ − increases the risk of localized conflicts and 
continued inequities in access to services, with significant 
impacts on local economies and human well-being. 

over-abstraction is often the result of out-dated models 
of natural resource use and governance, where the use 
of resources for economic growth is under-regulated and 
undertaken without appropriate controls. Groundwater 
supplies are diminishing, with an estimated 20% of the 
world’s aquifers currently over-exploited. disruption of 
ecosystems through unabated urbanization, inappropriate 
agricultural practices, deforestation and pollution are among 
the factors undermining the environment’s capacity to 
provide ecosystem services, including clean water.

Persistent poverty, inequitable access to water supply and 
sanitation services, inadequate financing, and deficient 
information about the state of water resources, their use 
and management impose further constraints on water 
resources management and its ability to help achieve 
sustainable development objectives.

Water and the three dimensions of 
sustainable development
Progress in each of the three dimensions of sustainable 
development − social, economic and environmental − is 
bound by the limits imposed by finite and often vulnerable 
water resources and the way these resources are managed 
to provide services and benefits.

Poverty and social equity
While access to household water supplies is critical 
for a family’s health and social dignity, access to water 
for productive uses such as agriculture and family-run 

Water is at the core of sustainable development. Water 
resources, and the range of services they provide, underpin 
poverty reduction, economic growth and environmental 
sustainability. from food and energy security to human and 
environmental health, water contributes to improvements 
in social well-being and inclusive growth, affecting the 
livelihoods of billions. 

Vision 2050: Water in a sustainable world
In a sustainable world that is achievable in the near 
future, water and related resources are managed in 
support of human well-being and ecosystem integrity 
in a robust economy. Sufficient and safe water is 
made available to meet every person’s basic needs, 
with healthy lifestyles and behaviours easily upheld 
through reliable and affordable water supply and 
sanitation services, in turn supported by equitably 
extended and efficiently managed infrastructure. 
Water resources management, infrastructure and 
service delivery are sustainably financed. Water is duly 
valued in all its forms, with wastewater treated as a 
resource that avails energy, nutrients and freshwater 
for reuse. Human settlements develop in harmony 
with the natural water cycle and the ecosystems 
that support it, with measures in place that reduce 
vulnerability and improve resilience to water-related 
disasters. Integrated approaches to water resources 
development, management and use − and to 
human rights − are the norm. Water is governed in a 
participatory way that draws on the full potential of 
women and men as professionals and citizens, guided 
by a number of able and knowledgeable organizations, 
within a just and transparent institutional framework.

The consequences of unsustainable growth
unsustainable development pathways and governance 
failures have affected the quality and availability of water 
resources, compromising their capacity to generate social 
and economic benefits. demand for freshwater is growing. 
unless the balance between demand and finite supplies is 
restored, the world will face an increasingly severe global 
water deficit.

Global water demand is largely influenced by population 
growth, urbanization, food and energy security policies, 
and macro-economic processes such as trade globalization, 
changing diets and increasing consumption. by 2050, global 
water demand is projected to increase by 55%, mainly due 
to growing demands from manufacturing, thermal electricity 
generation and domestic use. 
Competing demands impose difficult allocation decisions 
and limit the expansion of sectors critical to sustainable 

2

exeCUTIve sUMMary

Fisher and her husband pulling in the net (Timor Leste)
Photo: UN Women/Betsy Davis

businesses is vital to realize livelihood opportunities, 
generate income and contribute to economic productivity. 
investing in improved water management and services can 
help reduce poverty and sustain economic growth. Poverty-
oriented water interventions can make a difference for 
billions of poor people who receive very direct benefits 
from improved water and sanitation services through better 
health, reduced health costs, increased productivity and 
time-savings.

economic growth itself is not a guarantee for wider social 
progress. in most countries, there is a wide – and often 
widening – gap between rich and poor, and between those 
who can and cannot exploit new opportunities. access to 
safe drinking water and sanitation is a human right, yet 
its limited realization throughout the world often has 
disproportionate impacts on the poor and on women and 
children in particular.

Economic development
Water is an essential resource in the production of most 
types of goods and services including food, energy and 
manufacturing. Water supply (quantity and quality) at 
the place where the user needs it must be reliable and 
predictable to support financially sustainable investments in 
economic activities. Wise investment in both hard and soft 
infrastructure that is adequately financed, operated and 
maintained facilitates the structural changes necessary to 
foster advances in many productive areas of the economy. 
this often means more income opportunities to enhance 
expenditure in health and education, reinforcing a self-
sustained dynamic of economic development.

Many benefits may be gained by promoting and facilitating 
use of the best available technologies and management 
systems in water provision, productivity and efficiency, and 
by improving water allocation mechanisms. these types 
of interventions and investments reconcile the continuous 
increase in water use with the need to preserve the critical 
environmental assets on which the provision of water and 
the economy depends.

Environmental protection and ecosystem services
Most economic models do not value the essential services 
provided by freshwater ecosystems, often leading to 
unsustainable use of water resources and ecosystem 
degradation. Pollution from untreated residential and 
industrial wastewater and agricultural run-off also weakens 
the capacity of ecosystem to provide water-related services. 

under-recognized and under-utilized within most current 
economic and resource management approaches. a more 
holistic focus on ecosystems for water and development 
that maintains a beneficial mix between built and natural 
infrastructure can ensure that benefits are maximized.

economic arguments can make the preservation of 
ecosystems relevant to decision-makers and planners. 
ecosystem valuation demonstrates that benefits far exceed 
costs of water-related investments in ecosystem conservation. 
Valuation is also important in assessing trade-offs in ecosystem 
conservation, and can be used to better inform development 
plans. adoption of ‘ecosystem-based management’ is key to 
ensuring water long-term sustainability.

Water’s role in addressing critical 
developmental challenges
interlinkages between water and sustainable development 
reach far beyond its social, economic and environmental 
dimensions. Human health, food and energy security, 
urbanization and industrial growth, as well as climate 
change are critical challenge areas where policies and 
actions at the core of sustainable development can be 
strengthened (or weakened) through water.

lack of water supply, sanitation and hygiene (WasH) 
takes a huge toll on health and well-being and comes at 
a large financial cost, including a sizable loss of economic 
activity. in order to achieve universal access, there is a need for 
accelerated progress in disadvantaged groups and to ensure 
non-discrimination in WasH service provision. investments in 
water and sanitation services result in substantial economic 
gains; in developing regions the return on investment has 
been estimated at us$5 to us$28 per dollar. an estimated 
us$53 billion a year over a five-year period would be needed 
to achieve universal coverage – a small sum given this 
represented less than 0.1% of the 2010 global GdP. 

the increase in the number of people without access to 
water and sanitation in urban areas is directly related to the 
rapid growth of slum populations in the developing world 
and the inability (or unwillingness) of local and national 
governments to provide adequate water and sanitation 
facilities in these communities. the world's slum population, 
which is expected to reach nearly 900 million by 2020, is 
also more vulnerable to the impacts of extreme weather 
events. it is however possible to improve performance of 
urban water supply systems while continuing to expand the 
system and addressing the needs of the poor. 

ecosystems across the world, particularly wetlands, are 
in decline. ecosystem services remain under-valued, 

by 2050, agriculture will need to produce 60% more food 
globally, and 100% more in developing countries. as the 

WWDR 2015

3

spatial distributing of water resources and the frequency 
and intensity of water-related disasters rise significantly with 
increasing greenhouse gas emissions. exploitation of new 
data sources, better models and more powerful data analysis 
methods, as well as the design of adaptive management 
strategies can help respond effectively to changing and 
uncertain conditions. 

Regional perspectives
the challenges at the interface of water and sustainable 
development vary from one region to another. 

increasing resource use efficiency, reducing waste and 
pollution, influencing consumption patterns and choosing 
appropriate technologies are the main challenges facing 
Europe and North America. reconciling different water 
uses at the basin level and improving policy coherence 
nationally and across borders will be priorities for many 
years to come. 

sustainability in the Asia and the Pacific region is intimately 
linked with progress in access to safe water and sanitation; 
meeting water demands across multiple uses and mitigating 
the concurrent pollution loads; improving groundwater 
management; and increasing resilience to water-related 
disasters. 

Water scarcity stands at the forefront when considering 
water-related challenges that impede progress towards 
sustainable development in the Arab region, where 
unsustainable consumption and over-abstraction of surface 
and groundwater resources contribute to water shortages 
and threaten long-term sustainable development. options 
being adopted to enhance water supplies include water 
harvesting, wastewater reuse and solar energy desalination.

a major priority for the Latin America and the Caribbean 
region is to build the formal institutional capacity to manage 
water resources and bring sustainable integration of water 
resources management and use into socio-economic 
development and poverty reduction. another priority is to 
ensure the full realization of the human right to water and 
sanitation in the context of the post-2015 development 
agenda.

the fundamental aim for Africa is to achieve durable and 
vibrant participation in the global economy while developing 
its natural and human resources without repeating the 
negatives experienced on the development paths of some 
other regions. Currently only 5% of the africa’s potential 
water resources are developed and average per capita storage 
is 200 m3 (compared to 6,000 m3 in north america). only 5% 

Haitian students breathe new life into depleted pine forest
Photo: UN Photo/Logan Abassi

current growth rates of global agricultural water demand 
are unsustainable, the sector will need to increase its 
water use efficiency by reducing water losses and, most 
importantly, increase crop productivity with respect to  
water. agricultural water pollution, which may worsen  
with increased intensive agriculture, can be reduced  
through a combination of instruments, including more 
stringent regulation, enforcement and well-targeted 
subsidies. 

Energy production is generally water-intensive. Meeting 
ever-growing demands for energy will generate increasing 
stress on freshwater resources with repercussions on other 
users, such as agriculture and industry. since these sectors 
also require energy, there is room to create synergies as they 
develop together. Maximizing the water efficiency of power 
plant cooling systems and increasing the capacity of wind, 
solar PV and geothermal energy will be a key determinant in 
achieving a sustainable water future.

Global water demand for the manufacturing industry is 
expected to increase by 400% from 2000 to 2050, leading 
all other sectors, with the bulk of this increase occurring in 
emerging economies and developing countries. Many large 
corporations have made considerable progress in evaluating 
and reducing their water use and that of their supply chains. 
small and medium-sized enterprises are faced with similar 
water challenges on a smaller scale, but have fewer means 
and less ability to meet them.

the negative impacts of climate change on freshwater 
systems will most likely outweigh its benefits. Current 
projections show that crucial changes in the temporal and 

4

exeCUTIve sUMMary

of africa’s cultivated land is irrigated and less than 10% of 
hydropower potential is utilized for electricity generation. 

production, energy, industry and other social and economic 
activities.

Responses and means of implementation
The post-2015 development agenda
the Millennium development Goals (MdGs) were successful 
in rallying public, private and political support for global 
poverty reduction. With regard to water, the MdGs 
helped to foster greater efforts towards improving access 
to drinking water supply and sanitation. However, the 
experience of the MdGs shows that a thematically broader, 
more detailed and context-specific framework for water, 
beyond the issues of water supply and sanitation, is called 
for in the post-2015 development agenda. 

Achieving ‘The Future We Want’
the outcome document of the 2012 un Conference 
on sustainable development (rio+20), The Future We 
Want, recognized that ‘water is at the core of sustainable 
development’, but at the same time development and 
economic growth creates pressure on the resource and 
challenges water security for humans and nature. there 
also remain major uncertainties about the amount of water 
required to meet the demand for food, energy and other 
human uses, and to sustain ecosystems. these uncertainties 
are exacerbated by the impact of climate change.

in 2014, un-Water recommended a dedicated sustainable 
development Goal for water comprised of five target areas:  
(i) WasH; (ii) water resources; (iii) water governance; 
(iv) water quality and wastewater management; and (v) 
water-related disasters. such a focused water goal would 
create social, economic, financial and other benefits that 
greatly outweigh its costs. benefits would extend to the 
development of health, education, agriculture and food 

Water management is the responsibility of many different 
decision-makers in public and private sectors. the issue is 
how such shared responsibility can be turned into something 
constructive and elevated to a rallying point around which 
different stakeholders can gather and participate collectively 
to make informed decisions.

A stakeholder meeting in Punjab, India
Photo: India Water Portal

5

WWDR 2015– greatly improve the resilience of communities. blending 
structural and non-structural flood management approaches 
is particularly cost-effective.

risks and various water-related security issues can also 
be reduced by technical and social approaches. there are 
a growing number of examples of reclaimed wastewater 
being used in agriculture, for irrigating municipal parks and 
fields, in industrial cooling systems, and in some cases safely 
mixed in with drinking water.

existing assessments of water resources are often 
inadequate for addressing modern water demands. 
assessments are necessary to make informed investment 
and management decisions, facilitate cross-sector decision-
making, and address compromises and trade-offs between 
stakeholder groups.

Equity
social equity is one of the dimensions of sustainable 
development that has been insufficiently addressed in 
development and water policies. sustainable development 
and human rights perspectives both call for reductions in 
inequities and tackling disparities in access to WasH services. 

this calls for a reorientation of investment priorities and 
operational procedures to provide services and allocate 
water more equitably in society. a pro-poor pricing policy 
keeps costs as low as possible, while ensuring that water is 
paid for at a level that supports maintenance and potential 
expansion of the system. 

Water pricing also provides signals for how to allocate scarce 
water resources to the highest-value uses – in financial 
terms or other types of benefits. equitable pricing and water 
permits need to adequately assure that abstraction as well 
as releases of used water support efficient operations and 
environmental sustainability in ways that are adapted to the 
abilities and needs of industry and larger-scale irrigation as 
well as small-scale and subsistence farming activities. 

the principle of equity, perhaps more than any technical 
recommendation, carries with it the promise of a more 
water-secure world for all. 

A Somali woman drawing water from one of the many man-made  
ponds dug through a UNDP-supported initiative to bring water  
to drought affected communities.
Photo: UNDP Somalia, Jalam, Garowe, Somalia

Governance
Progress in water-related governance calls for engaging a 
broad range of societal actors, through inclusive governance 
structures that recognize the dispersion of decision-
making across various levels and entities. it is, for example, 
imperative to acknowledge women’s contributions to local 
water management and role in decision-making related to 
water.

While many countries face stalled water reform, others 
have made great strides in implementing various aspects of 
integrated water resources management (iWrM), including 
decentralized management and the creation of river basin 
organizations. as iWrM implementation has too often 
been geared towards economic efficiency, there is a need to 
put more emphasis on issues of equity and environmental 
sustainability and adopt measures to strengthen social, 
administrative and political accountability. 

Minimizing risks and maximizing benefits
investing in all aspects of water resources management, 
services provision and infrastructure (development, 
operation and maintenance) can generate significant social 
and economic benefits. spending on drinking water supply 
and sanitation is highly cost-effective on health grounds 
alone. investments in disaster preparedness, improved 
water quality and wastewater management are also highly 
cost-effective. distribution of costs and benefits among 
stakeholders is crucial for financial feasibility.

Water-related disasters, the most economically and socially 
destructive of all natural hazards, are likely to increase with 
climate change. Planning, preparedness and coordinated 
responses – including floodplain management, early 
warning systems and increased public awareness of risk 

6

exeCUTIve sUMMary

Prologue
The future of water – A vision for 2050

WWAP  |  Richard Connor, Joana Talafré, Karine Peloffy, Erum Hasan and Marie-Claire Dumont

the fact is there is enough water available to meet the 
world’s growing needs, but not without dramatically 
changing the way water is used, managed and shared. the 
global water crisis is one of governance, much more than of 
resource availability, and this is where the bulk of the action 
is required in order to achieve a water secure world.

over the past several decades, ever-growing demands for 
– and misuse of – water resources have increased the risks 
of pollution and severe water stress in many parts of the 
world. the frequency and intensity of local water crises have 
been increasing, with serious implications for public health, 
environmental sustainability, food and energy security, and 
economic development. 

although the central and irreplaceable roles that water 
occupies in all dimensions of sustainable development have 
become progressively recognized, the management of 
water resources and the provision of water-related services 
remains far too low on the scales of public perception and 
of governmental priorities. as a result, water often becomes 
a limiting factor, rather than an enabler, to social welfare, 
economic development and healthy ecosystems. 

Evoluzione
Photo: Rhae

7

WWDR 2015A vision for 2050
by 2050, humanity has achieved a water secure world,1 
where every person has access to adequate quantities 
of water of an acceptable quality and from sustainable 
sources, to meet their basic needs and sustain their well-
being and development. the human population is protected 
from waterborne pollution and diseases and water-related 
disasters. accessing water is no longer a gendered burden, 
and equitable access to water resources and services for 
both women and men has fostered greater social inclusion. 
ecosystems are protected in a climate of peace and stability. 
local and national economies are more robust, as the 
risks and uncertainties related to the availability of water 
resources have been taken into account in the long-term 
planning for poverty reduction and economic development. 
norms and attitudes have changed as a result of educational 
interventions, institutional changes, improved scientific and 
technical knowledge, sharing of lessons learned and best 
practices, and proactive policy and legislative developments. 

access to water, sanitation and hygiene (WasH) has been 
made universal through the massive deployment of urban 
water infrastructure as well as through decentralized small-
scale water purification technology in remote areas, leading 
to widely improved health conditions and allowing a life 
of human dignity for all persons. technological innovation 
allows for reduced water consumption, such as through 
waterless sanitation infrastructure that provides energy and 
products from human excreta and eliminates pollution to 
precious freshwater resources.

there is a balance between extracted water and water 
returned to aquatic ecosystems and aquifers, ensuring their 
long-term sustainability. Wastewater from all major human 
uses is collected and treated to the most appropriate level 
for reuse or release back to the environment, and maximized 
reuse is a major contributor to the achievement of universal 
access to water. 

Water demand per capita and per unit of productivity is 
significantly lower than it was in 2015 in the agricultural, 
industrial and energy sectors, allowing for the resource to 
be shared more equitably. reduced competition among the 
major water users has also helped increase their long-term 
economic performance. Water productivity (e.g. ‘crop  

1 

 Based on the definition of ‘water security’ by the UN-Water Task Force on 
Water Security: “Water security is defined as the capacity of a population to 
safeguard sustainable access to adequate quantities of acceptable quality 
water for sustaining livelihoods, human well-being, and socio-economic 
development, for ensuring protection against water-borne pollution and 
water-related disasters, and for preserving ecosystems in a climate of 
peace and political stability.” 

per drop’) in both rainfed and irrigated agriculture 
has increased dramatically, and water use efficiency in 
agriculture is widespread. 

agriculture as a whole is less vulnerable to rainfall 
variability due to the widespread adoption of advanced 
agro-technology, highly efficient irrigation techniques, 
reliable wastewater reuse and state-of-the-art water 
and soil conservation techniques. Water demand for 
everyday domestic uses is met through the use of efficient 
technologies and effective, equitable tariffs are in place. 
Power generation has increasingly adopted water efficient 
techniques (e.g. dry cooling), the proportion of less water 
intensive renewable energy (e.g. wind, solar PV and 
geothermal) has increased dramatically, and the development 
of sustainable hydropower installations in sub-saharan 
africa and south-east asia has helped provide electricity to 
hundreds of millions of people who were previously unserved. 
implementation and enforcement of water use regulation, 
in combination with development and adoption of water-
efficient manufacturing processes, has limited the water 
demand for industry, prompting economic development. 

ecosystem-based management and other environmental 
interventions that build resilience have been widely adopted; 
these interventions also support protection of water sources, 
catchments and riverbanks and promote conservation and 
efficient use of water in agriculture and other economic 
activities. 

sustainable production and consumption patterns related 
to water are achieved based on consistent and transparent 
water accounting systems that quantify water flows in the 
economy and the environment, providing clear and relevant 
information about related impacts. in this context, effective 
decoupling of economic growth from water resource use 
and negative environmental impacts has been accomplished.

Water is a key consideration for all sectors that use it as 
a resource through production chains, resulting in better 
supply and demand management. efficiency measures 
such as rainwater harvesting and wastewater reuse 
are mainstreamed. Global markets and trade flows are 
monitored through a global water sensitivity certification 
scheme that ensures water-intensive products are exported 
from areas with comparatively little or no water stress. 
the economic value of water has been recognized and all 
forms of economic enterprise take consideration of the 
water implications of their actions. explicit, transparent and 
equitable regulation mechanisms are in place to address 
water allocation, distribution, access and management, 
without risk of corruption. 

8

PrologUe

the world’s major transboundary basins and aquifers are 
managed in a collaborative manner among the multiple 
states involved, leading to improvements in quality and 
ecological conditions as well as improved relations, capacity 
and benefit-sharing among neighbouring countries. flexible 
multi-stakeholder water governance frameworks are 
commonplace, as are examples of cooperation, knowledge 
and technology transfers, and on-going participatory 
dialogue at all levels: local, national, regional and global. 

at the national level, governments rely on an integrated 
water resources management (iWrM) approach. iWrM 
is based on a sound and systematic knowledge of the 
resource, both surface and groundwater, and of its current 
state. it supports effective and adaptive decision-making 
across a broad policy spectrum, including agriculture and 
food security, energy, industry, financing, environmental 
protection, public health and public security. 

financing for a wide range of water-related infrastructure 
and services, including operation and maintenance, has 
become a central element of government expenditure. a 
flexible approach has been adopted to achieve financial 
sustainability with on-going exploration of alternative 
financing options. financing from non-governmental sources 
(including self-financing) and equitable tariffs support the 
public sector in achieving complete coverage of water 
management costs. this in turn has created an environment 
that encourages private sector involvement because of the 
lower risks to investment. improved guidelines, legislation, 
licensing agreements and contracts also support sustainable 
financing for water-related infrastructure and services. life-
cycle planning approaches have improved understanding 
of the short-term, mid-term and long-term costs associated 
with development, maintenance and replacement of water 
systems. Mid-course corrections are also possible due to a 
flexible approach to financing for water. in using such an 
approach, investment plans are transparent and accessible, 
thus promoting accountability and participation from 
stakeholders. the principle that sustainable financing is 
necessary for ensuring universal access to water services 
underpins this integrated approach.

technology, better management approaches and effective 
early warning systems enable rapid adaptive responses to 
variations in water availability and extreme water-related 
events. despite massive reductions in greenhouse gas 
emissions GHG emissions worldwide, impacts from such 

extreme events are still increasing as a result of decades of 
human-induced climate change. surface and groundwater, 
conjunctively managed, are at the centre of climate adaptation 
strategies, and improved and expanded water storage 
capacities create buffers for periods of water shortages.

the importance and value of ecosystems, and the services 
they deliver through water, are widely recognized. 
appropriate steps to protect key aquatic systems have 
been taken through basin-wide cooperation to ensure that 
water abstraction remains compatible with hydrological 
and environmental sustainability, pollution is eliminated, 
and ecosystems are restored to provide climate-resilient 
sources of freshwater. Human and natural infrastructures 
are mutually reinforcing, and their coordinated management 
increases benefits while reducing costs. Cities are redesigned 
to give public access to natural watershed community 
parks that, in addition to providing direct benefits in terms 
of overall living standards, foster broad-based citizen 
stewardship over water.

equity, non-discrimination, participation and accountability 
have become key principles in water governance. national 
laws support the mainstreaming of the human rights-based 
approach to water, which helps correct potential imbalances 
and avoid social exclusion. over the period 2015-2030, the 
greenhouse gas emissions sdGs and targets, including an 
sdG specifically dedicated to water, helped muster political 
will, trigger public support and mobilize investments 
between. although these alone were not enough to 
secure sustainable water for all, they led to new efforts 
and international conventions that take full account of the 
opportunities and limitations imposed by water on various 
other development goals, leading to cross-cutting synergies 
among sectors and actors. Policymakers, politicians, 
regulators, the judiciary, educators, allocators of resources, 
academics and members of civil society organizations are 
able to work together within their own areas of expertise 
to advance shared norms, protocols and understanding of 
water as a resource and how best to consume and protect it.

Water’s role in underpinning all aspects of sustainable 
development has become widely recognized. it is now 
universally accepted that water is an essential primary 
natural resource upon which nearly all social and economic 
activities and ecosystem functions depend. 

Getting there was not easy. 

WWDR 2015

9

1 Unsustainable growth

WWAP  |  Richard Connor, Joana Talafré, Erum Hasan and Evisa Abolina

unsustainable development pathways and governance 
failures have generated immense pressures on water 
resources, affecting its quality and availability, and in turn 
compromising its ability to generate social and economic 
benefits. the planet’s capacity to sustain the growing 
demands for freshwater is being challenged, and there can 
be no sustainable development unless the balance between 
demand and supply is restored.

Global gross domestic product (GdP) rose at an average 
of 3.5% per year from 1960 to 2012 (World economics, 
2014), and much of this economic growth has come at a 
significant social and environmental cost. during this same 
period, population growth, urbanization, migration and 
industrialization, along with increases in production and 
consumption, have generated ever-increasing demands 
for freshwater resources. these same processes have 
also contributed to the polluting of water resources, 

further reducing their immediate accessibility and thus 
compromising the capacity of ecosystems and the natural 
water cycle to satisfy the world’s growing demand for water 
(Mea, 2005a). 

1.1 Increasing global water demand
Global water demand is largely influenced by population 
growth, urbanization, food and energy security policies, and 
macro-economic processes such as trade globalization and 
changing consumption patterns. 

over the past century, the development of water resources 
has been largely driven by the demands of expanding 
populations for food, fibre and energy. strong income 
growth and rising living standards of a growing middle 
class have led to sharp increases in water use, which can be 
unsustainable, especially where supplies are vulnerable or 
scarce and where its use, distribution, price, consumption 

10

ChaPTer 1 

Traffic in Beijing
Photo: Li Lou/World Bank

and management are poorly managed or regulated. 
Changing consumption patterns, such as increasing meat 
consumption, building larger homes, and using more motor 
vehicles, appliances and other energy-consuming devices, 
typically involves increased water consumption for both 
production and use.

demand for water is expected to increase in all sectors of 
production (WWaP, 2012). by 2030, the world is projected 
to face a 40% global water deficit under the business-as-
usual (bau) scenario (2030 WrG, 2009).

Population growth is another factor, but the relationship 
is not linear: over the last decades, the rate of demand 
for water has doubled the rate of population growth 
(shiklomanov, 1999; usCb, 2012). the world’s population is 
growing by about 80 million people per year (usCb, 2012). 
it is predicted to reach 9.1 billion by 2050, with 2.4 billion 
people living in sub-saharan africa, the region with the 
most heterogeneously distributed water resources (undesa, 
2013a). 

increasing urbanization (see Chapter 6) is causing specific 
and often highly localized pressures on freshwater resource 
availability, especially in drought-prone areas. More than 
50% of people on the planet now live in cities, with 30% 
of all city dwellers residing in slums. urban populations 
are projected to increase to a total of 6.3 billion by 2050 
(WWaP, 2012). developing countries account for 93% of 
urbanization globally, 40% of which is the expansion of 
slums. by 2030, the urban population in africa and asia will 
double (un-Habitat, 2010).

excessive water withdrawals for agriculture and energy (see 
Chapters 7 and 8) can further exacerbate water scarcity. 
freshwater withdrawals for energy production, which 
currently account for 15% of the world’s total (WWaP, 2014), 
are expected to increase by 20% through 2035 (iea, 2012). 
the agricultural sector is already the largest user of water 
resources, accounting for roughly 70% of all freshwater 
withdrawals globally, and over 90% in most of the world’s 
least-developed countries (WWaP, 2014). Practices like 
efficient irrigation techniques can have a dramatic impact on 
reducing water demand, especially in rural areas. 

Many of the pressures that impact water sustainability occur 
at local and national levels, and are influenced by rules and 
processes established at those levels. increasingly, however, 
the rules and processes that govern global economics – 
investment of capital, trade, financial markets, as well as 
international aid and development assistance – influence 
local and national economies, which in turn dictate local 

water demand and the sustainability of water resources at 
the basin level (undesa, 2012).

1.2 Potential impacts of increasing demand
Competing demands will lead to increasingly difficult 
allocation decisions and limit the expansion of sectors critical 
to sustainable development, in particular food production 
and energy. inter-sectoral competition and the delicate 
trade-offs between energy and agricultural production can 
already be seen in the debate about biofuels. Production 
of biofuel from food crops, such as corn, wheat and palm 

Population growth, urbanization, 
migration and industrialization, 
along with increases in production 
and consumption, have generated 
ever-increasing demands for 
freshwater resources

oil, has induced additional competition for land and water 
even within the agricultural sector, especially in regions 
already under water stress (HlPe, 2013), and has also been 
associated with increased food prices. Growing food crops 
for biofuel has spurred debate over ethical considerations 
regarding future food security as well as existing efforts to 
combat malnutrition (Pimentel et al., 2008). 

increasing industrial production (see Chapter 9) will also 
lead to increased water use, with potential impacts on 
water quality. in certain areas where water use for industrial 
production is not well-regulated or enforced, pollution could 
increase dramatically, closely linking increasing economic 
activity with the degradation of environmental services. 

Competition for water between water ‘uses’ and water 
‘users’ increases the risk of localized conflicts and continued 
inequities in access to services. in this competition, the 
need to maintain water and ecosystem integrity in order 
to sustain life and economic development is often ignored 
(see Chapter 4). frequently, the environment, as well as 
marginalized and vulnerable people, are the biggest losers in 
the competition for water. 

inter-state and regional conflicts may also emerge due 
to water scarcity and poor management structures. it is 
noteworthy that 158 of the world’s 263 transboundary 
water basins lack any type of cooperative management 
framework. of the 105 water basins with water institutions, 

WWDR 2015

UNSUSTAiNAbLE gRoWTh

11

approximately two-thirds include three or more riparian 
states (adjacent to rivers and streams); yet, less than 20% 
of the accompanying agreements are multilateral (uneP, 
2002). this indicates that the mechanisms, political will and/
or resources to manage shared water resources bilaterally 
or multilaterally and share potential benefits efficiently and 
effectively are missing. 

Competition over water highlights the difficult policy 
choices that are posed by the water-food-energy-nexus 
and the trade-offs involved in managing each sector, either 
separately or together. these three pillars of any functioning 
society are closely interlinked, and choices made in one 
area will inevitably impact the choices and hence resources 
available in the others (WWaP, 2014). 

over-abstraction is often the result of out-dated models 
of natural resource use and governance, where the use 
of resources for economic growth is under-regulated and 
undertaken without appropriate controls. unsustainable 
withdrawals of surface and groundwater can severely 
affect water availability for ecosystems and the services 
they provide, with significant impacts on local economies 
and human well-being. inadequate assessment of water 
resources, especially groundwater (section 1.4), and in some 
cases a disregard of information when it is available, have 

contributed to water resources management failures in 
many parts of the world. 

if institutional mechanisms within governments and other 
governance structures continue to follow narrow objectives 
along sector-specific mandates, fundamental disconnects 
will continue to occur. this situation has already led to 
negative impacts for the most vulnerable and marginalized 
people; accelerated ecosystem degradation; depleted natural 
resources; and slowed progress towards development goals, 
poverty reduction and conflict mitigation (bonn2011 nexus 
Conference, 2012). 

1.3 Water resources: Status and availability
the distribution and availability of freshwater resources, 
through precipitation and runoff, can be erratic, with 
different areas of the globe receiving different quantities 
of water over any given year. there can be considerable 
variability between arid and humid climates and over wet 
and dry seasons. However, compounded yearly averages 
show significant variations in per capita water availability 
between countries (figure 1.1).

Climate change will exacerbate the risks associated with 
variations in the distribution and availability of water 
resources (see Chapter 10). increasing variability in 

Average annual total renewable water resources, 2011
Total renewable water resources per capita (2013)
 (m3 per capita per year)

1.1

E
R
U
G
i
F

 No data 
available

te
Absolu
scarcity

Scarcity

Stress

Vulnerability

0

500

1 000

1 700

2 500

7 500

15 000

50 000

Note: The figures indicate total renewable water resources per capita in m3.
Source: WWAP, with data from the FAO AQUASTAT database. (http://www.fao.org/nr/water/aquastat/main/index.stm) (aggregate data for all 
countries except Andorra and Serbia, external data), and using UN-Water category thresholds.

12

ChaPTer 1 

precipitation patterns, which many countries have already 
begun to experience, are leading to direct and indirect 
effects on the whole of the hydrological cycle, with changes 
in runoff and aquifer recharge, and in water quality (alavian 
et al., 2009). in addition, higher water temperatures due 
both to warmer climates and increasing discharges of waste 
heat, are expected to exacerbate many forms of pollution. 
these include sediments, nutrients, dissolved organic carbon, 
pathogens, pesticides and salt, as well as thermal pollution, 
with possible negative impacts on ecosystems, human 
health, and water system reliability and operating costs 
(bates et al., 2008). 

Groundwater plays a substantial role in water supply, in 
ecosystem functioning and human well-being. Worldwide, 
2.5 billion people depend solely on groundwater resources 
to satisfy their basic daily water needs, and hundreds of 
millions of farmers rely on groundwater to sustain their 
livelihoods and contribute to the food security of so many 
others (unesCo, 2012). Groundwater reportedly provides 
drinking water to at least 50% of the global population 
and accounts for 43% of all water used for irrigation 
(Groundwater Governance, n.d.). Groundwater also sustains 
the baseflows of rivers and important aquatic ecosystems. 
uncertainty over the availability of groundwater resources 
and their replenishment rates pose a serious challenge to 
their management and in particular to their ability to serve 
as a buffer to offset periods of surface water scarcity (van 
der Gun, 2012).

Groundwater supplies are diminishing, with an estimated 
20% of the world’s aquifers being over-exploited (Gleeson 
et al., 2012), leading to serious consequences such as 
land subsidence and saltwater intrusion in coastal areas 
(usGs, 2013). Groundwater levels are declining in several 
of the world’s intensely used agricultural areas and around 
numerous mega-cities (Groundwater Governance, n.d.). 
in the arabian Peninsula, freshwater withdrawal, as a 
percentage of internal renewable water resources, was 
estimated at 505% in 2011 (fao aQuastat), with 
significant volumes of groundwater reserves being 
transboundary in nature (unesCWa/bGr, 2013). 

Water availability is also affected by pollution. Most 
problems related to water quality are caused by intensive 
agriculture, industrial production, mining and untreated 
urban runoff and wastewater. expansion of industrial 
agriculture has led to increases in fertilizer applications. 
these and other industrial water pollutants create 
environmental and health risks. excessive loads of nitrogen 
and phosphate, the most common chemical contaminants in 
the world’s freshwater resources (WWaP, 2009), contribute 

to the eutrophication of freshwater and coastal marine 
ecosystems, creating ‘dead zones’ and erosion of natural 
habitats (un-Water, 2013). 

the human interference with phosphorus and nitrogen 
cycles is well beyond safe thresholds. eutrophication of 
surface water and coastal zones is expected to increase 
almost everywhere until 2030 (undesa, 2012). thereafter, it 
may stabilize in developed countries, but is likely to continue 
to worsen in developing countries. Globally, the number of 
lakes with harmful algal blooms will increase by at least 20% 
until 2050. Phosphorus discharges will increase more rapidly 
than those of nitrogen and silicon, exacerbated by the rapid 
growth in the number of dams (undesa, 2012).

the disruption of ecosystems through unabated urbanization, 
inappropriate agricultural practices, deforestation and 
pollution is undermining the environment’s capacity to 
provide basic water-related services (e.g. purification, 
storage). degraded ecosystems can no longer regulate 
and restore themselves; they lose their resilience, further 
accelerating the decline in water quality and availability (see 
Chapter 4).

Global environmental degradation, including climate 
change, has reached a critical level with major ecosystems 
approaching thresholds that could trigger their massive 
collapse (undesa, 2012). this is a result of past failures 
to design decision-making mechanisms that would 
appropriately govern the global and national commons 
and the earth’s shared natural resources. despite efforts 
to create cooperation around environmental treaties and 
agreements, decisions directly affecting environmental issues 
are often taken outside of environmental policy circles. any 
predominance of economic logic without the integration of 
social and environmental considerations, as it currently exists 
in many development approaches, means that long-term 
environmental objectives may be set aside in favour of short-
term economic goals.  

1.4 Constraints on water resources 
management
the previous sections of this chapter have provided a 
summary view of the processes that drive increasing 
demands for water, their potential consequences and what 
these could mean for water resources. However, there are 
additional constraints that pose significant challenges to 
improving water resources management. these transcend 
any type of pressure-state-response analysis, yet they are 
tangible and merit a critical level of consideration when 
addressing water-related issues in the context of sustainable 
development. 

UNSUSTAiNAbLE gRoWTh

13

WWDR 20151.4.1 Persistent poverty 
Persistent poverty is usually the result of a vicious cycle 
in which limited income converges with limited access to 
resources. safe water and sanitation are precursors to health 
care, education and jobs (see Chapter 2). for the last 15 
years, eradication of extreme poverty and hunger has been 
the number one priority under the MdGs. nevertheless, 
as of 2012, 1.2 billon people still lived in extreme poverty 
(lockhart and Vincent, 2013), the majority located in slums, 
often lacking adequate drinking water and sanitation 
services (un-Habitat, 2011). the global limit of ecological 
sustainability of water available for abstraction is reported 
to have been reached (barker et al., 2000). regionally, this 
limit has already been exceeded for about one-third of the 
human population and it will rise to about half by 2030 
(WWaP, 2012). apart from access to sanitation and clean 
drinking water, the world’s 850 million rural poor also lack 
access to water for agricultural production, which is usually 
their primary source of income (soussan and arriens, 2004). 
Without access to improved agricultural water management, 
poverty in these regions will persist (namara et al., 2010).

Women and youth are disproportionately impacted both by 
water scarcity and the lack of safe drinking water, increasing 
the vulnerability associated with persistent poverty. Water 
policies are often based on generalized perspectives that 
lack gender perspectives and local knowledge (WWaP, 
2012). by failing to integrate gender considerations in 
water resources management and also in sectors such as 
agriculture, urban water supply, energy and industry, gender 
inequities will persist, preventing the adoption of innovative 
solutions that may be put forth by women (WWaP, 2012). 

In most countries (...) funding 
for water infrastructure is neither 
adequate, nor sustainable

1.4.2 Discrimination and inequalities in access to  
drinking water and sanitation services
socio-economic inequalities, and the lack of policies to 
effectively address them, were among the main obstacles 
to the achievement of MdGs in general and improved 
access to sanitation and safe drinking water in particular 
(donat Castelló et al., 2010). Many people around the globe 
including women, children, the elderly, indigenous peoples 
and people with disabilities have lower levels of access to 
safe drinking water, hygiene or sanitation facilities than 
other groups (see Chapter 5). While access to safe drinking 
water and sanitation is recognized as a basic human right, 

14

discrimination based on ethnicity, religion, economic class, 
social status, gender, age or physical abilities often restricts 
people from accessing land and water resources and related 
services. such exclusion has long-term social and economic 
effects, as the disadvantaged are more likely to remain poor, 
lacking opportunities for education, employment and social 
engagement. 

Population dynamics also affect access. High urbanization 
rates in many countries have not been matched by 
governments’ ability to provide adequate drinking water and 
sanitation infrastructure and improved service delivery (un-
Habitat, 2011). Human migration from rural to urban areas 
is posing a continuous challenge to the provision of basic 
drinking water and sanitation services, especially in poor 
peri-urban and slum areas, as well as to public health, in 
particular to prevent outbreaks of cholera and other water-
related diseases (WHo and uniCef, 2014a). 

in the rural context, which require different systems to 
those generally found in urban settings, providing adequate 
drinking water and sanitation is also challenging. the lack 
of infrastructure and services means that many people do 
not have access to adequate sanitation and must rely on 
unsafe water supplies. the lack of access to safe drinking 
water coupled with other shortages of basic services, scarce 
resources and limited income-generating possibilities, can 
further entrench vulnerability. 

1.4.3 Insufficient and unsustainable financing for  
water resources management and services
Water services remain rather low on the scale of policy 
priorities, despite well-documented contributions to human 
and economic development. When compared with other 
development sectors, particularly education and health, 
sanitation and drinking water services receive a relatively 
low priority for both official development assistance 
(oda) and national expenditure (undesa, 2013a). this 
under-prioritization of water directly contravenes a state’s 
obligation to expend maximum available resources to 
promote the progressive realization of the human right to 
water and sanitation for all persons, without discrimination. 
financing for water resources management is also usually a 
low priority, in spite of it being a cornerstone of economic 
growth (see Chapter 3) (siWi, 2005). 

in most countries, funding for water infrastructure comes 
from government allocations, although many developing 
countries still depend on external assistance to fund water 
resources management and utilities. this is neither adequate, 
nor sustainable. Most countries report that information 
required for adequate financial planning in the water 

Chapter 1 1.1

x
o
b

The terms ‘safe’ and ‘improved’ in the MDG context

When it was first devised, the objective of the water target in the Millennium Development Goals was to ensure access to ‘safe’ 
drinking water. The precise wording is as follows:

Goal 7: Ensure environmental sustainability
Target 7.C: Halve, by 2015, the proportion of the population without sustainable access to safe drinking water and basic sanitation. 

There were no practical means, however, to measure the ‘safety’ of the water sources people use. The WHO AND UNICEF Joint 
Monitoring Programme (JMP) for Water Supply and Sanitation started using the proxy indicator of an ‘improved’ water source 
for monitoring Target 7.C:

Indicator: Proportion of population using an improved drinking water source

All ‘improved’ water sources are not necessarily ‘safe’. An improved water source is one where human use is kept separate 
from use by animals and faecal contamination. In many cases the water from such sources is not of good enough quality to 
be safe for human consumption (Bain et al, 2014). 

Various estimations of the number of people who use ‘improved’ sources that are not ‘safe’ now exist and these indicate that 
billions of people do not have access to water that is truly safe. See, for example, the UN Report of the High-Level Panel of 
Eminent Persons on the Post-2015 Development Agenda (UN, 2013a). The number of people without ‘safe’ water could be 
as large as those who do not have access to basic sanitation (about 2.5 billion), for which progress is unsatisfactory by nearly 
all accounts. In its latest report, the WHO/UNICEF JMP recognizes and explains the inadequacy of the improved water proxy 
indicator and outlines plans for strengthening monitoring and encouraging safe management of water sources and sanitation 
services. Its commissioned studies have found that, at any given time, 1.8 billion people are using a source of drinking water 
that is faecally (TBC)-contaminated (Bain et al., 2014). 

The unintended consequence of using the proxy indicator ‘improved water source’ for the ‘safe’ drinking water target is that 
the indicator has redefined the target by default; therefore, the original ambition of MDG 7.C has been downgraded. The 
claim that the original target has been reached is misleading, because what has really been met is a new and unintended MDG 
target for ‘improved’ water. This redefinition of the original target can send decision-makers in the wrong direction, leading 
them to believe that target 7.C has been met and a problem solved, when in reality much still remains to be done. 

Contributed by AquaFed (www.aquafed.org/).

services sector, such as information on users and their 
potential contributions, is insufficient. Costs of infrastructure 
operation and maintenance are often neglected or not well 
factored into water mobilization projects. as a result, many 
water systems are inadequately maintained, leading to 
damages, losses, unreliability, and decreasing quality and 
quantity of service to users. financing is reported to be 
particularly inadequate for sanitation, with drinking water 
absorbing the majority of funding available particularly 
in developing countries (WHo, 2012a). financing for 
wastewater treatment is chronically neglected.

despite persistent management obstacles relating to 
financing in the water sector, over 50% of countries low 
in the Human development index (Hdi) have reported 
that financing for water resources development and 

management from government budgets and official 
development assistance have been increasing over the last 
20 years (un-Water, 2012). 

1.4.4 Data and information
Monitoring water availability, use and the related impacts, 
represents a massive and persistent challenge. reliable 
and objective information about the state of water 
resources, their use and management is often poor, lacking 
or otherwise unavailable. Worldwide, water observation 
networks provide incomplete and incompatible data 
on surface and groundwater quality and quantity, and 
no comprehensive information exists on wastewater 
generation and treatment (WWaP, 2009). Various studies 
and assessments provide a snapshot of the state and use 
of water resources at a given time and place, but generally 

UNSUSTAiNAbLE gRoWTh

15

WWDR 2015do not provide a broader, more complete picture of how 
different dimensions of water are changing over time in 
different parts of the world.
in the context of sustainable development, where water 
is often a key driver – and a potential limiting factor – for 
economic growth, human well-being and environmental 
health, this lack of information and knowledge creates 
barriers to cohesive policy formulation and sound decision-
making on developmental objectives. for example, there 
are often too few reliable metrics on which to track the 
outcomes of water productivity improvement measures 
(WWaP, 2014). 

from an economic perspective, there is a need to couple 
data and information on water resources and their use with 
indicators of growth in various economic sectors in order 
to assess its role and contribution in terms of economic 
development, and to garner a better understanding of its 
consequences on the resource and different users. similarly, 
quantifying water’s role in maintaining healthy ecosystems 
is often limited to the determination of ‘environmental 
flows’ (i.e. the quantity and timing of water flows required 
to sustain freshwater ecosystems). although an important 
and useful tool for managing freshwater ecosystems, 
environmental flows are often based on the requirements 
of certain indicator species and may not take full account of 
the interconnections between ecological systems and their 
impacts on economic and social development.

in terms of human well-being, much of the focus has been 
on monitoring access to safe water supply and sanitation 
services, which has in large part been driven by MdG target 
7.C. Here too, data and information challenges persist, 
including the difficulty in translating the term ‘safe’ into a 

measurable metric (see box 1.1). Water quality testing is 
still not available in most countries, making it difficult to 
determine if improved sources actually deliver ‘safe’ water 
to the user or whether the risks of contracting water-related 
diseases remain. furthermore, most countries do not report 
on other aspects of access to ‘safe’ water such as the 
quantity available, possible security threats including as risks 
on the journey to fetch water, frequency and duration of 
access or supply, and water’s potentially prohibitive cost (dar 
and Khan, 2011).

although real progress has been made, full compliance 
with the human right to access safe drinking water clearly 
requires something that is significantly better than many 
of the improved sources that people have to use. this 
situation also highlights the need to select target indicators 
based on good (and readily available) data, and to craft 
and implement good monitoring mechanisms. the MdG 
indicators focused on aggregate outcomes, which masked 
the fact that access improvements often did not reach the 
most vulnerable groups such as the elderly poor, people 
with disabilities, women and children. indicators that 
disaggregate data by gender, age and social group pose 
both a challenge and an opportunity for the sdGs in the 
post-2015 development agenda (un-Water, 2013).

While data availability and quality remain a concern, a 
limited number of core indicators pertaining to various 
aspects of water resources, services, uses and management 
in the context of sustainable development are available. 
several of these indicators are used in this report. they 
are compiled and presented in Case studies and Indicators 
report (WWaP, 2015). 

16

ChaPTer 1 

PART 1
WATER AND ThE ThREE DiMENSioNS 
oF SUSTAiNAbLE DEVELoPMENT 

ChaPTers 
2. Poverty and social equity    –   3. Economic development
    –   4. Ecosystems 

water consumption of ricefields (viet nam)  
global water Consumption
Photo: Un Photo/kibae Park

the Prologue presents an ideal future where water resources are developed and used sustainably for 
the benefit of all. although this vision for water is fully attainable by 2050, a number of obstacles 
related to unsustainable growth, as well as other challenges described in Chapter 1, will first need to 
be overcome.

a water-secure world is more than a goal unto itself. it is a critical and necessary step towards a 
sustainable future. Progress in each of the three dimensions of sustainable development − social, 
economic and environmental − is bound by the limits imposed by finite and often vulnerable water 
resources and the way these resources are managed to provide services and benefits. it is therefore 
imperative that the role of water is taken into account, when seeking to address all major sustainable 
development objectives. 

Part 1 of this report, presented in three chapters, explores the complex linkages between water and 
the three dimensions of sustainable development. Chapter 2 examines water and the social dimension 
of sustainable development with a focus on poverty. Chapter 3 presents a series of sound arguments 
that show how water is a central pillar of sustainable economic growth. Chapter 4 describes the 
fundamental and irreplaceable role of ecosystems and the services they provide in the context of 
water and sustainable development.

18

WATER AND ThE ThREE DiMENSioNS oF SUSTAiNAbLE DEVELoPMENT

Poverty and social equity 

UnDP  |  Joakim Harlin, Marianne Kjellén and Håkan Tropp
WWAP  |  Richard Connor, Joana Talafré, Karine Peloffy, Erum Hasan and Marie-Claire Dumont

2

2.1 The water and poverty relationship
a daily struggle for water is one of the terrible burdens of 
poverty, especially for women and girls who spend endless 
hours fetching water over long distances. sources of water 
are often unclean or unaffordable, or groups are simply cut 
off from using a particular water source. Many poor urban 
dwellers have to pay very high water prices to informal 
water vendors or do without water. not having sufficient 
and safe water means constant weakness and pain through 
recurrent diarrhoea and other debilitating or fatal water-
related diseases. it leads to loss of time, educational and 
employment opportunities. low incomes and limited access 
to water also means choosing between paying for water, 
food, school fees or medicines. around the world, 748 
million people lack access to an improved drinking water 
source, while billions more lack drinking water that is really 
safe. in 2012, 2.5 billion people did not have access to an 
improved sanitation facility (WHo and uniCef, 2014a). 

access to water for household uses is critical for a family’s 
health and social dignity. access to water for productive uses 
such as agriculture and family-run businesses is vital to realize 
livelihood opportunities, generate income and contribute 

to economic productivity. almost one-fifth of the world's 
population – about 1.2 billion people – live in areas where 
water is physically scarce (un-Water/fao, 2007). one quarter 
of the global population also live in developing countries 
that face water shortages due to weak governance and 
human capacities, and a lack of infrastructure to transport 
water from rivers and aquifers (Comprehensive assessment 
of Water Management in agriculture, 2007). in practice, this 
means fewer opportunities to make use of water resources 
to grow food and for other productive purposes. 

access to water is linked to poverty. reducing poverty 
through water management is a useful pro-poor framework 
for action, allowing for the introduction of inter-related issues 
of governance, water quality, access, livelihood opportunities, 
capacity-building and empowerment, water-related disaster 
prevention and management, and ecosystem management. 

access to water is also about access to land. in most cases, 
access to and ownership of land implies access to the water 
that passes through, lies beneath the surface or comes from 
the sky. the land-water interdependency is often overlooked 
and handled under separate governance structures.

2.1

x
o
b

Water supply investments: The importance of governance and financing for reducing poverty

Weak governance, in combination with low incomes and costs of services, make it much harder for poor people to acquire 
sustainable access to water. Even in situations where investments are made, sustainability remains a serious challenge. As 
much as 30% to 50% of water supply projects fail after two to five years. Though figures differ between countries, about 30% 
or more of water supply points are non-functioning, with another 10% to 20% being only partially functional. “Figures collated 
by the Rural Water Supply Network indicate an average rate of 36% non-functionality for hand pumps across 21 countries in 
sub-Saharan Africa.” This level of failure represents a total investment of between US$1.2 billion and US$1.5 billion in the last 
20 years. A European Union evaluation report of 23 water supply and sanitation projects in sub-Saharan Africa found that 
equipment was generally installed as planned, but fewer than half of the projects’ results meet the needs of beneficiaries. A 
majority of the projects were potentially sustainable in the sense of using standard technologies and local materials. However, 
their results and benefits will not continue to flow in the medium and long term unless non-tariff revenue is ensured; or 
because of institutional ineffectiveness to regulate, monitor, collect service fees, manage procurement processes, and collect 
and disseminate information, or deficiencies in the capacities of operators to run the equipment installed.

Sources: ECA (2012); IRC (2009) and RWSN (2010).

Note: The evidence on unsustainable water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) investments is mounting; see, for example, Ministry of Foreign Affairs of 
the Netherlands (2012).

WWDR 2015

PoVERTy AND SoCiAL EqUiTy

19

the relation between water and poverty is a two-way street. 
Poverty itself can have negative effects on the management 
of water resources and services. the desperation and 
limitations arising from poverty can be a driver of pollution 
and unsustainable use of water resources. Poverty can also 
render existing investments in water less efficient, since 
households and communities often find it difficult to 
finance, operate and maintain infrastructure such as rural 
water pumps. this poses a serious threat to long-term 
development and poverty reduction (box 2.1).

2.2 The equity challenge
Great strides have been made in many countries − such as 
brazil, China and india − to reduce poverty. the Human 
Development Report (HDR) 2013 suggests that by 2020 
the combined economic output of these countries alone 

will surpass the aggregate production of Canada, france, 
Germany, italy, the united Kingdom and the united states 
(undP, 2013). Much of this expansion is being driven by 
new trade and technology partnerships within the south.
However, economic growth itself is not a guarantee for 
wider social progress. Poverty still remains at unacceptable 
levels even in these three countries, as elsewhere. in many 
developing countries, there is a wide – and often widening 
– gap between rich and poor, and between those who can 
and cannot exploit new opportunities arising from economic 
growth. this means that access to good schools, health care, 
electricity, safe water and other critical services still remains 
elusive for many people who live in economies on the rise. 
other challenges, such as economic shocks, food shortages 
and climate change, threaten to undercut economic and 
social progress made in recent years.

2.2

x
o
b

safeguarding the interests of poor people: Global trends with local effects 

According to the Water Governance Facility (WGF, 2012),  “Most vulnerable in a world of greater water insecurity are poor 
people living in informal urban settlements and those in rural areas whose livelihoods are dependent upon rainfed agriculture 
or the availability of grasslands and water for grazing animals. Protecting the rights of such people and avoiding elite capture 
of the resource and the benefits derived from it require tools that foster a more equitable allocation of scarce water resources.”

Two global trends are converging: climate change, and growing economic development in least developed countries (LDCs) 
and emerging economies. This convergence is certain to intensify the water insecurity of poor and marginalized people in 
low income countries and add to the urgency for new approaches to the allocation of water resources for development. The 
OECD Environmental Outlook to 2050 (OECD, 2012a) estimates that by 2050 water demands from manufacturing industries and 
thermal power generation will increase dramatically, especially in developing countries and the BRICS (the five major emerging 
national economies of Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa). In the manufacturing industry alone, the share of total 
water demand by 2050 is expected to increase from 7% to 22%. The water demand increase in BRICS will be sevenfold, while in 
developing countries it will come close to increasing by 400%. In OECD countries, an increase is expected of some 65%. While 
such increased demand for water can indicate positive economic growth ahead it also implies the huge challenge of how to 
allocate scarce water between and within different sectors such as industry, energy, agriculture and domestic use. There is also 
the huge challenge of how different groups, such as poor people, will be affected.

“To allocate water in ways that are efficient, equitable and sustainable in a world of increasing demand and more variable 
water supplies, the following issues could be considered: 

•   Market mechanisms (trading systems and full-cost pricing through valuation) excel in the efficiency arena, but can fall short 

when the goal is to realize the right to water and sanitation or when externalities that impact environmental sustainability 
are not taken into account.

•   From an efficiency perspective, when markets do not fully capture the total value of water, other mechanisms have to be 
engaged to allocate water to the highest value uses and users. Yet what constitutes ‘efficiency’ and ‘highest value uses and 
users’ is often subjective. People living at the margins seldom qualify as high value users, yet good development practice 
demands that their needs be given priority. 

•   Conflict resolution mechanisms and rubrics for managing trade-offs are often needed to facilitate water sharing among 
competing users such as upstream and downstream stakeholders. Ensuring that powerful interests do not dominate or 
entirely capture the process requires robust safeguards to ensure that poor people can participate meaningfully, hold 
officials to account and access information.” (WGF, 2012)

20

ChaPTer 2

WATER AND ThE ThREE DiMENSioNS oF SUSTAiNAbLE DEVELoPMENT

water resources management can provide fewer risks and 
increased productivity gains across and within sectors – 
such as land, energy, food, and mining – and upkeep of 
ecosystem services.  

Water management contributes to four key dimensions of 
poverty reduction (undP/sei, 2006): 

Enhanced livelihoods security relates to incentives 
provided to poor people to develop abilities and make use 
of their assets to earn an acceptable living. access to water 
is key to realizing livelihood opportunities and continuity of 
water flows determine the status and integrity of ecosystem 
services on which poor people are directly dependent, such 
as fishing or grazing of cattle. reliable water supplies are 

Comparatively powerless 
groups tend to be shut out of 
not just access to water but also 
the processes whereby allocation 
decisions are made

critical for a range of food production activities including 
irrigation, rearing of livestock, aquaculture, horticulture 
and other types of production in rural and certain urban 
areas. it is therefore critical that water interventions support 
diversified domestic livelihood opportunities such as 
vegetable production, pottery or laundering.

Reduced health risks relates to mitigating the social and 
environmental factors that put poor and vulnerable groups 
– especially women and children – at high risk from diseases 

the Global Risks 2014 report finds that income disparity 
is the risk most likely to cause an impact on the global 
scale in the next decade (Wef, 2014a). More than 80% 
of the world’s population live in countries where income 
differentials are widening (undP, 2007). the Hdr 2013 
identified four key areas to keep the momentum of 
economic growth: (a) enhancing equity, including the gender 
dimension; (b) enabling greater voice and participation of 
citizens, including youth; (c) confronting environmental 
pressures; and (d) managing demographic change (undP, 
2013).

development is about improving people’s well-being, 
giving them a say in the decisions that affect their lives, 
and expanding their freedoms, choices and opportunities. 
from this perspective, the way in which water resources 
are allocated in countries around the world is deeply 
problematic. Water resource allocation for a range of 
productive purposes, from agriculture to industry to 
ecosystem services, is typically inequitable. Generally 
speaking, comparatively powerless groups tend to be shut 
out of access to water, as well as the processes whereby 
allocation decisions are made. although integrated water 
resources management (iWrM) approaches are guided by 
a balanced concern for economic efficiency, environmental 
sustainability and social equity, in practice, the social equity 
goal is often given less priority when water allocation 
decisions are made (WGf, 2012).

non-inclusive growth coupled with inappropriate allocation 
of water resources and services and increasing demand for 
water by industry, agriculture and households run the risk 
of making societies more unstable and prone to tensions 
and conflicts. While demand is expected to continue 
to grow as a result of economic growth and changing 
consumer preferences, much can be done in the ways water 
is allocated and used. there is a need for more effective 
allocation mechanisms that also take into account the 
interests of poor people, and that can mediate grievances 
between different users (box 2.2).

2.3 Key dimensions of poverty reduction
Water and economic development are closely associated, 
and poverty-oriented water interventions can have 
direct, immediate and long-term social, economic and 
environmental results, making a difference to billions of 
people. investing in improved water management and 
services is a prerequisite to reducing poverty and achieving 
sustainable economic growth. Poor people receive very 
direct benefits from improved water and sanitation services 
through better health, reduced health costs, increased 
productivity and time-savings. improved management of 

WWDR 2015

PoVERTy AND SoCiAL EqUiTy

21

“One usual working day in Europe”
Photo: Svetlana Punte/European Commission DG EMPL

and poor nutrition leading to premature death. Water-
borne diseases, such as diarrhoea and water-related vector-
borne diseases like malaria are among the leading causes 
of death, especially affecting children and other vulnerable 
groups. increased access to safe water, basic sanitation and 
better hygiene is one of the most effective ways to improve 
health and reduce poverty. from an economic perspective 
it is a highly attractive investment since the rate of return is 
in excess of those found in many so-called productive uses. 
another effective strategy to alleviate poverty is to enhance 
the design of water infrastructure and water management 
in, for example reservoirs and irrigation structures, to reduce 
vector-borne disease transmission.

Reduced vulnerability implies reducing the risks and 
impacts of hazards related to volatile politics and economics 
as well as unsustainable environmental trends and shocks 
from water-related natural disasters. for example, floods 
and droughts undercut development and can lock people  
in to poverty and desperation. long-term trends of 
degrading ecosystems, increased rainfall variability, water 
pollution and land degradation place additional strains on 
poor people and long-term development. investment in 
improved water storage to ‘even out’ water access in and 
between rainy seasons and support preparedness for flood 
management is also an imperative part of any poverty 
reduction strategy.

Economic growth for poverty reduction is also critical. 
However, what matters is the quality of growth and how 
new wealth in a society is distributed. Water management 
and services provision are catalysts for such growth, 
which must create new livelihood opportunities for poor 
people. Water provides livelihood and entrepreneurial 
opportunities in various productive areas at many levels to 
develop supplying technologies, services and constructions. 
the untapped potential of local entrepreneurs needs to 
be realized since it can generate high returns for local 
economies in terms of jobs and multiplier effects (see 
Chapter 3). Major water infrastructure developments can 
generate significant national as well as regional economic 
benefits, and lessen vulnerabilities related to food and 
energy security. such investments need to be done with 
proper impact assessments and in collaboration with 
other countries whenever relevant. these investments are 
not a panacea, however, and need to be accompanied by 

smaller-scale investments in relation to irrigation, power 
generation, crop diversification, institutional development, 
better access to markets by farmers and rural artisans, and 
capacity development. a diversified investment strategy is 
required to make good progress in reducing poverty.

2.4 Targeting gender equality
improved gender equality is a key to boosting water 
management and access. the past two decades have 
seen a significant increase in gender awareness and the 
role women play to promote improved access to and 
management of water. However, in spite of a big push to 
mainstream gender in national development plans and 
policies, results on the ground remain rather limited. Women 
have considerable knowledge about the location and quality 
of local water resources and how to store water, but this 
knowledge is seldom tapped, and inclusion of women in 
decision-making on water development and management at 
all levels is still lagging. a study in south asia, for example, 
attributed the workforce gender disparity to women’s 
broader challenges of participating in the labour market (e.g. 
lack of access to childcare or work-schedule flexibility) and 
to their educational opportunities, which do not necessarily 
favour engineering education currently demanded by many 
parts of the water sector (un-Women, 2012).
the current limited water access by the poor can result not 
only from economic pressures, but also from socio-political 
and environmental pressures, such as armed conflicts and 
droughts. thus, women and children may have to walk even 
longer distances to access water, which can result in an 
increased exposure to violence in politically volatile areas.

access to safe drinking water and sanitation is a human 
right, yet its limited realization throughout the world often 
has disproportionate impacts on women. the fact that many 
women and children are carrying water as a daily chore 
has a number of social and economic implications. a 2012 
estimate suggests that cutting just 15 minutes off the 
walking time to a water source could reduce under-five child 
mortality by 11% and the prevalence of nutrition-depleting 
diarrhoea by 41%. in Ghana, a 15-minute reduction in 
water collection time increased girls’ school attendance 
from 8% to 12%. a bangladesh school sanitation project 
that provided separate facilities for boys and girls boosted 
girls’ school attendance by an annual average of 11% (un-
Women, 2012; nauges and strand, 2011). 

22

ChaPTer 2

WATER AND ThE ThREE DiMENSioNS oF SUSTAiNAbLE DEVELoPMENT

UnDEsA/Un-DPAC  |  Josefina Maestu (UNDESA/UN-DPAC), Carlos Mario Gómez (Universidad de Alcalá), Colin Green (University of Middlesex)
With contributions from Alan Hall (Global Water Partnership), Xavier Leflaive (OECD), Jack Moss (Aquafed) and Diego Rodriguez (World Bank)

economic development 

3

3.1 Expanding economic opportunities 
through water infrastructure
developed and developing economies require water 
resources and water infrastructure to support activities 
and services needed for all three dimensions of sustainable 
development. economic development and water are 
intimately connected in many ways. Water is an essential 
resource for economic production and an ‘enabler’ of 
trade for most types of goods and services. Water is as an 
essential input for the production of food and electricity, 
as well as for many manufactured products. investments 
in water infrastructure are therefore fundamental to 
unlocking the full potential of economic growth (box 3.1).  

Water supply (quantity and quality) at the place where the 
user needs it must be reliable and predictable to support 
financially sustainable investments in economic activities. 
this requires both hard and soft infrastructure that is 
financed, operated and reliably maintained. in addition, 
infrastructure to reduce risk of water scarcity and to manage 
water-related disasters such as floods and droughts can 
make a country’s development efforts more sustainable by 
reducing the vulnerability and/or increasing the resilience of 
economies to extreme events (box 3.2). 

3.2 Facilitating structural change
over the long term, water development benefits spill 
over into the entire economy. Wise investment in water 
infrastructure and sound water management are both 
essential to facilitate the structural changes that are 

Water development benefits 
spill over into the entire 
economy over the long term

necessary in many developing and intermediate economies. 
in rural areas, irrigation can be a pre-condition for 
modernized agriculture, paving the way for industry by 
facilitating the accumulation of capital that allows surplus 
investments (box 3.3). 

When favoured by enabling social and political conditions, 
better living conditions can translate into new and 
heightened income opportunities. these in turn generate 
the savings required to foster capital accumulation with 
further improvements in infrastructure health and education 

3.1

x
o
b

opportunities for water investments to facilitate economic growth

The expansion of irrigated agriculture in the 1950s and 1960s in Asia saw a doubling of cereal production and a 30% increase 
in calories available per person. Investment in water supply and irrigation can produce high economic rates of return, as 
measured by benefit-cost ratios, and compare well with those in other sectors of infrastructure. Groundwater development 
has brought major socio-economic benefits to rural communities and in many countries has helped to alleviate agrarian 
poverty through increasing food security. According to the GWP (2012), “In South Asia, the groundwater boom has also 
largely been pro-poor, with marginal farmers of holdings smaller than two hectares increasing their groundwater-irrigated 
area by three times more proportionally than farmers with more than ten hectares of land.”

Smallholder farmers in sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia are increasingly using small-scale irrigation to cultivate their land 
and examples show it is leading to improved yields and reduced risks from climate variability (Giordano et al., 2012).

Irrigated systems will increasingly require greater storage capacity to respond to variability in rainfall and more frequent 
and intense droughts. Quick and Winpenny (2014) have found that, “In Madhya Pradesh, incomes of farmers who 
constructed on-farm ponds to irrigate pulses and wheat have risen by over 70%; as a result, they have also been able to 
improve and expand their livestock herds. In Tanzania, half of the dry-season cash incomes of smallholders come from 
growing irrigated vegetables.” 

WWDR 2015

ECoNoMiC DEVELoPMENT 

23

that widen the potential opportunities for production and 
reinforce the gains of progress. 

economic benefits of investing in basic water services have a 
direct correlation with poverty alleviation (see Chapters 2 and 5).

basic provision of water and sanitation services is required to 
unlock the potential of economic growth, particularly to break 
the vicious cycle of low productivity linked to poor health and 
lack of educational opportunities that maintains poverty and 
economic stagnation. Gains in terms of time-saving, improved 
health and more effective learning demonstrate that improve 
access to water and sanitation is one of the more labour-saving 
solutions. it has the twin effect of (a) freeing resources for 
the production of food and other goods and services; and (b) 
expanding the productive potential of the economy by indirectly 
enhancing human capital. not surprisingly, the demonstrated 

using albert Hirschman’s (1958) terms, one can say that the 
backward linkages of increased water supplies at affordable 
prices serve to foster further economic advances in many 
productive areas of the economy. in turn, higher production, 
means more income opportunities that enhance expenditure 
in health and education and many other goods and services 
reinforcing a self-sustained dynamic of economic development.

3.3 Investment challenges
success of water investments can be measured by the 
sustainable economic progress and development to which it 

3.2

x
o
b

3.3

x
o
b

investing in water infrastructure: When damages avoided become main benefits

In Kenya, the 1997-98 floods cost the country at least US$870 million (11% of GDP) and the 1999-2000 drought cost at least 
US$1.4 billion a year (16% of GDP). On average, the country experiences a flood that costs about 5.5% of GDP every seven 
years and a drought that costs it about 8% of GDP every five years. This translates to a direct long-term fiscal liability of about 
2.4% GDP per annum. This means that Kenya’s GDP annually should grow at a rate of at least 5% to 6% in order to start 
reducing poverty. In 1996, a good year in Kenya, real GDP growth was 4.1% (SIWI, 2005).

In Pakistan, three years of repeated floods in 2010, 2011 and 2012 inflicted serious damage on the national economy, halving its 
potential economic growth. The economy grew on average at a rate of 2.9% per year during this period. That is less than half the rate 
of 6.5% that Pakistan could potentially have achieved if it had not faced economic and human losses associated with flooding.

Pakistan lost a total of 3,072 lives and US$16 billion to the 2010-2012 floods. An initial estimate made by the National Disaster 
Management Authority of the floods’ impact shows agriculture sector losses at US$2 billion due to damages to 1.05 million 
acres of standing crops.

Consecutive years of flooding have also pushed up the country’s inflation and unemployment rate because the flooding 
has disrupted supply chains, damaged major crops like sugarcane, rice and cotton, and hampered industrial production 
(Government of Pakistan, 2012).

investing in water: A wise policy option that’s good for business

Analysis of Africa’s irrigation needs demonstrates an attractive internal rate of return, ranging from 12% in central Africa for 
large-scale irrigation to 33% for small-scale irrigation in the Sahel. The average economic rates of return for both water supply 
and irrigation projects compare well with those in infrastructure investments in other sectors, according to Foster and Briceño-
Garmendia (2010), who present this table showing economic rates of return for infrastructure projects in sub-Saharan 
Africa (percentages):

Railway 

rehabilitation

irrigation

Road 

Road 

Road 

Power 

rehabilitation

upgrades

maintenance

generation

5.1

22.2

24.2

17

138.8

18.9

Water 
supply

23.3

Source: Table extracted from Foster and Briceño-Garmendia (2010, Table 2.5, p. 71), © World Bank. https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/
handle/10986/2692 License: CC BY 3.0 IGO.

24

ChaPTer 3

WATER AND ThE ThREE DiMENSioNS oF SUSTAiNAbLE DEVELoPMENT

Dhay, the first recipient of an urban micro credit scheme (PPAF) for women in Pakistan
Photo: Caroline Suzman/World Bank

contributes overall, but water challenges are context-specific. 
some countries may give priority to investments in infrastructure 
for hydropower and irrigation for economic growth. However, 
poor attention to water availability and protection of critical 
water sources may mean that these investments perform 

below expectations. in other cases, technologies and financial 
resources to invest in water infrastructure might be available 
while the institutional capability is lacking, leading to poor or 
non-existent service provision. in other instances, the social 
benefits of water infrastructure might be self-evident, but the 

3.4

x
o
b

still many opportunities to do more with less

Agriculture, which accounts for 70% of global freshwater withdrawals, offers some of the best opportunities to take advantage 
of enhanced water efficiency to improve productivity and reduce poverty. 

“On-farm water balance analysis indicates that, in savannah farming systems in sub-Saharan Africa, less than 30% of rainfall 
is used as productive transpiration by crops. Thus, crop failures commonly blamed on ‘drought’ might be prevented in many 
cases through better farm-level water management (Rockström et al., 2010)”. 

In sub-Saharan Africa, agricultural productivity can improve with little impact on water resources (FAO, 2012a) through 
a combination of sound agricultural practices and links to inputs, credit and markets combined with weather insurance 
schemes. These measures are ways of producing more with less. They offer outstanding opportunities to reconcile economic 
growth with the recovery and adequate protection of water resources (Quick and Winpenny, 2014).

More radical improvements in ‘crop per drop’ can be realized by the adoption of aerobic rice production in place of paddy field 
rice and the use of System of Rice Intensification cultivation and other agro-ecological methods not only for rice but also for 
other crops (Africare, Oxfam America and WWF-ICRISAT, 2010).

ECoNoMiC DEVELoPMENT 

25

WWDR 2015potential beneficiaries of these services might not have the 
ability to pay for their provision, or policymakers may not be 
willing to charge for them. 

scarcity of capital, in some contexts, forces reliance on low 
capital cost. on the other hand, high running cost solutions 
might make water unaffordable for the poor. 

Water management can be highly capital intensive. Capital 
intensity results in economies of scale and low running costs. 
Many countries face very practical problems with the lack of 
availability of capital and the cost of capital. that availability 
is in turn dependent upon the ability to recover that capital. 

3.4 Economic opportunities from  
improved water efficiency
Water challenges and water development priorities 
change over time. the outstanding benefits of water as 
a means to pave the way out of poverty suggest placing 

3.5

x
o
b

3.6

x
o
b

Trade-offs in water and production

To avoid solving one problem by worsening another, it is essential to understand how different areas of the economy are 
linked through water. 

In spite of outstanding advances in water provision in the last decades, over 80% of wastewater worldwide (and 90% or more in 
developing countries) is not collected or treated, and urban settlements are the main source of pollution (WWAP, 2012). Effluent from 
industry is causing pollution to downstream surface-waters and aquifers and major health threats to people (Bahri, 2009). Small-scale 
industries, such as agro-processors, textile dyeing and tanneries, can release toxic pollutants into local waters (WWAP, 2012).

Land use change from urban and rural development can exacerbate soil erosion, reduce soil water-holding capacity, 
and decrease the recharge of groundwater and existing surface-water storage capacity. It does so through siltation and 
sedimentation of rivers and reservoirs that subsequently results in water scarcity over time. Land use change may involve the 
loss of wetlands, yet the importance of wetlands in regulating flood and drought risk is well understood (WWAP, 2012). 
There is also a link between deforestation and increasing flood risk, which has been observed at the micro level and over 
particular catchments. Deforestation results in degradation and desertification of watersheds and catchment areas, and 
reduces the amount of usable safe water available downstream (FAO, 2007). 

Water development might come along with other costs, too. It may increase the exposure of economic assets to drought 
events and may lower reserves in rivers and aquifers to compensate for rainfall deficits. This exposure has been recognized in 
recent reports in the United States, where drought in 2012 had an impact on 80% of farms and ranches, resulting in crop losses 
in excess of US$20 billion and a wide range of ripple effects. According to the National Drought Forum (2012), “Corn crops 
were greatly reduced due to a lack of rainfall, affecting food and livestock feed supplies and prices, as well as corn ethanol 
production. Power plants had to scale back operations or even shut down because the water temperatures of many rivers, 
lakes and estuaries had increased to the point where they could not be used for cooling. Household, municipal and farm wells 
in the Midwest had to be extended deeper into aquifers to make up for the lack of rainfall, draining groundwater supplies and 
demanding more electricity to run the pumps.”  The full costs are estimated to be as high as US$50 billion.

investing in protecting water resources

Measures of improved water resource management have shown considerable economic gains. A US$15 to US$30 billion 
investment in improved water resources management in developing countries can have direct annual income returns in the 
range of US$60 billion. Every US$1 invested in watershed protection can save anywhere from US$7.5 to nearly US$200 in costs 
for new water treatment and filtration facility (SIWI, 2005).

A global economic assessment of 63 million hectares of wetlands estimated their value at US$3.4 billion per year (Brander and 
Schuyt, 2010).

In eastern Uganda, more than one-third of the District of Pallisa is occupied by wetlands. The annual value of their goods and 
services has been estimated to be US$34 million for the local economy, which is equivalent to US$500 per hectare (Emerton 
and Bos, 2004).

26

ChaPTer 3

WATER AND ThE ThREE DiMENSioNS oF SUSTAiNAbLE DEVELoPMENT

an emphasis on infrastructure to unlock the economic 
growth potential of water in the early stages of a country’s 
economic development. once the marginal benefits of 
further development decrease, emphasis must gradually 
shift towards building human and institutional capabilities 
to enhance water efficiency and sustainability and secure 
economic and social development gains. Many benefits 
may be gained through promotion and application of best 
available technologies, management systems in water 
provision, use and allocation (box 3.4).  

fortunately, wider adoption of best practices offers substantial 
efficiency gains, particularly in industry where greater 
efficiency in water use often results in increased profitability. 
this emphasizes the need to increase learning as well as 
improve the rate of adoption and diffusion of appropriate 
technologies. Capacity for rapid learning and innovation is 
now a key requirement for water management organizations. 

3.5 Intersectoral trade-offs
Water is an essential input to production activities, and 
availability must be taken into account by decision-
makers in sectors such as energy and industry; if not, their 
investments (by both private and public sector) will be 
put at risk. Projects in hydropower, irrigation, energy or 
urban development that are carried out simultaneously 

and in isolation from each other can lead to water scarcity, 
unsustainable use of resources, and conflicts between users 
and local communities. for example, energy options such as 
biofuels and hydraulic fracturing, and agricultural options 
such as crop choice or irrigation, impact directly on water 
scarcity and/or water pollution. this is one reason that an 
integrated approach to managing water resources has been 
adopted by the united nations and governments in many 
countries. that approach will need to be extended (box 3.5).

3.6 Protecting water resources
Water investments are crucial in emergent economies to 
ensure abundant and affordable water supplies to the 
economic system. there is a need, however, to increasingly 
shift the focus of such investments towards changing the 
way in which water, and the environment more generally, 
are valued, managed and used. Water investments can 
help to reconcile the continuous increase in water use with 
the need to preserve the critical environmental assets on 
which the provision of water and the economy depend. any 
possibility of sustaining the gains of economic progress relies 
on investing in the protection of water-related ecosystems 
(see Chapter 4) for maintaining the essential and varied 
environmental services they provide, and upon which the 
economy depends (box 3.6).  

ECoNoMiC DEVELoPMENT 

27

WWDR 20154 ecosystems

UnEP  |  Thomas Chiramba, Eric Hoa, Annie Von Burg (UNEP), Rob Sinclair, Salim Kombo (Nottawasaga Institute) 
Contributions from: Peter Koefoed Bjørnsen,  Maija Bertule (UNEP DHI), Isabelle Fauconnier (IUCN) and Glenn Benoy (International Joint Commission)

4.1 Context
aquatic ecosystems are at the centre of all life and all 
forms of development. However, while economic and 
population growth are set to increase strain on existing 
water resources, most economic models are yet to value 
the essential services provided by freshwater ecosystems, 
a mistake that often leads to unsustainable use of water 
resources and degradation of aquatic ecosystems. there is a 
need to shift towards environmentally sustainable economic 
policies where ecosystem-based management (ebM) takes 
into consideration the interconnection of ecological systems 
to address human impacts and meet the needs for healthy 
productive ecosystems. ebM needs to be part of the solution 
to ensure a ‘green economy’2  and sustainable development.   

2 

 UNEP has developed a working definition of a green economy as one that 
results in improved human well-being and social equity, while significantly 
reducing environmental risks and ecological scarcities. In its simplest 
expression, a green economy can be thought of as one which is low 
carbon, resource efficient and socially inclusive.

Healthy ecosystems are required for continuous supply of water 
and other services vital for human well-being and development. 
according to the Millennium ecosystem assessment (Mea, 
2005b), ecosystem services comprise four main categories:

•   provisioning (e.g. clean water);
•   regulating (e.g. flow regulation and flood control);
•   cultural (e.g. recreation); and 
•   supporting (e.g. habitat for aquatic species). 

different ecosystems provide different services. Wetlands, for 
instance, attenuate floods, store water and provide other 
direct economic benefits such as fisheries and tourism. as 
box 4.1 illustrates, a healthy ecosystem provides key services 
to maintain environmental, economic and social well-being. 
another example is forested highlands, which have a key 
role in recharging aquifers and ensuring clean water flows 
for agriculture, hydropower and other uses. they are also 
critical for conserving biological diversity, water and soil, and 
providing major habitats for wildlife. (see also box 6.2). 

4.1

x
o
b

Reconnecting lakes in the Central yangtze River basin 

In the last 50 years, Hubei Province’s wetland ecosystem, with its 1,066 lakes, has played a major role in summer flood 
attenuation along the Yangtze River basin, home to 400 million people. However, 757 of the lakes were converted to polders 
and disconnected from each other, which resulted in massive flood damage from 1991 to 1998 causing hundreds of deaths, 
costing billions of dollars, and resulting in pollution from aquaculture fertilizer.  

In 2002, a WWF sustainable lake programme demonstrated a good example of the role of natural infrastructure by re-
establishing the natural flood protection provided by the river basin. Sluice gates were seasonally opened around three lakes 
(Hong, Tian-e-Zhou and Zhangdu) and illegal, uneconomic aquaculture facilities and other infrastructure were removed, 
reducing pollution.

This resulted in an increase in fish and wildlife and return of species. Before the programme, Lake Hong supported only 100 
herons and egrets; since its restoration, 45,000 wintering water birds and 20,000 breeding birds are now found. To strengthen the 
effectiveness of wetland conservation efforts, a Nature Reserve Network was established linking 17 reserves. In 2006, the Hubei 
provincial government adopted a wetlands conservation master plan and allocated resources to protect 4,500 km2 by 2010.

The local population benefited from cleaner water supplies and a 17% increase in fish catches within six months of 
reconnection of Lake Zhangdu. The development of certified eco-fish farming adopted by 412 households increased income 
of fisheries dependent households by 20% to 30%. 

Sources: WWF (2008); Pittock and Xu (2011); ICPDR (1999) and Scholz et al. (2012).

28

ChaPTer 4

WATER AND ThE ThREE DiMENSioNS oF SUSTAiNAbLE DEVELoPMENT

Tourism and ecosystems conservation, Napo Wildlife Center, Yasuni National Park (Ecuador)
Photo: Peter Prokosch, http://grida.no/photolib/detail/napo-wildlife-center-yasuni-national-park-ecuador_d911

4.1.1 Ecosystem-based management
ecosystem-based management is described by the united 
nations Convention on biological diversity (Cbd) as a 
“strategy for the integrated management of land, water and 
living resources that promotes conservation and sustainable 
use in an equitable way” (Cbd, 2014). the interconnected 
network of ecosystems can be seen in the quantity of water 
required to maintain water-related ecosystem services, and 
the ecosystems that serve to maintain this quantity, such as 
wetlands and forests (WWaP, 2012). such ecosystem inter-
relationship is often referred to as ‘natural infrastructure’ 
(ni). it is nature’s equivalent to human-built infrastructure, 
providing for the maintenance of healthy ecosystems, and 
many of the same services.

natural infrastructure uses the natural environment and 
natural processes to create healthier environments and 
may present economic benefits, since the destruction of ni 
requires investment in built infrastructure to perform some 
of the same services. ebM demonstrates that opportunities 
can be missed when the interlinkages between ecosystems 
and their collective provision of services are not taken into 
account.  

ecosystem services remain under-valued, under-recognized 
and under-utilized within economic and resource 
management approaches. the MdG framework did not 

fully recognize water’s interlinkages with other areas, and 
an emphasis on ‘sustainability’ was not included (un-Water, 
2014).

a more holistic focus on ecosystems for water and 
development can ensure that benefits are maintained. as 
noted in the un-Water (2014) report on a global goal for 
water, the difficulty of balancing water supply between 
multiple users and uses will become worse, unless attention 
is paid to the sustainable use and development of water 
resources and the ecosystems that provide them. the 
ebM approach addresses these shortfalls. incorporating 
ecosystem-based thinking into water management will play 
important roles in addressing the proposed target areas 
for the post-2015 sustainable development Goals, which 
include WasH, water quality, water efficiency, integrated 
water resources management and water-related ecosystems.

4.2 Challenges
ecosystems across the world, particularly wetlands, are in 
decline in terms of the services they provide. increasing 
population and economic growth are accelerating strain on 
the natural world. direct drivers of ecosystem degradation 
include infrastructure development, land conversion, water 
withdrawal, eutrophication and pollution, overharvesting 
and overexploitation, and the introduction of invasive alien 
species (Mea, 2005b).

ECoSySTEMS 

29

WWDR 20154.2.1 Environmental challenges
the WWf living Planet index 2012 shows a 30% decline 
in biodiversity health since 1970 (WWf, 2012). Poor 
water management approaches can be a driver of this 
decline, for example, through poorly designed or operated 
dams disrupting water flows or degradation of soil water 
retention. Pollution from untreated residential and industrial 

Ecosystems across the world, 
particularly wetlands, are in 
decline in terms of the services 
they provide

wastewater and agricultural run-off also weakens ecosystem 
capacity to provide services such as water.

Climate change also has a significant impact on ecosystems. 
the effect on wetlands and their multiple ecosystem services 
is expected to be severe. rising sea levels will threaten 
biodiversity, while increased frequency and strength of 
storms and tidal surges will increase damage and variation 
of sediment transfer in river flows (boelee, 2011).

While these environmental challenges steadily degrade the 
health of ecosystems and thus the quality of their services, 
short-term economic and social decisions further threaten 
sustainability. over-exploiting forests for timber or firewood, 
for example, compromises ecosystem health, including its 
capacity to regulate the level of the water table. 

4.2.2 Social challenges
degraded ecosystems strain the most vulnerable populations, 
particularly the poorest, leading to food and water insecurity. 
as populations increase and ecosystem services decline, the 
risk of resource conflicts rises especially where tensions 
already exist along ethnic or socio-economic lines. according 
to un peacekeepers, since 1990, at least 18 violent conflicts 
have been fuelled by the exploitation of natural resources, 
whether ‘high-value’ resources like timber, diamonds, gold, 
minerals and oil, or scarce ones like fertile land and water 
(uneP, 2009). ecosystem degradation and climate change 
have significant potential to increase these tensions. 

4.2.3 Economic challenges
While economic development may lead to ecosystem decline, 
ecosystem services underpin economic development, so 
the real challenge is in building awareness of the economic 
value of healthy ecosystems.

in some cases, human-built infrastructure can cause 
biodiversity loss and degradation of ecosystem services, yet 
it often directly depends on ecosystem services to maintain 
performance. dams, for example, are constructed to 
ensure water availability, flood protection, hydropower and 
other services. However, dams can prevent nutrients and 
sediments from reaching oceans and alter the water cycle 
by increasing water ‘residence time’, altering the flow of 
matter and energy in rivers which changes the conditions 
of these ecosystems entirely (Vörösmarty et al., 2010). this 
can have a direct and negative impact on other sectors 
such as downstream fisheries and agriculture. at the 
same time, dams only work effectively when supported by 
healthy ecosystems. unhealthy ecosystems cause dams to 
become clogged by siltation, damaged by flood waters or 
degraded with pollution. dams also need proper watershed 
management. the challenge, therefore, is to manage water 
resources to maintain a beneficial mix between built and 
natural infrastructure and provision of their respective 
services.  

Current food production practices are likewise responsible 
for nitrogen, phosphorous and pesticide loading and 
fisheries depletion (Vörösmarty et al., 2010). it is estimated 
that between us$4.3 and us$20.2 trillion per year worth of 
ecosystem services were lost between 1997 and 2011 due 
to land use change (Costanza et al., 2014). 

Water is a key resource for industrial and manufacturing 
processes (e.g. heating, cooling, cleaning, rinsing, etc.), 
but generated wastewater can cause environmental 
damage when discharged untreated. the industrial and 
manufacturing sector has a corporate social responsibility to 
take action to ensure acceptable quality of discharged water 
and cover the costs related to any corrective clean-up action. 
at the same time, manufacturing processes can also benefit 
from cleaner water influent by saving costs on treating 
potential impurities (Corcoran et al., 2010). 

4.2.4 Management challenges
Current water management practices are often fragmented, 
leading to lost synergies, poor trade-offs and sub-optimal 
solutions. this phenomenon pervades across sectors such as 
health, leaving missed opportunities for broader strategies 
(boelee, 2011). it fails to capitalize on synergies in basin-
wide and cross-sectoral approaches to water management 
to protect ecosystem services, such as the flow of water 
needed to maintain biodiversity. 

Poor water management (especially wastewater 
management) leads to the degradation of ecosystems 
through pollution and contamination, resulting in social 

30

ChaPTer 4

WATER AND ThE ThREE DiMENSioNS oF SUSTAiNAbLE DEVELoPMENT

and economic costs: it is more expensive to rehabilitate 
an ecosystem than to preserve it. in short, there is a basic 
failure to recognize the economic and social value of healthy 
ecosystems.

trade-offs in the conservation of ecosystems and can be 
used to better inform development plans (farber et al., 
2002).

the water management sphere is beset by a lack of 
ecosystem knowledge among decision-makers, and 
lack of resources and technical know-how to empower 
communities to take the lead in ebM. lack of resources, 
skills and capacity affects related approaches such as 
watershed management or other conservation programmes.
Management practices have emphasized water quantity 
requirements for human and environmental needs at the 
expense of water quality. Moreover, they prioritize human 
uses over environmental needs and fail to recognize the 
symbiotic relationship between the two. 

4.3 Responses
responses that mitigate, reverse and, most of all, prevent 
ecosystem degradation are required to address threats to 
ecosystems. the nature of these responses has implications 
for the quality and quantity of water supply, especially 
since restored ecosystems do not always perform the same 
range of ecosystem services as the original sites (boelee, 
2011). the adoption of ebM is essential to ensure water 
sustainability. 

4.3.1 Ecosystems valuation
using economic arguments for preserving ecosystems 
can make them relevant to decision-makers and planners. 
an economic perspective is also important in assessing 

ecosystem valuation can be broadly described as what 
users would be willing to pay directly for the services, or 
what it would cost to replace the same services with built 
infrastructure (boelee, 2011). such valuations can be 
incorporated into national income accounts, or used to 
clarify comparative options in land use planning, payment 

Ecosystem valuation has 
demonstrated that benefits far exceed 
costs of water-related investments in 
ecosystem conservation

for ecosystem services (Pes) and common asset trusts 
(Costanza et al., 2014). Valuations help in building the case 
for a green economy in the post-2015 development agenda.

ecosystem valuation has demonstrated that benefits far 
exceed costs of water-related investments in ecosystem 
conservation. according to the study ‘Changes in the Global 
Value of ecosystem services’, the 2011 economic value 
of ecosystems has been globally estimated at us$124.8 
trillion. Global GdP was estimated at us$75.2 trillion in the 
same year (Costanza et al., 2014). box 4.2 illustrates the 
application of this approach at the micro-level.

4.2

x
o
b

Wastewater treatment in the Fynbos Ecosystem, south Africa 

The Fynbos Ecosystem of Western Cape, South Africa, contains numerous wetlands whose function and value until recently 
were unknown. Many of these wetlands have been degraded or lost due to farming practices and other land use changes. 
Both wetlands and land use play a role in determining water quality emanating from sub-catchments in the biome.
Water-quality amelioration by wetlands benefits both ecology and humans downstream. For example, preventing 
contamination protects downstream fisheries from pollutants and reduces the impact on human health, such as from 
extensive growth of algae or aquatic macrophytes due to nutrient loading.

The economic benefits of the water treatment capacity of wetlands in the Fynbos Biome were estimated “on the basis of the 
cost of performing the same service, i.e. removal of nitrogen, with man-made water treatment plants. The study calculated the 
value of the wetlands’ service as US$12,385 per hectare per year, high enough to compete with alternative land uses.”

Highlighting the economic value of critical wetlands builds a case for investing in natural infrastructure. While policy changes 
have not directly been impacted by this study, an increased number of these studies globally show growing demand for 
improved understanding of the value of nature. 

Source: Turpie (2010).

ECoSySTEMS 

31

WWDR 20154.3

x
o
b

Transboundary collaboration for healthy ecosystems and community engagement

The International Joint Commission (IJC) was established by the Boundary Waters Treaty of 1909 between the USA and Canada 
and serves to resolve and prevent transboundary water disputes between the two countries. 

The Commission adopted the Lake Erie Ecosystem Priority (LEEP) for 2012-2015. In August 2013 it released a collaborative 
report between scientists of both countries entitled ‘Lake Erie Ecosystem Priority: Scientific Findings and Policy 
Recommendations to Reduce Nutrient Loadings and Harmful Algal Blooms’. The study focused on lake-wide changes resulting 
from phosphorus enrichment, climate change and invasive species.

The report contained policy proposals to reduce phosphorus inputs to the lake, for implementation by federal, state and 
provincial governments, including setting phosphorus load targets 40% below average loads of the past five years.

The report was then opened up to the public for comment through the internet and open house events held in Michigan, 
Ohio and Ontario and a scientific panel discussion at the Great Lakes Week held in Milwaukee, Wisconsin. Public engagement 
helped in shaping the outcomes of the report.  

Source: IJC (2013).

4.3.2 Natural infrastructure solutions
in order to effectively address the myriad environmental 
challenges, water managers need to recognize and 
incorporate ni into their planning and implementation 
activities (dini, 2013).  for example, the creation of ‘green 
corridors’ along rivers, floodplains and streams can link 
ecosystems, thus absorbing nutrients and reducing water 
pollution.

Conservation programmes are often reactive and fail to fully 
consider the interconnected nature of ecosystem processes 
for sustainability. the ni perspective places emphasis on 
connectivity (ePa, 2014), creating a sustainability framework 
for environmental decisions. ni solutions should be seen 
as cost-effective, long-term infrastructure solutions that 
utilize water-related ecosystem services to augment, replace 
and/or strengthen performance of built infrastructure to 
provide a wide array of benefits that support livelihoods. 
it has higher capacity to adapt to climate change impacts. 
Hence investments yield benefits across a number of policy 
areas, as illustrated in table 4.1. for example, in the table, 
the rows which refer to “Water purification and biological 
control”, “reconnecting rivers to floodplains” and “Wetland 
restoration/conservation” are shown as ni alternatives 
for “Water treatment plant”, as illustrated in the Yangtze 
example in box 4.1.

4.3.3 Policy responses
the major decisions in ebM over the next decades must 
address trade-offs between “agricultural production and 
water quality, land use and biodiversity, water use and 
aquatic biodiversity” (Mea, 2005c).

the emphasis on access to water and sanitation in the MdGs 
has focused policy priorities on urgent human needs, but 
addressing broader sustainability issues that underpin access 
to water resources must move to the forefront. the post-
2015 development agenda focuses on higher attention to 
ecosystems, water quality and disaster management and 
needs to be supported by further evidence of the necessity 
of an integrated ecosystem-based management of water 
resources.

Coordination and collaboration between natural resource 
managers and sectors such as health, agriculture and 
industry are needed to foster synergy and integrate 
responses to environmental, economic and social challenges 
and eliminate compartmentalization. Collaboration is vital 
for policy formulation and compliance and for stakeholder 
engagement in planning and monitoring, as in the example 
in box 4.3. Policies should provide incentives and reduce 
operational bottlenecks for the implementation of ebM 
tools, such as Pes, in combination with reducing emissions 
from deforestation and forest degradation (redd), and 
landscape planning, among others.

Coordination among international environmental bodies 
can reduce compartmentalization and create a conducive 
framework for enforcement. the ramsar Convention, 
for instance, is already working with the World Heritage 
Convention, Convention on the Conservation of Migratory 
species of Wild animals and the Cbd in developing ‘wise 
use’ concepts for an integrated approach to wetland 
conservation (boelee, 2011).

32

ChaPTer 4

WATER AND ThE ThREE DiMENSioNS oF SUSTAiNAbLE DEVELoPMENT

Policies should seek to increase participation of all 
stakeholders (local, regional and national) including 
rural women in developing countries, who already act 
as grassroots ecosystem managers. involving them 
more substantively in decision-making would benefit all, 
integrate indigenous knowledge in the process and help 

capitalize on the increasing global concern for international 
environmental issues.

sustainable wastewater treatment is also key to maintaining 
sustainable ecosystem services, particularly water provision 
and purification. Protected areas can be utilized to preserve 

4.1 overview of natural infrastructure solutions for water resources management

E
l
b
A
T

Water management issue 

(Primary service to be provide)

natural infrastructure 

solution

location

l

n
a
p
d
o
o
F

i

l

n
a
b
r
U

l

a
t
s
a
o
C

Water supply regulation 
(including drought mitigation) 

Water quality 
regulation

Water purification 
and biological 
control

d
e
h
s
r
e
t
a
W

Re/afforestation and forest conservation

Reconnecting rivers to floodplains

Wetland restoration/conservation

Constructing wetlands

Water harvesting*

Green spaces (bio-retention & infiltration)

Permeable pavements*

Re/afforestation and forest conservation

Riparian buffers

Reconnecting rivers to floodplains

Wetland restoration/conservation

Constructing wetland

Green spaces (bio-retention & infiltration)

Erosion control

Re/afforestation and forest conservation

Riverine flood 
control

Moderation  
of extreme  
events  
(floods)

Riparian buffers

Reconnecting rivers to floodplains

Re/afforestation and forest conservation

Riparian buffers

Reconnecting rivers to floodplains

Wetland restoration/conservation

Constructing wetland

Establishing flood bypasses

Coastal flood 
(storm) control

Protecting/restoring mangroves, coastal 
marshes and dunes

Protecting/restoring reefs (coral/oyster)

* Built elements that interact with natural features to enhance water-related ecosystem services.  

Source: Extracted from UNEP/UNEP-DHI/IUCN/TNC (2014, Table 1, p. 6).

Corresponding 

built infrastructure 

solution 

(at the primary 
service level)

Dams and
groundwater 
pumping 
Water distribution 
systems

Water 
treatment 
plant

Reinforcement 
of slopes

Dams and 
levees

Sea walls

ECoSySTEMS 

33

WWDR 2015specific ecosystems that provide services vital to the 
health of much larger landscapes that may shelter specific 
endangered species. this requires collaboration with local 
populations and balancing trade-offs between conservation 
and economic activities.

•   Reduction of nutrient loading through wiser fertilizer use;
•   Improved mitigation of destructive environmental impacts 

in extractive industries;

•   Correction of market failures that cause environmental 

degradation; and

•   Greater involvement and capacity building of stakeholders 

the drivers of ecosystem and biodiversity degradation must 
be addressed through policies with actionable goals:

and greater accountability and transparency in decision-
making regarding ecosystem conservation (boelee, 2011).

•   Elimination of perverse subsidies that deplete ecosystem 

services and the reallocation of funds towards their 
preservation;

•   Promotion of water efficiency technologies and increased 

ecosystem-based management must be adaptive and 
incremental, beginning with a specific objective focused on 
a few issues; later, these issues can be increased in number 
and scope. 

water productivity in agriculture;

34

ChaPTer 4

WATER AND ThE ThREE DiMENSioNS oF SUSTAiNAbLE DEVELoPMENT

PART 2
ADDRESSiNg CRiTiCAL 
DEVELoPMENTAL ChALLENgES

ChaPTers 
5. Water, sanitation and hygiene    –   6. Urbanization
7. Food and agriculture    –   8. Energy    –   9. Industry
10. Adapting to climate variability and change

Uzbek women, khiva (Uzbekistan)
Photo: global water Partnership

the interlinkages between water and sustainable development reach far beyond its social, economic 
and environmental dimensions. Water plays a vital role in various aspects and challenges related to 
sustainable development, including human health, food and energy security, urbanization, industrial 
growth and climate change. Part 2 of this report defines critical ‘challenge areas’ where policies and 
actions at the core of sustainable development can be strengthened or weakened through water.

Chapter 5 reflects on the role of water, sanitation and hygiene (WasH) in achieving sustainable 
development and outlines key challenges to achieving sustained universal coverage. Chapter 6 covers 
the challenges associated with rapid urbanization, describing how cities provide opportunities for 
more sustainable use of water. Chapter 7 focuses on what is required to achieve a world free from 
hunger and malnutrition in a sustainable manner. Chapter 8 addresses the challenges of meeting 
rising energy demands without compromising the sustainability of freshwater resources. Chapter 
9 examines water’s role in the pursuit of sustainable industrial development. finally, Chapter 10 
describes how sustainable freshwater resources management is affected by climate variability and 
change.

36

ADDRESSiNg CRiTiCAL DEVELoPMENTAL ChALLENgES

water, sanitation and hygiene 

UniCEF and WHo  |  Robert Bain, Richard Johnston,* Cecilia Scharp, Rifat Hossain,* Bruce Gordon* and Sanjay Wijesekera

5

this chapter reflects on the role of water, sanitation and 
hygiene (WasH) in achieving sustainable development, and 
outlines key challenges that need to be addressed in order 
to achieve and sustain universal coverage.

implications of inadequate WasH – for education, cognitive 
development and nutrition – are not fully documented, and 
inadequate WasH is one of many deprivations suffered by 
the world’s poorest and most marginalized populations.

WasH is fundamentally important to lives and livelihoods, 
and underpins poverty alleviation and sustainable 
development (figure 5.1). at a basic level, everyone needs 
access to safe water in adequate quantities for drinking, 
cooking and personal hygiene, and sanitation facilities that 
do not compromise health or dignity. lack of WasH takes 
a huge toll on health and well-being and comes at a large 
financial cost, including a sizeable loss of economic activity 
in many countries, not just least developed countries. While 
the impacts are most pronounced in lower income countries, 
challenges remain in wealthier nations where concerns 
regarding water safety and environmental sustainability 
persist alongside inequalities. Many of the broader 

access to water and sanitation is recognized as a human 
right and has long been a central aim of international 
development policies and targets (unCesCr, 2003; unGa, 
2010). the MdGs sought to “halve the proportion of the 
population without access to safe drinking water and basic 
sanitation” between 1990 and 2015 (unGa, 2001). the 

* 

 The author is a staff member of the World Health Organization. The author 
alone is responsible for the views expressed in this publication and they 
do not necessarily represent the views, decisions or policies of the World 
Health Organization. Nothing contained herein shall be construed as a 
waiver of any of the privileges and immunities enjoyed by WHO under 
national or international law, and/or as submitting WHO to any national 
court jurisdiction.

schematic of criteria for sustainable water, sanitation and hygiene services and their key impacts  
on sustainable development 

5.1

E
R
U
G
i
F

Sustainable Development

Economy

Environment

Equity

Direct 
•   Reduced burden of collecting 

water when on premises
•   Lower medical expenses
•   Affordability including for the poor

indirect
•   Educated and healthy workforce
•   Industry and commerce

Direct
•   Reduced water wastage and 

avoiding overexploitation

•   Adequate treatment of excreta 
and wastewater to protect the 
natural environment

indirect
•   Sustainable environmental 

services

Direct 
•   Disease prevention
•   Dignity
•   School attendance, especially for 

adolescent girls

indirect
•   Full participation in society
•   Reduced poverty
•   Gender equality

Underpinning Human Rights WAsH criteria:
Normative: Availability, safety, acceptability, accessibility and affordability
Cross-cutting: Non-discrimination, participation, accountability, impact and sustainability

Source: Authors and UNGA (2010).

WATER, SANiTATioN AND hygiENE

37

WWDR 2015WHo and uniCef Joint Monitoring Programme for Water 
supply and sanitation (JMP) reports impressive gains made 
over the last two decades with 2.3 billion people gaining 
access to an improved drinking water source and 1.9 billion 
to an improved sanitation facility (WHo and uniCef, 2014a). 
of those gaining access to drinking water, 1.6 billion 
now use a higher level of service: a piped water supply 
on premises. However, much still needs to be done – 748 
million do not use an improved source of drinking water 
and 2.5 billion do not use an improved sanitation facility. 
Moreover, not all of those using improved facilities have 
fulfilled their rights; for example, an estimated 1.8 billion 
people drink water contaminated with Escherichia coli, an 
indicator of faecal contamination (bain et al., 2014). 

Hand washing with soap is one of the important elements 
of hygiene in WasH, although it did not form part of MdG 
monitoring. Globally, the prevalence of hand washing with 
soap is very low with some estimates suggesting four out 
of five people do not wash their hands after contact with 
excreta (freeman et al., 2014). Moreover, many challenges 
remain in addressing concerns about the adequacy of WasH 
services and ensuring their sustainability (box 5.1).

5.1 Return on WASH investments
investments in water and sanitation services result in 
substantial economic gains. in developing regions, the 
return on investment has been estimated at us$5 to us$28 
per dollar invested (WHo, 2012b). overall, us$53 billion 
a year over a five-year period would be needed to achieve 
universal coverage (Hutton, 2013) – a small sum given this 
represented  less than 0.1% of global world product in 2010 
and since the return on investment is many times higher.

despite the potential for sizeable returns on investment, 
sustainable financing has not yet been attained in many 
settings, raising questions about who should pay and 
what the barriers to investment are. in many cases, capital 
investments are made without adequate financial planning 

5.1

x
o
b

Examples of unsustainable WAsH

•  Persistently non-functioning community supplies
•  Failure to treat wastewater or safely handle excreta
•  Leakage and intermittency of utility piped water
• 

 Increasing water scarcity and low priority given to 
domestic water use
 Inadequate investment in maintenance and 
operations

• 

or investment in maintenance, operations and monitoring 
(aMCoW, 2011; Wateraid india, 2008; barnard et al., 2013). 
this leads to poor levels of service (e.g. quality, reliability, 
acceptability), lower usage and, in some cases, permanent 
failure. such unsustainable financing not only reduces the 
benefits but also wastes available capital, resulting in lower 
coverage per dollar spent. 

from the user’s perspective, the affordability of WasH 
services is of utmost importance and may influence 
access, especially for the poor. the financing of water 
and sanitation, including the proportion contributed by 
households, varies greatly (WHo, 2014) as does willingness 
to pay for water and sanitation services. data on household 
contributions are few and generally available at the national 
level, preventing assessments of affordability for the poorest. 
in most countries, regressive cost structures predominate 
whereby low volume consumers pay a premium on a  
per volume basis. there are some notable exceptions, such 
as south africa (box 5.2), where a basic level of service is 
free to the end user. 

in order to reap the full benefits of these services, greater 
emphasis is needed on ensuring that services last. in many 
settings, services are not living up to their potential, with 
intermittency a daily problem for piped supplies even in 

5.2

x
o
b

A focus on providing for the poorest leads 
to more equitable WAsH outcomes in south 
Africa

"With the ending of apartheid the Government of 
South Africa prioritized the provision of basic services 
including, water supply, sanitation and energy services. 
Ambitious targets were set within a policy framework 
that included ‘free basic water’ and ‘free basic sanitation’ 
for households with resources below the social grant 
amount (approximately US$1 per day). In 2012, 3.47 
million and 1.84 million people benefitted from free 
services for water and sanitation respectively." 

"Resources were provided to decentralized 
organizations charged with providing basic WASH 
services. Strong monitoring frameworks were put in 
place to track progress against the targets. Although 
the time frame for reaching the targets of universal 
coverage have not been met, major gains in access 
have been achieved, especially for the poor and those 
living in rural areas. There remains, however, a major 
challenge in attracting and retaining professional staff 
to manage, operate and maintain WASH infrastructure."

Source: UNGA (2013).

Source: WHO (2014, p. 4).

38

ChaPTer 5

ADDRESSiNg CRiTiCAL DEVELoPMENTAL ChALLENgES

major cities, and functionality of community sources and 
hygienic sanitation facilities not always assured. the problem 
of non-functioning supplies and unused sanitation facilities 
is symptomatic of unsustainable or misdirected financing 
and a mismatch between supply and demand. this points 
to the need for greater accountability, enhanced monitoring 
as well as adequate financing for continued operations 
and maintenance. this is not restricted to lower income 
countries. the investment ‘deficit’ for ageing infrastructure 
in the united states has been estimated at us$84 billion by 
2020 (asCe, 2011). Water services should also be located 
close to or ideally within the home in order to ensure that 
time can be used more productively since opportunity 
costs are an important contributor to the overall return on 
investment (WHo, 2012b) and to support good hygiene. 

5.2 Environmental implications
the quantities of water required for domestic uses, and 
especially ingestion, are generally very small compared 
to those for agriculture and industry: 20 litres per person 
per day for drinking and personal hygiene is considered to 
be ‘basic’ access (WHo, 2011). domestic water accounts 
for at most 11% of freshwater withdrawals (fao, 2011a). 
Yet the availability of water and sanitation services is 
intimately linked to the wider policies and practices in 
water management. unregulated abstraction can influence 
local availability of water and its quality with negative 
repercussions for water services. Changing climate is also 
expected to influence water resource availability, putting 
more pressure on already stretched resources and increasing 

the risk of contamination due, in part, to more frequent and 
intense flooding (WHo/dfid, 2009).

Pollution of the environment in other spheres can also 
influence the ability to provide adequate quantities of high-
quality drinking water or the costs and energy required to 
do so. ensuring water safety requires a focus on source 
protection, rational use of fertilizer and pesticides, and 
reducing industrial pollution as integral elements of 
comprehensive water safety planning. 

In many lower-income countries  
bottled water is a privilege of 
the wealthy who may resort to 
it due to lack of trust in the 
safety of municipal supplies, 
exacerbating inequalities

as societies develop, their water usage patterns change. 
Global trends in the use of different water sources 
demonstrate a shift towards piped water on premises, 
especially in urban areas. use of piped water can be highly 
beneficial for societal well-being; however, it also generates 
a tendency to raise the quantity of water used per capita, 
increasing stress on local water resources and wastewater 

strong growth of bottled and sachet water as a main drinking water source in urban settings, 
2000-2012

5.2

E
R
U
G
i
F

)

%

(
 
n
o

i
t
a
l

 

u
p
o
p
n
a
b
r
u
e
h
t
 
f
o
n
o

 

 

i
t
r
o
p
o
r
P

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

51

31

11

Lao People’s 

Democratic Republic 

2000

2005

2010

29

15

1

Indonesia

40

20

23

20

0

Philippines

7

0

Ghana

54

37

Turkey

Source: Authors’ analysis based on data compiled by the WHO and UNICEF Joint Monitoring Programme for Water Supply and Sanitation (JMP).

WWDR 2015

WATER, SANiTATioN AND hygiENE

39

treatment facilities. in addition, household surveys show a 
marked increase in the use of packaged waters – bottles and 
sachets – in several countries (figure 5.2). although globally 
this is a small proportion of people, with an estimated 
6% of people primarily relying on bottled water in 2010 
(WHo and uniCef, 2012), there are concerns about the 
environmental sustainability of packaging water (especially 
the plastic waste) and affordability of this trend. in many 
lower-income countries, bottled water is a privilege of the 
wealthy who may resort to it due to lack of trust in the 
safety of municipal supplies.

lack of sanitation and poor management of excreta has a 
detrimental impact on the environment. in many countries, 
the demand for sewer-connected sanitation coverage has 
meant increases in connections without due attention to 
treatment and disposal of wastewater. although data are 
few, estimates suggest that even in upper-middle income 
countries wastewater from 75% of households with sewer 
connections may not receive adequate treatment (baum 
et al., 2013).the impact of releasing untreated human 
excreta to the environment is substantial, with negative 
impacts on rivers, lakes and coastal waters. furthermore, the 
WHo and uniCef JMP finds that one billion people do not 
use a sanitation facility and instead defecate in the open 
(WHo and uniCef, 2014a). in addition to the clear risk to 
the health of communities, where open defecation takes 
place, the consequences for water and the environment are 
severe. the ideal solution from a sustainability perspective 
is to find productive uses for wastewater, especially in 
agriculture, thus relieving stress on water resources and 
treatment facilities as well as avoiding loss of nutrients. 
Where wastewater is to be treated, minimizing the amount 
of wastewater generated improves the potential for 
adequate and efficient treatment. in countries where robust 
regulations and wastewater treatment exist, reducing energy 
use is a key challenge requiring innovative approaches. 

5.3 Reducing disparities and  
enhancing services
sustainable development and human rights perspectives 
both call for reductions in inequalities and tackling 
disparities in access to services (unGa, 2013). the human 
right to water and sanitation sets normative and cross-
cutting criteria against which the adequacy of WasH 
services is to be judged (figure 5.1). for WasH services to 
meet individual’s needs, they must be aesthetically and 
culturally acceptable so that people are willing to and 
continue to use them, reliable, functional and physically 
accessible for all, including the elderly and disabled. services 
must be appropriate for a given population and setting, and 
therefore must be selected and managed in such a way as 

Public toilet in the shanty town of Ciudad Pachacutec, Ventanilla District, El 
Callao Province (Peru)
Photo: Monica Tijero/World Bank

to enable participation from a wide range of stakeholders, 
including the customers. 

Pronounced disparities in access to WasH services, for 
example between regions, rural and urban areas, and 
socio-economic groups, are well-documented (WHo and 
uniCef, 2014a). in order to achieve universal access, there 
is a need for accelerated progress in disadvantaged groups 
and to ensure non-discrimination in WasH service provision. 
Whereas some countries have made remarkable progress 
in reducing inequalities, in others these gains have largely 
bypassed the poor and marginalized. ethiopia provides an 
example of a country that has made great progress during 
the period of working towards the MdGs – substantially 
increasing sanitation coverage and doing so equitably 
across wealth quintiles and regions (figure 5.3). in 22 years, 
ethiopia reduced open defecation from 92% to 37% (WHo 
and uniCef, 2014a).

Coverage alone does not fully reflect inequalities; disparities 
are evident in the levels of service related to the safety, 
accessibility and reliability of water services (WHo and 
uniCef, 2011). even in countries where the majority of the 
population uses piped water on premises, certain minority 
groups may be neglected. for example, an analysis of 
data from bosnia and Herzegovina found only 32% of the 
poorest roma use an improved source of drinking water 
compared with 94% of the general population (WHo and 
uniCef, 2014a). in order to ensure sustainability, the type of 
service needs to be appropriate to the context and carefully 
chosen based on the available infrastructure, human 
and financial resources. for example, the suggestion that 
everyone should aspire to a sewer-connected sanitation 
facility (a flush toilet) can create great difficulties for 
achieving sustainable systems with adequate financing and 
especially suitable management of wastewater. similarly, in 

40

ChaPTer 5

ADDRESSiNg CRiTiCAL DEVELoPMENTAL ChALLENgES

will shift towards attaining the additional benefits of 
higher levels of service as well as achieving environmental 
sustainability.

Globally, key targets for sustainable WasH identified by 
a wide stakeholder consultation include: universal access 
to basic water, sanitation and hygiene; elimination of 
open defecation; reduction of inequalities; progressive 
improvement of service levels; and safe management of 
water and excreta (WHo and uniCef, 2013). in order to 
achieve these goals, there is a need to focus on service 
delivery and not solely on capital costs, ensure that 
services are financially viable, enhance accountability 
and transparency in financing, strengthen independent 
regulatory agencies, and build capacity to monitor 
progress and assess inequalities in service. Creation of new 
infrastructure, while essential, will not suffice to increase 
sanitation and hygiene coverage. a renewed focus on 
changing social norms is paramount.

remote rural areas community sources such as boreholes 
can be more affordable than a piped system and easier 
to maintain. in these settings, safe household storage is 
essential to avoid contamination and creating potential 
breeding grounds for disease vectors. 

Household surveys and national censuses also indicate that 
there are disparities within households, including gender. 
Women and girls are often responsible for collecting water, 
especially in rural sub-saharan africa where many must 
spend at least half an hour to do so (WHo and uniCef, 
2012), and some make multiple trips taking up two to four 
hours a day (Pickering and davis, 2012). at school, lack 
of sanitation is more likely to hinder a girl’s educational 
attainment than a boy’s. Women’s involvement in local 
management of water supplies improves the chances 
of successful outcomes (uneP, 2004), illustrating the 
importance of inclusive and participatory approaches in 
sustainable water resource management.

5.4 Towards sustainable WASH services
Many challenges remain in securing sustainable WasH 
services for present and future generations and ensuring 
that these services are within environmental limits. the types 
of challenges vary considerably between countries, with 
attaining basic access the priority in some and enhancing 
services and meeting environmental targets in others. as 
coverage continues to increase globally, the emphasis 

sanitation coverage (%) in Ethiopia, by province (2000-2012)

5.3

E
R
U
G
i
F

46

13

41

89

5

6

43

66

85

17

40

18

16

8

7

43

37

38

37

37

56

17

27

5

58

0

93

24

15

62

42

39

17

46

5
2

2
0

12

11 

73

35 

32

98

54 

56

13

14

34

82

82

80

19

94

61

72

58

0

39

7

35

14

14

1

10

19

8

47

9

9

2000
2012
National

3
3
2000

2012

2000

2012

Afar

Somali

2000
2012
Gambela

2000

2012

Tigray

2012

2000
Oromia

2000
2012
Benishangul-

Gumuz

2000

2012

Dire 
Dawa

2012

2000
Amhara

2000

2012

Harar i

2000
2012
Southern 
Nations,  

2000

2012

Addis 
Ababa

Improved and shared facilities

Unimproved  facilities

Open defecation

Source: WHO and UNICEF (2014a, Fig. 19, p. 15). Reproduced with the permission of the publisher.

Nationalities,  
and People's 

Region 

WWDR 2015

WATER, SANiTATioN AND hygiENE

41

6 Urbanization

Un-Habitat  |  Bhushan Tuladhar, Andre Dzikus and Robert Goodwin

6.1 Water in a rapidly urbanizing world
Cities have become the place where development challenges 
and opportunities increasingly come face to face. in 2014, 
3.9 billion people, or 54% of the global population, lived in 
cities, and by 2050, two-thirds of the global population will 
be living in cities (undesa, 2014). furthermore, most of this 
growth is happening in developing countries, which have 
limited capacity to deal with this rapid change.

(oeCd, 2012a). as easily available surface water and 
groundwater sources have been depleted in many urbanized 
areas, cities will have to go further or dig deeper to access 
water, or will have to depend on innovative solutions 
or more advanced technologies such as reverse osmosis 
for desalination, or reclaimed water to meet their water 
demands (see WWaP, 2015, Chapter 1, Case study “towards 
sustainable groundwater management in asian cities”.)

Cities impact the hydrological cycle in several ways by: 
extracting significant amounts of water from surface and 
groundwater sources; extending impervious surfaces thus 
preventing recharge of groundwater and exacerbating flood 
risks; and polluting water bodies through the discharge of 
untreated wastewater. since much of the water consumed 
by cities generally comes from outside the city limits, and 
the pollution they generate also tends to flow downstream, 
the impact of cities on water resources goes beyond their 
boundaries. Cities also import significant amounts of food, 
consumer goods and energy from outside the city, which 
requires large amounts of water at the point of production, 
transportation and sale. this virtual demand of cities greatly 
exceeds direct water use (Hoekstra and Chapagain, 2006). 

at the same time, as centres for innovation, cities provide 
opportunities for more sustainable use of water, including 
treating used water to standards that enable it to be used 
again. they are well positioned to rapidly adopt conservation 
measures, and the concentration of people in compact 
settlements can reduce the cost of providing services such as 
water supply and sanitation. furthermore, cities can connect 
with their hinterlands and support the protection of water 
resources in their surrounding areas by actively engaging in 
watershed management or providing Pes. 

6.2 Challenges
6.2.1 Access to water supply and sanitation
rapid urbanization, increased industrialization, and 
improving living standards generally combine to increase the 
overall demand for water in cities. as shown in figure 6.1, by 
2050, global water demand is projected to increase by 55%, 
mainly due to growing demand from manufacturing, thermal 
electricity generation and domestic use, all of which mainly 
results from growing urbanization in developing countries 

although the MdG target on access to safe drinking water 
– as measured by the proportion of population using an 
improved drinking water source (see box 1.1) – was met in 
2010, the progress in urban areas has not been able to keep 
up with the rapid pace of urbanization (figure 6.2). between 
1990 and 2012, the number of urban residents who did not 
have access to an improved drinking water source decreased 
by 1 percentage point. However, in absolute terms, the 
number of people in urban areas without access to an 
improved drinking water source increased from 111 million 
to 149 million (WHo and uniCef, 2014a), indicating that 

6 .1

E
R
U
G
i
F

Global water demand in 2000 and 2050

6 000

5 000

4 000

3

m
k

3 000

2 000

1 000

0

2000 2050

OECD

2000 2050

BRIICS

2000 2050

ROW

2000 2050

World

Irrigation

Manufacturing

Domestic

Electricity

Livestock

Note: BRIICS (Brazil, Russia, India, Indonesia, China, South Africa); 
OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development); 
ROW (rest of the world). This graph only measures ‘blue water’ 
demand and does not consider rainfed agriculture. 
Source: OECD (2012a, Fig. 5.4, p. 217, output from IMAGE). OECD 
Environmental Outlook to 2050 © OECD.

42

ChaPTer 6

ADDRESSiNg CRiTiCAL DEVELoPMENTAL ChALLENgES

16 
16 

4 
4 

17
17

23 
23 

15 
15 

9 
9 
4 
4 
11 
11 

84

84

25
25

24 
3 
3 
24 

18
18

7
7

35
35

19
19

3
3

12
6.3
12

16 

3 
3 

63
63

7
7

7

19
19

19

16 

84
16 
84
16 
4 
4 

63
63

63

25 
25 
17 
17 
17 
1 
1 
2 
2 

2 

2 
2 
40 
40 

40 

3

4 

17

15 

9 
4 

35
35

23 
23 

35
14 
14 

17
17
2
40 
40 
2
2
9
9

9 
4 
9 
4 
11 
11 
2010
2010

17 
15 
17 
15 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
5 
1 
20 
5 
5 
1 
20 
Access to sanitation in urban Cambodia in 
12
1995
2010
2010
12
10 
10 
2010
2010
1995
1995
2010
2010
1995
different wealth quintiles
Type 1: Uneven progress – Rural Pakistan
1995
2010
Type 1: Uneven progress – Rural Pakistan
Type 1: Uneven progress – Rural Pakistan
1995
2010
2010

2 
2 
2010
10 
10 
2010
2010

9
1995
1995

3
3
12
12

20 
37 
37 
20 
20 

1995
1995

2010
2010

1995
1995

1995
1995

40 
40 

14 
14 

19
19

2
2

2010

2010

2010

1995

2010

2010

1995

1995

1995

1995

2010

1995

1995

23 

11 

12

2 
2 

42
42

1 
1 

4 
1 
4 

37 
37 

37 
44 
44 

14 
14 

22
22
14 
2
2
1 
1 
1 
10 
10 
10 
18
18
1995
1995
1995

5 
5 
14 

14 
14 

53 

2 
34 
2 
2 
34 
10 
10 
10 
1995
1995

1995

2010

1995

2010

2010

2010

1995
Type 1: Uneven progress – Rural Pakistan
Type 1: Uneven progress – Rural Pakistan
Poor 
Poor 

Poorest 
Poorest 

Poorest 

E
1995
R
U
G
i
F

1995

Poor 

2010

1995

1995

2010

1995

1995

1995
2010
Type 2: Equitable progress – Rural Peru
Type 2: Equitable progress – Rural Peru
Middle 
Rich 
Middle 
Middle 
Rich 
2
2
2
5 
5 
5 
Poorest 
0
Poorest 
0
0
6 
6 
6 
11
11
11

Richest 
Rich 
Richest 
Richest 
0
1 
000
0
0
1 
1 
000
000
0
1 
0
0
1 
1 
Poor 
Middle 
4
4
4
Poor 
Middle 
9 
9 
9 

Poorest 
Poorest 

Poorest 

Rich 
Rich 

Poor 
Poor 

Poor 

Richest 
Richest 

32 
32 

32 

16 
16 

16 

Middle 
Middle 
2
2
0
0
11
11

32 
32 

Rich 
Rich 
0
0
0
0
4
4

5 
5 
6 
6 

Richest 
Richest 
14
14
14
1 
000
1 
000
1 
1 
9 
9 
2
2

2

16 
16 

54
54

54

15
15

15

15 
15 

15 

2010

2 
2 
5 
5 
1995
1995

2
access to drinking water is actually deteriorating where the 
2
9
most rapid urbanization is outpacing public services (see 
9
1995
section 6.3.1). the situation is worse in sub-saharan africa, 
1995
where urbanization is happening most rapidly. in this region, 
the percentage of people who enjoyed piped water on their 
premises, which is the preferred option for urban areas, 
Poor 
Poor 
actually decreased from 42% to 34% (WHo and uniCef, 
2014a). this clearly indicates that access to ‘safe’ drinking 
water sources continues to be a major problem in cities in 
the developing world. 

Poorest 
Poorest 

2010

54
54

14
14

2
2

15
15

2010
2010
2010
Type 2: Equitable progress – Rural Peru
2010
Type 2: Equitable progress – Rural Peru
Type 2: Equitable progress – Rural Peru
2010

1995

2010

15 
15 

15 
15 

96 
96 

96 

87
87

73 
73 

69
69

85 
85 

85 

3

100
100

89 
89 

69

69
69

14

3
96
3
96
14
14

92
92
96
96
96

92
100
100
92
100

90 
90 
89 
89 
89 

86 
86 

15 

15 
15 

93 
93 
87
87
87

96 
96 

73 

73 
73 

65 

92
72 
72 

92
92

93 
93 

93 
86 
86 

81 
96 
81 

96 
96 

38 

38 
38 

16 

13 
13 

3
3

96 
96 

similar to trends in drinking water, the number of urban 
85 
85 
residents without access to improved sanitation increased 
by 40%, from 541 to 754 million, between 1990 and 2012 
(WHo and uniCef, 2014a). therefore, although sanitation 
14
14
coverage is generally higher in urban areas, because of 
rapid urbanization, increasing numbers of urban residents, 
particularly the poor, are unable to access improved 
11 
11 
sanitation. also, due to higher population densities in urban 
4 
4 
0 
0 
areas, the health consequences of poor sanitation can be 
1995
1995
pervasive. in urban Cambodia, for example, 54% of the 
people in the poorest quintile still defecate in the open, 
while among the richest 40% of the population, this has 
Improved 
Improved 
gone down to zero (figure 6.3).

4 
4 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1995
1995

2010

29

29
29

11 

29
29

38 
38 

4 
4 
0 
0 
4 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1995
1995
1995
1995

11 
11 
4 
4 
0 
0 
4 
0 
1995
1995
1995
1995
2010
1995
Type 3: Levelling up – Urban Cambodia
Type 3: Levelling up – Urban Cambodia
Improved 
Improved 
Improved 
Unimproved  
Unimproved  

Shared
Shared

2010

1995

2010

1995

1995

2010

2010

1995

2010

2010

3
5 
3
5 
3
2010
2010
1995
2010
1995
3 
3
3 
2
2 
2
2 
1995
2010
2010
2010
2010
1995
Type 3: Levelling up – Urban Cambodia
Type 3: Levelling up – Urban Cambodia
2010
2010
1995
Type 3: Levelling up – Urban Cambodia

1995
1995
2 
2 
1 
1995
1 
2010
1995
2010
Type 4: Stagnation – Rural Burkina Faso
Type 4: Stagnation – Rural Burkina Faso

2 
2 
3 
2010
2010
3 
2 
2 
2010
1995
1995

4
4
2
2010
2010
2
2
2
2010
1995
1995

2010
2010
2010
2010

1995
1995

1995

5 
5 
5 
5 
4 
4 
2010
2010

2 
2 
7 
3 
3 
2 
7 
2 
2 
3 
3 
3 
2 
1995
1995
4 
4 
1995
1995
1995

11 

4
4
6 
6 
2
2
4
2
2
2
9 
9 
2
1995
1995
1995

9 
9 
2 
2 
1 
1 
4 
2 
4 
1 
2010
2010
6 
6 
2010
2010
Type 4: Stagnation – Rural Burkina Faso
Type 4: Stagnation – Rural Burkina Faso
2010
Type 4: Stagnation – Rural Burkina Faso

2010

Shared
Shared

Shared
Open defecation
Open defecation

Unimproved  
Unimproved  
Unimproved  

Open defecation
Open defecation
Open defecation

the increase in the number of people without access to water 
and sanitation in urban areas is directly related to the rapid 

Source: Extracted from WHO and UNICEF (2014a, Fig. 29, p. 24). 
Reproduced with the permission of the publisher.

6.2

E
R
U
G
i
F

Trends in urban water supply coverage (1990-2012)

2 
8 

3

12

4 

13 

0
6

1 
9 

0
4

3 
5 

2
4

1 
3 

13 

1
3

10

0 
6 

8 

0
5
4

1 
4 

10 

0
4
4

1 
5 
7 

0
3
3

1 
2 
5 

0
2
3

18 

20

44

39 

42

49 

41 

51

86

86 

83 

74 

74

91

85 

92

87 

94

92 

95

51 

54

50

42 

41 

34

1 0 
2 

00
2

2

14

5 

16 

1 
6 

22 

0
5

21

1 
4 

14 

0
4

16

97 

98

81 

80

71 

74

50 

51

33

29 

1990

2012

1990

2012

Sub-

Saharan 
Africa

South-
Eastern 

Asia

1990 2012
Southern 

1990
2012
Oceania

Asia

1990
2012
Caucasus 
and Central 

1990
2012
Northern 

1990
2012
Western 

Africa

Asia

Asia

1990

2012

Latin 

America & 
Caribbean

1990
2012
Eastern 

Asia

1990

2012

Least 

developed 
countries 

2012

1990
Developing 

regions

1990 2012
Developed 
regions 

1990
2012
19901990 20122012

World

Piped on premises

Other improved

Unimproved 

Surface water 

Source: WHO and UNICEF (2014a, Fig. A4-1, p. 66), reproduced with the permission of the publisher.

WWDR 2015

URbANizATioN

43

growth of slum populations in the developing world and the 
inability or unwillingness of local and national governments 
to provide adequate water and sanitation facilities in these 
communities. While there has been some progress in moving 
people out of slum conditions, it has not been enough to 
counter population growth in informal settlements. the 
world's slum population is expected to reach 889 million by 
2020 (un-Habitat, 2010). as slum dwellers are generally more 
likely to suffer inadequate access to safe water and sanitation 
and are also more vulnerable to the impacts of extreme 
weather events, water management in cities, particularly 
slum settlements, will be a major challenge in the future. in 
some informal settlements, however, local communities and 
the private sector have come up with innovative solutions. in 
Mombasa, for example, where only about 15% of the people 
have access to piped water supply, more than 80% have 
access to an improved water source because they receive 
water from kiosks (figure 6.4).

6.2.2 Pollution and wastewater management
Many cities in developing countries do not have the 
necessary infrastructure to collect and treat wastewater. 
in the absence of proper drainage systems, sewage mixes 
with stormwater causing further pollution. it is estimated 
that up to 90% of all wastewater in developing countries is 
discharged untreated directly into rivers, lakes or the oceans, 
causing major environmental and health risks (Corcoran et 
al., 2010). this has huge social and economic impacts due 
to increased health care costs and lower labour productivity.

Wastewater also has impacts on the global environment as 
wastewater-related emissions of methane, a powerful global 
warming gas, and nitrous oxide could rise by 50% and 25%, 
respectively, between 1990 and 2020 (Corcoran et al., 2010).

there is clearly a need to expand wastewater treatment systems 
and improve efficiency of existing treatment plants. While 
some developing countries such as Chile have been successful 
in treating almost all their wastewater (bartone, 2011), 
experience from most developing countries indicates that 
wastewater management can be expensive and most cities do 
not have or allocate the necessary resources for this. Moreover, 
the cost of the wastewater collection is often underestimated. 
there is a need for more innovative options for such as 
decentralized wastewater treatment solutions and biogas 
production for reusing and recycling wastewater and reducing 
the cost of wastewater management (lüthi et al., 2011). 

6.2.3 Institutional capacity and water governance
Given the rapid pace of urbanization, the institutional 
capacity of local and national governments and water 
utilities to increase investments and manage the delivery of 
services is becoming critical, especially in cities with old and 
poorly maintained water and sanitation infrastructure and 
cities in the developing world. High rates of unaccounted-
for water (mainly due to leakages), unsustainable tariffs and 
weak systems of governance are typical manifestations of 
the growing capacity gaps in many urban areas. leakage 
results in loss of revenue, higher chances of drinking water 

6.4

E
R
U
G
i
F

Access to water in Mombasa's informal settlements

)

%

(
 
e
g
a
r
e
v
o
c
 
r
e
t
a
w
g
n

 

i
k
n

i
r
D

100 

80 

60 

40 

20 

0 

Other unimproved 

Cart with small tank/drum 

Other improved 

Water kiosk 

Neighbour's tap/public tap 

Piped on premises 

Kenya
Urban 

Mombasa

Informal areas 

Low 

Medium

Wealth

High 

Source: WHO and UNICEF (2014a, Fig. 24, p. 20). Reproduced with the permission of the publisher.

44

ChaPTer 6

ADDRESSiNg CRiTiCAL DEVELoPMENTAL ChALLENgES

contamination and outbreaks of waterborne diseases, which 
will further reduce water service quality and the consumers' 
willingness to pay.

6.2.4 Climate change and water-related disasters
because the impacts of climate change are complex and 
unpredictable (see Chapter 10), the availability of and 
demand for water are highly likely to be affected. Water and 
sanitation infrastructure may be at risk because of extreme 
events and sea level rise. With increased urbanization 
encroaching upon natural drainage paths and changed land 
use caused by urbanization resulting in increased runoff, 
there is also an urgent need for more sustainable urban 
drainage systems to address the issues of inundation and 
water contamination. as the urban poor tend to live in 
concentrated and highly vulnerable areas such as river banks, 
they are more vulnerable to the impacts of climate change. 
Coping with the effects of climate change will therefore 
require cities to strengthen planning and management 
capacities related to water and integrate water management 
with overall urban development.

6.3 Responses
the dedicated goal for water and its five targets proposed 
by un-Water (2014) as part of the post-2015 agenda for 
sustainable development (see Chapter 16) are very relevant 
for the sustainable use of water in the urban context. the 
targets provide an appropriate framework for responding to 
the challenges of managing water in cities. 

6.3.1 Pro-poor policies for safe water supply and 
sanitation
rapid urbanization is outpacing public service provisions 
in the developing world and the overall number of people 
without access to safe water and sanitation in urban areas 
is increasing. the proposed target on universal access to 

Many cities in developing 
countries do not have the 
necessary infrastructure to 
collect and treat wastewater

safe water, sanitation and hygiene should stimulate action 
to address this critical issue. furthermore, as the target also 
includes an element of progressively eliminating inequalities 
in access, it would encourage policy-makers to address the 
needs of the urban poor. in doing so, governments and 
service providers can learn from experiences of successful 
and innovative initiatives that focus on the needs of urban 
poor and create an enabling environment for service delivery 
(box 6.1).
 
6.3.2 Integrated urban water management
the proposed target on sustainable use and development 
of water resources can benefit from experiences of 

6.1

x
o
b

Pro-poor policies in Kampala

In 2004, the Government of Uganda set a target 
of 100% coverage of water supply and sanitation 
services in urban areas by 2015. In response, the 
National Water and Sewerage Corporation (NWSC), 
which is responsible for water and sanitation services 
in Kampala, introduced a series of measures such as 
affordable connection, a pro-poor tariff, and special 
projects targeted at the poor. It set up an urban pro-
poor branch in 2007 and provided a variety of service 
options including household connections, prepaid 
public water points/kiosks, and shared yard taps. As 
a result, NWSC was able to significantly expand its 
services to the urban poor while increasing its revenue. 
The pro-poor branch was also able to reduce the 
proportion of inactive public water points and yard 
taps from 40% in 2007 to less than 10% in 2009. 

6.2

x
o
b

Forest conservation by a water utility in 
Costa Rica

Since 2000, the local water supply company (Empresa 
de Servicios Públicos de Heredia) in the province 
of Heredia in Costa Rica has invested in protecting 
strategic forest areas in the Virilla River Watershed, 
allowing for the recharge of surface and groundwater 
sources. Enforcement of approved regulation against 
changes in land use patterns ensures the protection 
of the province’s main sources of water supply. The 
company charges an additional 3% of the monthly 
water bill to its users and collected funds are used to 
compensate land owners for control of changes in 
land use. Over the last ten years, the programme has 
protected more than 1,100 ha of forest within the 
catchment. As a result, the province is able to provide 
clean water to all its 200,000 residents while minimizing 
the need to invest in water treatment infrastructure. 

Source: Kariuki et al. (2014). 

Source: Barrantes and Gámez (2007).

WWDR 2015

URbANizATioN

45

Rocinha Favela, the largest in Brazil
Photo: Ahln

6.3

x
o
b

Phnom Penh water supply: An example of 
good governance

The Phnom Penh Water Supply Authority (PPWSA), 
which has transformed itself from a near-bankrupt, 
demoralized and corrupt institution into one of the 
best water utilities in the world, can provide valuable 
experiences for other cities. Under the dynamic 
leadership of Ek Sonn Chan, PPWSA was able to 
turn around the performance of the utility within a 
decade to provide all people with continuous, good 
quality and affordable water supply, while consistently 
increasing its net profit. Due to its pro-poor policies, it 
has also increased its connections to poor households 
from 101 household connections in 1999 to 17,657 
in 2008. The fact that Phnom Penh has been able 
to reduce its unaccounted-for water from over 60% 
in 1998 to just 6% by 2008, which is comparable to 
Singapore, demonstrates that state managed utilities 
in developing countries can be efficient, if they have 
good leadership and governance. 

6.4

x
o
b

DEWATs in indonesia 

The government of Indonesia is promoting 
community-managed decentralized wastewater 
treatment systems (DEWATS) and aims to reach 5% of 
the total urban population through DEWATS by the end 
of 2014. A review of almost 400 DEWATS units installed 
in different Indonesian cities between 2003 and 2007 
found that over 80% of them were functioning well 
and complying with effluent discharge standards. 
The study found, however, that sustained use of 
the infrastructure over the long term requires some 
external monitoring and support, as community 
groups often lose enthusiasm and are reluctant to 
fund major repairs on their own. It concluded that 
"community managed DEWATS can be effective for 
serving poor communities where the appropriate type 
of system is built well in the right location, the number 
of users is optimized and sustained and there is shared 
responsibility with government for operation and 
maintenance” (WSP, 2013).

Source: Biswas and Tortajada (2010).

Source: WSP (2013).

46

ChaPTer 6

ADDRESSiNg CRiTiCAL DEVELoPMENTAL ChALLENgES

integrated urban water management (iuWM) systems in 
various countries. iuWM calls for the alignment of urban 
development and basin management and brings together 
water supply, sanitation, and stormwater and wastewater 
management, and integrates these with land use planning 
and economic development. implementation of iuWM will 
require appropriate institutional structures, policies, careful 
planning, capacity-building and investment in systems 
such as protection of upstream catchment areas, rainwater 
harvesting and recharge, water demand management and 
water reuse (box 6.2).  

6.3.3 Urban water governance
the target on equitable, participatory and accountable 
water governance will require strong political commitment, 
appropriate policy and legal frameworks, effective 
institutional structures, efficient administrative systems and 
capable human resources. it will also require investments in 
water infrastructure, renewal, operations and maintenance. 
a study estimates that one dollar of water and sewer 
infrastructure investment increases private output (gross 
domestic product) in the long-term by us$6.35 and yields a 
further us$2.62 output in other industries. these benefits 
accrue in terms of jobs created, final output and private 
sector investment (Krop et al., 2008). experiences from cities 
around the world have shown that it is possible to improve 
the performance of urban water supply systems and increase 
revenue and profits, while continuing to expand the system 
and addressing the needs of the poor, provided that there is 
strong leadership and good governance (box 6.3).

6.3.4 Sustainable sanitation
effective management of water resources and reduction 
of water pollution will require investment in sustainable 
sanitation systems which are technically appropriate, 
economically viable, socially acceptable and environmentally 
sound. these may include promotion of reuse, treatment of 
wastewater to an appropriate level for the intended reuse 
option, and integration of sanitation systems with overall 
water resource and urban planning and design (lüthi et al., 
2011). since transportation accounts for much of the cost of 
wastewater management, decentralized systems that treat 
wastewater close to the source, using simple technologies 
that maximize recycling of water and nutrients, can be more 

effective, particularly in poor and peri-urban settlements 
(box 6.4). Wastewater systems can also generate energy;  
treated wastewater can be reused, thus contributing to 
water, energy and food security and therefore health and 
economy. in accra, urban vegetable gardens irrigated by 
treated wastewater provide up to 90% of the vegetable 
needs of the city (tettey-lowor, 2009).

on-site sanitation, which is still the main approach used in 
most urban areas in africa and asia, is a challenge as well 
as an opportunity. if faecal sludge is not managed properly, 
it can cause major health risks and pollution, but avoiding 
extensive sewer systems leads to investment savings and 
allows for more innovative decentralized options that are 
less water- and energy-intensive can be explored.

6.3.5 Adaptation to climate change and  
water-related disasters
the World bank estimates that the global costs of 
adaptation from 2010 to 2050 will be us$70 billion to 100 
billion a year (World bank, 2010a). the sectors requiring 
the main bulk of this investment will be water supply and 
flood protection, infrastructure and coastal zones, with 
urban areas requiring an estimated 80% of the total 
funding required for adaptation (World bank, 2010b). as 
most of this investment will be needed in developing 
countries, where the infrastructure and systems are yet 
to be built, there are possibilities for making future cities 
climate smart, thus reducing climate risks and maximizing 
environmental and economic benefits. for example, cost-
benefit assessments of early warning systems for storms, 
floods, and droughts undertaken throughout asia indicate 
potential returns of up to us$559 for each us$1 invested 
(subbiah et al., 2008).

some cities like singapore have taken adaptive measures to 
increase the resilience of urban water supply and sanitation 
systems. to avoid seawater intrusion into reservoirs, most 
reservoir dams are much higher than the predicted sea 
level rise, and if needed the gates can be further raised. by 
diversifying its water sources to include rainwater harvesting, 
reclaimed water and desalinization, the city has reduced 
its vulnerability to prolonged dry periods (Chiplunkar et al., 
2012). 

WWDR 2015

URbANizATioN

47

7 food and agriculture

FAo  |  Edited by: Jippe Hoogeveen

by 2050, agriculture will need to produce 60% more 
food globally, and 100% more in developing countries 
(alexandratos and bruinsma, 2012). However, current 
growth rates of agricultural demands on the world’s 
freshwater resources are unsustainable. inefficient use 
of water for crop production depletes aquifers, reduces 
river flows, degrades wildlife habitats, and has caused 
salinization of 20% of the global irrigated land area (fao, 
2011a). the bulk of capture fisheries production comes from 
coastal waters, where both the productivity and the quality 
of fish stocks are severely affected by pollution, much of 
which comes from agriculture. although reservoirs can 
create opportunities for aquaculture, capture fisheries and 
aquaculture can also be threatened by competing demands 
from hydropower development and water diversion for 
industrial uses. 

to achieve “a world free from hunger and malnutrition, 
where food and agriculture contribute to improving 
the living standards of all, especially the poorest, in an 
economically, socially and environmentally sustainable 

manner” (fao, 2013a), fao has proposed the following five 
principles (fao, 2014a):

1.   improving efficiency in the use of resources is crucial to 

sustainable agriculture.

2.   sustainability requires direct action to conserve, protect 

and enhance natural resources.

3.   agriculture that fails to protect and improve rural 
livelihoods and social well-being is unsustainable.
4.   enhanced resilience of people, communities and 

ecosystems is key to sustainable agriculture.

5.   sustainable food and agriculture requires responsible and 

effective governance mechanisms.

the principles are interconnected and complementary and 
should often be considered simultaneously (figure 7.1). they 
support the three dimensions of sustainable development. 
the first two principles directly refer to the environment, 
while the third refers to social and economic development. 
the fourth and the fifth underpin all three dimensions of 
sustainable development. for the application of all five 

The five principles of sustainable agriculture

7.1

E
R
U
G
i
F

Source: FAO (2014a, Fig. 3, pp. 18-19).

48

ChaPTer 7

ADDRESSiNg CRiTiCAL DEVELoPMENTAL ChALLENgES

principles, a range of actions can be taken to enhance 
agricultural productivity and sustainability. 

7.1 Improving resource use efficiency
in broad terms, agriculture has two options to increase 
water use efficiency: reduce water losses and increase water 
productivity.

the first option seeks to increase the efficiency of water 
use by reducing water losses in the process of production. 
technically, ‘water use efficiency’ is a dimensionless ratio 
that can be calculated at any scale, from irrigation system 
to the point of consumption in the field. it is generally 
applied to any management approach that reduces the non-
beneficial use of water (i.e. reducing leakage or evaporative 
losses in water conveyance and application). the second 
option focuses on increasing crop productivity. this involves 
producing more crop or value per volume of water applied. 

Clearly, there is scope for managing the demand for water 
in agriculture in time and in space. However, excessive 
emphasis is often placed on the first option, with efforts 
aimed at reducing water ‘losses’ within irrigation distribution 
systems. two factors limit the scope for and impact of water 
loss reduction. first, only part of the water ‘lost’(defined 
as water that is diverted for purposes that have clear and 
tangible benefits, such as for household purposes, irrigation, 
industrial processing and cooling), while withdrawn for 

beneficial use, can be recovered effectively at a reasonable 
cost. second, part of the water ‘lost’ between the source 
and final users return to the hydrological system, either 
through percolation into aquifers or as return flow into river 

The single most important avenue 
for managing water demand in 
agriculture is through increasing 
agricultural productivity

systems. the share of water lost through non-beneficial 
consumption, either through evaporation or through 
drainage into low quality water bodies or to the sea, varies 
according to local conditions. a clear understanding of the 
real potential for reducing water losses is needed to avoid 
designing costly and ineffective demand management 
strategies (2030 WrG, 2013).

in most cases, the single most important avenue for 
managing water demand in agriculture is through increasing 
agricultural productivity. increased crop yields are made 
possible through a combination of improved water control, 
improved land management and agronomic practices. 
the latter include the choice of genetic material, and 

7.1

x
o
b

Deficit irrigation for high yield and maximum net profits

Maximum crop productivity is achieved using high-yielding varieties with optimal water supply, soil fertility and crop 
protection. However, crops can also produce well with sub-optimal water supply. In deficit irrigation, water supply is less 
than the crop’s full requirement, and mild stress is allowed during growth stages that are less sensitive to moisture deficiency. 
The expectation is that any yield reduction will be limited, and additional benefits are gained by diverting the saved water to 
irrigate other crops or for other beneficial uses. 

A six-year study of winter wheat production on the North China Plain showed water savings of 25% or more through the 
application of deficit irrigation at various growth stages. In normal years, two irrigations (instead of the usual four) of 60 mm 
were enough to achieve acceptably high yields and maximize net profits. In Punjab, Pakistan, a study of the long-term impacts 
of deficit irrigation on wheat and cotton reported yield reductions of up to 15% when irrigation was applied to satisfy only 
60% of total crop evapotranspiration. The study highlighted the importance of maintaining leaching practices in order to avoid 
the long-term risk of soil salinization. 

In studies carried out in India on irrigated groundnuts, production and water productivity were increased by imposing transient 
soil moisture-deficit stress during the vegetative phase, 20 to 45 days after sowing. Water stress applied during the vegetative 
growth phase may have had a favourable effect on root growth, contributing to more effective water use from deeper soil 
horizons. Higher water savings are possible in fruit trees, compared to herbaceous crops. In Australia, regulated deficit irrigation 
of fruit trees increased water productivity by approximately 60%, with a gain in fruit quality and no loss in yield.

It should be noted, however, that deficit irrigation can only obtain good results if the irrigation systems provide very reliable 
water services that are also quite flexible.

Source: FAO (2011b).

WWDR 2015

FooD AND AgRiCULTURE

49

improved soil fertility management and plant protection. it 
is important to note that plant breeding and biotechnology 
can help by increasing the harvestable parts of the biomass, 
reducing biomass losses through increased resistance to 
pests and diseases, reducing soil evaporation through 
vigorous early growth for fast ground cover, and reduced 
susceptibility to drought. therefore, managing overall 
demand through a focus on water productivity rather than 
concentrating on the technical efficiency of water use alone 
is an important consideration (box 7.1).

7.2 Conserving, protecting and  
enhancing natural resources
it is crucial to protect and restore natural ecosystems like 
wetlands, forests, rivers and lakes that provide important 
ecosystem services with regard to the quality and quantity 
of water (see Chapter 4). However, while preserving the 
environmental function of water systems is a priority, its 
execution will involve careful negotiation on required 
environmental flows. since agricultural landscapes also 
perform environmental functions, the boundary between 
environmental water requirements and agricultural water 
demand is often not clear-cut (see WWaP, 2015, Chapter 7, 
Case study "Progress on sustainable development objectives 
in the Mekong delta, Viet nam.")

Planting rice in Viet Nam
Photo: UN Photo/Kibae Park

7.2

x
o
b

Rio Rural: Payments for environmental services in a watershed management programme

In the northern parts of the State of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, past rural policies gave priority to mono-cropping of coffee and 
sugar cane, as well as extensive cattle raising. The associated deforestation and unsustainable production systems lead to soil 
degradation and depletion of water resources.

Since 2006, the Rio Rural Programme has been working to reverse this pattern by providing long term support to small family 
farmers, to transition to eco-friendly productive systems. Since most of the more sustainable technologies have higher costs 
of implementation and low impacts on rural income, it is crucial to establish a financial incentive system to support their 
adoption. 

With financing from GEF (2006-2011), the World Bank (2010-2018), federal and state programmes and the private sector, Rio 
Rural will invest US$200 million on 180,000 ha and benefiting 78,000 farmers, of which 47,000 receive direct financial incentives 
and technical assistance to improve productivity. In return, farmers agree to conserve remnant forest areas.

The Rio Rural strategy for long-term sustainability of farmers´ agro-ecosystems is to ensure that every farming technology 
upgrade is jointly adopted with a conservation practice, so farmers are able to raise productivity while improving environment 
quality. Farmers who adopt rotational grazing systems with Rio Rural support also agree to release part of their lands to forest 
restoration, to protect springs and riparian strips.

Activities directly related to water protection are partly funded by water supply authorities, at local, state and federal levels. 
Rio Rural offers technical support and financial incentives to income generation activities and watershed management 
committees invest earmarked shares of water fees directly in the conservation practices. 

Contributed by the Rio Rural project team, Sustainable Development Department (SEAPEC), Rio de Janeiro State Secretariat of Agriculture, Brazil 
(http://www.microbacias.rj.gov.br/index.jsp).

50

ChaPTer 7

ADDRESSiNg CRiTiCAL DEVELoPMENTAL ChALLENgES

With increased intensive agriculture, water pollution from 
both point and non-point sources may worsen. technologies 
exist to limit agricultural water pollution, in particular through 
integrated pest and plant nutrition management. experience 
from high income countries shows that a combination of 
incentives, including more stringent regulation, enforcement 
and well-targeted subsidies, can help reduce water pollution 
(fao, 2012b). in addition, the Pes approach (see section 
4.3.1), often in combination with the above-mentioned 
incentives, can lead to a noticeable reduction in agricultural 
pollution and savings in water treatment costs downstream of 
agricultural land (box 7.2). 

7.3 Rural livelihoods and social well-being
agricultural development aims to benefit those whose 
livelihoods depend on it by increasing their access to 
resources and assets, their participation in markets 
and their job opportunities. if it fails to do so, it is 
unsustainable. since 75% of the world’s poor live in 
rural areas, broad-based rural development and the wide 
sharing of its benefits are the most effective means of 
reducing poverty and food insecurity (World bank, 2007a). 
the status of women, who make up the majority of the 
world’s hungry and have disproportionately low levels of 
resource ownership, requires special attention. With equal 
access to resources and knowledge, female farmers, who 
account for the majority of all subsistence farmers, could 
produce enough additional food to reduce the number of 
the world’s hungry by 150 million (fao, 2011c). 

Water scarcity can impose a major constraint on agricultural 
productivity and rural poverty reduction. the vulnerability of 
rural people remains considerable due to a combination of 
highly variable and erratic precipitation; poor development 
of hydraulic infrastructure, management and markets; 

non-conducive land and water governance; and a lack 
of access to water for domestic and productive uses. for 
millions of smallholder farmers, fishers and herders, water 
is one of the most important production assets. securing 
access to and control and management of water is key to 
enhancing their livelihoods, especially in africa (see Chapter 
15). approaches exist for well-targeted local interventions 
in water that contribute to rapid improvement in the 
livelihoods of the rural poor (box 7.3). However, investments 
in water infrastructure alone cannot suffice to improve 
agricultural productivity. farmers need access to inputs like 

The social impacts of rapid food 
price inflation have hit the 
poorest hardest

fertilizer and seed material and, like fishers, need access to 
water, and all users need access to credit. in addition, they 
need better education and information regarding the use of 
inputs and latest techniques.
 
in south-east asia, under the influence of fast but uneven 
economic growth, the agricultural sector faces two 
complex trends: (a) an increasing income gap between 
agriculture and other sectors and (b) the need to reverse 
the unsustainable use and degradation of the region’s 
limited natural resources base. a key challenge for decision-
makers is to adopt policies and strategies to help bridge a 
widening gap between urban affluence and rural poverty, 
while also encompassing ‘green’ measures necessary to 
enhance ecological well-being. for many farmers and fishers, 
solutions need to be found outside of the agricultural sector.

7.3

x
o
b

The Keita Project: Exploring the range of water conservation options in western niger

The Keita Project, funded by Italy and the World Food Programme at more than US$80 million, started its activities in the Ader-
Doutchi-Majiya, an arid region of Niger, in 1984. It is a project of unusual scale and duration and, by 1991, it covered an area of 
13,000 km2, with about 300,000 people in 400 villages. The project provided services and infrastructure on a grand scale. By the 
end of 1999, it had created 50 artificial lakes, 42 dams and 20 anti-erosion dykes, and 65 village wells. It had applied soil and 
water conservation techniques to about 10,000 ha of land, and had planted 16 million reforestation seedlings. In addition, the 
project provided a variety of infrastructure, including schools, maternity centres, veterinary facilities, shops and storehouses, 
and it included women’s empowerment programmes, microcredit and adult literacy courses. 

The aspects of the project that were most appreciated by the local population were the increased availability of water and 
fodder, together with the distribution of ‘food for work’ in an area with few work opportunities (Rossi, 2006). Ten years after 
project completion, most of the hydraulic infrastructure was still in place and functioning for the benefit of local populations.

Source: FAO (2002 and 2008, Box 6, p. 51) and Italian Development Cooperation (2009).

WWDR 2015

FooD AND AgRiCULTURE

51

there is general recognition that the current performance of 
the irrigation sector is often environmentally unsustainable, 
and that the level of service delivery is, on the whole, 
inadequate to meet the poorest farmers’ needs to generate 
sufficient income for a dignified livelihood, let alone their 
future requirements. Modernizing large scale irrigation 
systems should allow for farm size consolidation, rendering 
them highly reliable, flexible and service oriented. this 

Female farmers, who account 
for the majority of all subsistence 
farmers, could produce enough 
additional food to reduce the 
number of the world’s hungry by 
150 million

would also create room for acknowledging the multiple 
users of water so that their planning can be compatible 
with long-term urban, energy and transport infrastructure 
perspectives.  

7.4 Improving resilience
in the context of sustainable food and agriculture, resilience 
is the capacity of farming, fishing and herding communities, 
households or individuals to maintain or enhance system 

productivity by preventing, mitigating or coping with risks, 
adapting to change and recovering from shocks. Phenomena 
such as extreme weather events and market volatility, as well 
as civil strife and political instability, impair the productivity 
and stability of agriculture, which in turn increases 
uncertainty and risks for producers. the social impacts of 
rapid food price inflation have hit the poorest hardest. 
improving the resilience of water users to shocks and 
extreme events is a vital part of an effective coping strategy 
(box 7.4). the buffering capacity of global agricultural 
markets to absorb supply shocks and stabilize agricultural 
commodity prices is tied to the continued functioning of 
land and water systems. at the same time, climate change 
brings additional risks and further unpredictability of 
harvests for farmers, fishers and herders due to warming 
and related aridity, shifts in rainfall patterns, and the 
frequency and duration of extreme events. 

7.5 Effective governance
the key principles for enhancing effective governance 
include: participation, accountability, transparency, equality 
and fairness, efficiency and effectiveness, and rule of 
law (fao, 2013b). following these key principles helps 
ensure social justice, equity and a long-term perspective 
on the protection of natural resources. When sustainability 
processes are dominated by abstract environmental 
concerns, without adequate attention to social and 
economic dimensions, they are unlikely to be implemented. 
a transition to sustainable agriculture requires enabling 

7.4

x
o
b

strengthening adaptive capacity of smallholder farmers through land and water management

The pilot project ‘Strengthening capacity for climate change adaptation in land and water management’ carried out from 
2011 to 2014 by FAO and funded by the Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency (Sida), aimed to identify 
appropriate technologies that decrease crop and livestock production risk in East Africa.

In sub-Saharan Africa, ‘no regret options’ for climate change adaptation (i.e. options that increase the resilience of communities, 
not only to climate change but to any type of shock) have the highest probability of success both in the short and in the long 
term. In the Wurba watershed, Shoa Robit Woreda Ethiopia, measures were implemented to retain the surface runoff in the 
uplands and improve water-holding capacity of the soil. These measures increase groundwater recharge and also protect the 
top soil. The measures consisted of hillside terraces with trenches, stone check dams on hillsides, cut-off drains, trenches and 
micro-basins. 

In addition, water harvesting methods were undertaken in an attempt to reduce the impact of periods of droughts and to 
diversify sources of income. These methods included excavation of ponds on homesteads and farmland, lined with geo-
membrane, in which water was stored and used for domestic purposes, to water animals, and for horticulture. The project 
also provided cisterns for rooftop water harvesting, as no source of water is available locally during the dry season. The 
interventions have decreased the time and labour required to fetch water, while also increasing household incomes through 
the availability of high value horticultural products. 

Source: FAO (2014b).

52

ChaPTer 7

ADDRESSiNg CRiTiCAL DEVELoPMENTAL ChALLENgES

7.5

x
o
b

Groundwater governance in Andhra Pradesh, india

The Netherlands-funded ‘Andhra Pradesh Farmer Managed Groundwater Systems (APFAMGS) Project’ was implemented by 
FAO in the southern part of the Republic of India. It covered about 638 villages in seven drought-prone districts of Andhra 
Pradesh. In the project area, the natural groundwater recharge rates are estimated to be about 70–100 mm/year.

By the late 1990s, groundwater abstraction rates had grown to an equivalent of 120–150 mm/year, and an increasingly 
large portion of existing dug wells fell dry or became seasonal. In response, a rapid growth of bore wells was observed with 
steadily increasing depths (related to the flat-rate rural electricity tariff ). The expansion of groundwater use resulted in serious 
dewatering of the main water bearing horizons of the shallow aquifer system.

In order to reverse the problem, the project developed a participatory hydrological monitoring programme to provide farmers 
with the necessary knowledge, data and skills to understand the hydrology of groundwater resources. Due to significant 
variations in local hydrogeology, the calculations are specific for each aquifer and follow the standard methodology developed 
and used by India’s Central Ground Water Board. 

Groundwater management committees in each aquifer or hydrological unit estimated the total groundwater resource 
available and worked out the appropriate cropping systems to match. The committees then disseminated the information to 
the entire farming community and acted as pressure groups encouraging appropriate water saving and harvesting projects, 
promoting low investment organic agriculture and helping formulate rules that would ensure inter-annual sustainability of 
limited groundwater resources.

In the majority of the pilot project area, the results have been very positive, as witnessed by a substantial reduction in 
groundwater use through crop diversification and irrigation water-saving techniques and improving profitability despite less 
water use.

Source: Govardhan Das and Burke (2013).

policy, legal and institutional environments that strike the 
right balance between private and public sector initiatives, 
and ensures accountability, equity, transparency and 
appropriate legislation (box 7.5). 

agriculture and food security are intimately linked to water, 
and therefore policies in these domains must be consistent. 
in times of crises, and with volatile markets, ensuring a 
country’s food security (or that a country’s population is 
fed) becomes a primary concern for national decision-
makers. Water authorities should cease to regard water as 
a sector ‘compartment’ and engage more proactively with 
other economic sectors to make their strategies for coping 
with water scarcity coherent with key decisions being taken 
elsewhere (WWaP, 2009). such intersectoral dialogue is 

essential for ‘operationalizing’ the concept of integrated 
water resources management.

Policies, legislation and fiscal measures have profound effects 
on what happens at district and local levels, most importantly 
in setting boundaries for stakeholder involvement in 
decision-making, and in clearly articulating their roles and 
responsibilities (Moriarty et al., 2007). it is crucially important 
that there is good alignment among the many policies, 
items of legislation and fiscal measures that influence water 
management, service delivery and level of demand. decisions 
outside the water domain, such as those concerning energy 
prices, trade agreements, agricultural subsidies and poverty 
reduction strategies, often have a major impact on water 
supply and demand, and hence on water scarcity.

WWDR 2015

FooD AND AgRiCULTURE

53

8 energy

WWAP  |  Richard Connor

8.1 Thirsty energy
a necessity for meeting basic human needs like cooking 
and heating, access to a secure source of energy is a 
core component of sustainable development. energy is 
tightly interlinked with water. nearly all forms of energy 
require some amount of water as part of their production 
process. thermal power generation and hydropower, which 
respectively account for 80% and 15% of global electricity 
production, generally require large quantities of water. 
Conversely, energy is required for the collection, treatment 
and delivery of water. it has been estimated that electricity 
accounts for 5% to 30% of the total operating cost of 
water and wastewater utilities (World bank, 2012), but in 
some countries such as india and bangladesh, it can be as 
high as 40% (van den berg and danilenko, 2011).

Water and energy also provide complementary services at 
the household level, where energy is needed for pumping 
water from wells (for domestic or agricultural use), and to 
produce hot water for cooking, cleaning and hygiene. 

8.1.1 Access to water and energy services
access to water and energy services is necessary to meet 
sustainable development goals. the same people who lack 
access to improved water and sanitation are also likely to 
lack access to electricity and to rely on solid fuel for cooking 
(WWaP, 2014). some 748 million people lack access to 
an improved source of drinking water (WHo and uniCef, 
2014a), although the number of people whose right to 
water is not satisfied could be as high as 3 billion (onda 
et al., 2012); 2.5 billion people remain without access to 
improved sanitation. over 1.3 billion people lack access to 
electricity, and roughly 2.6 billion use solid fuels (mainly 
biomass) for cooking (iea, 2012). another estimated 
400 million people rely on coal for cooking and heating 
purposes, which, like wood, charcoal, peat or other biomass, 
causes air pollution and has potentially serious health 
implications when used in traditional stoves. the close 
association between waterborne diseases like diarrhoea 

3 

 One DALY can be thought of as one lost year of "healthy" life. The sum 
of these DALYs across the population, or the burden of disease, can be 
thought of as a measurement of the gap between current health status 
and an ideal health situation where the entire population lives to an 
advanced age, free of disease and disability.

caused by lack of safe drinking water and sanitation and 
respiratory diseases caused by indoor air pollution is a point 
of evidence that it is the same people that are underserved 
by water services and electricity. these two combined 
courses are also one of the most important causes of 
premature death and loss of disability-adjusted life years 
(dalYs) 3. 

Meeting any sustainable development goal related to health, 
and by association to poverty, education, and overall equity, 
is therefore contingent on providing access to safe water 
and energy services to all, including women and children 
who represent a disproportional share of the underserved. 

8.1.2 Global energy demand
at the global level, energy demand is projected to increase 
by one third by 2035, with demand for electricity expected 
to grow by 70% over the same period (iea, 2013). in terms 
of primary energy, the transition away from fossil fuels 
is likely to take considerable time to achieve. demand is 
expected to grow for all forms of energy: oil by 13%, coal 
by 17% (mainly before 2020), natural gas by 48%, nuclear 
by 66% and renewables by 77%. Global power generation 
will continue to be dominated by thermal electricity 
production from coal, natural gas and nuclear − with coal 
remaining the largest source. the share of renewables, 
including hydropower (the largest source), is expected to 
double, accounting for 30% of all electricity production by 
2035 (iea, 2013). 

because 90% of thermal power is water intensive, the 
estimated 70% increase in electricity production by 
2035 would translate into a 20% increase in freshwater 
withdrawals. Water consumption would increase by 85%, 
driven by a shift towards higher efficiency power plants with 
more advanced cooling systems (that reduce withdrawals 
but increase consumption), and increased production of 
biofuel (iea, 2012). 

With the exception of evaporative losses, hydropower is 
generally non-consumptive but can require the storage of 
large amounts of water in reservoirs, which may or may not 
be available for other uses at certain times. the quantity of 
water required for thermal power is dependent on the type 

54

ChaPTer 8

ADDRESSiNg CRiTiCAL DEVELoPMENTAL ChALLENgES

of cooling system. open-loop cooling requires more water 
withdrawals but is less consumptive, whereas closed-loop 
systems require less water to operate but nearly all of 
this water is consumed.

independent, produces minimal to near-zero GHG emissions, 
consumes minimal to near-zero water (depending on the 

In terms of water impacts, wind 
and solar PV are the most sustainable 
forms of power generation

in terms of water impacts, wind and solar PV 
are clearly the most sustainable forms of power 
generation. However, in most cases, the intermittent 
service provided by wind and solar PV needs to be 
compensated for by other sources of power that do require 
large quantities of water to maintain load balances.

although increasing in proportion to conventional energy, 
renewables remain underdeveloped and under subsidized 
in comparison to fossil fuels (WWaP, 2014). Wind and solar 
PV account for only 3% of the global power mix. although 
they are expected to grow rapidly over the next few 
decades, they are not likely to represent much more than 
10% of global electricity generation by 2035 (iea, 2012). 
Geothermal energy for direct thermal uses (district heating 
and others) and for power generation is underdeveloped 
and its potential is greatly underappreciated. it is climate 

system configuration), and its availability is infinite at human 
time scales (WWaP, 2014; Williams and simmons, 2013). 

8.2 Challenges: Meeting ever growing 
demands
Meeting ever-growing demands for energy will generate 
increasing stress on freshwater resources with repercussions 
on other users, such as agriculture and industry. since these 
sectors also require energy, there is room to create synergies 
as they develop together.

agriculture accounts for 70% of water withdrawals 
worldwide and the food production and supply chain 

WWDR 2015

Geothermal plant in Wairakai (New Zealand)
Photo: Geothermal Resources Council

ENERgy

55

accounts for about 30% of total global energy consumption 
(WWaP, 2014). the industrial sector accounts for about 
37% of primary global energy use and proportionately uses 
significantly less water (unido, 2008). increasing both 
water and energy efficiency in these sectors alone would 
generate substantial savings and have positive repercussions, 
especially in areas where resources are most scarce. However, 
the greatest challenge lies in decreasing the water intensity 
of fuel and power generation. 

Power generation is dominated by thermal electricity, which 
accounts for over 80% of global electricity production. 
Maximizing the water use efficiency of power plants will be 
a key determinant in achieving a sustainable water future. 
this will require limiting the construction and use of the least 
efficient coal-fired power plants and widely adopting dry-
cooling or highly efficient closed-loop cooling technologies. 

although increasingly competitive, wind and solar PV remain 
expensive and therefore require policy support to foster their 
deployment in most countries. Hydropower and geothermal 
energy have long been economically competitive. in addition 
to displacing water intensive thermal power, renewables 
offer additional benefits, including enhancing energy security 
and diversity, reducing GHG emissions and local air pollution, 
contributing to ‘green growth’, and mini-grid or off-grid 
solutions which are often less costly than grid extension 
to rural areas (iea, 2013). support for the development of 
renewable energy, which remains far below that for fossil fuels, 
will need to increase dramatically before it makes a significant 
change in the global energy mix, and by association, in water 
demand. renewables, such as wind, solar PV and geothermal 
energy, can make a substantial contribution to energy supply 
and freshwater demand at local or national scales, even if they 
do remain marginal at the global scale.

Although increasing in proportion 
to conventional energy, renewables 
remain underdeveloped and 
undersubsidized in comparison 
to fossil fuels

although using alternative water sources, such as sea or 
wastewater, can be challenging, they offer a great potential 
for reducing demands for freshwater (WWaP, 2014). 

Climate change increases the risks and adds to the pressures. 
over the past decade, the increased intensity of droughts, 
heatwaves and local water scarcities has interrupted 
electricity generation, with serious economic consequences. 
at the same time, limitations on energy availability have 
constrained the delivery of water services. 

there is much room for development of hydropower 
installations, particularly in sub-saharan africa and south-
east asia where access to modern energy services is 
lowest and undeveloped technical potential is greatest. 
beyond electricity generation, hydropower reservoirs 
may also provide storage for dry spells and support flood 
management, irrigation, navigation and recreation. Problems 
can arise when releases of water are required for different 
purposes at different times throughout the year. large-
scale hydroelectric plants around the world have been 
criticized for a number of reasons, including damage to the 
environment and biodiversity, loss of cultural and historical 
sites, and social disruption (Glassman et al., 2011).

biofuels offer an alternative energy source to fossil fuels. 
their water-related impacts mainly depend on whether they 
are produced from rainfed or irrigated feedstock crops. the 
water requirements of biofuels produced from irrigated 
crops can be much larger than for fossil fuel resources and 
can therefore have important implications for local water 
availability, whereas rainfed production does not substantially 
alter the water cycle. bioenergy production involving 
smallholders can help create jobs, improve livelihoods and 
reduce poverty in rural areas. optimism over biofuels is 
tempered by concerns over their economic viability and their 
implications for socio-economic development, food security 
and environmental sustainability (WWaP, 2014).the outlook 
for biofuels remains uncertain as they are highly sensitive to 
possible changes in oil and gas prices, as well as government 
subsidies and blending mandates, which remain the main 
stimulus for biofuels use (iea, 2013). 

Withdrawals and consumption are not the only aspects that 
deserve attention in the context of water and environmental 
sustainability. thermal power plants using open-loop 
cooling release large volumes of heated water into natural 
watercourses, affecting fish and other wildlife. biofuel 
production, like agriculture, can lead to nutrient loading, 
affecting the quality of surface water and groundwater. Coal 
mining requires large amounts of water, and discharges to 
surface water bodies and aquifers may be contaminated. oil 
and gas extraction yields high volumes of water that comes 
out of a well along with the oil and gas. this ‘produced 
water’, which usually has very high salinity and is difficult to 
treat, is often re-injected subsurface.

uncertainties persist over potential human health and the 
long-term environment impacts from the development 

56

ChaPTer 8

ADDRESSiNg CRiTiCAL DEVELoPMENTAL ChALLENgES

With the possible exception of the most water scarce areas, 
availability of (and impacts on) water for various energy 
production processes is far too rarely taken into account in 
energy policy-making. the two domains have historically 
been regulated and managed separately (World bank, 2013).
this has led to the adoption of unsustainable practices that 
jeopardize the availability of water resources and creates risks 
to other users and the environment (WWaP, 2014, box 3.3). 

Yet there are pragmatic measures that can be taken to co-
produce energy and water services and to exploit the benefits 
of synergies. these include combined power and desalination 
plants, combined heat and power plants, using alternative 
water sources for thermal power plant cooling, and even 
energy recovery from sewerage water (WWaP, 2014).

unfortunately, not every situation offers such opportunities 
for synergies. there are situations in which competition for 
resources can arise between water and energy objectives, 
meaning some degree of trade-off will be necessary. 
these trade-offs will need to be managed and contained, 
preferably through collaboration and in a coordinated 
manner, which in turn requires adequate and compatible 
data and information.

improved cooperation between regional electrical grids 
and transboundary basin organizations operating in the 
same region, in conjunction with the respective national 
governments, could potentially help to better coordinate 
water management and the energy sector via hydropower 
development. such cooperation can also support the 
sustainable allocation of water to other forms of energy 
producers and other water use sectors in the region.

finally, from a global sustainable development perspective, 
the availability (and limitations) of water for energy 
production will be a necessary and critical factor in achieving 
the sdG on energy, and in meeting its related targets. even 
if electricity production from renewables like wind and solar 
PV were to double, there would still be a need to rely on 
water-intensive sources of energy to achieve universal access 
to affordable, sustainable and reliable energy services and to 
support global economic and industrial growth.

Geothermal cooling towers at Larderello, Tuscany (Italy)
Photo: Simon

of unconventional sources of gas (‘fracking’) and oil (oil/
tar sands), both of which require disproportionally large 
quantities of water and pose significant risks to water 
quality.

8.3 Responses: A water perspective on energy
in terms of technology, the energy sector is evolving rapidly. 
unconventional oil and gas supplies are being unlocked, 
liquefied natural gas is enhancing supply flexibility, larger 
shares of variable renewable supply are being integrated 
into the power sector and overall energy efficiency is 
increasing (iea, 2013). the drivers of this evolution are 
mainly economic (market supply/demand), political (energy 
security) and social (providing safe energy to the unserved). 

the quest to reduce GHG emissions is leading the 
deployment of renewable energy technologies. Wind, 
solar PV and geothermal energy have the added benefit 
of consuming negligible quantities of water. However, as 
renewables become increasingly competitive on their own 
merits, carefully designed subsidy schemes will be required 
to allow for the multiple benefits of low-carbon energy 
sources without placing excessive burdens on those that 
cover the additional costs associated with low-carbon 
energy production (iea, 2013). 

WWDR 2015

ENERgy

57

9 Industry

UniDo  |  UNIDO Water Management Unit and John Payne, John G. Payne and Associates Ltd

since the dublin statement on Water and sustainable 
development in 1992, several notable pronouncements 
regarding water and sustainability have been issued, 
including the MdGs and the rio+20 outcome document, 
The Future We Want. but until the 2013 lima declaration 
(unido, 2013), none had specifically addressed inclusive 
and sustainable industrial development. 

the lima declaration focuses on poverty eradication 
through sustainable industrial growth supported by the 
‘three dimensions of sustainable development’: economic 
growth, social equity and environmental sustainability. 
the underlying principle is that ‘industrialization is a 
driver of development’ by increasing productivity, jobs 
and income towards the eradication of poverty and 
providing opportunities such as gender equality and youth 
employment (unido, 2013, Clause 2). the declaration 
builds on the MdGs and rio+20 and moves towards the 
post-2015 development agenda. Promoting the sustainable 
use of natural resources and reducing environmental impact 
are included in the measures. these two measures have 
a direct bearing on industrial water use, which is a very 
obvious way industry can demonstrate its commitment 
to the environment through ‘sustainable production and 
industrial resource efficiency’ (unido, 2013, Clause 21).

9.1 Context
industry is a widely-based sector. this chapter concerns 
manufacturing and extractive industry, whereas agriculture 
and power generation, themselves large industrial water 

users, are discussed separately in Chapters 7 and 8. Key 
elements of the water services industry are covered in 
Chapters 5 and 6 on WasH and urbanization.

the scope of water-related challenges across the industrial 
spectrum is a function of scale. the OECD Environmental 
Outlook to 2050 (oeCd, 2012b) predicts that global 
water demand for manufacturing will increase by 400% 
from 2000 to 2050 which is much larger than any other 
sector. Most of this increase will be in emerging economies 
and developing countries, with implications on water 
supply, allocation and quality. large corporations, often 
multinational or global, have made considerable progress in 
evaluating and reducing their water use (box 9.1) and that 
of their supply chains. small and medium-sized enterprises 
(sMes) are faced with similar water challenges on a smaller 
scale, but have fewer means and less ability to meet them. 

9.1

x
o
b

Mining and water sustainability: Minera 
Esperanza, Chile

Minera Esperanza’s operation is located 180 km from 
Antofagasta in the Atacama Desert, one of the driest 
places in the world, and requires approximately 20 
million m3 of water a year to operate. Securing a 
long-term supply of useable water and optimizing 
its use in the processes were important for mining 
development. As a result the plant was designed to use 
untreated seawater. Studies in laboratory conditions 
and carried out by a pilot project determined optimum 
operating conditions for the primary flotation process 
using seawater. A supply pipe network was constructed 
to transport seawater 145 km from the Pacific coast to 
the mine site. Minera Esperanza recruited a significant 
part of its staff from neighbouring communities. A 
major feature of the community plan was a programme 
to enhance the job skills (both for construction and 
mine workers) of the local residents. To provide equal 
opportunities, Minera Esperanza focused on attracting 
women to participate in the scheme and in 2010 had 
12% women workers, compared with a country average 
for the mining industry of 6%.

Source: Adapted from ICMM (2012).

New construction in Astana (Kazakhstan)
Photo: Shynar Jetpissova/World Bank

58

ChaPTer 9

ADDRESSiNg CRiTiCAL DEVELoPMENTAL ChALLENgES

Moreover large companies and sMe’s are faced with 
different water sustainability issues depending on whether 
they operate in developed or developing countries.

in developed countries, the emphasis is mainly on efficiency 
measures to conserve water resources that already exist. for 
developing countries, however, the priority for industry is 
to gain and secure access to water supplies that are reliable, 
which is often a challenge in water stressed areas. 

Various possibilities for water efficiency are available for 
each of these situations depending on the progress of 
industrial development and the business climate. sustainable 
industry may be achieved by retrofitting old facilities 
and plants, or building new ones specifically designed 
for efficiency and, in some locations, interlinked in eco-
industrial parks (box 9.2).  

the shape and form of industry’s plans and actions and 
the degree to which they are executed are conditioned by 
prevailing national and local regulatory regimes as well as 
by certain trade- and investment-protection agreements. 
Collisions of policy with regard to water in different sectors, 
for example the water-energy nexus, lead to functional 
trade-offs in water use.

9.2 Challenges
balancing the requirements of sustainability against the 
conventional view of industrial mass production creates a 
number of conundrums for industry. this stand-off can only 
be resolved by effecting trade-offs and changing paradigms. 
Water use is central to these dilemmas.

on the largest scale, the challenge of globalization is 
how to spread the benefits of worldwide industrialization 

9.2

x
o
b

Water and wastewater in eco-industrial parks

Industrial parks have existed for some time in both developing and developed countries. Most are created by formal planning 
processes, but some have grown organically. They provide competitive advantages for the businesses within them and also 
social, economic and environmental benefits beyond the confines. Usually, industrial parks separate a collection of factory 
premises from domestic habitation and other activities. However, this does not apply universally. For example, the China-
Singapore Suzhou Industrial Park in China combines over 60 Fortune 500 companies with a current residential population of 
600,000 people.

Eco-industrial parks ensure effective management of water and effluents together with liquid and solid materials recovery. 
They: 
•   permit ‘tailored’ water supply, effluent collection and treatment that maximizes the use and reuse of available water and 

other materials; 

•   aid the optimization of processes to reduce carbon footprints and ensure compliance with regulations: and
•   enable the whole water cycle to be linked with successive steps in the value chain of the processes and products of the 

industries in the park.

A good example is the Shanghai Chemical Industrial Park, which groups chemical companies working in chlorine chemistry 
and has an integrated water and wastewater and solid waste services operator, Sinofrench. 

At the conception stage, industrial parks bring the full benefits of specialized design, pooling best available technology, 
risk reduction and risk sharing in ways that optimise future technical performance and provide security for investors. At the 
operational stage, they provide the benefits of a committed and specialized operator with high levels of operation and 
management skills, rigorous quality control procedures backed by on-site laboratories and often with an additional R&D 
facility.

In some cases, the provision of specialized effluent treatment to preserve a country’s specialized industry has been the reason 
for creating a park. The Tuzla Organized Leather Industrial Zone Project in Istanbul is an example. In other cases, by integrating 
water and wastewater challenges it has been possible to ensure continuity of historic industry groupings threatened with 
closure on environmental protection grounds such as Bran Sands on Teesside in the U.K. and Villers-Saint-Paul in France.

Contributed by AquaFed. For more information about the parks, see the online sources for SIPAC (www.sipac.gov.cn/english/), SCIP (www.scip.com.
cn/en/), Tuzla (www.ideriosb.org.tr/hizmetler/aritma), Bran Sands (nwl.co.uk/business/water-and-waste-water-management.aspx) and Villers-Saint-
Paul (www.suezenvironnement-media.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/02/12.-Villers.pdf)

WWDR 2015

iNDUSTRy

59

equitably and without unsustainable impacts on water and 
other natural resources. While un-Water has proposed a 
‘dedicated global goal for water’ with targets designed to be 
tailored to the contexts and priorities of each country, the 
reality of national and local politics in regulating water, as 
well as geography, will involve compromises (WWaP, 2014).

industry’s priority is to maximize production rather than 
water efficiency and conservation. even in the case of 
improved water efficiency there may be a rebound effect 
(ercin and Hoekstra, 2012) where the water savings 
obtained are reinvested to increase production. therefore, 
though the process may be more efficient, total water use 
may not decrease. in parallel, industry seeks to be either 
self-supplied or to obtain water from public supplies at 
the lowest price possible, neither of which encourages 
water efficiency, though the value of water to industry may 
be high. Moreover, cost–benefit drives water efficiency 
as it relates to maximizing company profit rather than 
optimizing water use. Within industries, water hotspots 
can be identified that present the highest risks and highest 
opportunities (figure 9.1).

the business case for water efficiency frequently requires a 
financial trade-off. the common problem is the internal rate 
of return. investment in efficient water treatment technology 
or cooling processes may have longer payback periods than 
the immediate returns of alternative short-term investment 
in production. Moreover, low (or non-existent) water prices 
do not encourage investment in water efficiency, which may 
have other drivers such as water allocation or permitting. 
on the upside, in the long term, investment in sustainable 
technology provides extended savings. Conversely, it may be 
less expensive to pay the fine for pollution than to pay for 
better water treatment. Managers have to see and make the 
business case to offset shareholder and stakeholder pressure. 
However, it is incumbent upon the political and legal 
authorities to develop appropriate incentives for industries 
(standards, permissions, prohibitions, fines, charges, etc.) 
with objectives to align business decisions with the public 
interest.

directly related to the debate over water efficiency are 
predicaments arising from the introduction of new water 
technology. there are many good ideas and innovative 

9.1

E
R
U
G
i
F

Examples of water hotspots in selected industries

Exploration

Development

operations

Distribution 

(Export)

•   Groundwater 
environmental 
safety

Upstream 
oil & gas

•   Water efficiency and 
environmental safety 
in asset design and 
construction

•   Groundwater 
environmental 
safety 

•   Reduction or better 

•   Safety of the “water 

management of 
produced water

•   Groundwater 
environmental 
safety

we cross” (river 
crossing, internal 
water lanes, sealanes 
and their fragile 
environments)

supply chain

operations

Products

Distribution

Assembled 
products

•   Raw materials 

environmental records 
and availability 
•    Supply chain  

resilience to future 
reduced water 
availability

•   Improvement in 
water efficiency 
of manufacturing 
plants

•   Sell water 

management 
benefits of products 
– understand where 
this is a buying 
factor

•   Safety of the “water 
we cross” (internal 
water lanes, sea-lanes 
and their fragile 
environments)

Pharmaceuticals

•    “License to operate” through engagement with 

communities and government: 
-  in the vicinity of manufacturing operations
-  where key raw materials originate

•    Disposal of COD-rich waters and connections 

with other industries

Source: Place et al. (2012, Table 4, p. 64). Reproduced with the permission of Arthur D. Little.

60

ChaPTer 9

ADDRESSiNg CRiTiCAL DEVELoPMENTAL ChALLENgES

approaches. there are even technological solutions 
developed for niche applications, such as removal of specific 
contaminants, which may struggle for acceptance outside 
the mainstream issues of more effective and efficient 
overall water treatment. but it can be difficult bringing new 
technology from concept to laboratory to pilot scale and 
to full commercial implementation. investors with venture 
capital are looking for the best bets and industrial managers 
are looking for reliability and track record; neither of these 
views is conducive to moving innovation forward quickly.

thoughtful policy and regulation combining compliance 
and incentives may provide a balance between supporting 
the needs of industry versus overall economic results, social 
benefits and the environment (see WWaP, 2015, Chapter 
6, Case study “Water recycling in singapore”). additionally, 
the application of sustainable measures requires assistance, 
education and finance. in this respect, agencies such as 
unido, can act as intermediaries and provide a necessary 
stimulus, particularly in transitional and developing 
economies.

9.3 Responses
actions to improve water sustainability in industry commonly 
originate from one of two directions. first, top-down 
approaches are those initiated by government at various 
levels. they include command-and-control (carrot and stick) 
methods of policy, regulation, enforcement and incentives. 
Manufacturing as a point source of pollution is a good 
target. in the past, these methods focused on technology 
and performance ignoring preventive approaches and 
resource efficiency (uneP, 2011). second, bottom-up 

approaches come from industry as it reacts to government 
approaches, a company’s own internal policies, customer 
demand and public pressure. the industry approach is more 
hands-on and applied, and often dependent on technology 
and engineering to deliver results and meet needs. 
Corporate and managerial buy-in is necessary to enable 
industry to produce the deliverables.

It may be less expensive to pay 
the fine for pollution than to pay 
for better treatment

intersecting these top-down and bottom-up actions are 
initiatives from intergovernmental agencies which, acting 
as intermediaries, provide guidance, targets and expert 
advice (box 9.3). other players include nongovernmental 
organizations and academia that contribute certain 
specialties at various levels.

9.3.1 Governance directions
Policy for sustainable industry has four main instruments 
(uneP, 2011), which are closely paralleled in the lima 
declaration:

Regulatory and control mechanisms usually target water 
abstractions and effluent discharges, and include legislation, 
standards and licensing. on the upside, they can promote 

9.3

x
o
b

United nations post-2015 global goal for water and what it means for industry

The United Nations has proposed a set of potential targets and indicators for a global goal for water sustainability (Chapter 16) 
which filter down to national levels. As these targets dovetail with the intent of the Lima Declaration, it can be foreseen that 
they may lead to general guidelines for industry. In particular, two of the targets have direct relevance to industry as they relate 
to quantity and quality of water addressing complexities in the SDGs of the post-2015 development agenda. 

Target B deals with improving the sustainable use and development of water resources. Actions are called for to increase water 
productivity and reduce waste from inefficient industrial processes. A core indicator is the change in industrial GDP per industrial 
withdrawals. The aim is the sustainable management of the resource to balance social, economic and environmental needs.

Target D concerns wastewater and pollution. Protection of water quality is seen as a pre-condition to sustainable 
development. With regard to industry, the main elements within the target are reductions in untreated industrial wastewater 
and increases in safe reuse of wastewater. The focus is on both point sources and diffuse (non-point) sources of pollution. 
One indicator references the proportion of industrial wastewater not collected in public systems that is treated to national 
standards; another the proportion of flows discharged by industrial wastewater treatment plants that is safely reused.

Source: UN-Water (2014).

WWDR 2015

iNDUSTRy

61

best available techniques/technology (bat) and the polluter-
pays principle (PPP), which encourages manufacturers to 
recycle. on the downside, the standards may not keep up 
with technological progress, yet industry requires predictable 
regulation to enable long-term planning and investment in 
order to accommodate change.

Economic or market-based instruments can include 
monetary penalties for non-compliance and charges for 
water withdrawals and wastewater discharge. to promote 
integrated water resources management (iWrM), prices 
can be influenced through taxes and royalties and quantity 
may be regulated through tradable permit systems for water 
which currently exist in only a handful of countries. Credit 
and trading schemes can be introduced in developing 
countries through industry initiatives and projects (uneP, 
2011). in such countries, it may be possible to apply water 
sustainability approaches to specific industry sectors in a 
similar way to those proposed for climate action. similarly, 
such sector approaches would run the risk of targeting high 
polluters, as opposed to the full value chains of supply and 
demand involving these and other industries.

Fiscal instruments and incentives are comprised of public 
expenditure, subsidies and taxation that can affect cost–
benefit analyses in industry and change the bau status. 
taxation can drive technology change and conversely tax 
exemptions can apply to specific products that are more 
water efficient and tax revenues directed to the same 
end. there is an increasing trend, particularly in developed 
countries, to abolish subsidies that distort the price of water 
below its full cost. it is recognized that inefficiencies in 
water use are the result of users, including industry, who 
do not pay the full cost (WbCsd, 2012). funds of various 
sorts are available to support sustainable manufacturing 
and environmental subsidies can encourage innovative 
water technology. sMes with limited access to commercial 
financing could receive preferential loans funded by 
environmental taxes.

Voluntary action, information and capacity-building 
based on information instruments, such as product data and 
labelling reporting, which could have a water efficiency or 
pollution component. eco-labelling and consumer awareness 
can reflect water use and pollution. support programmes 
aimed at sMes could improve resource efficiency and 
recycling.

9.3.2 Industry reaction
the efforts of government need a corresponding response 
reaction from industry to effect improvements in water use 
and efficiency (uneP, 2011). 

for the application and success of sustainable water 
initiatives they must be referenced to baseline evaluations. a 
Water footprint assessment (Wfa) accounts for the direct 
and indirect use of freshwater in industry (uneP, 2012). 
Wfas apply to the supply chain as well as to the production 
process (figure 10.2). Most companies have a supply chain 
water footprint much larger than their operational one, 
and it may be more cost-effective to shift investment in 
sustainability in that direction (Hoekstra et al., 2011). More 
than 80% to 90% of a company’s footprint, and most of its 
water risks, may be beyond its direct operations (Place et al., 
2012). the analysis may also include water use downstream 
from where the product was produced then purchased 
or used to the point of its disposal. Water footprinting 

9.2

E
R
U
G
i
F

Relative water footprints of various 
industry sectors

raw 

material 

direct 

production suppliers

operations

Product 
use/end 
of life

Apparel

 

 

High-tech/ 
Electronics

Beverage

Food

Biotech/
Pharma

Forest 
products

Metals/
Mining

Electric 
power/ 
Energy

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Note: Water drops indicate the value chain segments that have 
relatively high blue, green and grey water footprint intensities. 
The water footprint is an indicator of water use that looks at both 
direct and indirect water use of a consumer or producer. The 
water footprint of an individual, community or business is defined 
as the total volume of freshwater that is used to produce the 
goods and services consumed by the individual or community or 
produced by the business. 
 
Source: Morrison et al. (2009, Table 3, p. 20).

62

ChaPTer 9

ADDRESSiNg CRiTiCAL DEVELoPMENTAL ChALLENgES

also changes the concept of water use to incorporate 
consumptive water use with withdrawals, and the focus 
from complying with discharge standards to managing 
the grey water footprint from an ecosystem perspective 
(uneP, 2012). notwithstanding, the Wfa methodology 
has shortcomings and its relevance is being questioned in 
different situations. 

Water stewardship concerns how a company performs and 
behaves in terms of its operations and supply chains (WWf/

deG KfW bankengruppe, 2011). stewardship means being 
proactive in conservation, restoration and management at 
the watershed level and balancing internal and external 
action. Communication with other stakeholders in the same 
watershed and engagement in forums is essential. a three-
phase water stewardship strategy is shown in figure 9.3. 
at the plant level, approaches include cleaner production 
and zero discharge and associated technologies, life-cycle 
management and eco-design. at the industry level, there 
are sustainability initiatives for supply chains and industrial 

9.3 Water stewardship strategy for industry

E
R
U
G
i
F

Key

phases

Key

programmes

Ongoing
process

Measure footprint/
engage stakeholders

Evaluate risks/
opportunities

Execute 

programmes

•   Inventory of current  
program and projects

•   Map risks – Direct and indirect

•   Reduce footprint and offset

•   Water footprint – Enterprise 

resource issues

•   Alignment with other  

•   Water innovation and 
technology investment

wide and supply chain

•   Map water opportunities  

•   Brand and reputations 

•   Water footprint – Products

and value

•   Stakeholder mapping

•   Prioritize issues and  

establish goals

management

•   Reporting, disclosure, 

governance, and policy 
engagement

Stakeholder/comunity/employee engagement

An effective water stewardship strategy has three key phases and programmes to support the actions 
of each phase. It is essential to keep stakeholders, local communities, and employees engaged in the 
stewardship activities across all phases.

Source: Deloitte (2012, Fig. 1) and Sarni (2011).

UniDo’s Green industry initiative

Greening of industries
Helping enterprises improve resource productivity and 
environmental performance

Creating new green industries
Establishing new operations delivering environmental  
goods and services

9.1

E
l
b
A
T

Efficient use of materials, energy and water

• 
•  Reduction of wastes and emissions
• 

 Safe and responsible management of chemicals,  
renewable raw materials

•  Phasing out toxic substances
• 
•  Product and process redesign, Green Chemistry

Substituting fossil fuels with renewable energy sources 

Source: UNIDO (2014).

•  Reduce, reuse and recycle (3R) industries
•  Pollution control technology and equipment
•  Renewable and energy-efficient technologies
•  Waste management and resource recovery
• 

Environmental advisory and analytical services

WWDR 2015

iNDUSTRy

63

clusters in economic zones to maximize the use of available 
water resources and reuse of wastewater. these are moves 
towards closed-cycle manufacturing. 

9.3.3 UNIDO as a catalyst: the Green Industry Initiative
in concert with government and industry initiatives, unido 
has a green industry policy in line with the lima declaration 
(unido, 2011a). in addition, unido is actively promoting a 
Green industry initiative (table 9.1) that is directly applicable 
to water efficiency (unido, 2011b).

.business partnerships are key to the development of green 
industry, and include social investments, philanthropic, 
multi-stakeholder and transformational partnerships (unido, 
2014). the purpose is to capture the core strengths of the 
private sector and to change business operations in line 
with sustainability goals. in putting this policy into action, 
unido has set up national Cleaner Production Centres in a 
number of countries. it uses its test methodology (transfer 
of environmentally sound technology) to demonstrate that 
economic benefits can accrue from sustainable and cleaner 
production (unido, 2014). 

64

ChaPTer 9

ADDRESSiNg CRiTiCAL DEVELoPMENTAL ChALLENgES

adapting to climate variability and change

UnEsCo-iHP and WMo  |  Contributors: Wouter Buytaert, Anil Mishra, Siegfried Demuth, Blanca Jiménez Cisneros, 
Bruce Stewart and Claudio Caponi

10

10.1 Context
the essence of sustainable freshwater resources 
management is balancing freshwater supplies with demands 
and uses in a manner that ensures water availability 
(quantity and quality) for the present and the future. 
Climate variability and change may affect both sides of the 
balance, and thus add to the challenges (iPCC, 2014).

Climate change will affect the natural water balance and 
water availability in several ways: changes in spatiotemporal 
patterns and variability of precipitation affect the 
replenishment of water resources. increases in temperature 
cause higher evaporation from open surfaces and soils, and 
increased transpiration by vegetation, potentially reducing 
water availability. Water quality will be affected (Hipsey 
and arheimer, 2013), for instance as a result of seawater 
intrusion in coastal aquifers, faster dissolved oxygen 
depletion because of higher water temperatures, or higher 
content of pollutants that flow into water bodies following 
extreme rain events (iPCC, 2014). each of these impacts 
has implications for ecosystems, including biodiversity and 
ecosystem services.

although the fundamental physics behind these processes 
are rather straightforward, the specific impacts of climate 
change on local water resources are difficult to determine. 
one reason is that of scale. Water resources within a river 
basin are determined by local and regional weather patterns 
and water uses, which are often poorly resolved by global 
climate models, if at all considered (todd et al., 2011).

the other factor concerns weather and climate patterns, 
and anthropogenic and non-anthropogenic changes therein, 
affecting hydrological processes in complex ways, which 
include secondary effects, interactions and feedbacks 
(Milly et al., 2010). for example, changes in precipitation 
and temperature may induce shifts in natural vegetation 
patterns, which will not only affect transpiration, but also 
interception of precipitation and soil moisture. Many other 
human activities, such as deforestation and other land-use 
changes, soil degradation, withdrawals for agricultural and 
industrial use, and water contamination have a profound 
and often negative impact on the availability and quality of 
water resources.

lastly, the spatial patterns of water demand are highly 
variable and changing. Population growth and elevated 
living standards are creating a continuous increase in 
demand for water in many developing countries. the 
worldwide trend of urbanization increases the related 
water demand of cities (see Chapter 6), which may increase 
pressure on nearby water sources, as well as the need for 
costly water transport.

Many tools exist to deal with these issues. statistical and 
dynamic methods can be used to downscale climate model 
outputs to the river basin scale. Computer-based simulation 
models are available also for water quantity and quality 
modelling. nonetheless, the complex relations between 
climate change, ecosystem response, water quality, water 
consumption patterns and policy actions are not always fully 
understood, and models that do take account of several 
of these aspects cannot be easily coupled. the resulting 
uncertainties are often so high that the outputs from models 
using downscaling methods for water resources availability 
have little, if any, value for decision-making necessary for 
sustainable development, such as where to locate or re-
locate new agricultural, residential or industrial development 
in areas safely out of flood zones yet with adequate water 
supplies to meet anticipated near- and long-term future 
needs.

10.2 Challenges
some climate-induced changes may lead to positive 
outcomes for local and regional water resources. a 
temperature increase may make water-rich high-latitude 
regions and mountain areas potentially more liveable. 
increases in precipitation may alleviate water scarcity 
in some arid and semi-arid regions. Putting proper 
infrastructure in place, for instance to store or reclaim water, 
may help translate these changes to actual positive local 
impacts. However, the negative impacts of climate change 
on freshwater systems will most likely outweigh its benefits. 

Current projections show that freshwater-related risks 
increase significantly with increasing GHG emissions. the 
latter are leading to an exacerbated competition for water 
among all uses and users, affecting regional water, energy 
and food securities (iPCC, 2014). Combined with an 

WWDR 2015

ADAPTiNg To CLiMATE VARiAbiLiTy AND ChANgE

65

increasing water demand, this will create huge challenges 
for water resources management.

there is a wide spectrum of threats to sustainable water 
resources management related to climate change. in 
coastal regions, including parts of bangladesh and much 
of south-east asia, sea level rise threatens salinization of 

Climate change will affect the 
natural water balance and water 
availability in several ways: changes 
in spatiotemporal patterns and 
variability of precipitation affect the 
replenishment of water resources

coastal aquifers, with potential effects on drinking water 
sources and coastal ecosystems (see WWaP, 2015, Chapter 
5, Case study “Challenges to freshwater security in the 
Pacific sids: focus on saltwater intrusion in samoa”). Many 
of the biggest and fastest growing megacities are located 
in coastal areas, and are facing a combination of threats 
emerging from increasing flood risk and degradation of 
essential ecosystem services (World bank, 2010c; Hallegatte 
et al., 2013). on the other side of the topographical 
spectrum, tropical and subtropical mountain regions are 

traditionally poverty pockets because of their physically 
harsh environmental conditions. Melting glaciers, drying 
wetlands, deforestation and soil erosion may disrupt 
mountain ecosystem services hence threatening socio-
economic development and widening the development 
gap with the surrounding lowlands (Viviroli et al., 2011).
the cryosphere, where water is frozen, provides us with 
direct, visual evidence of temperature changes and is an 
important contributor to water supplies in many countries. 
Within populations, vulnerability is highly variable. but it is 
clear that climate change will tend to exacerbate existing 
equality patterns, including gender inequality. Women are 
often disproportionately affected by climate-change related 
natural disasters such as floods and droughts.

in addition to the impacts of climate change, there are often 
universal constraints to the development of adaptation 
actions due to data scarcity, poor predictive capacity of 
socio-economic and climate models, inadequate decision 
support mechanisms and limited institutional capacity. 

regarding data, the lack of availability and access 
is well known (see section 1.4.4). the global in situ 
hydrometeorological network has been in decline since 
the 1980s, and large regions, mainly in the tropics and 
subtropics, currently have insufficient rain gauge density and 
in some instances do not provide good quality data (WMo, 
2009). Hydrometeorological monitoring also tends to be 
concentrated in highly populated regions and economic 
backbones. While this makes sense from an operational 
perspective, it limits the monitoring and development of 
untapped resources and contributes to widening the poverty 
gap. new data sources, especially satellite observations, 
hold great promise to alleviate the problem of data scarcity 
for certain hydrological processes such as precipitation and 
evapotranspiration. the best results are often obtained by 
merging in-situ data with remotely sensed data sources. 
However, in some cases, the collection of in situ data is 
costly and requires highly- trained personnel to collect and 
verify data, especially for groundwater assessment and water 
quality measurement (Hipsey and arheimer, 2013).

this scarcity of good quality and relevant data impacts the 
performance of socio-economic, hydrological and climate 
models, and thus limits their usefulness and credibility in 
supporting decision-making and policy formulation. from 
predicting the impact of localized land-use changes to global 
climate projections, models provide quantitative estimates of 
the potential impact of different scenarios, using tools such 
as sensitivity analyses. as such, they can help weigh the 
benefits and costs of different policy options and adaptation 
or adaptation/mitigation scenarios. but models of the water 

Emigrant Lake during the 2014 drought in Oregon (United States)
Photo: Al Case

66

ChaPTer 10

ADDRESSiNg CRiTiCAL DEVELoPMENTAL ChALLENgES

cycle are still plagued by large uncertainties if not properly 
calibrated with field data, especially in non-stationary 
conditions such as those produced by climate change (beven, 
2008). there is a need to quantify these uncertainties, and 
interpret them in a context of managing future risks as well 
as benefits, to support the policy-making process (brugnach 
et al., 2008).

Current institutional aspects of water resources 
management also often form bottlenecks for effective 
climate adaptation. for instance, inadequately described 
or enforced water rights may hinder improved access to 
water for poor and other vulnerable communities in many 
developing regions. also, despite the increasing adoption of 
integrated water resources management (iWrM) concepts, 
political levels of decision-making are still often misaligned 
with the natural boundaries of water resources. this is 
particularly the case for transboundary river basins and 
groundwater aquifers. 

lastly, current disaster response and prevention 
management strategies are often still insufficiently 
integrated, and focus on individual disasters (e.g. floods 
or droughts) rather than pursuing a holistic, sustainable 
development and resilience-based approach.

10.3 Responses and opportunities
10.3.1 Adaptive management
adaptation decisions need to be taken now. an adaptive 
approach focusing on robust strategies and low regret 
or no-regret solutions4 is a way to deal with the current 
uncertainties in climate impact projections (Heltberg et al., 
2009).

adaptive water management aims to move away from a 
’predict-and-control’ paradigm, to one of building resilient 
communities. strategies under this outdated paradigm 
include irreversible decisions, costly long-term infrastructure 
developments, and fixed management strategies. they do 
not allow for adjustment and learning. instead, adaptive 
management accepts that irreducible uncertainties exist 
about future climate change, and therefore champions an 
approach based upon flexibility, robustness and resilience, 
and continuous learning. it aims at creating capacity to 
respond effectively to changing and uncertain conditions, 
using solutions that are robust under the full range of 
possible future climate scenarios (Pahl-Wostl, 2007).

4 

 No-regret interventions are defined as strategies that yield benefits 
regardless of future trends in climate scenarios.

this approach is particularly useful in areas most vulnerable 
to climate change, such as low-lying deltas and other coastal 
areas, fragile mountainous areas and arid and semi-arid 
regions. for instance, the Himalayas and the andes have a 
history of intensive land use, with cultivation and grazing on 
steep slopes, large-scale deforestation and soil degradation. 
these processes affect water resources negatively in terms of 
both quantity and quality. soil compaction favours surface 
runoff, decreasing the recharge of groundwater aquifers and 
accelerating the hydrological response and increasing the 
risk for both floods and droughts. When these impacts are 
combined with increasing populations in mountainous areas, 
the limits of sustainability may be exceeded in the near 
future. the interactions between climate change and these 
issues (e.g. soil compaction through intensive land use) may 
affect the speed and magnitude, but not the fundamental 
trend of the impacts. Hence, low-regret strategies (Jiménez 
Cisneros et al., 2014), such as protecting ecosystems that 
provide clear benefits to water supply, enhancing supplies 
via retention and recharge dams in small water catchments, 
and reducing distribution losses and water requirements, 
are obvious pathways towards increased sustainability and 
resilient communities.

10.3.2 Knowledge generation for policy formulation
amid the variety of water resources adaptation issues, 
enhanced monitoring and evaluation of weather and climate 
are clearly priorities. there is often a clear inverse relation 
between data availability and water resources vulnerability, 
highlighting the need for identifying focus areas that 
combine a high fragility with a high complexity of the 
natural environment and low data availability. examples of 
such regions are mountains and arid and semi-arid regions 
in low-income countries, as well as river and groundwater 
systems that provide ecosystem services to fast-growing 
megacities. investments should focus on strengthening 
traditional monitoring networks (i.e. in situ, based on robust, 
low cost, easy to maintain technology) because of their 
proven track record of generating data and information to 
support scientific knowledge generation. 

at the same time, exploration and support for new forms 
of data collection would help build the knowledge base 
and broaden the understanding of trends. remote sensing 
technologies have a high initial cost but can provide 
observational data in traditionally data-scarce areas. the 
advent of cheap electronics, networking technology 
and personal devices including widespread access to 
mobile phone services, and cloud-computing based data 
analytics, also enable the installation of distributed sensor 
networks, often in a way that involves local actors in the 
data collection and knowledge generation process. such 

ADAPTiNg To CLiMATE VARiAbiLiTy AND ChANgE

67

WWDR 2015citizen science (Gura, 2013) has the added benefit of 
bringing generators and users of knowledge closer together. 
nonetheless, the validation and tailoring of the data for 
water management decision-making systems is still an 
outstanding challenge to be met.

there is also a challenge to collect data and improve 
understanding of interactions and feedbacks between 
the water cycle and other natural and human processes, 
such as the carbon cycle, population growth, food 
production, energy consumption and ecosystem services. 
data analysis and simulation methods still have a long 
way to go to enable the formulation and evaluation of 
adaptation practices. translating policy options into model 
parameterizations is in itself a very uncertain and difficult 
process, which may be complicated further by model 
uncertainties and deficiencies.

Capacity-building of technicians, water managers and 
policy makers is another priority to optimize the creation of 
actionable knowledge. the exploitation of new data sources, 
better models and more powerful data analysis methods, as 
well as the design of adaptive management strategies, will 
require new skills and continuous education. again, focused 
attention on data-sparse and vulnerable and deprived areas 
would greatly help to bridge the traditional knowledge 
divide.

Communication of available environmental and socio-
economic observations, insights and predictions, with 
their uncertainties, is critical to the implementation of 
successful policies. integrating environmental and socio-
economic knowledge and its limits into policy formulation 
is a challenge, in which improved communication and 

interaction between actors is crucial. new technologies for 
visualization and communication of data and simulations 
(infographics) are emerging (spiegelhalter et al., 2011), 
which allow for two-way interaction and interactive scenario 
analysis. Climate information and services, including data, 
diagnostics, assessments, monitoring, predictions and 
projections that users need for a broad range of climate-
sensitive decisions at different levels are required at national 
and local scales. there is a need for the implementation of 
a process of knowledge co-generation, in which science 
listens and reacts to the needs of decision-makers, who 
in turn try to understand the limits of science and accept 
to integrate its outcomes in the decision-making process 
(e.g. buytaert et al., 2012). this will provide a much better 
support for adaptive governance of water resources, in 
addition to information from continuous monitoring and the 
build-in ability to flexibly change the course of adaptation.

lastly, institutional development holds promise for 
improving climate change adaptation. in particular, the 
strong interaction of climate change with other natural 
and socio-economic change highlights the need for a more 
integrated approach, for instance by merging sustainable 
development with disaster response and humanitarian aid. 
Creating forums of water users, public authorities and other 
relevant stakeholders at the basin scale could achieve a 
more inclusive approach to consultation, coordination and 
efficient decision-making. together with transparent criteria 
and priorities for water allocation and planning, especially 
under conditions of scarcity, these are potential short-
term solutions to increase environmental sustainability and 
societal resilience, complementing enhanced monitoring 
and scientific knowledge generation as longer-term 
objectives.

68

ChaPTer 10

ADDRESSiNg CRiTiCAL DEVELoPMENTAL ChALLENgES

PART 3
REgioNS

ChaPTers 
11. Europe and North America    –   12.  Asia and the Pacific
13. The Arab region    –   14. Latin America and the Caribbean    
15. Africa

walking through the Potato Park in Pisaq, Cusco (Peru)
Photo: Manon koningstein (CIaT)

69

WWDR 2015ChapteR titlethe challenges, interlinkages and opportunities described throughout the previous chapters of this 
report are presented from a global perspective. However, the challenges at the interface of water 
and sustainable development can vary considerably from one region to another. Part 3 of the report 
examines the challenges and opportunities most relevant to specific regions of the world.

the five regional chapters cover europe and north america, asia and the Pacific, the arab region, 
latin america and the Caribbean, and africa. the delineation of the five regions follows the regional 
division of the united nations regional economic commissions (uneCe, unesCaP, unesCWa, 
uneClaC and uneCa) maps of the Member states can be found in the fourth edition of the WWdr 
(WWaP, 2012). for the arab region and africa chapters, it was decided that all the arab countries 
would be reported on in the arab region chapter rather than having some of them included in the 
africa chapter.

70

REgioNS

europe and north america

UnECE  |  Annukka Lipponen and Nicholas Bonvoisin

11

Many countries in the uneCe region have high levels of 
economic development and per capita resource use, which 
exert increasing pressure on natural resources. at the 
same time, poverty is widespread in the eastern part of 
the pan-european region (south-eastern europe, eastern 
europe, the Caucasus and Central asia), where economic 
development is a priority. in both cases, the main challenges 
are increasing resource use efficiency, reducing waste, 
influencing consumption patterns and choosing appropriate 
technologies. there is friction between water use sectors 
in many basins in the region (uneCe, 2011). the challenge 
is to look beyond water to other sectors and address the 
need for more integration and coherence of sectoral policies. 
reconciling different water uses at the basin level and 
improving policy coherence nationally and across borders 
will be priorities for many years to come.

Management of the nitrogen cycle has been identified as a 
major challenge across most of the region, and improving 
the handling of nutrients in agriculture plays a key role 
in addressing the related problems. diffuse agricultural 

pollution poses significant pressure on 38% of the european 
union’s (eu) water bodies. the eu water blueprint also 
identifies the need to tackle diffuse pollution using different 
approaches to accommodate the wide range of agricultural 
systems. the ‘greening’ of agriculture, which also includes 
improving water use efficiency in agriculture (especially in 
south-eastern europe, eastern europe, the Caucasus and 
Central asia) while taking account of the potential impacts 
of climate change is therefore the second key priority for the 
region’s sustainability.

11.1 Coordination between users
Well-functioning coordination at different levels – from 
national to river basin and sub-basin – and joint planning 
involving different interests are important for sustainable 
management of water resources. in eastern europe, 
the Caucasus and Central asia (eeCCa), intersectoral 
coordination mechanisms for water resource use have been 
established in armenia, Kyrgyzstan, tajikistan and ukraine, 
and are being established in azerbaijan and Kazakhstan 
(uneCe/oeCd, 2014). in this sub-region, regular national 

Windmill farm in Mid-Michigan (United States)
Photo: Mike Boening Photography

EURoPE AND NoRTh AMERiCA

71

WWDR 2015meetings under the european union Water initiative 
national Policy dialogues provide for intersectoral exchange 
on major water policy developments (uneCe, 2013). a 
number of policy packages have been adopted as a result of 
such intersectoral consultation. in turkmenistan, for example, 
an inter-ministerial expert group drafted a new national 

Well-functioning coordination at 
different levels – from national to 
river basin and sub-basin – and joint 
planning involving different interests 
are important for sustainable 
management of water resources

Water Code in line with the uneCe Water Convention5  and 
principles of iWrM (eu, oeCd and uneCe, 2014). 

incompatible sectoral objectives, unintended consequences 
of resource management and trade-offs between sectors 
may result in friction and possibly conflict. this is especially 
the case in transboundary settings, where intersectoral 
coordination and steps to address negative intersectoral 
impacts or capitalize on potential synergies between 
sectors are even more challenging. an assessment of the 
water-food-energy-ecosystems nexus is being carried out 
in selected transboundary river basins under the uneCe 
Water Convention, in close cooperation with national 
administrations, to strengthen the basis for decision-making 
through knowledge, dialogue and joint identification of 
solutions. solutions might include adjustments to policies, 
management and coordination measures, and operation of 
infrastructure. in the alazani/Ganikh river basin, shared by 
azerbaijan and Georgia, deforestation caused by extraction 
of biomass for fuel results in the degradation of ecosystems 
and their services, as well as aggravation of sedimentation. 
energy policy and notably gasification and electrification 
of rural areas were identified in a nexus assessment as 
potential tools in mitigating the situation (uneCe, 2014). 

5 

6 

 Convention on the Protection and Use of Transboundary Watercourses 
and International Lakes (1992). The amendments to Articles 25 and 26 
entered into force on 6 February 2013, turning the Convention into a legal 
framework for transboundary water cooperation open for accession by 
countries outside the UNECE region. 

 Framework Agreement on the Sava River Basin (2002), Protocol on 
Navigation Regime (2002) Protocol on the Prevention of Water Pollution 
caused by Navigation (2009), Protocol on Flood Protection (2010). 

an institutional and legal framework is needed to provide 
a basis for addressing intersectoral issues (beisheim, 
2013). transboundary cooperation in the sava river basin, 
underpinned by the basin’s framework agreement6 and 
the international sava river basin Commission, covers 
navigation, sustainable water management, river tourism 
and hazards. this permanent mechanism provides a 
platform for transboundary coordination of developing joint/
integrated plans for the basin. the international Commission 
for the Protection of the danube river, in cooperation with 
the sava river basin Commission and the danube navigation 
Commission, coordinated a process of intensive, cross-
sectoral consensus-building between stakeholders, which 
led to the adoption of the Joint Statement on Guiding 
Principles for the Development of Inland Navigation and 
Environmental Protection in the Danube River Basin (iCPdr/
srbC, 2007). 

formalized cooperation involving different users of water 
resources can help to better inform decisions and reduce 
friction between different sectoral objectives. However, 
reaching effective and balanced intersectoral governance 
is complex, and solutions have a high degree of context 
specificity. the case of the rhone river demonstrates that 
even in the context of increased cooperation between actors, 
the consideration of governance at the river basin scale 
and the inclusion of a growing number of water users, the 
governance challenge is such that agreements adopted in 
a sectoral perspective do not guarantee more integrated 
and coherent management of a river (bréthaut and Pflieger, 
2013). 

11.2 ‘Greening’ agricultural practices
Many governments in the uneCe region have started to 
reorient their policies to take into account the environmental 
consequences of food and agriculture production and 
consumption. in the pursuit of green growth strategies, 
the oeCd (2011) has compiled examples of green growth 
policies for agriculture, including:

•   Environmental regulations and standards, e.g. for 

controlling agro-chemical use;

•   Support measures targeting environmental outcomes 

or environment-friendly production practices and public 
investments in green technologies; and

•   Application of economic instruments such as charges on 

use of environmentally-damaging inputs.

Pressures are also mounting to modernize agriculture in 
Central asia, where some gradual crop diversification is 
observed and efforts are being made to reduce water losses 
in the extensive and ageing infrastructure. in Kazakhstan, 

72

ChaPTer 11

REgioNS

the Presidential Decree on Transition to Green Economy 
(Government of Kazakhstan, 2014a) sets ambitious 
targets for improving water efficiency in different uses, 
including agriculture, and these are echoed in the new 
State Programme on the Management of Water Resources 
(Government of Kazakhstan, 2014b).

encouraged farmers to switch to high-efficiency irrigation 
systems by providing subsidies and long-term, low-interest 
loans. this policy has resulted in a major change in irrigation 
behaviour and irrigation efficiency (eea, 2009). However, 
improved irrigation efficiency may lead to the expansion of 
irrigated area instead of increased flows in rivers.7

Wastewater reuse is recognized to have considerable 
potential in many eu Member states, but is constrained by 
a lack of standards and concerns about its safety and its 
possible effect on the sale of crops. 

in the united states, despite gradual improvement of water 
use efficiency in irrigation in the past few decades with the 
adoption of gravity and pressure/sprinkler-based systems, at 
least half of irrigated cropland is still irrigated traditionally. 
also, more than 90% of irrigators do not evaluate crop 
irrigation requirements using more efficient on-farm water 
management practices such as moisture-sensing devices 
and commercial irrigation-scheduling services (schaible and 
Marcel, 2012). after a long debate to address different 
concerns around agricultural interests, government spending 
and support for provision of water for the poor, the country 
passed a farm bill in february 2014 (known officially as the 
agricultural act of 2014). the bill expanded crop insurance 
for farmers, eliminated a crop subsidy that had been paid 
whether or not crops were grown, cut the food stamp 
budget (supplemental nutritional assistance Program) by 
us$8.5 billion over a ten year period, and introduced new 
soil conservation measures.8 

the reform of the eu Common agricultural Policy (CaP) 
for the post-2013 period may significantly alter water 
use in agriculture in the eu. albeit heavily debated, the 
introduction of a ‘greening payment’ – where 30% of 
the available national agricultural subsidy is linked to the 
provision of certain sustainable farming practices, such 
as permanent grassland and crop diversification – would 
mean that a significant share of the subsidy would be linked 
to rewarding farmers for the provision of environmental 
public goods. other eu instruments such as cross-
compliance (which links certain CaP payments with specific 
environmental requirements) and rural development funding 
have had a positive impact in supporting policy objectives 
to improve water quantity and quality. However, these 
instruments were considered by eu auditors to be limited 
with regard to CaP’s policy objectives (eCa, 2014).

the eu roadmap to a resource efficient europe requires 
that by 2020 water abstraction should stay below 20% of 
available renewable water resources. in the face of predicted 
scarcity increases, the eu water blueprint (eC, 2011) refers 
to a number of measures and tools to increase water 
efficiency, including volumetric water pricing, innovation, 
water efficiency targets and leakage reduction. the eu 
Water framework directive (eu, 2000) provides criteria 
for establishing water pricing schemes, and introduces 
the concepts of cost recovery, the ‘polluter pays’ principle 
and incentive pricing. Charging for agricultural water 
use can have a significant impact on reducing water use, 
but implementation faces constraints including a lack of 
appropriate tariff structures, societal resistance and concerns 
about impacts on food prices (arCadis et al., 2012).

the Mediterranean region is among the most water-
scarce areas in pan-europe. in Cyprus, the government has 

7 

8 

 Under EU rural development regulation, an investment resulting in an 
increase of the irrigated area is only eligible in situations where the river 
basin management plan did not identify undue water quantity pressures. 
The Presidency revised consolidated text of the proposed EAFRD 
Regulation COM (2011) 627/3 (EC, 2012).   

 The Agricultural Act of 2014 of the United States Congress. See, 
for example, http://www.nytimes.com/2014/02/05/us/politics/
senate-passes-long-stalled-farm-bill.html?_r=0  and http://www.
pewtrusts.org/en/research-and-analysis/blogs/stateline/2014/02/04/
congress-oks-food-stamp-cuts-in-farm-bill

EURoPE AND NoRTh AMERiCA

73

WWDR 201512 asia and the Pacific

UnEsCAP  |  Kelly Anne Hayden, Donovan Storey, Jeremy Tormos-Espinoza and Salmah Zakaria

the heavily populated asia-Pacific region faces challenges 
associated with water-related disaster risk reduction in the 
context of climate change, accelerated urbanization, and 
the quality and quantity of available water supplies. these 
three issues are examined detail in the sections below. 
the region’s challenges concerning water and sustainable 
development, however, are by no means limited to those 
covered in this report. for example, intensified industrial 
development and growing energy demand will add to 
already existing pressure on water resources in the region. 
individually and together, these challenges create significant 
obstacles to sustainable development

although some progress has been made in terms of access 
to improved drinking water (people using improved water 
supplies increased by 19% southern asia and 23% in 
eastern asia between 1990 and 2012), nearly 1.7 billion 
people in the region (with more than half of these living in 

rural areas) still did not have access to improved sanitation in 
2012 (WHo and uniCef, 2014a). 

12.1 Water-related disasters
asia and the Pacific is one of the most disaster-prone regions 
in the world. in 2013, over 17,000 people died from water-
related disasters in the region, accounting for 90% of all 
water-related disaster deaths globally. economic losses 
totalled more than us$51.5 billion (Cred, 2014). exposure 
of people and assets to hydrometeorological hazards has 
been growing over the past few decades. With urbanization, 
people and increasingly valuable economic assets are located 
in hazard-prone areas such as floodplains (unesCaP/unisdr, 
2012). 

Climate change (see Chapter 10) is likely to increase the 
incidence and severity of extreme events, with some 
projections including an increase in the frequency of years 

74

ChaPTer 12

REgioNS

The Mekong Delta is set to face more extreme weather conditions
Photo: G. Smith/CIAT

with above normal monsoon rainfall or extremely low 
rainfall (iPCC, 2014). Melting glaciers will affect water 
supplies, creating risks of glacial lake outburst floods and 
downstream flooding for some regions, and in the long term 
leading to an overall reduction in water supplies from snow 
cover and glacial runoff (World bank, 2013). over the long 
term, drought will become an even more serious concern, 
particularly given the already strained water access issues 
(iPCC, 2013).

Governments have been working towards making their 
countries and societies more resilient, but much more work 
is needed. in many countries, national policies are not well 
implemented, measures to protect the most vulnerable 
are often lacking, and institutional capacity to handle 
disasters are at times weak (unesCaP/unisdr, 2012). some 
governments have been working towards better integrating 
disaster risk reduction into development strategies through 
their development plans. the governments of bangladesh, 
China and indonesia have been consistently investing in 
disaster risk reduction as they recognize that disasters can 
undo hard-earned development gains and cause long-
term economic and social damage (unesCaP, 2013).

12.2 Urban water
asia and the Pacific is one of the most rapidly urbanizing 
regions in the world, with 2.4% annual growth of the 
urban population (see Chapter 6). in 2012, 47.5% of 
the total population (over 2 billion) lived in urban areas 
(undesa, 2014), with 30% of the region’s urban population 
living in slums (un-Habitat, 2013). by 2015, it is estimated 
that 2.7 billion people will be living in urban areas (undesa, 
2014), placing considerable stress on the resource base of 

the region’s cities, including water, and undermining the 
sustainable development efforts of these cities and their 
respective national governments. 

the asia-Pacific region faces a myriad of urban water 
challenges. these include drinking water supply 
(compounded by a high proportion of water loss in 
distribution), water quality control, limited coverage of 
sewerage networks and (often non-existing) wastewater 
treatment systems, pollution control, and ecosystem 
degradation, especially in peri-urban areas and in 
surrounding river basins. sustainability of cities in the region 
is intimately linked to the key water-related challenges: lack 
of access to safe water and sanitation; increasing water 
demand for multiple uses and the concurrent pollution 
loads; and increasing resilience to disaster events such as 
floods and droughts. 

India, China, Nepal, Bangladesh 
and Pakistan alone account 
for nearly half the world’s total 
groundwater use 

urban water needs and challenges require multi-sectoral, 
inclusive and comprehensive strategies. several strategies 
are notable in the region, including efforts towards urban 
nexus (water-energy-food) planning; integrated stormwater 
management and green buildings (stormwater management 
and road tunnels in Malaysia); water sensitive urban design 

12.1 Growth in agricultural groundwater use in selected countries, 1940–2010

E
R
U
G
i
F

300 

250 

200 

150 

100 

50 

0 

r
a
e
y
/
 
3

m
k

United States 
Western Europe 
Spain 
Mexico 
China 
India 
Pakistan 
Bangladesh 
Sri Lanka 
Vietnam 
Ghana 
South Africa 
Tunisia 

1940 

1950 

1960 

1970 

1980 

1990 

2000 

2010 

Source: Shah (2005). Reproduced from Figure 1 "Growth in groundwater use in selected countries: 1940-2010". Groundwater and Human Development: 
Challenges and Opportunities in Livelihoods and Environment. Water, Science & Technology 51 (8): 27-37 with permission from the copyright holders, 
IWA Publishing.

ASiA AND ThE PACiFiC

75

WWDR 2015(australia); eco-efficient water infrastructure development 
(indonesia and the Philippines); and urban wetlands (Kolkata, 
india). efforts to rehabilitate urban water resources include 
the increasing use of wastewater for peri-urban agriculture 
and for energy production. an increasing number of 
initiatives are now looking at opportunities to integrate 
water management with urban needs in energy, green 
spaces and food security. 

Provision of safe water has been primarily under the aegis 
of governmental bodies, but public−private partnerships are 
also well established in the region, including with the Manila 
Water Company in the Philippines, sYabas in Malaysia and 
shenzhen Water Group in China. financing and managing 
the future needs of urban water infrastructure will be a 
considerable challenge, particularly for the region’s rapidly 
growing small- and medium-sized cities where resources and 
capacity are limited. 

there are a number of lessons to be learned from recent 
typhoons and the success stories of cyclone shelters 
and early warning systems in bangladesh, india and 
the Philippines, and from the development of strategic 
frameworks and revitalized institutional arrangements in 
river management (Citarum river rehabilitation project in 

indonesia). Many of these strategies require not only urban 
but also regional and national support and commitment, 
signifying that urban water management and meeting 
future water needs is a challenge that involves coordination 
of stakeholders both within and beyond the urban boundary. 

12.3 Groundwater
any consideration of the quality and quantity of available 
water supplies in the region must examine groundwater, 
which is critical to several economic sectors. experts estimate 
that groundwater irrigation contributes us$10 to us$12 
billion per year to the asian economy. When also including 
earnings from groundwater sales for irrigation, that estimate 
increases to us$25 to us$30 billion (shah et al., 2003). 
bangladesh, China, india, nepal and Pakistan together 
account for nearly half the world’s total groundwater use 
(iGraC, 2010). 

smallholder irrigation projects can provide households 
easy access to groundwater at relatively low costs and is 
particularly effective in areas with plentiful groundwater 
resources. in india, the groundwater or tube well revolution 
has largely contributed to relieving poverty, but the increase 
in demand for irrigation has also caused severe groundwater 
stress in areas such as southern and eastern Maharashtra, 

Agricultural groundwater use in China (km3 per year)

12.2

E
R
U
G
i
F

0

0
< 1
< 1
1 - 5 
1 – 5
5 - 10
5 – 10
10 - 15
10 – 15
n.d.
10 – 15

Source: Adapted from Wang et al. (2012, Fig. 3-a, p. 6).

0

< 1

1 – 5

5 – 10

10 – 15

10 – 15

76

ChaPTer 12

REgioNS

12.3 Map of arsenic traces in groundwater in Asia

E
R
U
G
i
F

Source: IGRAC (n.d.), http://www.un-igrac.org/publications/148

and rajasthan. figure 12.1 shows the rapid growth in 
groundwater use in india, where the increase in the total 
number of mechanized wells and tube wells rose from less 
than 1 million in 1960 to 19 million in 2000. 

China extensively uses groundwater for agriculture (figure 
12.2). intensive irrigation over the north China Plain aquifer 
system has significantly lowered the water table by more 
than 40 metres in parts of the shallow aquifer and much 
of the deep aquifer since 1960 (foster and Garduño, 2004). 
investigations by the Chinese Ministry of Water resources 
in 118 cities revealed that 97% of groundwater sources 
are polluted, with 64% of cities having seriously polluted 
drinking water from groundwater sources (World bank, 
2007b).

Coastal cities such as Calcutta, dhaka, Jakarta and shanghai 
are experiencing saltwater intrusion in groundwater supplies 
due to uncontrolled groundwater abstraction as a result of 
the inadequacy of public water supply systems. saltwater 
intrusion will be exacerbated by the rise in sea-level resulting 
from climate change (iPCC, 2014). land subsidence as a 
result of groundwater abstraction is seen in a number of 
coastal asian cities including bangkok. 

Groundwater quality is affected by both anthropogenic and 
natural contaminants. natural groundwater contaminants 
found in the region’s aquifers include arsenic (figure 12.3), 

Arsenic_region

<all other values>

Region

few
uncertain
many

fluoride and iron. anthropogenic contaminants come 
from fertilizers and pesticides used in agriculture; mining, 
tanneries and other industries; landfill and garbage dumps; 
and inadequate sanitation and wastewater disposal. 
Water shortages during the dry season are leading to over-
exploitation of groundwater, a situation seen in China 
(World bank, 2007b), thailand (World bank, 2011) and 
elsewhere. the Pacific is also facing freshwater stress 
(see WWaP, 2015, Chapter 5, Case study ”Challenges to 
freshwater security in the Pacific sids: focus on saltwater 
intrusion in samoa”). for example, people in tuvalu and 
samoa increasingly rely on bottled water because of lower 
than average rainfall in recent years and saltwater intrusion 
of underground reserves from rising sea levels.

if managed in a sustainable manner, the region’s 
groundwater can serve as a buffer in times of surface 
water scarcity, hence contributing positively to nearly 
all sustainable development objectives. However, if 
groundwater resources continue to be used beyond 
sustainable limits, agricultural production, which is the main 
source of income for the majority of the population in the 
region, will be threatened. 

ASiA AND ThE PACiFiC

77

WWDR 201513 The arab region

UnEsCWA  |  Carol Chouchani Cherfane

Water scarcity stands at the forefront when considering 
the water-related challenges that impede progress towards 
sustainable development in the arab region. other 
important challenges include the need for more sustainable 
water use, access to more reliable water services (particularly 
in least developed countries and countries suffering 
directly and indirectly from conflict), and improved water 
governance for national and transboundary surface water 
and groundwater resources. 

13.1 Water scarcity
Population growth and increasing socio-economic pressures 
have reduced the availability of freshwater resources in the 
arab region. availability dropped from 921 m3 per capita  
per year in 2002 to 727 m3 per capita per year a decade 
later, with 16 of 22 arab countries falling below the water 
scarcity level of 1,000 m3 per capita per year and able to 
withdraw on average only 292 m3 per capita per year in 
2011 (figure 13.1). almost 75% of the arab population live 

under the water scarcity level, and nearly half lives under 
extreme water scarcity level of 500 m3 per capita per year.

Climate change and climate variability are making the 
situation even worse. a comparison of climate indices 
based on historical observations conclusively finds that 
there has been a consistent warming trend across the arab 
region since the mid-twentieth century (donat et al., 2014). 
drought now affects over two-thirds of the land area of 
unesCWa member countries (unesCWa, 2013a), and an 
ensemble of regional climate change models for the arab 
region projects an increase of temperature of at least 2°C by 
the year 2040 (nikulin, 2013). Meanwhile, infrequent yet 
intensive flash floods damaged and destroyed infrastructure 
in the Comoros, Gaza strip, oman, saudi arabia and 
tunisia during 2012 and 2013. Climate change adaptation 
measures, drought preparedness strategies, and flash flood 
risk maps are in turn being prepared and updated in egypt, 
Jordan, lebanon, Morocco, Palestine, sudan and tunisia 

13.1

E
R
U
G
i
F

Per capita share of renewable water resources in selected Arab region countries (2011)

 

r
a
e
y
 
r
e
p
s
r
e
t
e
m
c
i
b
u
C

 

3 500

3 000

2 500

2 000

1 500

1 000

500

0

Iraq

Mauritania

Comoros

Somalia

Sudan and South Sudan

Egypt

Oman

Tunisia

Lebanon

Morocco

Syrian Arab Republic

Algeria

Djibouti

Occupied Palestinian Territory

Jordan

Libya

Saudi Arabia
Bahrain

Kuwait

Yemen

Qatar

United Arab Emirates

Note: The statistics for the year 2011 cover Sudan and South Sudan, as South Sudan did not become a country since July 2011.
Source: UNESCWA, prepared with data from FAO AQUASTAT.  

78

ChaPTer 13

REgioNS

In the Berkani neighborhood near Meknès (Morocco), 10,504 households are now connected to piped water services
Photo: Arne Hoel/World Bank

(undesa/unesCWa, 2013). artificial groundwater recharge 
is being pursued in the Persian Gulf sub-region as a means 
to harvest water from flash floods to increase water storage 
capacity and freshwater availability in face of increasing 
scarcity.

13.2 Threats to sustainability
unsustainable consumption and over-extraction of 
freshwater resources also contribute to water shortages and 
threaten long-term sustainable development. on average, 
the agricultural sector continues to be the greatest consumer 
of water in the arab region, although consumption levels 
vary significantly between countries. these represent only 
16% of freshwater withdrawals in djibouti, but 99% of 
total freshwater withdrawals in somalia over the last decade 
(fao aQuastat). the urgent social and political need to 
ensure food security while avoiding negative impact on 
rural livelihoods has led arab governments with agriculture-
dependent segments of society to pursue irrigation 
efficiency programmes, wastewater reuse and water 
harvesting schemes as ways to conserve water resources. 

such measures were chosen over water pricing schemes that 
may generate socio-economic repercussions for vulnerable 
communities. egypt, Jordan, lebanon, Morocco, oman 
and tunisia have also sought to rehabilitate irrigation 
canals, terraces and traditional water networks to improve 
agricultural water use efficiency, although flood irrigation 
remains dominant in many countries (iCarda/Gef/ifad, 
2013). Meanwhile, most arab countries remain dependent 
upon food imports to offset national food deficits.

although several countries in the region are rich in oil and 
gas reserves, desalination cannot be a sustainable option 
unless alternative energy sources are considered. apart 
from a handful of pilot solar energy desalination facilities 
being piloted in the region (see box 12.2, WWaP, 2014), 
investments in nuclear energy are being pursued to diversify 
the region’s water-energy mix. dozens of nuclear-powered 
desalination plants are expected to go online in arab 
countries over the next 20 years, with saudi arabia alone 
expected to build up to 16 nuclear desalination facilities by 
2030 (Wna, 2013).

ThE ARAb REgioN

79

WWDR 2015Water utilities face increasing freshwater shortages due 
to drought, water distribution losses, damage to water 
infrastructure and networks due to armed conflicts, and 
increasing energy costs associated with pumping water 
from more distant or deeper sources. these factors 
reduce their ability to provide regular and reliable quality 
services to domestic consumers in a sustainable manner. 
Meanwhile, water rationing and groundwater pumping 
to offset water shortages have become commonplace in 
egypt, Jordan, lebanon, Palestine and syria. Countries of 
the Gulf Cooperation Council are in turn looking at ways 

The Arab region is pursuing 
efforts to respond to increased 
water scarcity, drought, 
climate variability and service 
deficiencies under changing and 
uncertain conditions

to increase water storage in aquifers as a means to increase 
reserves and offset risks (see WWaP, 2015, Chapter 3, Case 
study “sustainable water resources management in the Gulf 
Cooperation Council countries”).

threats to sustainability are further exacerbated by regional 
conflicts. by october 2013, access to water supply services 
in syria had decreased by 70% on average since the 
beginning of the conflict and has continued to decline 
due to a breakdown in services, this has resulted in a 
massive undertaking among WasH sector partners to 
distribute chlorine, hygiene kits and generators throughout 
the country (uniCef, 2013). the situation has become 
precarious along the euphrates river, where water levels 
have dropped and destroyed pipes have forced residents 
of aleppo, syria, to use jerrycans to collect water from 
untreated surface water sources. over 1.53 million syrian 
refugees have also been registered in Jordan and lebanon, 
where water services are already stressed by scarcity and 
drought9. Water infrastructure destroyed during the arab-
israeli conflict has forced Palestinians to spend a significant 
share of their income on water from tankers and to rely 
on unclean sources of water in the Gaza strip, which have 

increased the prevalence of water-related diseases (un, 
2013b).

in addition to the impacts of civil and military conflict, the 
dependency of arab countries on transboundary water 
resources further complicates matters. over 66% of 
freshwater resources in arab countries originate outside 
national borders (arab Water Council, 2012), which 
leaves downstream arab countries vulnerable to upstream 
developments, such as the construction of the renaissance 
dam on the blue nile in ethiopia and turkish dams along the 
tigris and euphrates rivers. Groundwater reserves in large 
aquifer systems in the Western asia part of the arab region 
extending from iraq to Yemen far exceed the discharge 
volume of all rivers combined in that area (unesCWa/
bGr, 2013). However, the number of surface water or 
groundwater agreements involving arab countries is very 
limited, and the few that exist are bilateral in nature rather 
than at the basin level. 

13.3 Progress and perspectives 
in the face of these challenges, arab countries are 
focusing on water and sustainable development in legal 
and policy frameworks. for example, the arab Ministerial 
Water Council adopted a regional water security strategy 
for sustainable development in 2012 and an associated 
action plan in May 2014. at the national level, the new 
constitution of tunisia (adopted in January 2014) established 
the human right to water and the preservation of water 
and its rational use as an obligation of the state and society 
(national Constituent assembly of tunisia, 2014). Morocco 
and algeria also have legal provisions related to access to 
water and sanitation (oHCHr, 2010). 

according to the WHo and uniCef Joint Monitoring 
Programme (JMP) for Water supply and sanitation, out of 
the total arab population estimated at 355 million people in 
2011, approximately 17% (60 million people) do not have 
access to improved drinking water sources, while 20% (71 
million people) do not have access to improved sanitation 
facilities (unesCWa, 2013b; WHo and uniCef, 2013). this 
means that 83% of the population in the arab region has 
access to improved water sources. However, this does not 
mean that consumers have regular or reliable access to 
water supplies, or that the quality of water supplied is safe 
for drinking (see box 1.1). the arab regional MdG+ initiative 
is improving monitoring and reporting on the quality and 
quantity of access to water supply and sanitation services 
under the auspices of the arab Ministerial Water Council. 

9 

 Calculated based on UNHCR figures as of 6 March 2014, as presented in 
Majdalani (2014).

Water harvesting and reuse are expanding throughout 
the region, with best practices being exchanged between 

80

ChaPTer 13

REgioNS

tunisia and Palestine,10  irrigation with treated wastewater 
expanding in Jordan, and treated wastewater being injected 
on a daily basis into coastal aquifers to ward off saltwater 
intrusion and bolster water reserves in oman (Zekri et al., 
2014). egypt has used water from flash floods to recharge 
groundwater along the red sea. artificial groundwater 
recharge through the construction of dams and other 
infrastructure is also common in the Persian Gulf and 
Mashreq sub-regions. improved water use efficiency is being 
promoted through Green Help desks and Clean Production 
Centres instituted in most arab countries. Collaborative 
mechanisms for transboundary groundwater also continue 
among algeria, libya and tunisia on the north-Western 
sahara aquifer system11 and shared rivers such as the 

10 

11 

 Memorandum of Understanding between Tunisia and Palestine, 2012. 

 Technically supported by the Sahara and Sahel Observatory (OSS).

senegal. nevertheless, there is a need for cooperation 
and improved water governance and the management of 
transboundary surface water and groundwater resources. 
improved databases, monitoring systems and assessment 
tools are also under development by international and 
regional organizations and national ministries to inform 
planning and decision-making.

the arab region is thus pursuing efforts to respond to 
increased water scarcity, drought, climate variability 
and service deficiencies under changing and uncertain 
conditions. a more integrated and inclusive approach to 
water resources management is needed. ensuring water 
security under conditions of increased water scarcity will 
require coordinated responses across sectors, and the 
recognition of water supply and sanitation as a human right 
as central to the achievement of sustainable development in 
the arab region.

ThE ARAb REgioN

81

WWDR 201514 latin america and the Caribbean

UnEClAC  |  Author: Andrei Jouravlev
With the cooperation of Caridad Canales, and comments and contribution of Terence Lee, Miguel Solanes and Juan Pablo Bohoslavsky

latin america and the Caribbean is a hydrologically and 
economically heterogeneous region, which in the last 
decade has seen significant reductions in poverty, high 
economic growth and greater macroeconomic stability, as 
well as the emergence of a middle class (uneClaC, 2013a 
and 2013b). However, the region remains the most unequal 
in the world. it has been unable to converge per capita 
GdP with developed countries, and over 160 million people 
(about 28% of its population) still live in poverty.

the focus of national policies is primarily on economic 
development and poverty reduction. the basis of most 
economies remains the export of natural resources, which 
use large quantities of water in production. this situation 
generates tensions in water management for two main 

reasons. first, economic activities and population tend to 
be concentrated in dry and sub-humid areas. this leads to 
increasing competition in terms of quantity, but also more 
recently in terms of quality and opportunity of use for scarce 
water resources. this situation is expected to be aggravated 
in the future through the joint negative effect of higher 
water demands due to population growth and economic 
development coupled with drier conditions and increased 
hydrological variability in many river basins as a result of 
climate change (iPCC, 2008). second, economic growth and 
rising income levels generate increased demand for public 
services and environmental amenities. unfortunately, recent 
decades have seen a reduction in investments in economic 
infrastructure. With rising incomes and democratization, 
people are demanding more emphasis to be given to 

82

ChaPTer 14

Isla del Sol (Sun Island), Lake Titicaca (Bolivia)
Photo: Benjamin Dumas

REgioNS

environmental conservation, citizen participation in 
decision-making, and protection of the rights of indigenous 
communities. these tensions highlight two water-related 
priorities that countries will have to address in the coming 
decades: (i) strengthening water governance and (ii) 
improving provision of drinking water supply and sanitation 
services.

and regulate public utility services. ultimately, there is a 
need for strong governance to ensure an adequate balance 
between the efforts to attract foreign investment and ensure 
stable business environment, on the one hand and the 
objective to achieve socio-economic development, poverty 
reduction, environmental sustainability and protection of 
vital public interests, on the other.

14.1 Water governance
the first priority for latin america and the Caribbean is to 
improve and consolidate water governance, with a paradigm 
shift to the sustainable integration of water resources 
management and use into socio-economic development 
and poverty reduction. Given the relative abundance of 
water in the region, any ’water crisis’ is more institutional 
than related to physical availability (uneClaC, 2001). Most 
countries have an extremely limited formal institutional 
capacity to manage water resources, and effective 
implementation of existing management instruments is not 
very high on political agendas. Common problems include 
inefficient public administration; widespread informality; 
weak regulatory institutions; low levels of participation, 
coordination, transparency, credibility and accountability; 
unstable and insufficient financing; corruption and capture; 
fragmented and outdated water legislation; lack of technical 
capacity; implementation agencies and service providers 
with politicized and weak governance; and insufficient 
information. the widespread inability to establish effective 
formal and stable institutions to deal with water allocation 
(and increasingly reallocation) and pollution control issues 
is evidenced in many examples of poor management, 
informality and lack of coordination (WWaP, 2012).

these deficiencies in governance manifest themselves in 
unsustainable and informal practices of water use, water 
pollution, particularly in and downstream from densely 
populated urban areas, and especially in the proliferation of 
conflicts in relation to most large infrastructure and natural 
resources development projects (Martín and Justo, 2014). 
these conflicts arise particularly between large commercial 
interests such as mining and hydroelectric power on the 
one hand, and the interests of environmental protection, 
in-stream water users, and small local, traditional and 
indigenous users (often without duly formalized water 
rights) on the other. Many of these conflicts relate to 
projects with foreign participation, which are usually covered 
by international investment agreements. Various cases in 
the region, as well as in other parts of the world (solanes 
and Jouravlev, 2007; bohoslavsky, 2010; unCtad, 2014) 
indicate that, particularly in countries with weak governance, 
international investor protection can limit public policy space 
to adequately manage water and other natural resources 

Given the relative abundance 
of water in the region, any ’water 
crisis’ is more institutional 
than one in terms of physical 
availability 

to overcome this situation, governments will have to put 
in place and make fully operational: (i) water management 
institutions that adequately respond to the nature of the 
problems involved in utilising the resource, and that are in 
tune with the conceptions and practices of society; (ii) water 
management instruments (water use rights and discharge 
permits, assessment, planning, water quality norms, demand 
management, conflict resolution, regulation, etc.), which 
increasingly use economic means such as charges, efficient 
costs, markets and social evaluation; (iii) independent water 
authorities, with powers and resources commensurate with 
their responsibilities, supported by river basin organizations; 
(iv) water allocation (and especially reallocation) systems that 
promote investment in water development and conservation, 
ensure efficient and orderly water use, avoid monopolies 
and facilitate control in the public interest; and (v) water 
pollution control systems able to mobilize the necessary 
technological and financial resources (solanes and Jouravlev, 
2006).

14.2 Drinking water supply and sanitation
the second priority for latin america and the Caribbean is 
to consolidate the progress achieved in providing drinking 
water and sanitation services, ensuring the full realization 
of the human right to water and sanitation (Justo, 2013) 
and considering the post-2015 development agenda. the 
levels of provision of water and sanitation, with the possible 
exception of wastewater treatment, achieved in the region 
compare favourably to those in other developing nations 
(Jouravlev, 2004; sato et al., 2013; WHo and uniCef, 2014b). 
However, such overall estimates tend to exaggerate real levels 
of access to services and do not take into consideration the 
preferences of the population for piped access and especially 
the serious deficiencies in service quality (intermittence, water 

LATiN AMERiCA AND ThE CARibbEAN

83

WWDR 2015losses, water quality control, etc.) which disproportionally 
affect rural areas and the poor (Jouravlev, 2011). Many cities 
still suffer from episodic flooding because of inadequate 
stormwater drainage infrastructure and deficiencies in urban 
planning (WWaP, 2012).

Governments will have to concentrate efforts to achieve 
universal service coverage – with emphasis on household 
connections, improvement in service quality and 
sustainability – which could take 10 to 20 years in many 
countries, while the expansion of wastewater treatment and 
stormwater drainage systems is likely to require similar time. 
With the expansion of wastewater treatment (and reuse), 
attention will have to centre on more advanced treatment 
technologies (tertiary with nutrient removal) and sludge 
disposal as well as solid waste management and industrial 
and non-point source pollution control, particularly in 
agriculture.

to advance in the realization of these goals, governments 
will have to focus public policies on (Hantke-domas and 
Jouravlev, 2011): (i) assigning high political priority to 
these services both in terms of budgetary allocations and 
development of stable and efficient institutions; (ii) a gradual 
transition to self-financing with tariff design that encourages 
resource use efficiency, accompanied by the creation of 
effective subsidy systems for low income groups; (iii) a more 
consolidated or aggregated industrial structure, to take 
advantage of economies of scale and ensure technical and 
financial viability of service providers; (iv) effective economic 
regulation, with emphasis on access to information, uniform 
accounting, benchmarking and consumer participation; 
(v) adjusting regulatory practices and utilities’ governance 
to their property structure, so as to make them more 
transparent and responsive to regulatory incentives; and (vi) 
closer integration of economic regulation and water and 
land management policies so as to ensure environmental 
sustainability of service provision.

84

ChaPTer 14

REgioNS

africa

WWAP  |  Stephen Maxwell Kwame Donkor

15

15.1 Overview
building on the economic recovery of the past decade, 
improvements in governance, and the gradual emergence 
of capable states beginning in the mid-1990s, africa’s 
key policy goal is a transition and transformation from 
political to economic independence. the fundamental 
aim is to achieve durable and vibrant participation in the 
global economy while ensuring that the abundant natural 
resources are managed sustainably and equitably to serve 
the needs of present and future generations of africans.

for africa, perhaps more than any other region of the world, 
the challenge of sustainable development lies in developing 
africa’s natural and human resources without repeating the 
negatives that have appeared on the development paths 
of others. rather, the region can learn from the negative 
experiences to engender sustainability, such as supporting 
policy choices for ‘clean’ industrial processes that reduce 
waste and pollution of water sources.

Many african economies are now growing faster than they 
have in 40 years. six of the world’s 10 fastest growing 
countries (on the basis of GdP) in the 2000s were in sub-
saharan africa: angola at 11.1% a year; nigeria 8.9%; 
ethiopia 8.4%; Chad 7.9%; Mozambique 7.9%; and 
rwanda 7.6%. and several others were above or near the 
7% growth needed to double their economies in 10 years. 
in 2012 sierra leone led the way with a 17.2% rise in GdP 
(aCet, 2014).

these figures must, however, be taken with some caution 
in terms of sustainable development because it has not 

been accompanied by an effective transformation of the 
basic economic structures of many of these states. these are 
based on exporting raw agricultural and mineral products 
without much processing and have led to a rise in social and 
economic inequity.

the backbone of many african economies is agriculture 
(box 15.1), which is dependent on highly variable and 
unpredictable rainfall patterns. assured and timely water 
availability is a major constraint in sustainable agricultural 
production. as other regions around the globe gentrify and 
reach fertility rates below those needed to replace current 
populations and thus a productive work force, africa has 
a different problem − that of rapid population growth, 
which can be seen as an opportunity to transform african 
economies to sustainable and inclusive growth for the next 
half century. this population must be fed, educated, and 
kept healthy and productive. it is in this context that water 
for food, water for health and water for energy is critical to 

The concept of sustainable 
development is perhaps more 
important for Africa than other 
regions of the world

the continent’s sustained development. important progress 
has been made towards attaining the MdG target for access 
to improved drinking water (except for the most fragile 
states), especially for urban populations, but much less 
progress has been made with respect to sanitation.

15.1

x
o
b

Kofi Annan on Africa’s green and blue revolutions

“If we want to accelerate Africa’s transformation, then we have to significantly boost our agriculture and fisheries, which 
together provide livelihoods for roughly two-thirds of all Africans. […] The time has come to unleash Africa’s green and 
blue revolutions. These revolutions will transform the face of our continent for the better. Beyond the valuable jobs and 
opportunities they will provide, such revolutions will generate a much-needed improvement to Africa’s food and nutrition 
security.”

Source: Africa Progress Panel (2014, p. 11).

AFRiCA

85

WWDR 2015at the highest policymaking level, the african union (au) 
has recognized the critical role of water in various summit 
declarations (au, 2004 and 2008; aMCoW, 2008) and has 
adopted the african Water Vision 2025 as the fundamental 
policy instrument for the management of africa’s water 
resources for sustainable development. the shared 
vision is for: “an africa where there is an equitable and 
sustainable use and management of water resources for 
poverty alleviation, socio-economic development, regional 
cooperation, and the environment” (uneCa, 2000). as a 
policy instrument, the african Water Vision 2025 identifies 
the key challenges for water resources development in africa.

15.1

The water-food-energy nexus in Africa 

E
R
U
G
i
F

Water
security

Water

Energy
security

Food
security

Water security: The availability of an acceptable 
quantity and quality of water for health, livelihoods, 
ecosystems and production, coupled with an acceptable 
level of water-related risks to people, environment and 
economies (Grey and Sadoff, 2007).

Food security: When all people at all times have access 
to sufficient , safe, nutritious food to maintain a healthy 
and active life (WHO, n.d.).

Energy security: The uninterrupted physical availability 
(of energy) at a price which is affordable, while respecting 
environment concerns (IEA, 2011).

Source: Wouters (2011).

15.2 Key water challenges related to 
sustainable development in Africa
the sharm el-sheikh Commitments by the au identify key  
water challenges related to sustainable development in 
africa (au, 2014):

1.  Water infrastructure for economic growth;
2.  Managing and protecting water resources;
3.  achieving water supply and sanitation MdGs;
4.  Global changes and risk management in africa;
5.  Water governance and management;
6.  financing water and sanitation sector; and
7.   education, knowledge, capacity development and water 

information.

of particular importance for africa is the critical nexus 
between water, food and energy (figure 15.1). Water 
availability, access and optimal use are essential for 
transforming the vicious cycle of insecurities to a virtuous 
upward spiral towards inclusive green (and blue) growth. 
Currently, only 5% of the africa’s potential water resources 
are developed and average per capita storage is 200 m3 
compared to 6,000 m3 in north america. only 5% of 
africa’s cultivated land is irrigated and less than 10% of 
hydropower potential is utilized for electricity generation 
(sperling and bahri, 2014). this occurs in a situation where 
only 57% of the population has access to modern energy 
services (mainly electricity), which are becoming less reliable 
with the accelerating rate of urbanization in most of the 
region’s major cities (iea, 2013). in 2012, three years before 
the end of MdGs, on average about 36% of the population 
did not have access to improved water resources and 70% 
still did not have access to improved sanitation. (WHo and 
uniCef, 2014b). 

in addition to these statistics, climate variability and change 
is likely to restrain progress in managing africa water 
resources. regional cooperation is especially needed due 
to the multiplicity of transboundary water resources (more 
than 80 international river basins and aquifers) which must 
be managed coherently and equitably to meet regional and 
national goals and evolving sectoral needs.

agriculture remains the achilles’ heel of africa’s 
development. low productivity levels trap millions of 
farmers in poverty, act as a brake on growth and weaken 
links between the farm and non-farm economies. africa’s 
farmers could potentially feed rapidly growing urban 
populations and generate exports to meet demand in global 
markets. However, the region is increasingly dependent 
on imports. african countries spent us$35 billion on food 
imports (excluding fish) in 2011 and the share accounted 

86

ChaPTer 15

REgioNS

for by intra-african trade is less than 5% (africa Progress 
Panel, 2014). if africa’s farmers increased productivity and 
substituted their own produce for these imports, this would 
provide a powerful impetus to reduce poverty, enhance 
food and nutrition security, and support a more inclusive 
pattern of economic growth. this potential is dependent on 
developing the infrastructure and expertise for harnessing 
the abundant water resources for irrigation, power 
generation, domestic use and value adding industries to 
traditional export commodities. such water infrastructure 
development is dependent on a deeper level of regional 
integration and cooperation due to the transboundary 
nature of most of africa’s water resources. a paradigm  
shift from a focus on trade only between african nations  
to joint planning and resource development (including 
water) is needed in future discourse on african regional 
integration.

15.3 The way forward
despite these challenges, significant progress has been 
made by many african countries in the utilization of water 
resources for socio-economic development. looking forward, 

the key will be not only achieving economic growth but also 
sustainable and inclusive growth. the africa Progress report 
addresses the importance of achieving economic growth, 
as well as sustainable and inclusive growth (africa Progress 
Panel, 2014, p. 14):

Africa stands at a crossroads. Economic growth 
has taken root across much of the region. Exports 
are booming, foreign investment is on the rise and 
dependence on aid is declining. Governance reforms 
are transforming the political landscape. Democracy, 
transparency and accountability have given Africa’s 
citizens a greater voice in decisions that affect their 
lives. These are encouraging developments. Yet the 
progress in reducing poverty, improving people’s lives 
and putting in place the foundations for more inclusive 
and sustainable growth has been less impressive. 
Governments have failed to convert the wealth created 
by economic growth into the opportunities that all 
Africans can exploit to build a better future. The time 
has come to set a course towards more inclusive 
growth and fairer societies.

Fisher on the White Nile (Morada), Khartoum (Sudan)
Photo: Arne Hoel/World Bank

AFRiCA

87

WWDR 201515.2

x
o
b

The Grand inga project 

Offering 40,000 MW of potential hydropower, the Grand Inga hydroelectric project on Africa’s largest river, the Congo River, 
may provide a potential answer to meeting Africa’s regional energy needs. The table shows current potential hydropower, 
actual electricity production, consumption per capita and 2005 demand estimates.  The map shows one of the options for 
distribution of the power generated if the Grand Inga project is executed and shows how the enormous power generated  
by the massive dam can be distributed through the Power Pools to meet demand in all regions of Africa. This makes the  
Grand Inga hydropower project a truly regional project and could help improve regional integration using a renewable energy 
source, water, as the prime instrument.

Energy situation in Africa

sub-
region

Hydroelectricity 

potential 

(GWh)

North Africa

West Africa

Central Africa

Southern Africa

East Africa

41 000

100 970

653 361

151 535

171 500

Total

1 118 366

%

3.7

9.2

57.7

13.8

15.6

100

Electricity 
production 

(GWh)

133 830

38 033

10 537

208 458

12 281

403 139

%

33.2

9.4

2.6

51.7

3.1

100

Consumption 

per capita
(kWh/hab/
monthly)

740

143

148

1617

68

Estimate 
of demand 

in 2015

%

209 296

36.8

50 546

13 052

279 409

12 281

8.9

2.3

49

3

Potential regional power distribution from Grand inga

4 000 MW
WEST COMELEC
MOROCCO

4 000 MW
CENTRE COMELEC
TUNISIA

N’Djamena

Maroua

Lagdo

Ngaoundéré

Nachtigal

Yaoundé

Lom Pangar

Dimoll

Bangul

Yokadouma
Chollet

Kembé

Mobaye

1 500 THEN
6 000 MW WAPP

Douala

Memvé Elé

Bata

Ntoum

Chules de l’impératrice

Grand Poubara

Bongolo

Mongo Kamba
Pointe Noire

Inga

Cabinda

Maquela do Zombo

Ulge

Pambo de sanhe

Lucala

4 000 MW
EAST COMELEC
EGYPT

2000 MW
EAPP NORTH
SUDAN

Mukurunwa

Kikoma

Goma
Ruzizi 1
Kiliba
Bujumbura
Rwendura

Mbararra

Muvloha

Gitenga

Gikondo
Kuharondo
Rusomo
Biharamulo

4 000 MW
EAPP SOUTH
KENYA

Target networks 2020-2030
option 1a – direct current 500 kv with backbone
north-south coast in 400 kv aC

Multiregional projects 500 kV CC

Multiregional projects 500 kV CC (2030)

 

 

Regional projects 220/400 kV AC

Regional projects 400 kV AC (post-2025)

RDC-Rwanda-Burundi-Tanzania projects 
110/220 kV AC

National projects 220/400 kV AC

acronyms:
COMELEC – Comité Maghrébin de l'Électricité
EAPP – Eastern Africa Power Pool
kV – Kilovolt
SAPP – Southern African Power Pool
WAPP – Western Africa Power Pool
WESCOR – Western Power Corridor

6 000 MW
SAPP CENTRE
ZAMBIA

6 000 MW
SAPP WEST
WESTCOR

Source: ECCAS (2010).

88

ChaPTer 15 

REgioNS

15.3

x
o
b

large-scale agricultural lease investments

A study commissioned by the African Ministers’ Council on Water (AMCOW) and executed by the International Water 
Management Institute (IWMI) assessed the extent and prevalence of large-scale agricultural lease investments (LSALI) in many 
countries in Africa (IWMI, 2014). Proponents of LSALI contend that after 50 years of difficulty in transforming low productivity 
traditional agricultural practices, large-scale private-sector investments – mainly as part of the overall efforts at attracting 
foreign direct investments (FDI) – may provide an alternative means of acquiring the technologies needed in improving overall 
productivity in African agriculture.

AFRICA

sub-saharan African countries with total large-scale investment in agricultural land greater than 100,000 hectares, 2000-2012.

M e dite

r

r

Tunis
TUNISIA

anean     S e a  

     

Algiers

ALGERIA

Madeira Is.
(PORTUGAL)

Rabat

MOROCCO

Canary Is.
(SPAIN)

Laayoune
Western
Sahara

Tripoli

LIBYA

Cairo

EGYPT

 

 

R

e

d

 
 
S

e

a

  

SUDAN
Khartoum

ERITREA
Asmara

CHAD

Lake
Chad

N'Djamena

CAPE VERDE

MAURITANIA
Nouakchott

Praia

SENEGAL

Dakar
GAMBIA
Banjul
Bissau

GUINEA-BISSAU

GUINEA

Bamako

MALI

NIGER

Niamey

BURKINA FASO
Ouagadougou

B

NIGERIA

Abuja

Conakry
Freetown

SIERRA
LEONE

Monrovia

G

H

CÔTE- 
D'IVOIRE
Yamoussoukro Accra

A

N

A

 

E
N
I

N
 

T
O
G
O

 

LIBERIA

Abidjan

Porto
Novo

Lome

Malabo
EQUATORIAL GUINEA

Principe

CENTRAL

AFRICAN REPUBLIC
Bangui

CAMEROON

Yaoundé

SAO TOME AND PRINCIPE

São Tomé

São
Tomé 

Libreville
GABON

SOUTH
SUDAN

Juba

Lake 
Albert

UGANDA
Kampala

ETHIOPIA
Addis Ababa

Lake

Turkana

KENYA
Nairobi

These large-scale 
investments are 
widespread across the 
continent and many 
are based on irrigated 
farming for both local 
consumption and 
exports of food crops, 
livestock and biofuels.

e n 

d

G u l f  o f  A

Socotra
(YEMEN)

DJIBOUTI
Djibouti

A 
LI
S O MA

Mogadishu

I N D IA N   O C E AN

Annobón

(EQUATORIAL GUINEA)

Ascension

(UK)

A T LA NT IC

O C E AN

St. Helena

(UK)

     C ONGO 

Brazzaville

Cabinda
(ANGOLA)

Kinshasa

DEMOCRATIC 

REPUBLIC 
OF THE
CONGO

RWANDA

Kigali

Bujumbura

Lake

Tanganyika

Lake

Victoria

Luanda

ANGOLA

BURUNDI

Dodoma

UNITED REPUBLIC OF

TANZANIA

Lake
Nyasa

Pemba
Zanzibar

Amirante Is.
SEYCHELLES

Victoria

Aldabra Is. 
Moroni

COMOROS

Providence Is. 
Farquhar Is.
Agalega Is.
(MAURITIUS) 

ZAMBIA
Lusaka

 Lake
Kariba

Harare
ZIMBABWE

NAMIBIA

BOTSWANA

Windhoek

Gaborone

 

E

Lilongwe

MALAWI
U

A M B I Q

Z
O
M

Mayotte Is.
(under French
admin.)

SCA R 

Antananarivo

A
G
A
D
A
M

Tromelin
(FRANCE)
Cargados 
Carajos
MAURITIUS

Port Louis

Réunion
(FRANCE)

Pretoria
Mbabane

Maputo

SWAZILAND

Maseru

LESOTHO

Bloemfontein
SOUTH
AFRICA

Cape Town

Source: IWMI (2014). IWMI acknowledges support from FAO, GRID-Arendal and UNEP in the conduct of the study that produced this map and graph.

Production activities on large-scale investment schemes in selected sub-saharan African countries (2000-2012)

)
a
h
(
 
a
e
r
A

300 000

250 000

200 000

150 000

100 000

50 000

0

South Sudan

Zambia

Ethiopia

Mali

Ghana

Sierra Leone

Tanzania

Mozambique

Biofuel

Food crop

Livestock

AFRiCA

89

WWDR 2015in terms of agriculture, africa’s response, led by the african 
development bank (afdb), is to promote interventions 
which focus on water storage and management to 
overcome the low, unreliable rainfall during the cropping 
season, in situ rainwater management, water harvesting or 
runoff harvesting, and water management for crop growth 
in wetlands. additional interventions will also focus on 
infrastructure for livestock, fisheries and rural energy (afdb, 
2010).

to achieve this, regional – and especially transboundary – 
cooperation in the development of africa’s water resources 
will be critical in the coming decades. transformation 
in agricultural production based on more acreage under 
irrigation, transboundary hydropower generation and 
distribution through regional power pools and a redoubled 

effort to meet the goals and targets of the african Water 
Vision 2025 will be essential.

emerging approaches for meeting africa’s energy and 
food security needs for sustainable development include 
inter-regional generation and use of hydropower such 
as the inga Power Project and large scale agricultural 
lease investments. boxes 15.2 and 15.3 provide an 
introduction to these emerging approaches for promoting 
a virtuous upward spiral in the water-food-energy nexus for 
sustainable development in africa. they may stimulate some 
‘leapfrogging’ in the use of modern agricultural technologies 
and increase productivity. these approaches have been 
proposed as essential to meeting the growing food and 
energy needs of an urbanizing and industrializing africa.  

90

ChaPTer 15 

REgioNS

PART 4
RESPoNSES AND 
iMPLEMENTATioN

ChaPTer
16. Framework for implementing The Future We Want

Consolation Prize “Clean India Photo Contest” 2008
Photo: dinesh Chandra

91

WWDR 2015recognizing the critical role of water across the different developmental challenges described 
throughout this report is merely the first step towards achieving sustainable development. true 
progress requires immediate and decisive action. 

this part of the report presents a roadmap of potential responses, solution options and means of 
implementation that can be adopted to foster progress. since the challenges vary across the planet 
in both nature and scope, it is incumbent upon stakeholders and decision-makers in each region, 
country, basin and community to identify the most appropriate mix of options for their particular 
situation. implementing such action is necessary to ensure sustainable water management and a 
mandatory path on the route towards sustainable development. 

92

RESPoNSES AND iMPLEMENTATioN

framework for implementing 
The Future We Want

UnDP  |  Joakim Harlin, Marianne Kjellén and Håkan Tropp
WWAP  |  Richard Connor, Joana Talafré, Karine Peloffy, Erum Hasan and Marie-Claire Dumont

16

16.1 Water and the three dimensions of 
sustainable development
the outcome document of the 2012 united nations 
Conference on sustainable development (rio+20), The 
Future We Want, recognized that ‘water is at the core 
of sustainable development’ and its social, economic 
and environmental dimensions (assevero and Chitre, 
2012). Water is the lifeblood of the planet and of critical 
importance for all socio-economic development. 

from a social perspective, there are obvious connections 
between access to safe and adequate quantities of water and 
health, for drinking first, but also for hygiene and sanitation at 
the household, community and national levels (see Chapter 5). 
access to safe and predictable sources of water is essential to 
addressing the multiple forms of deprivation related to poverty 
(see Chapter 2), directly through drinking water and its relation 
to human health, but also indirectly since water is required in 
most economic activity (see Chapter 3).

economically, addressing lack of safe drinking water and 
sanitation will lead to long-lasting effects on human capital 
and growth. recent estimates suggest that, globally, the 
benefits of achieving universal access to sanitation outweigh 
the costs by a factor of 5.5 to 1, whereas for universal 
access to drinking-water the ratio is estimated at 2 to 1 
(WHo, 2012b). 

sustainable management of water resources and related 
infrastructure can greatly increase productivity in the 
agricultural and food sector (see Chapter 7). achieving more 
efficient water use is crucial considering that production 
and consumption of agricultural products alone account 
for over 70% of water withdrawals in many developing 
countries (undesa, 2013b). beyond the primary economic 
sectors, water is also crucial to all other economic activities, 
most notably through its role in energy production, mining 
and tourism. Water scarcity could be an important obstacle 
for the expansion of the power sector, especially in asia, 
southern africa and the Middle east, where the demand is 
set to grow rapidly (WWaP, 2014). 

the rio earth summit in 1992, floods, droughts and storms 
have affected 4.2 billion people (95% of all people affected 
by all disasters) and caused us$1.3 trillion of damage (63% 
of all damage) (unisdr, 2012). 

the environmental dimension of water and sustainable 
development includes the role of healthy ecosystems, which 
provide water services that have enormous societal value 
through flood control, groundwater recharge, river-bank 
stabilization and erosion protection, water purification, 
biodiversity conservation, as well as transportation, recreation 
and tourism (Mea, 2005b) (see Chapter 4). drivers that 
affect water quality and quantity, such as pollution, species 
introductions, changes in land use and climate change, 
can also affect the ability of ecosystems to appropriately 
regulate themselves, affecting other ecosystem services in 
turn. removing or reducing these pressures is therefore a 
necessary aspect of maintaining ecosystem integrity. 

16.2 The post-2015 development agenda
16.2.1 Stocktaking at the end of the MDGs:  
Achievements and lessons
in september 2000, 189 world leaders signed the united 
nations Millennium declaration from which emerged 
a set of eight MdGs. for the first time, there was an 

Millennium Development Goal 7: 
Ensure environmental sustainability 

16.1

x
o
b

•   Target 7.A: Integrate the principles of sustainable 

development into country policies and programmes 
and reverse the loss of environmental resources 
-   Indicator 7.4 Proportion of total water resources 

used  

•   Target 7.C: Halve, by 2015, the proportion of people 

without sustainable access to safe drinking water 
and basic sanitation 
-   indicator 7.7: Proportion of population using an 

improved drinking water source

   -   indicator 7.8: Proportion of population using an 

improved sanitation facility

Water can also lead to economic losses due to water-related 
hazards, which have risen greatly in the last decade. since 

Source: UNGA (2001).

FRAMEWoRk FoR iMPLEMENTiNg The FuTure We WanT

93

WWDR 2015global agreement in which rich and developing countries 
recognized that they share the responsibility to end poverty 
and its root causes. Water underpins all the MdGs but is only 
explicitly included in Goal 7 targets 7a and 7C (box 16.1).

the MdGs have been successful in rallying public, private 
and political support for global poverty reduction. a major 
strength of the MdG framework has been its focus on a 
limited set of concrete development goals and targets, which 
has supported priority-setting in national and international 
development policies. for water, the MdGs fostered greater 
coordination of international development efforts towards 
improving access to drinking water supply and sanitation. 

However, as the MdGs did not derive from a consultative 
process with a wide range of national-level stakeholders, 
they have suffered from a perception of being donor-
centric and being somewhat imbalanced regarding which 
topics were addressed. for example, no specific targets 
were included for sustainable water resources management 
(surface and groundwater), for water quality, pollution, 
wastewater treatment or for maintaining the roles of 
ecosystems. Water-related gender and hygiene dimensions 
were also lacking, as were water-related disasters.

the strength of being simple and relatively straightforward 
to measure also led to difficulties in accounting for the 

local context. the way that the MdGs achievements are 
accumulated can mask significant regional and in-country 
disparities. inequities between urban-rural, rich- poor, men-
women, large and small countries are lost in the aggregated 
data. 

another set of problems with the MdGs stem from the use 
of proxy indicators. the target for safe drinking water, for 
example, was captured by the proxy indicator for using an 
‘improved drinking water source’ (box 1.1) and important 
aspects such as the quality, availability and reliability of 
services were not included.
the limited scope of the MdGs has also not prompted 
developing countries − particularly those vulnerable to 
emerging challenges such as climate change, food crises 
and rapidly increasing urbanization − to fully address 
governance-related issues such as the development of 
robust government institutions, social welfare systems and 
an enabling environment for civil society participation (un, 
2012). 

despite some drawbacks, however, the MdGs created 
momentum and constituted a vital instrument in focusing 
global attention to the lack of access to safe drinking 
water and sanitation. Pioneering efforts also helped to 
highlight many institutional challenges such as lack of 
implementation capacity, weak stakeholder participation 

Children learning the importance of proper hand washing and drinking safe water, Had Ane Primary School, Oudomxay Province (Laos)
Photo: Bart Verweij/World Bank

94

ChaPTer 16

RESPoNSES AND iMPLEMENTATioN

and unclear mandates within government structures (un, 
2013c). the achievement of the MdG drinking water 
target, albeit measured, through the proxy indicator of 
an ‘improved’ water source, demonstrates that setting 
international goals and targets can drive change through 
sustained commitment, dedication of resources and 
effective implementation approaches (un, 2013c). as they 
come to an end, the experience of the MdGs shows that 
a thematically broader, more detailed and context- specific 
framework for water, beyond the issues of water supply and 
sanitation, is critical for the post-2015 development agenda.

16.2.2 The need for a dedicated post-2015 goal for 
water 
Whereas the MdGs concentrated efforts on developing 
countries, the post-2015 sdGs will aim for a worldwide 
scope. this is especially important in the context of 
water services since the drinking water and wastewater 
infrastructure of developed nations has deteriorated in 
the last decades (asCe, 2011) and vulnerable populations 
still lack access to WasH in rich countries (Government of 
Canada, 2014). 

Water’s fundamental importance for human development, 
the environment and the economy needs to feature 
prominently in the new post-2015 development agenda. 
in 2014, un-Water recommended a dedicated sdG for 
water with five target areas: (i) WasH; (ii) water resources; 
(iii) water governance; (iv) water quality and wastewater 
management; and (v) water-related disasters. a dedicated 
water goal would create social, economic, financial and 

other benefits that greatly outweigh its costs (un-Water, 
2014) and extend well beyond the water domain (as it is 
normally understood) (box 16.2). the development of health, 
education, agriculture and food production, energy, industry 
and other social and economic activities all depend on the 
effective management, protection and provision of water 
and the delivery of safe water supply and sanitation services. 
Communities also need protection from the dangers that 
water-related hazards can present.

technical advice from un-Water on a possible global sdG 
for water helped inform discussions of the un General 
assembly open Working Group (oWG) on sustainable 
development Goals. in september 2014, the General 
assembly adopted a resolution on the final report of the 
oWG on sdGs, containing 17 goals, one of which is a 
dedicated goal on water. the General assembly decided that 
the proposal of the oWG on the sdGs “shall be the main 
basis for integrating sustainable development goals into 
the post-2015 development agenda, while recognizing that 
other inputs will also be considered in the intergovernmental 
negotiating process at the 69th session of the Ga” (unGa, 
2014). all dimensions of water suggested by un-Water were 
incorporated in the final report of the oWG (box 16.3). 

Water is much more than a cross-cutting issue. unless the 
fundamental role of water is recognized, water resources 
and the impacts of its various uses are properly assessed, 
and the major water-related challenges are addressed, many 
other critical objectives of the new development agenda 
will be unachievable (un-Water, 2014). Water and water 

16.2

x
o
b

outcomes of a dedicated sDG for water as suggested by Un-Water

Healthy people 

Increased prosperity 

 Universal access to safe drinking water, sanitation and hygiene, 
improving water quality and raising service standards

The sustainable use and development of water resources,  
increasing and sharing the available benefits

Equitable societies 

through

Robust and effective water governance with more effective  
institutions and administrative systems 

Protected ecosystems 

Resilient communities

Source: UN-Water (2014).

Improved water quality and wastewater management taking  
account of environmental limits

Reduced risk of water-related disasters to protect vulnerable  
groups and minimize economic losses

WWDR 2015

FRAMEWoRk FoR iMPLEMENTiNg The FuTure We WanT

95

16.3

x
o
b

Text related to water and sanitation in the final report of the open Working Group on sDGs

introduction
Paragraph 7. Rio+20 outcome reaffirmed the need to be guided by the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United 
Nations, with full respect for international law and its principles. It reaffirmed the importance of freedom, peace and security, 
respect for all human rights, including the right to development and the right to an adequate standard of living, including 
the right to food and water, the rule of law, good governance, gender equality, women’s empowerment and the overall 
commitment to just and democratic societies for development.

Proposed goal 1. End poverty in all its forms everywhere 
1.5 by 2030 build the resilience of the poor and those in vulnerable situations, and reduce their exposure and vulnerability to 
climate-related extreme events and other economic, social and environmental shocks and disasters 

Proposed goal 3. Ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all at all ages
3.3 by 2030 end the epidemics of AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria, and neglected tropical diseases and combat hepatitis, water-
borne diseases, and other communicable diseases
3.9 by 2030 substantially reduce the number of deaths and illnesses from hazardous chemicals and air, water, and soil 
pollution and contamination

Proposed goal 6. Ensure availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all 
6.1 by 2030, achieve universal and equitable access to safe and affordable drinking water for all
6.2 by 2030, achieve access to adequate and equitable sanitation and hygiene for all, and end open defecation, paying 
special attention to the needs of women and girls and those in vulnerable situations 
6.3 by 2030, improve water quality by reducing pollution, eliminating dumping and minimizing release of hazardous chemicals 
and materials, halving the proportion of untreated wastewater, and increasing recycling and safe reuse by x% globally 
6.4 by 2030, substantially increase water use efficiency across all sectors and ensure sustainable withdrawals and supply of 
freshwater to address water scarcity, and substantially reduce the number of people suffering from water scarcity 
6.5 by 2030 implement integrated water resources management at all levels, including through transboundary cooperation 
as appropriate 
6.6 by 2020 protect and restore water-related ecosystems, including mountains, forests, wetlands, rivers, aquifers and lakes 
6.a by 2030, expand international cooperation and capacity-building support to developing countries in water- and 
sanitation-related activities and programmes, including water harvesting, desalination, water efficiency, wastewater 
treatment, recycling and reuse technologies 
6.b support and strengthen the participation of local communities for improving water and sanitation management

Proposed goal 11. Make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable
11.5 by 2030 significantly reduce the number of deaths and the number of affected people and decrease by y% the 
economic losses relative to GDP caused by disasters, including water-related disasters, with the focus on protecting the 
poor and people in vulnerable situations

Proposed goal 12. Ensure sustainable consumption and production patterns
12.4 by 2020 achieve environmentally sound management of chemicals and all wastes throughout their life cycle in 
accordance with agreed international frameworks and significantly reduce their release to air, water and soil to minimize 
their adverse impacts on human health and the environment

Proposed goal 15.  Protect, restore and promote sustainable use of terrestrial ecosystems, sustainably manage 
forests, combat desertification, and halt and reverse land degradation and biodiversity loss
15.1 by 2020 ensure conservation, restoration and sustainable use of terrestrial and inland freshwater ecosystems 
and their services, in particular forests, wetlands, mountains and drylands, in line with obligations under international 
agreements 

15.8 by 2020 introduce measures to prevent the introduction and significantly reduce the impact of invasive alien species 
on land and water ecosystems, and control or eradicate the priority species

Source: UNGA (2014).

96

ChaPTer 16

RESPoNSES AND iMPLEMENTATioN

infrastructure will be a vital part of the foundations for 
sustainable development, poverty alleviation and human 
well-being irrespective of the post-2015 development 
agenda outcome. Hence, water problems and water’s 
inter-linkages to sustainable development will need to be 
addressed for generations to come − even in the absence 
of a dedicated water sdG in the post-2015 development 
agenda. 

16.3 Achieving The Future We Want
sustainable development is recognized as the way to 
collectively progress as a global society. but there are 
many questions: How does one achieve success on such 
an ambitious but somewhat ambiguous quest? How can 
a balance be reached between different societal interests? 
What and whose priorities should take precedence? What 
trade-offs need to be made? ban Ki-moon, united nations 
secretary-General, speaks of the dilemma of sustainable 
development and water, stating: “there is still enough water 
for all of us – but only so long as we keep it clean, use 
it more wisely and share it fairly” (Planet under Pressure, 
2012). 
Water management and decisions affecting water will play 
a key role in tackling the development challenges of the 
twenty-first century, including urbanization, sustainable 
industrial development and economic growth, eradicating 
persistent poverty, ensuring food security, responding to 
new patterns of consumption and conserving threatened 
ecosystems. 

demand for water is increasing from all sectors, particularly 
for energy, manufacturing industry and agriculture 
in developing countries and emerging economies 
(oeCd, 2012a). the paradox is that water is essential 
for development but at the same time development and 
economic growth will put pressure on the resource and 
challenge water security for humans and nature. there are 
also major uncertainties about the precise amounts of water 
required to meet the demand for food, energy and other 
human uses, and to sustain ecosystems (see section 1.4.4). 
these uncertainties are further exacerbated by the impact 
of climate change on available water resources (see Chapter 
10).

unfortunately, water management is far too often done 
in hindsight. the real drivers of water demand and use 
are mainly found in the need for more food, fodder and 
fibre, energy production, mining of minerals, industry 
and manufacturing, and for meeting increasing domestic 
needs, especially in rapidly growing cities. the fact that 
multi-uses of water are critical for development, combined 
with its dispersed decision-making character, makes water 

management the responsibility of many different decision 
makers in public and private sectors. How can such shared 
responsibility be turned into something constructive that 
different parties can rally around to collectively make 
informed decisions?

there are no quick fixes or silver bullets. it is equally 
apparent that different societal contexts need to find their 
own unique ways and apply their own measures to achieve 
the future they want. like the MdGs, the sdGs will continue 
to provide government guidance and momentum for 
development priorities as well as better alignment between 
bilateral and multilateral donor organizations. tensions 
between multiple water priorities and entitlements will need 
to be resolved contextually by water stakeholders on the 
ground (tremblay, 2011).

Vulnerability to climate change and other hazards − 
including economic volatility − is highly inclined towards 
the poor. it is the ‘bottom billion’ that suffers from lack of 
access to services and from the most severe consequences 
of natural and human-made disasters. a new grip on 
poverty and a solid commitment to governance, risk 
and security issues, and equity is required in the coming 
decades. it must take into account investments needed in 
infrastructure, institutional development, human capacities 
and technological application and innovation.

16.3.1 Addressing the governance crisis:  
Reorienting policy frameworks
the global water crisis is mainly one of governance (WWaP, 
2006). addressing the challenges related to water requires 
changing the way we assess, manage and use our water 
resources. Progress calls for engaging a broad range of 
societal actors to take account of water in their decision-
making processes and responses. 

research shows that essential governance features 
incorporate inclusive structures that can enable effective 
legal frameworks, reduction of inequality, open access 
to systematically updated data and information, and 
meaningful stakeholder participation (Planet under Pressure, 
2012). inclusive governance structures recognize: the 
dispersion of decision-making across various levels and 
entities, from the local to the global level; gender and 
socio-economic stakeholder aspects; and interdependencies 
between public and private sectors. this is particularly 
true for water, where the agents of change are numerous 
and the drivers multiple. it is for example, imperative 
to recognize women’s contributions to local water 
management and their role in decision-making related 
to water. Water aspects need to be clearly visible and 

WWDR 2015

FRAMEWoRk FoR iMPLEMENTiNg The FuTure We WanT

97

accounted for in decisions to promote food and energy 
security. 

Many paths to sustainable development are linked to water, 
but the decisions that determine how water resources are 
used or abused are largely driven by economic sectors. 
achieving the vision for the future of water (see Prologue) 
will require reorienting policy frameworks significantly 
to strengthen public policies and institutions, including 
planning systems and decision-making processes.

during recent years many countries have re-oriented their 
water policies towards an iWrM approach. fundamentally, 
the iWrM approach can be seen as a set of management 
methodologies to achieve coordinated development and 
management of water, land and related resources that 
aims to achieve sustainable water development. it provides 
a sound basis for countries to adopt more integrated 

Many paths to sustainable 
development are linked to water, but 
the decisions that determine how 
water resources are used or abused are 
largely driven by economic sectors

decision-making that provides greater incentives for 
sustainable development, with water as the catalyst for 
progress (Planet under Pressure, 2012). Yet, while some 
countries have made great strides to implement various 
aspects of iWrM, including, for example, decentralized 
management and the creation of river basin organizations, 
many others still face huge implementation problems and 
water reform is stalling (WWaP, 2006 and 2009). While the 
rationales for iWrM implementation have been too much 
geared towards economic efficiency, there is a need to 
put more emphasis on issues of equity and environmental 
sustainability (WGf, 2012). for example, the use of human 
rights-based approaches can sharpen the focus on equity 
through targeted work on social, political and administrative 
accountability, non-discrimination and rule of law (tremblay, 
2011). 

different scales require different solutions. Growing 
demand for and use of water will have impacts beyond 
country borders and make water a primary strategic 
national resource. there are a number of transboundary 
river commissions that mediate different country interests 
and promote technical cooperation, such as the Mekong 
river Commission, Zambezi Watercourse Commission, 

Irrigation channels carry water from its source to the top of the village,  
Al Hamra', Ad Dakhiliyah (Oman)
Photo: Simon Monk

orange-senqu river Commission, and many more. there are 
also many cases of bilateral and multilateral collaborations 
and agreements. for example, the Grand ethiopian 
renaissance dam (Gerd) for hydropower has created 
downstream concerns, particularly in egypt. in august 2014, 
egypt, ethiopia and sudan agreed to form a committee 
to serve as a joint negotiation platform and to perform 
independent studies on the impacts of the dam (fdre, 
2014). While all three countries have legitimate claims and 
concerns, the dam will produce energy that can benefit the 
entire region’s energy security. a regional perspective that 
takes into account other ongoing economic collaborations 
and broader trade issues (e.g. food and energy) can open up 
space for more constructive negotiations and dialogues.

the need for taking broader political economy dynamics in 
society into account is also illustrated by gender issues and 
water. the advancement of gender equity would require 
that organizations and agencies review not only their 
own structures and practices, but also develop improved 
understanding of the underlying power dynamics and 
structural barriers that reinforce gender inequities in water 
access, use and management. this would imply strategies 
with greater focus on women’s solidarity and collective 
action, and the inclusion of men and boys in the efforts 

98

ChaPTer 16

RESPoNSES AND iMPLEMENTATioN

towards changing values, attitudes and gender relations 
(WGf, 2014).

the benefits of strengthened inclusive governance are 
manifold, both in terms of providing enforcement tools 
and through its impacts on political processes of allocation 
and quality control. inclusive governance helps: ensure 
coherence of the normative framework of the water sector; 
increases the accountability and transparency of its service 
providers; promotes a comprehensive set of minimum 
standards for water supply; prioritizes poor, marginalized 
and vulnerable groups and strengthens their claims for 
improved access to water; and provides effective monitoring, 
assessment and enforcement mechanisms (tremblay, 2011). 

to achieve effective governance of water resources and 
services, decision-makers and service providers need to 
take responsibility for their decisions and the quality of 
service. accountability mechanisms can help to clarify the 
commitments of actors involved in water governance and 
lead to efficient management of fiscal resources. they 
can also help protect water resources and increase control 
over the actions of public and private stakeholders, while 
ensuring adequate quality standards. according to a World 
bank study, unethical practices drain 30% of the budgets 
within the WasH sector in sub-saharan africa (Plummer 
and Cross, 2006). to be able to attract much of the funding 
required for sustainable infrastructure development and 
functional institutions, it will be increasingly important to 
institute anti-corruption measures across water and related 
economic sectors. improving accountability will require 
all decision-makers in government, the private sector and 
civil society to recognize that being open and transparent, 
engaging stakeholders, evaluating and learning, and 
responding to complaints is crucial to their legitimacy and 
effectiveness and to achieve long-lasting benefits to the 
poor through sustainable water and sanitation interventions. 

accountability is at the heart of well-functioning regulatory 
systems. the regulator holds to account water service 
providers and industries, for example, by verifying 
compliance with rules and regulations. regulatory measures 
can take the form of administrative and legal or economic 
incentives. a wide range of measures exists to strengthen 
social, administrative and political accountability, such as 
public expenditure tracking, auditing, public access to water 
utility budget and performance information, citizen report 
cards, consumer redress mechanisms, establishment of 
model contracts, and raising consumer awareness of their 
rights and obligations. in albania, for example, the providers 
of water and sewerage services and their customers 
established a so-called ‘model contract’. the contract 

integrates the provisions of the consumer protection law 
and those of the water and sewerage code. developed 
by the stakeholders in the sector, the contract covers 
all standard elements such as terms of service, fees and 
payments, metering, service interruptions and complaints, 
handling them in a way that is fully compliant with all 
applicable legislation. by the end of 2011, over 35,000 
contracts, based on the model had been signed (including 
new contracts and old ones replaced), representing around 
16% of all serviced customers (WGf, 2013).

the above examples of policy reorientation are also 
important for the next sections of this Chapter, which look 

Investing in all aspects of water 
resources management, services 
provision and infrastructure can 
be highly cost-effective

at reduced risks and increased security and how particular 
water measures can address inequity aspects to a greater 
extent. 

16.3.2 Minimizing risk and maximizing water security
Water users face multiple risks, and securing access to water 
is a fundamental requirement for various livelihood purposes. 
Climate change and political and economic volatility 
create additional risks. responses can include a range of 
measures to: expand, improve and reinforce infrastructure; 
develop water use efficiency technologies; employ adaptive 
management; and maintain ecosystem services and natural 
infrastructure.

investing in all aspects of water resources management, 
services provision and infrastructure (development, operation 
and maintenance) is beneficial to social and economic 
development. the size of net benefits will be highly country-
specific as a function of its particular situation. nevertheless, 
current evidence suggests that even under the most 
conservative estimates, historical spending on drinking 
water supply and sanitation has been ‘highly cost-effective’ 
on health grounds alone (unosd/unu, 2013). there is 
also much evidence to suggest that investment in disaster 
preparedness, improved water quality and wastewater 
management are very cost-effective (un-Water, 2014).
distribution of costs and benefits among stakeholders is 
crucial for financial feasibility (fao, 2010). decision-makers 
can evaluate costs and benefits from a hydrological basin 
viewpoint and appraise economic justification by taking 

WWDR 2015

FRAMEWoRk FoR iMPLEMENTiNg The FuTure We WanT

99

areas of the world, and to intensify droughts in some 
areas over certain seasons. Planning, preparedness and 
coordinated responses − including floodplain management, 
early warning systems and increased public awareness of 
risk − have been shown to greatly improve the resilience 
of communities to natural hazards. blending structural and 
non-structural flood management approaches is particularly 
cost-effective (un-Water, 2014). 

risks and various water-related security issues can also be 
reduced by technical and social approaches. one example 
is to treat wastewater as a resource. it is possible and 
potentially beneficial to move beyond treating wastewater 
as a costly by-product to be disposed of and explore paths 
to valuing this otherwise discarded resource (fao, 2010). 
not all water needs to be up to drinking quality standards; 
it is a matter of distinguishing the right kind of treatment 
for the right kind of use. there are a growing number of 
examples of reclaimed wastewater being used in agriculture, 
for irrigating municipal parks and fields, in industrial cooling 
systems, and even in some cases, mixed in with drinking 
water (2030 WrG, 2013). biogas produced from wastewater 
sludge is being used to power water treatment plants, public 
transportation and city heating. 

account of the benefits of multiple uses: domestic, industrial, 
power and energy, agricultural and environmental. financing 
proposals can gauge various incentives or penalties in the 
forms of water taxes, charges, subsidies, environmental 
service payments, or soft loans, among others (fao, 2010). 

The complexity of any pricing of 
water resources is compounded by the 
fact that different users and uses are 
very differently inserted into local 
and global economies

Projects can focus on developing innovative financing 
schemes, seek multiple financing partners among the 
expected beneficiaries of investments and consider re-paying 
contributors from the savings in public expenditures (2030 
WrG, 2013).

for example, investing in ecosystem services can result in 
significant cost savings in drinking water supply, improved 
sanitation and wastewater management (see Chapter 4). it 
costs us$235,000 per year to optimize waste treatment to 
preserve the ecological integrity of the nakivumbo swamp in 
uganda that provides water purification services for the city 
of Kampala worth us$2 million annually (russi et al., 2012). 
Watershed management saves us$300 million every year 
for new York City and avoided capital costs of us$5 billion 
(Perrot-Maître and davis, 2001).

investments can align with initiatives aimed at ‘greening the 
economy’ through enabling synergies with local job creation 
and national economic growth opportunities that focus 
on the poor. it has been advanced that every us$1 million 
invested in river restoration in the united states of america 
creates 15 jobs as well as obvious public benefits in terms of 
reduced pollution (Kantor, 2012). Pro-poor employment can 
be a key element of community endorsement of a water-
related project (2030 WrG, 2013).

Water-related disasters are the most economically and 
socially destructive of all natural hazards. economic losses 
due to natural and human-induced water-related hazards 
have increased greatly in the last decade, well beyond 
reported immediate losses. single water-related disasters 
can even have repercussions on development on a multi-
annual to decadal scale. this situation is likely to become 
exacerbated by climate change, which is anticipated to 
increase the frequency of heavy precipitation over many 

100

ChaPTer 16

RESPoNSES AND iMPLEMENTATioN

Young girl refills water pot, Korhogo, Savanes (Côte d´Ivoire)
Photo: UN Photo/Ky Chung

increased water scarcity should lead to a questioning of the 
propriety of using precious freshwater as a waste disposal 
mechanism in flushing toilets. focusing on access to WasH 
and providing infrastructure to the worlds’ slums and 
informal settlements provides an opportunity for intensive 
innovation in moving away from the conventional flush-
toilet/sewerage systems. the ever-increasing concentrations 
of people in urban spaces can enable the deployment of 
efficient, radically different technical solutions that may have 
been unaffordable or unthinkable elsewhere (Planet under 
Pressure, 2012). the other challenge will be to educate and 
persuade urban populations who may be reluctant to adopt 
alternatives to conventional sewerage systems. 
existing global and national water resources assessments 
are often inadequate for addressing twenty-first century 
water demands and resolving increasing competition 
among users, especially under conditions of increased 
climatic variability. thus, new approaches for comprehensive 
assessments of water resources are urgently needed to 
support complex decision-making. these assessments in turn 
will require viable financing and capacity building, and they 
will remain an essential tool for sustainable development 
and monitoring progress towards achieving the sdGs in 
particular.

Comprehensive water resources assessments require sound 
scientific data on the status of hydrological basins and 
groundwater resources, coupled with metrics concerning 
water demand, withdrawals, consumption and discharges 
by different users. information regarding governance and 
regulatory mechanisms, as well as gender-disaggregated 
data on access to water resources and services also need to 
be significantly expanded and shared among stakeholders. 
assessments are necessary in order to make informed 
investment and management decisions, facilitate cross-
sector decision-making, and address compromises and 
trade-offs between stakeholder groups. 

to better inform work at all levels, the capacities to 
measure, model and monitor relevant dimensions of use 
and the sustainability of supplies need to be strengthened. 
transparent sharing of information enables participation 
and trust, and is key for the successful implementation of 
initiatives seeking behavioural change. for example, it has 
been shown that consumer engagement and education 
can lead to a greater public endorsement of demand-side 
improvement projects even when they result in increased 
water bills (2030 WrG, 2013). 
alongside GdP growth and other economy-wide indicators 
such as GHG emissions, water accounting at the river 
basin level has been proposed as a tool for the purpose of 
overall water management and the generation of economic 

assessments (undesa, 2012). there is also a need to 
consider ecosystem services within such resource accounting 
schemes, to establish the links between resource efficiency, 
biodiversity and ecosystem services and the connection to 
the social values of water (uneP, 2012).

16.3.3 Equitable growth
the third group of issues that need to be addressed in 
order to achieve the Future We Want relates to equity. 
indeed, social equity is one of the dimensions of sustainable 
development that has been insufficiently addressed in 
development and water policies (see Chapter 2). a fresh 
commitment and sustained action to reduce poverty and 
inequities is urgently needed in the post-2015 world. 

in order to achieve universal access to water and sanitation, 
there is a need for accelerated progress in disadvantaged 
groups and to ensure non-discrimination in WasH service 
provision. Pronounced disparities between regions, rural 
and urban areas, and socio-economic groups are well-
documented (WHo and uniCef, 2014a). even in countries 
where service coverage is near universal, certain minority 
groups may be neglected (see section 5.3).

Whereas services at the general level are far less available 
in rural areas, there has been an increase in the number 
of people without access to water and sanitation in urban 
areas (see chapters 5 and 6). the situation relates to the 
rapid growth of slums and the inability or unwillingness 
of local and national governments to provide adequate 
facilities for impoverished urban communities. People living 
in the world’s slums (estimated to reach nearly 900 million 
by 2020 (un-Habitat, 2010) are more vulnerable to extreme 
weather events and more likely to suffer from the lack 
access to safe water and sanitation. However, as described 
in section 6.2.1, innovative solutions such as functioning 
water kiosks have been shown to significantly improve 
access to drinking water supplies in informal settlements.

local and national authorities need to find ways to 
cross the institutional boundaries produced by policies 
or regulation that impede service provision to informal 
areas. useful starting points for this can involve building on 
existing solutions and actor constellations to find ways to 
incrementally improve the situation – in dialogue with users 
and providers. determination can also be highly beneficial to 
increasing coverage, as exemplified in the case of pro-poor 
policies in uganda (see box 6.1).

sustainable development and human rights perspectives 
both call for reductions in inequities and tackling disparities 
in access to services (unGa, 2013). this calls for a 

WWDR 2015

FRAMEWoRk FoR iMPLEMENTiNg The FuTure We WanT

101

reorientation of investment priorities and operational 
procedures to provide services and allocate water more 
equitably in society. Greater equity is not only a moral 
imperative; it also stands to improve the economy (see 
Chapters 2 and 3) (WHo, 2012b). Yet, despite the potential 
for sizeable returns on investment, adequate financing has 
not yet been attained in many settings. 

Prioritizing investments in the provision of basic services 
unlocks the potential for economic growth and breaks 
the vicious cycle of low productivity linked to poor health 
and lack of education opportunities that preserves poverty. 
Where benefits such as reduced disease prevalence accrue to 
society rather than to the investor, regulatory measures may 
be needed to guide investments towards the greatest return 
for society.

regulators ensure that service providers act in coherence 
with water sector policies. this is important for 
accountability. social objectives may be high on the political 
agenda of most developing countries, yet they tend to be 
poorly followed up in regulatory practices. this may be a 
consequence of importing regulatory frameworks from 
economies where services are already provided to all citizens, 
and where coverage is consequently not an issue (Gerlach 
and franceys, 2010). equity needs to be kept as a priority at 
several policy levels and, in particular, followed through by 
regulatory measures.

in order to maximize the benefits, services should be 
provided close to or ideally within the home, not only to 
conveniently support good hygiene and health, but in 
order to ensure that time can be used more productively. 
opportunity costs are an important contributor to the overall 
return on these investments (WHo, 2012b). further, having 
facilities in or nearer to the home is also important from 
a safety perspective, as women and girls in particular may 
face harassment and violence when collecting water, when 
using communal toilet facilities or when undertaking open 
defecation in the evenings.

beyond water, access to electricity can have tremendous 
positive effects on education achievement as it provides 
the opportunity for studies after dark. Moving up the 
energy ladder and the use of cleaner fuels for cooking and 
heating also has very positive effects in reducing respiratory 
disease, particularly for women who tend to be those 
responsible for cooking, and for the children who tend 
to be present in smoky environments with their mothers. 
the same people who lack access to improved water and 
sanitation are likely to lack access to electricity and to rely 
on solid fuel for cooking (WWaP, 2014). the demonstrated 

economic benefits of investing in basic services have a direct 
correlation with the alleviation of poverty.

the economic benefits of prioritizing equity and poverty 
eradication can also be discerned in the adequate 
prioritizing of investments in the area of agriculture. as 
presented in Chapter 3, the internal rate of return on 
investing in large-scale irrigation in central africa was 
calculated at 12%, while the figure for investing in small-
scale irrigation in the sahel stood at 33%. Policies to support 
income generation for small-scale producers are not only 
fair; they also stimulate economic growth in rural areas. as 
suggested in the previous section, to ensure that equitable 
water allocation is followed through, greater accountability, 
transparency and not least participation is required to avoid 
resources being captured by powerful minorities.

the allocation of water between users and between 
different types of uses, like agriculture, industry or 
municipal demands, is usually managed through systems of 
administrative permits. Water pricing also provides signals 
on how to allocate scarce water resources to the highest-
value uses – in financial terms or other types of benefits. 
still, the complexity of any pricing of water resources is 
compounded by the fact that different users and uses are 
very differently inserted into local and global economies. 
indeed, the contribution to the economy and benefits 
created by subsistence farming or commercial agriculture is 
difficult to compare with any simple parameters. equitable 
pricing and water permits would need to adequately assure 
that abstraction as well as releases of used water support 
efficient operations and environmental sustainability. this 
can be done in ways that are adapted to the abilities and 
needs of industry and larger-scale irrigation as well as the 
small-scale and subsistence farming activities.

the human right to water and sanitation requires that 
all persons have sufficient, safe, acceptable, physically 
accessible and affordable water for personal and domestic 
uses without discrimination (un, 2002). discrimination over 
access takes place whenever lower priority in investment 
or service delivery is provided to residents lacking social, 
economic or cultural clout over those with power to decide. 
affordability can be determined in several ways, e.g. as a 
proportion of a household’s income, though there is no 
generalized agreement on the appropriate proportion (dar 
and Khan, 2011).

in the area of service delivery, prices or tariffs are usually 
linked to volumetric measures of water. Yet, prices in this 
area do not represent the scarcity value of the water as such 
but the cost of its delivery in a clean state. in many places, 

102

ChaPTer 16

RESPoNSES AND iMPLEMENTATioN

Chapter 1 water services are under-priced, resulting in poor service 
delivery, low maintenance of existing infrastructure and the 
lack of extension to new service areas, as service providers 
are not fully compensated for the cost of service delivery. 

low tariffs are at times justified by poor people’s inability 
to pay. low tariffs may have the effect of limiting the scope 
of services, however, and tend to exclude low-income 
populations from public water services. this contradiction 
is partly due to under-pricing which precludes network 
extension and hence permeates historic inequalities of 
public water systems catering to powerful minorities rather 
than the public at large and more recent settlers. the other 
part of this contradiction relates to the fact that many poor 
households still pay significant amounts of money to receive 
water. since the public system is not responding to this 
demand, independent or informal providers tend to be the 
main suppliers of water in informal, low-income or peri-
urban areas. in these situations, the poorest pay more for 
water, sometimes of a lower quality, than the rich.

in a piped water system, it is the access to a connection 
which determines who has access or not to a service. in 
order to provide access for the poor, it is more important to 
subsidize, or amortize over time, the cost of the connection 
rather than the cost of water as such. as suggested above, 
the tariff price for piped water may be magnitudes lower 
than that from other supply sources. as a result, people 
excluded from piped water services may be purchasing water 
from mobile vendors or even paying for water they have 
to collect themselves at kiosks. this speaks for a pro-poor 
pricing policy to keep effective connection costs as low as 
possible, while ensuring that water use is paid for at a level 
that supports maintenance and potentially even expansion 
of the system. Where affordability is still an issue, it is 
preferable to support those who are unable to pay rather 
than to lower the price of water to everyone, particularly as 
it may only be the wealthiest that benefit from such a policy.

serious concern about the increasingly inequitable division 
of resources and income in the world has been voiced by 
economic leaders and development agencies. the World 
economic forum identified ‘widening income disparities’ 
as an important trend and major global risk (Wef, 2014a 
and 2014b). oxfam finds these extreme levels of wealth 
concentration to be damaging and worrying, not least 
because “when wealth captures government policymaking, 
the rules bend to favour the rich, often to the detriment of 
everyone else” (fuentes-nieva and Galasso, 2014). Wealth 
concentration can also skew water policies and supply 
priorities, as shown in a mapping research project in nairobi, 
Kenya. Here, the water provider pumps more water to the 

Girls washing and cleaning at the Lycée Regina Pacis (Burundi)
Photo: SuSanA Secretariat

never-rationed upper and high-consuming areas, testifying 
that “despite recent apparent concerns for the poor, 
servicing the wealthy high consumers who consume and pay 
more and are more politically influential is still prioritized” 
(ledant et al., 2013).

Present water tariffs are commonly far too low to actually 
limit excessive water use by wealthy households or 
industry. While it is important that pricing policies reward 
users for saving water, responsible use may at times be 
more effectively fostered through awareness- raising and 
appealing to the common good. Pricing signals need to be 
supported by awareness-raising and information in order to 
work towards a cohesive society that collaborates around 
the wisest possible use of water – cherished and shared 
equitably within the present and towards future generations. 
again, sustainable development needs to work with the 
economic, social and environmental dimensions coherently 
to ensure the mutual reinforcement of social equity, 
economic growth and sustainability.

FRAMEWoRk FoR iMPLEMENTiNg The FuTure We WanT

103

WWDR 2015epilogue
Water for a sustainable world

WWAP  |  Richard Connor
UnDP   |  Contributors: Joakim Harlin, Marianne Kjellén and Håkan Tropp

in the sustainable world of 2050 envisioned in the Prologue 
of this report, water resources are managed and water-
related services provided in support of human wellbeing 
and ecosystem integrity in a robust and equitable global 
economy. this vision is attainable, but only if the required 
efforts are deployed, supported by a number of concrete 
actions, all of which are interrelated and mutually 
reinforcing.

first, appropriate legal and institutional frameworks are 
required in order to guarantee that water resources are 
managed and used sustainably. these include laws and 

financial and other benefits that greatly outweigh its costs. 
in addition to adequately financing the development, 
operation and maintenance of infrastructure, increased 
funding is also needed in order to develop institutional 
capacity and ensure well-functioning governance structures. 
Greater financial support is equally essential to enhance 
the knowledge base and provide reliable and objective 
information about the state of water resources, their 
use and management, to enable water managers and 
administrators to inform decision-makers about policy 
options and their potential impacts.

Decisions that determine how  
water resources are used (or abused)  
are not made by water managers 
alone, but driven by various  
socio-economic development 
objectives and the operational 
decisions to achieve them

regulations whose enforcement ensure a secure balance 
between water availability and use, and protect the resource 
against pollution and over-abstraction for the security of 
future generations. 

second, there is an urgent need to increase access to WasH 
services, and improve existing service levels. reflecting 
the established principles of the human right to water and 
sanitation, as recognized in resolution 64/292 of the un 
General assembly in July 2010, governments need to adopt 
ambitious targets for improving WasH service levels in order 
to reduce the global burden of WasH-related diseases, to 
improve productivity and economic growth, and to reduce 
inequalities between population groups.

third, increased investment and financial support for water 
development is essential. When efficiently and transparently 
managed, investments in water generate social, economic, 

104

ePIlogUe

fourth, managing and allocating water across competing 
developmental sectors to meet multiple challenges is 
required to ensure that benefits created for one group of 
stakeholders do not disadvantage others. Water needs 
to be at the centre of a multisectorial  dialogue, which 
includes decision-making processes and mechanisms for 
conflict resolution within the context of national inter-
ministerial bodies and multilateral agencies, and in the 
case of transboundary waters. decisions that determine 
how water resources are used (or abused) are not made 
by water managers alone, but driven by various socio-
economic development objectives and the operational 
decisions to achieve them. Progress towards sustainable 
development requires engaging a broad range of actors in 
government, civil society and business to assure that water is 
taken into account in their decision-making and to promote 
cooperation across disciplines, sectors and borders. 

the development of the post-2015 sdGs provides a critical 
opportunity to generate progress. achieving the sdGs 
by 2030 will require a concerted effort across multiple 
domains and sectors, and water will need to be recognized 
as the nexus through which various sdGs and other 
development objectives are linked. Water efficiency gains 
in one domain can help relieve constraints in others, and 
contribute to the realization and sharing of greater benefits 
to society. for example, the health and livelihood benefits 
of access to safe water supplies and improved sanitation 
services is incontrovertible. Water management responses 
that maximize co-benefits can reduce risks, but these 
require coordinated approaches. taking full account of the 
opportunities and limitations imposed by water on various 

other development goals would lead to cross-cutting 
synergies among sectors and actors, allowing progress to 
continue beyond the 2030 milestone.

Whereas poverty eradication and the reduction of inequities 
remain at the core of the concerns of the un system, 
governments have obligations towards the of their citizens. 
to contribute towards a water-secure, fair and sustainable 
world, the un system will need to continue to provide 
and promote leadership addressing the full range of goals 
and targets in the post-2015 world. Particular emphasis 
is needed on: universal access to water, sanitation and 
hygiene; the sustainable use and development of water 
resources; equitable, participatory and accountable water 
governance; increased reuse and reduced pollution from 

wastewater; maintaining ecosystem services; and reduced 
human and economic losses from water-related disasters. 

specifically addressing these critical issues through a 
dedicated global sdG for water with specific and measurable 
targets will trigger national governments and the global 
community to take action and track progress over a much 
broader set of water-related challenges than was considered 
under the MdGs. each of these challenges is fundamental 
to sustainable development, just as most other sustainable 
development goals are in some way water dependent. 
addressing these water-related challenges within the sdG 
process represents an inescapable intermediate step towards 
achieving the 2050 vision for water in a sustainable world. 

Students at public school in Taliko neighbourhood, Bamako (Mali)
Photo: UN Photo/Marco Dormino

105

WWDR 2015REFEREnCEs

2030 WrG (2030 Water resources Group). 2009. Charting our water future: Economic frameworks to inform decision-making. 

Washington, dC, 2030 WrG.

_____. 2013. Managing Water Use in Scarce Environments: A Catalogue of Case Studies. Washington, dC, 2030 WrG.  

http://www.waterscarcitysolutions.org/assets/WrG-Managing-Water-scarcity-Catalogue.pdf

aCet (african Centre for economic transformation). 2014. 2014 African Transformation Report: Adding Depth to Africa’s Growth. 

accra, aCet.

A

afdb (african development bank Group). 2010. Agriculture Sector Strategy 2010-2014. agriculture and agro-industry department 

and operational resources and Policies department. tunis, afdb.

africa Progress Panel. 2014. Africa Progress Report 2014: Grain, Fish, Money – Financing Africa’s Green and Blue Revolutions.  

Geneva, switzerland, africa Progress Panel.

au (african union), 2004. Sirte Declaration on the Challenges of Implementing Integrated and Sustainable Development on Agriculture 

and Water in Africa. assembly of the african union, second extraordinary session, 27 february 2004. addis ababa, au.

_____. 2008. Sharm El-Sheikh Commitments for Accelerating the Achievement of Water and Sanitation Goals in Africa. assembly of 

the african union, eleventh ordinary session, 1 July 2008. addis ababa, au.

_____. 2014. Decision on the Report on the Implementation of Sharm El-Sheikh Commitments on Accelerating Water and Sanitation 

Goals in Africa. assembly of the african union, twenty-second ordinary session, 30-31 January 2014. addis ababa, au.

africare, oxfam america and WWf-iCrisat. 2010. More Rice for People, More Water for the Planet. WWf-iCrisat Project, 

Hyderabad, india.

alavian, V., Qaddumi, H.M., dickson, e., diez, s.M., danilenko, a.V., Hirji, r.f., Puz, G., Pizarro, C., Jacobsen, M. and blankespoor, b. 2009. 

Water and Climate Change: Understanding the Risks and Making Climate-Smart Investment Decisions. Washington, dC, the World bank. 

alexandratos, n. and bruinsma, J. 2012. World agriculture towards 2030/2050: The 2012 revision. esa Working Paper no. 12-03. 

rome, food and agriculture organization of the united nations (fao). 

aMCoW (african Ministers’ Council on Water). 2008. The eThekwini Declaration and AfricaSan Action Plan. Made at the afrisan+5 

Conference on sanitation and Hygiene. february 2008, abuja, aMCoW.  
http://www.wsp.org/sites/wsp.org/files/publications/ethekwiniafricasan.pdf

_____. 2011. AMCOW Country Status Overviews – Regional Synthesis Report. Pathways to Progress: Transitioning to Country-Led 
Service Delivery Pathways to Meet Africa’s Water Supply and Sanitation Targets. Washington, dC, the World bank/Water and 
sanitation Program.  
http://www.wsp.org/wsp/content/pathways-progress-status-water-and-sanitation-africa. 

 arab Water Council. 2012. Arab Strategy for Water Security in the Arab Region to Meet the Challenges and Future Needs for 

Sustainable Development 2010-2030. Cairo, arab Water Council.

arCadis/ecologic/intersus/fresh thoughts/typsa. 2012. The role of water pricing and water allocation in agriculture in delivering 

sustainable water use in Europe. final report for the european Commission. brussels, arCadis. 

asCe (american society of Civil engineers). 2011. Failure to Act: The economic impact of current investment trends in water and 

wastewater treatment infrastructure. Washington, dC, asCe.

assevero, V.a. and Chitre, s.P. 2012. Rio 20 - An Analysis of the Zero Draft and the Final Outcome Document 'The Future We Want'. 

new York, the Green impresario.  
http://ssrn.com/abstract=2177316

bahri, a. 2009. Managing the Other Side of the Water Cycle: Making Wastewater an Asset. GWP-teC background Paper no. 13. 

stockholm, Global Water Partnership (GWP).

b

bain, r., Cronk, r., Hossain, r., bonjour, s., onda, K., Wright, J., Yang, H., slaymaker, t., Hunter, P., Prüss-ustün, a. and 

bartram, J.2014. Global assessment of exposure to faecal contamination through drinking water based on a systematic review. 
Tropical Medicine and International Health, 19(8): 917-927.

106

referenCes

barker, r., van Koppen, b. and shah, t. 2000. A global perspective on water scarcity and poverty: Achievements and challenges for 

water resources management. Colombo, sri lanka, international Water Management institute (iWMi).

barnard, s., routray, P., Majorin, f., Peletz, r., boisson, s., sinha, a. and Clasen, t. 2013. impact of indian total sanitation Campaign 
on latrine Coverage and use: a Cross-sectional study in orissa three Years following Programme implementation. PLoS One, 8(8): 
e71438. 

barrantes, G. and Gámez, l. 2007. Programa de Pago de por servicio ambiental Hidrico de la empresa de servicios Publicos de 

Heredia. G. Platais and s. Pagiola (eds), Ecomarkets: Costa Rica’s Experience with Payments for Environmental Services. Washington, 
dC, the World bank. 

bartone, C.r. 2011. From Fear of Cholera to Full Wastewater Treatment in Two Decades in Santiago, Chile. Washington, dC, the World bank.

bates, b.C., Kundzewicz, Z.W., Wu, s. and Palutikof, J.P. 2008. Climate Change and Water. technical Paper of the intergovernmental 

Panel on Climate Change (iPCC). Geneva, switzerland, iPCC secretariat.

baum, r., luh, J. and bartram, J. 2013. sanitation: a Global estimate of sewerage Connections without treatment and the resulting 

impact on MdG Progress. Environmental Science & Technology, 47(4): 1994-2000.

beisheim, M. 2013. The Water, Energy and Food Security Nexus: How to Govern Complex Risks to Sustainable Supply?  

sWP Comments 32. berlin, German institute for international and security affairs (sWP). 

beven, K. 2008. Environmental Modelling: An Uncertain Future? london, routeledge.

biswas, a. and tortajada, C. 2010. Water supply of Phnom Penh: an example of Good Governance. International Journal of Water 

Resources Development, 26 (2): 157-172.

boelee, e. (ed.). 2011. Ecosystems for water and food security. nairobi/Colombo, united nations environment Programme (uneP)/

international Water Management institute (iWMi).

bohoslavsky, J.P. 2010. Tratados de protección de las inversiones e implicaciones para la formulación de políticas públicas (especial 

referencia a los servicios de agua potable y saneamiento). santiago, Chile, united nations economic Commission for latin america 
and the Caribbean (uneClaC).  
http://www.cepal.org/publicaciones/xml/4/40484/lcw326e.pdf

bonn2011 nexus Conference. 2012. Messages from the Bonn 2011 Conference: The Water, Energy and Food Security Nexus – 

Solutions for a Green Economy.  
http://www.water-energy-food.org/en/conference.html

brander, l. and schuyt, K. 2010. Benefits transfer: The economic value of the world's wetlands. the economics of ecosystems and 

biodiversity (teeb).  
http://www.teebweb.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/01/the-economic-value-of-the-worlds-wetlands.pdf

bréthaut, C. and Pflieger, G. 2013. the shifting territorialities of the rhone river’s transboundary governance: a historical analysis 
of the evolution of the functions, uses and spatiality of river basin governance. Regional Environmental Change, october 2013. 
springer berlin Heidelberg.

brugnach, M., dewulf, a., Pahl-Wostl, C. and taillieu, t. 2008. toward a relational Concept of uncertainty: about Knowing too little, 

Knowing too differently, and accepting not to Know. Ecology and Society, 13(2): 30.

buytaert, W., baez, s., bustamante, M. and dewulf, a. 2012. Web-based environmental simulation: bridging the Gap between 

scientific Modeling and decision-Making. Environmental Science & Technology, 46(4): 1971-1976.

Cbd (Convention on biological diversity). 2014. Ecosystem Approach.  

http://www.cbd.int/ecosystem/

C

Chiplunkar, a., Kallidaikurichi, s. and Cheon Kheong, t. (eds). 2012. Good Practices in urban water management: Decoding good 

practices for a successful future. Mandaluyong City, Philippines, asian development bank (adb).

Comprehensive assessment of Water Management in agriculture. 2007. Water for Food, Water for Life: A Comprehensive 

Assessment of Water Management in Agriculture. london/Colombo, earthscan/international Water Management institute (iWMi).

Corcoran, e., nellemann, C., baker, e., bos, r., osborn, d. and savelli, H. (eds). 2010. Sick Water? The central role of wastewater 

management in sustainable development. A Rapid Response Assessment. nairobi/arendal, Kenya/norway, united nations 
environment Programme (uneP)/united nations Human settlements Programme (un-Habitat)/Grid-arendal.  
http://www.grida.no/publications/rr/sickwater/ 

Costanza, r., de Groot, r., sutton, P., van der Ploeg, s., anderson, s.J., Kubiszewski, i., farber, s. and turner, r.K. 2014. Changes in 

the global value of ecosystem services. Global Environmental Change, 26: 152-158. 

Cred (Centre for research on the epidemiology of disasters). 2014. eM-dat, the international disaster database. brussels, université 

Catholique de louvain.  
http://www.emdat.be/database

WWDR 2015

107

D

E

F

dar, o.a. and Khan, M.s. 2011. Millennium development goals and the water target: details, definitions and debate. Tropical 

Medicine and International Health, 16: 540-544.

deloitte. 2012. Ripple Effects: Why water is a CFO issue. CFO Insights. Westlake, texas, usa, deloitte university Press.  

http://deloitte.wsj.com/cfo/files/2012/08/Why_Water_is_a_Cfo_issue.pdf

dini, J. 2013. Investing in Ecological Infrastructure: Nature Delivering Services. silverton, south africa, south african national 

biodiversity institute (sanbi).

donat Castelló, l., Gil-González, d., alvarez-dardet diaz, C. and Hernández-aguado, i. 2010. the environmental millennium 

development goal: Progress and barriers to its achievement. Environmental Science and Policy, 13(2): 154-163. 

donat, M.G. et al. 2014. Changes in extreme temperature and precipitation in the arab region: long-term trends and variability 

related to enso and nao. International Journal of Climatology, 34(3): 581-592.  

eC (european Commission). 2011. Roadmap to a Resource Efficient Europe. brussels, eC. CoM(2011) 571 final.  

http://ec.europa.eu/resource-efficient-europe/

_____. 2012. Elements of strategic programming for the period 2014-2020. Working paper prepared in the context of the seminar on 

"successful Programming" eafrd 2014-2020. brussels, eC.

eCa (european Court of auditors). 2012. European Union Development Assistance for Drinking Water Supply and Basic Sanitation in 

Sub-Saharan Countries. special report no.13. luxembourg, Publications of the european union.  
http://www.europarl.europa.eu/meetdocs/2009_2014/documents/droi/dv/1405_specialreport_/1405_specialreport_en.pdf 

_____. 2014. Integration of EU water policy objectives with the CAP: A partial success. special report no. 4. luxembourg, Publications 

office of the european union.

eCCas (economic Community of Central african states). 2010. Etude sur l’interconnexion des réseaux électriques des pays membres 

de la CEEAC. rsW international/soGreaH. synthesis report. libreville, eCCas Publication.

eea (european environment agency). 2009. Report on good practice measures for climate change adaptation in river basin 

management plans. Prepared by Cornelius laaser, anna leipprand, Colette de roo and rodrigo Vidaurre. Copenhagen, ecologic 
institute.

emerton, l. and bos, e. 2004. Value: Counting Ecosystems as Water Infrastructure. Gland/Cambridge, switzerland/uK, international 

union for Conservation of nature (iuCn).

ePa (environmental Protection agency). 2014. Natural Infrastructure.  

http://www.epa.gov/region03/green/infrastructure.html

ercin, a.e. and Hoekstra, a.Y. 2012. Carbon and Water Footprints: Concepts, Methodologies and Policy Responses. WWdr4 side 

Publication series no. 04. Paris, unesCo.

eu (european union). 2000. eu Water framework directive. directive 2000/60/eC of the european Parliament and of the Council of 

23 october 2000 establishing a framework for Community action in the field of water policy. Official Journal 327, 22/12/2000,  
P. 001-0073.

eu, oeCd and uneCe (european union Water initiative/eeCCa, organisation for economic Co-operation and development, and 

united nations economic Commission for europe). 2014. Water Policy reforms in eastern europe, the Caucasus and Central asia. 
achievements of the european union Water initiative since 2006. 

fao (food and agriculture organization of the united nations). 2002. Project intégré Keita. rapport terminal du project. Project GCP/

ner/032/ita. rome, fao.

_____. 2007. towards a new understanding of forests and Water. Unasylva, 58: 229. rome, fao.

_____. 2008. Water and the rural poor: Interventions for improving livelihoods in sub-Saharan Africa. rome, fao  

ftp://ftp.fao.org/docrep/fao/010/i0132e/i0132e.pdf

_____. 2010. The Wealth of Waste: The economics of wastewater use in agriculture. rome, fao. 

_____. 2011a. The State of the World's Land and Water Resources for Food and Agriculture: Managing systems at risk. london/rome, 

earthscan/fao.  
http://www.fao.org/docrep/017/i1688e/i1688e.pdf 

_____. 2011b. Water management: Technologies that save and grow. factsheet 4: sustainable crop production intensification (sCPi). 

rome, fao.

_____. 2011c. The State of Food and Agriculture 2010–2011: Women in agriculture: Closing the gender gap for development. rome, fao.  

http://www.fao.org/docrep/013/i2050e/i2050e.pdf

_____. 2012a. Food Security and Agricultural Water. rome, fao. 

108

referenCes

_____. 2012b. Coping with water scarcity: An action framework for agriculture and food security. fao Water reports 38. rome, fao. 

http://www.fao.org/docrep/016/i3015e/i3015e.pdf

_____. 2013a. reviewed strategic framework. thirty-eighth session of the Conference. rome, 11-22 June 2013.  

http://www.fao.org/docrep/meeting/027/mg015e.pdf 

_____. 2013b. the director-General’s Medium-term Plan 2014-17 and Programme of Work and budget 2014-15. thirty-eighth session 

of the Conference. rome, 11-22 June 2013.  
http://www.fao.org/docrep/meeting/027/mf490e.pdf

_____. 2014a. Building a common vision for sustainable food and agriculture: Principles and Approaches. rome, fao.  

http://www.fao.org/3/919235b7-4553-4a4a-bf38-a76797dc5b23/i3940e.pdf 

_____. 2014b. Adapting to climate change through land and water management in Eastern Africa. rome, fao.  

http://www.fao.org/3/a-i3781e.pdf  

fao aQuastat. online database. rome, food and agriculture organization of the united nations (fao).  

http://www.fao.org/nr/water/aquastat/main/index.stm

farber, s.C., Costanza, r. and Wilson, M.a. 2002. economic and ecological concepts for valuing ecosystem services. Ecology 

Economics, 41: 375-392.

fdre (federal democratic republic of ethiopia). 2014. Ministry of foreign affairs Website.  

http://www.mfa.gov.et/news/more.php?newsid=3432

foster, s. and Garduño, H. 2004. China: Towards sustainable groundwater resource use for irrigated agriculture on the North China 

Plain. sustainable Groundwater Management lessons, Practice Case Profile Collection no. 8. Washington, dC,  
the World bank. 

foster, V. and briceño-Garmendia, C. (eds). 2010. Africa’s infrastructure: A Time for transformation. Washington, dC, agence 

française du développement/the World bank.

freeman, M.C., stocks, M.e., Cumming, o., Jeandron, a., Higgins, J.P., Wolf, J., Prüss-ustün, a., bonjour, s., Hunter, P.r., fewtrell, l. and 

Curtis, V. 2014. Hygiene and health: systematic review of handwashing practices worldwide and update of health effects. Tropical 
Medicine and International Health, 19(8):906-916.

fuentes-nieva, r. and Galasso, n. 2014. Working for the Few: Political capture and economic inequality. oxford, uK, oxfam international.  

Gerlach, e. and franceys, r. 2010. regulating Water services for all in developing economies. World Development, 38: 1229-1240.

Giordano, M., de fraiture, C., Weight, e. and van der bliek, J. 2012. Water for wealth and food security: Supporting farmer-

driven investments in agricultural water management. synthesis report of the agWater solutions Project. Colombo, sri lanka, 
international Water Management institute (iWMi). 

Glassman, d., Wucker, M., isaacman, t. and Champilou, C. 2011. the Water-energy nexus: adding Water to the energy agenda. 

World Policy Papers. new York/Zurich, usa/switzerland, World Policy institute (WPi)/ebG Capital.

G

Gleeson, t., Wada, Y., bierkens, M.f.P. and van beek, l.P.H. 2012. Water balance of global aquifers revealed by groundwater footprint. 

Nature, 488: 197-200, doi:10.1038/nature11295. 

Government of Canada, 2014.  First Nations Water Infrastructure. Canada’s economic action Plan 2014.  

http://actionplan.gc.ca/en/initiative/first-nations-water-infrastructure

Government of Kazakhstan. 2014a. Presidential decree signed 20 May 2014. transition to Green economy. strategy Kazakhstan 2050. 

astana, Ministry of environmental Protection.

_____. 2014b. state Programme integrated Water resources Management.

Government of Pakistan. 2012. Pakistan Economic Survey 2010-11. Special Section 2: Flood Impact Assessment. islamabad, Ministry 

of finance.  
http://www.finance.gov.pk/survey_1011.html

Govardhan das, s. V. and burke, J. 2013. Smallholders and sustainable wells. A Retrospect: Participatory Groundwater Management 

in Andhra Pradesh (India). rome, fao.  
http://www.fao.org/docrep/018/i3320e/i3320e.pdf 

Grey d. and sadoff C.W. 2007. sink or swim? Water security for growth and development. Water Policy, 9: 545-571.

Groundwater Governance. n.d.  

http://www.groundwatergovernance.org/ 

Gura, t. 2013. Citizen science: amateur experts. Nature, 496(7444): 259-261.

WWDR 2015

109

GWP (Global Water Partnership). 2012. Groundwater Resources and Irrigated Agriculture: Making a Beneficial Relation More 

Sustainable. stockholm, GWP.  
http://www.gwp.org/Global/the%20Challenge/resource%20material/Perspectives%20Paper_Groundwater_web.pdf 

Hallegatte, s., Green, r., nicholls, r.J. and Corfee-Morlot, J. 2013. future flood losses in major coastal cities. Nature Climate Change, 

3: 802-806.

H

Hantke-domas, M. and Jouravlev, a. 2011. Lineamientos de política pública para el sector de agua potable y saneamiento. lC/W.400, 

June 2011. santiago, Chile, united nations economic Commission for latin america and the Caribbean (uneClaC).  
http://www.cepal.org/publicaciones/xml/1/43601/lcw400e.pdf 

Heltberg, r., siegel, P. b. and Jorgensen, s. l. 2009. addressing human vulnerability to climate change: toward a `no-regrets’ 

approach. Global Environmental Change, 19: 89-99.

Hipsey, M.r. and arheimer, b. 2013. Challenges for water-quality research in the new iaHs decade. b. arheimer et al. (eds). 

Understanding freshwater quality problems in a changing world. Wallingford, uK, international association of Hydrological 
sciences (iaHs) Press, 361: 17-29.

Hirschman, a. 1958. The Strategy of Economic Development. new Haven, usa, Yale university Press.

HlPe (High level Panel of experts on food security and nutrition). 2013. Biofuels and food security: A report by The High Level Panel 

of Experts on Food Security and Nutrition. HlPe report 5. rome, HlPe. 

Hoekstra, a.Y. and Chapagain, a.K. 2006. Water footprints of nations: Water use by people as a function of their consumption 

pattern. Water Resource Management, 21: 35-48.  
doi: 10.1007/s11269-006-9039-x.

Hoekstra, a.Y., Chapagain, a.K., aldaya, M.M. and Mekonnen, M.M. 2011. The Water Footprint Assessment manual: Setting the 

global standard. london/Washington, dC, earthscan.  
http://www.waterfootprint.org/downloads/theWaterfootprintassessmentManual.pdf 

Hutton, G. 2013. Global costs and benefits of reaching universal coverage of sanitation and drinking-water supply. Journal of Water 

and Health, 11(1): 1-12. 

i

iCarda/Gef/ifad (international Center for agricultural research in the dry areas/Global environment facility/international fund 
for agricultural development). 2013. Rehabilitating Irrigation canals and olive trees boosts farmer income in Jordan. Menarid 
Gateway, Knowledge fact sheet.  
http://southsouthworld.org/office/images/session_files-ifad/solutions%20submitted%20by%20tHe%20field/rehabilitating%20
irrigation%20in%20Jordan.pdf  

iCMM (international Council on Mining and Metals). 2012. Water management in mining: A selection of case studies. london, iCMM. 

http://www.icmm.com/www.icmm.com/water-case-studies

iCPdr (international Commission for the Protection of the danube river). 1999. Danube Pollution Reduction Programme: Evaluation 

of Wetlands and Floodplain Areas in the Danube River Basin. Final Report. Germany, united nations development Programme/
Global environment facility (undP/Gef)/WWf-danube-Carpathina-Programme/WWf-auen-institut.   
http://www.icpdr.org/main/sites/default/files/eValuationWetlandsfloodPlainareas.pdf

iCPdr/srbC (international Commission for the Protection of the danube river/international sava river basin Commission). 2007. Joint 
Statement on Guiding Principles for the Development of Inland Navigation and Environmental Protection in the Danube River Basin. 
Vienna, iCPdr.

iea (international energy agency). 2011. The IEA Model of Short-term Energy Security (MOSES) Primary Energy Sources and 

Secondary Fuels. Working Paper. Paris, oeCd/iea.

_____. 2012. World Energy Outlook 2012. Paris, oeCd/iea.  

http://www.worldenergyoutlook.org/

_____. 2013. World Energy Outlook 2013. Paris, oeCd/iea.  

http://www.worldenergyoutlook.org/

iGraC (international Groundwater resources assessment Center). 2010. Global Groundwater information system (GGis). delft,  

the netherlands, iGraC.  
http://www.un-igrac.org/publications/104

_____. n.d. arsenic in groundwater worldwide. 

http://www.un-igrac.org/publications/148

iJC (international Joint Commission: Canada and united states). 2013. International Joint Commission 2013 Activities Report.  

Washington/ottawa, dC/ontario, iJC.

iPCC (intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). 2008. Climate Change and Water. technical Paper of the intergovernmental 

Panel on Climate Change. Geneva, switzerland, iPCC secretariat.  
https://www.ipcc.ch/publications_and_data/_climate_change_and_water.htm 

110

referenCes

_____. 2013. Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Working Group i Contribution to the fifth assessment report of the 

intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge/new York, Cambridge university Press. 

_____. 2014. Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Working Group ii Contribution to the fifth assessment 

report of the intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge/new York, Cambridge university Press.

irC (international Water and sanitation Centre). 2009. Providing Reliable Rural Water Services that Last. triple-s briefing. the Hague, 

the netherlands, irC.  
http://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/9Cfe920CdCd215C98525767000578b0b-full_report.pdf

italian development Cooperation. 2009. Keita Project: Where the man stopped the desert (niger).  

http://www.abidjan.cooperazione.esteri.it/utlabidjan/en/best_practices/keita.html 

iWMi (international Water Management institute). 2014. Analysis of impacts of large scale investments in agriculture on water 

resources, ecosystems and livelihoods; and development of policy options for decision-makers. Presentation at the 5th african Water 
Week, dakar. 

J

Jiménez Cisneros, b.e., oki, t., arnell, n.W., benito, G., Cogley, J.G., döll, P., Jiang, t. and Mwakalila, s.s. 2014. freshwater resources. 

intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (iPCC), Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Contribution 
of Working Group ii to the fifth assessment report of the iPCC. Cambridge/new York, uK/usa, Cambridge university Press. pp. 
229-269.

Jouravlev, a. 2004. Drinking water supply and sanitation services on the threshold of the XXI century. santiago, Chile, united nations 

economic Commission for latin america and the Caribbean (uneClaC).  
http://www.eclac.org/publicaciones/xml/9/19539/lcl2169i.pdf 

_____. 2011. Importancia de los recursos hídricos para el desarrollo socioeconómico de la región (legislación hídrica en la adaptación 
al cambio climático). Presented during the Workshop: definición de Prioridades de investigación económica sobre la relación entre 
Cambio Climático y agua en la región. 30 september-1 october 2011, Panama City, Panama.  
http://www.eclac.cl/drni/noticias/noticias/8/44648/Panama_30_09_2011.pdf

K

l

Justo, J.b. 2013. El derecho humano al agua y al saneamiento frente a los Objetivos de Desarrollo del Milenio (odM). santiago, Chile, 

united nations economic Commission for latin america and the Caribbean (uneClaC).  
http://www.cepal.org/publicaciones/xml/8/49558/elderechohumanoalagua.pdf 

Kantor, s. 2012. The Economic Benefits of the San Joaquin River Restoration. fresno, usa, fresno regional foundation.

Kariuki, M., Patricot, G., rop, r., Mutono, s. and Makino, M. 2014. Do pro-poor policies increase water coverage? An analysis of 

service delivery in Kampala's informal settlements. Water and sanitation Programme. Washington, dC, the World bank.  
http://www-wds.worldbank.org/external/default/WdsContentserver/WdsP/ib/2014/02/24/000442464_20140224140639/
rendered/Pdf/850530WsP0box30la0PPPs0report0final.pdf

Krop, r., Hernick, C. and franz, C. 2008. Local Government Investment in Municipal Water and Sewer Infrastructure: Adding Value to 

the National Economy. Watertown, usa, Cadmus Group inc.

ledant, M., nilsson, d., Calas, b. and flores fernandez, r. 2013. Access to Water in Nairobi: Mapping inequalities beyond the 
statistics. nairobi, Global Water operators’ Partnerships alliance (GWoPa)/the french institute for research in africa (ifra). 

lockhart, C. and Vincent, s. 2013. Ending Extreme Poverty in Fragile and Conflict-affected Situations. background research paper. 

submitted to the High-level Panel on the Post-2015 development agenda.

lüthi, C., Panesar, a., schütze, t., norström, a., McConville, J., Parkinson, J., saywel, d. and ingle, r. 2011. Sustainable Sanitation in 
Cities: A Framework for Action. rijswijk, the netherlands, sustainable sanitation alliance susana/international forum on urbanism 
(ifou)/Papiroz Publishing House.  
http://www.susana.org/en/resources/library/details/1019

M

Majdalani, r. 2014. Water and Sanitation within the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and the post-2015 Development 

Agenda: A Regional Perspective. PPt delivered to seminar on Water and sanitation services in the arab region: Challenges and 
opportunities. unesCWa technology Center, amman, 11 March 2014.

 Martín, l. and Justo, J.b. 2014. Análisis, prevención y resolución de conflictos por agua en América Latina y el Caribe. unpublished 

draft. santiago, Chile, united nations economic Commission for latin america and the Caribbean (uneClaC).

Mea (Millennium ecosystem assessment). 2005a. Ecosystems and Human Well-Being: Current State and Trends. Washington, dC, 

island Press.

_____. 2005b. Ecosystems and Human Well-Being: Wetlands and Water Synthesis. Washington, dC, World resources institute (Wri).

_____. 2005c. Ecosystem and Human Well-Being: Biodiversity Synthesis. Washington, dC, World resources institute (Wri).

Milly, P.C.d., betancourt, J., falkenmark, M., Hirsch, r.M., Kundzewicz, Z.W., lettenmaier, d.P. and stouffer, r.J. 2010. stationarity is 

dead: Whither Water Management? Science, 319 (5963): 573-57a4.

WWDR 2015

111

n

o

P

Ministry of foreign affairs of the netherlands. 2012. From infrastructure to sustainable impact: Policy review of the Dutch 

contribution to drinking water and sanitation (1990-2011). iob evaluation. the Hague, the netherlands.

Moriarty, P., batchelor, C., abd-alhadi, f.t., laban, P. and fahmy, H. 2007. The EMPOWERS Approach to Water Governance: 

Guidelines, Methods and Tools. amman, Jordan, inter-islamic network on Water resources development and Management 
(inWrdaM)/eMPoWer Partnership. 

Morrison, J., Morikawa, M., Murphy, M. and schulte, P. 2009. Water Scarcity and Climate Change: Growing Risks for Business and 

Investors. boston, Ma, usa, Ceres.

namara, r.e., Hanjra, M.a., Castillo, G.e., ravnborg, H.M., smith, l. and Van Koppen, b. 2010. agricultural water management and 

poverty linkages. Agricultural Water Management, 97(4): 520-527.

national Constituent assembly of tunisia. 2014. Constitution de la république tunisienne, article 40. 26 January 2014.  

in arabic and in french: http://www.legislation-securite.tn/fr/node/33504?secondlanguage=ar&op=oK&form_build_id=form-8ce23
fff422d2fbdbba1fd8b49f484cc&form_id=dcaf_multilanguage_form_render

national drought forum. 2012. Drought and U.S. Preparedness in 2013 and Beyond, Summary Report and Priority Actions. 

Washington, dC, december 12-13, 2012.  
http://www.drought.gov/media/pgfiles/2012-droughtforumfullreport.pdf 

nauges, C. and strand, J. 2011. Water hauling and girls’ school attendance: Some new evidence from Ghana. Policy research working 

paper no. 6443. Washington, dC, the World bank. 

nikulin, G. 2013. Regional Climate Modeling Results and Ensemble using RCA4. PPt delivered to the fifth expert Group Meeting of 
the regional initiative for the assessment of the impact of Climate Change on Water resources and socio-economic Vulnerability 
in the arab region (riCCar). amman, Jordan, 11 december 2013. 
 http://www.escwa.un.org/riCCar/meetings.asp

oeCd (organisation for economic Co-operation and development). 2011. Green Growth Strategy for Food and Agriculture, 

Preliminary report. Paris, oeCd.

_____. 2012a. Environmental Outlook to 2050: The Consequences of Inaction. Paris, oeCd. 

doi:10.1787/9789264122246-en. 

_____. 2012b. Environmental Outlook to 2050: The Consequences of Inaction, Key Facts and Figures. Paris, oeCd.  

oHCHr (office of the High Commissioner for Human rights). 2010. The Right to Water. factsheet no. 35, p. 11.  

http://www.ohchr.org/documents/Publications/factsheet35en.pdf 

onda, K., lobuglio, J. and bartram, J. 2012. Global access to safe water: accounting for water quality and the resulting impact on 

MdG progress. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 9(3): 880-894. 
doi:10.3390/ijerph9030880.

Pahl-Wostl, C. 2007. transitions towards adaptive management of water facing climate and global change. Water Resources 

Management, 21: 49-62.

Perrot-Maître, d.P. and davis, P. 2001. Case Studies of Markets and Innovative Financial Mechanisms for Water Services from Forests. 

Washington, dC, forest trends association.

Pickering, a.J. and davis, J. 2012. freshwater availability and Water fetching distance affect Child Health in sub-saharan africa. 

Environmental Science & Technology, 46(4): 2391-2397.

Pimentel, d., Marklein, a., toth, M.a., Karpoff, M., Paul, G.s., McCormack, r., Kyriazis, J. and Krueger, t. 2008. biofuel impacts on 

World food supply: use of fossil fuel, land and Water resources. Energies, 1: 41-78.

Pittock, J. and Xu, M. 2011. Controlling Yangtze River Floods: A New Approach. World resources report Case study. Washington, dC, 

World resources report.  
http://www.wri.org/sites/default/files/uploads/wrr_case_study_controlling_yangtze_river_floods.pdf

Place J., dutto, P.r. and Casula, V. 2012. Putting water in the mainstream of your business strategy. Prism 1: 69-81. london, arthur d. 

little.  
http://www.adlittle.com/downloads/tx_adlprism/Prism_01-12_water.pdf

Planet under Pressure. 2012. Water Security for a Planet Under Pressure: Transition to sustainability: Interconnected challenges and 

solutions. rio+20 Policy brief no.1. london, Planet under Pressure.

Plummer, J. and Cross, P. 2006. Tackling corruption in the water and sanitation sector in Africa: Starting the dialogue. Water and 

sanitation Program (WsP) working paper. Washington, dC, the World bank.  
documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2006/12/10087913/tackling-corruption-water-sanitation-sector-africa-starting-dialogue 

Quick, t. and Winpenny, J.  2014. Topic Guide: Water security and economic development. uK, evidence on demand.   

http://www.evidenceondemand.info/topic-guide-water-security-and-economic-development

Q

112

referenCes

R

s

rockström, J., Karlberg, l., Wani, s., barron, J., Hatibu, n., oweis, t., bruggeman, a., farahani, J. and Qiang, W. 2010. Managing 

water in rainfed agriculture – the need for a paradigm shift. Agricultural Water Management, 97: 543-550.

rossi, b. 2006. aid Policies and recipient strategies in niger. Why donors and recipients should not be Compartmentalized into 

separate "Worlds of Knowledge". d. lewis and d. Mosse (eds). Development Brokers and Translators: The Ethnography of Aid and 
Agencies. bloomfield, Ct, usa, Kumarian Press, inc.

russi, d., brink, P., farmer, a., badura, t., Coates, d., förster, J., Kumar, r. and davidson, n. 2012. The Economics of Ecosystems 

and Biodiversity for Water and Wetlands. final Consultation draft. london/brussels/Gland, uK/belgium/switzerland, institute for 
european environmental Policy (ieeP)/ramsar secretariat. 

rWsn (rural Water supply network) executive steering Committee. 2010. Myths of the Rural Water Supply Sector. rWsn Perspective 

no. 4. st. Gallen, switzerland, rWsn.

sarni, W. 2011. Corporate Water Strategies. london, earthscan.

sato, t., Qadir, M., Yamamoto, s., endo, t. and Zahoor, a. 2013. Global, regional, and country level need for data on wastewater 

generation, treatment, and use. Agricultural Water Management, 130: 1-13.

schaible, G.d. and Marcel, P.a. 2012. Water Conservation in Irrigated Agriculture: Trends and Challenges in the Face of Emerging 
Demands. economic information bulletin no. 99. united states department of agriculture (usda), economic research service. 

scholz, M., Mehl, d., schulz-Zunkel, C., Kasperidus, H.d., born, W. and Henle, K. 2012. Ökosystemfunktionen von Flussauen 

– Analyse und Bewertung von Hochwasserretention, Nährstoffrückhalt, Kohlenstoffvorrat, Treibhausgasemissionen und 
Habitatfunktion [Ecosystem functions in floodplains - analysis of floodwater detention, nutrient retention, carbon storage and 
habitat provision]. naturschutz und biologische Vielfalt, 124: 257 s.  
https://www.bfn.de/fileadmin/Mdb/documents/ina/vortraege/2013/2013-auen-15_scholz_oekosystemleistungen_auen.pdf

shah, t., roy, a.d., Qureshi, a.s. and Wang, J. 2003. sustaining asia’s Groundwater boom: an overview of issues and evidence. 

Natural Resources Forum – A United Nations Sustainable Development Journal, 27 (2): 130-141.

shah, t., 2005. Groundwater and Human development: Challenges and opportunities in livelihoods and environment. Water, Science 

& Technology, 51 (8): 27-37.

shiklomanov, i. 1999. international Hydrological Programme database. st. Peterburg, russia, state Hydrological institute.  

http://webworld.unesco.org/water/ihp/db/shiklomanov/

siWi (stockholm international Water institute). 2005. Making Water a Part of Economic Development: The Economic Benefits of 

Improved Water Management and Services. stockholm, siWi.

solanes, M. and Jouravlev, a. 2006. Water governance for development and sustainability. santiago, Chile, united nations economic 

Commission for latin america and the Caribbean (uneClaC).  
http://www.eclac.org/publicaciones/xml/0/26200/lcl2556e.pdf

_____. 2007. Revisiting privatization, foreign investment, international arbitration, and water. santiago, Chile, united nations economic 

Commission for latin america and the Caribbean (uneClaC).  
http://www.eclac.org/publicaciones/xml/0/32120/lcl2827e.pdf 

soussan, J. and arriens, W.l. 2004. Poverty and water security: Understanding how water affects the poor. Water for all series no. 2. 

asian development bank (adb).

sperling, f. and bahri, a. 2014. Powering Africa’s Green Growth: The importance of Water-Energy Nexus. Presentation at the 5th 

africa Water Week, dakar, senegal.

spiegelhalter, d., Pearson, M. and short, i. 2011. Visualizing uncertainty about the future. Science, 333: 1393-1400.

subbiah, a.r., bildan, l. and narasimhan, r. 2008. Background Paper on Assessment of the Economics of Early Warning Systems for 

Disaster Risk Reduction. Washington, dC, the World bank.

tettey-lowor, f.  2009. Closing the loop between sanitation and agriculture in Accra, Ghana: Improving yields in urban agriculture by 

using urine as a fertilizer and drivers & barriers for scaling-up. MsC thesis. the netherlands, Wageningen university.

T

todd, M.C., taylor, r.G., osborn, t.J., Kingston, d.G., arnell, n.W. and Gosling, s.n. 2011. uncertainty in climate change impacts on 
basin-scale freshwater resources. Preface to the special issue: the Quest-Gsi methodology and synthesis of results. Hydrology and 
Earth System Sciences, 15: 1035-1046.

tremblay, H. 2011. a Clash of Paradigms in the Water sector? tensions and synergies between integrated Water resources 

Management and the Human rights-based approach to development. Natural Resources Journal, 51: 307-356.

turpie, J. 2010. Wastewater treatment by wetlands, South Africa. the economics of ecosystems and biodiversity (teeb).  

http://www.eea.europa.eu/atlas/teeb/water-quality-amelioration-value-of/view

WWDR 2015

113

U

un (united nations). 2002. Substantive Issues Arising in the Implementation of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and 

Cultural Rights. General Comment no. 15, e/C.12/2002/11. economic and social Council, Committee on economic, social and 
Cultural rights, new York, un.  

_____. 2012. Review of the contributions of the MDG Agenda to foster development: Lessons for the post-2015 UN development 

agenda. un system task team on the Post-2015 un development agenda. new York, un.

_____. 2013a. A new global partnership: Eradicate poverty and transform economies through sustainable development. the report of 

the High-level Panel of eminent Persons on the Post-2015 development agenda. new York, un.

_____. 2013b. Economic and social repercussions of the Israeli occupation on the living conditions of the Palestinian people in the 

Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and the Arab population in the occupied Syrian Golan. a/68/77–e/2013/13. 
new York, un. 

_____. 2013c. TST Issues Brief: Water and Sanitation. third session of the open Working Group, 22-24 May 2013. united nations 

sustainable development Knowledge Platform. new York, un.

unCesCr (united nations Committee on economic, social and Cultural rights). 2003. General Comment no. 15: the right to Water 

(arts. 11 and 12 of the Covenant), 20 January 2003. e/C.12/2002/11.  

unCtad (united nations Conference on trade and development). 2014. Trade and Development Report, 2014: 135-145.  

new York/Geneva, united nations (un).  
http://unctad.org/en/Publicationslibrary/tdr2014_en.pdf

undesa (united nations department of economic and social affairs). 2012. Back to our Common Future: Sustainable Development 

in the 21st Century (SD21) project. new York, united nations (un).

_____. 2013a. World Population Prospects: the 2012 revision. new York, Population division, united nations (un).  

http://esa.un.org/wpp/

_____. 2013b. Global Sustainable Development Report – Executive Summary: Building the Common Future We Want. new York, 

division for sustainable development, undesa. 

_____. 2014. World Urbanization Prospects: The 2014 Revision, Highlights. (st/esa/ser.a/352). new York, united nations (un). 

http://esa.un.org/unpd/wup/

undesa/unesCWa. (united nations department of economic and social affairs/united nations economic and social Commission for 

Western asia). 2013. Working draft background paper on the analysis, mapping and identification of critical gaps in pre-impact 
and preparedness drought management planning in water-scarce and in-transitioning-settings countries in West Asia/North Africa. 
expert Group and inception Meeting on strengthening national Capacities to Manage Water scarcity and drought in West asia 
and north africa. beirut, 24-25 June 2013. 

undP (united nations development Programme). 2007. Fighting Climate Change: Human solidarity in a divided world. new York, undP.

_____. 2013. The Rise of the South: Human Progress in a Diverse World. new York, undP.

undP/sei (united nations development Programme/stockholm environmental institute). 2006. Linking Poverty Reduction and Water 

Management. Poverty-environment Partnership (PeP) report. new York, undP.

uneCa (united nations economic Commission for africa). 2000. The Africa Water Vision for 2025: Equitable and Sustainable Use of 
Water for Socioeconomic Development. Produced jointly with un-Water/africa, african development bank, african union. addis 
ababa, uneCa.

uneCe (united nations economic Commission for europe). 2011. Second Assessment of Transboundary Rivers, Lakes and 

Groundwaters. new York/Geneva, uneCe. 

_____. 2013. The European Union Water Initiative National Policy Dialogues: Achievements and lessons learned. new York/Geneva, 

uneCe.

_____. 2014. alazani/Ganikh river basin Water-food-energy-ecosystems nexus assessment. unpublished first draft report for 

comments by the concerned authorities. Prepared by the (KtH, stockholm) under the supervision of the uneCe Water Convention 
secretariat.  
http://www.unece.org/fileadmin/daM/env/documents/2014/Wat/09sept_8-9_Geneva/the_nexus_assessment_in_the_alazani_-
consolidated_v19June2014_compatible_1_.pdf

uneCe/oeCd (united nations economic Commission for europe/organisation for economic Co-operation and development). 2014. 

Integrated Water Resources Management in Eastern Europe, the Caucasus and Central Asia: European Union Water Initiative 
National Policy Dialogues Progress Report. new York/Geneva, united nations/oeCd.  

uneClaC (united nations economic Commission for latin america and the Caribbean). 2001. Network for Cooperation in Integrated 

Water Resource Management for Sustainable Development in Latin America and the Caribbean. Circular no.12. santiago, Chile, 
uneClaC.  
http://www.eclac.org/drni/noticias/circulares/2/6202/Carta12in.pdf

114

referenCes

_____. 2013a. Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean 2013. lC/G.2574-P. santiago, Chile, uneClaC.  

http://www.cepal.org/publicaciones/xml/3/50483/economicsurvey2013complete.pdf 

_____. 2013b. Social Panorama of Latin America 2013. briefing paper. santiago, Chile, uneClaC.  

http://www.cepal.org/publicaciones/xml/8/51768/socialPanorama2013briefing.pdf

uneP (united nations environment Programme). 2002. The World’s International Freshwater Agreements. nairobi, uneP.

_____. 2004. Women and Water Management: an integrated approach. Women and the Environment, nairobi, uneP. pp. 60-83.

_____. 2009. From Conflict to Peacebuilding – The Role of Natural Resources and the Environment. nairobi, uneP.

_____. 2011. Towards a Green Economy: Pathways to Sustainable Development and Poverty Eradication. nairobi, uneP.  

http://www.unep.org/greeneconomy/greeneconomyreport/tabid/29846/default.aspx 

_____. 2012. Measuring Water Use in a Green Economy: A Report of the Working Group on Water Efficiency to the International 

Resource Panel. nairobi, uneP. 

uneP/uneP-dHi/iuCn/tnC (united nations environment Programme/uneP-dHi Partnership – Centre on Water and environment/

international union for Conservation of nature/the nature Conservancy). 2014. Green Infrastructure Guide for Water 
Management: Ecosystem-based management approaches for water-related infrastructure projects. nairobi, uneP.

unesCaP (united nations economic and social Commission for asia and the Pacific). 2013. Statistical Yearbook for Asia and the 

Pacific 2013. bangkok, unesCaP.

unesCaP/unisdr (united nations economic and social Commission for asia and the Pacific/united nations office for disaster risk 

reduction). 2012. Reducing Vulnerability and Exposure to Disasters. The Asia-Pacific Disaster Report 2012. bangkok, unesCaP/
unisdr.

unesCo (united nations educational, scientific and Cultural organization). 2012. World’s groundwater resources are suffering from 

poor governance. unesCo natural sciences sector news. Paris, unesCo.

unesCWa (united nations economic and social Commission for Western asia). 2013a. drought in the esCWa region: technical 

Material. e/esCWa/sdPd/WP/2013.

_____. 2013b. Water Development Report 5: Issues in Sustainable Water Resources Management and Water Services. new York, 

united nations (un). 

unesCWa/bGr (united nations economic and social Commission for Western asia/bundesanstalt für Geowissenschaften und 

rohstoffe). 2013. Inventory of Shared Water Resources in Western Asia. beirut, unesCWa. 

unGa (united nations General assembly). 2001. Road map towards the implementation of the United Nations Millennium 

Declaration. report of the secretary General. fifty-sixth session. 6 september 2001. new York, un.

_____. 2010. The human right to water and sanitation. sixty-fourth session, 3 august 2010. 2a/res/64/292. new York, un. 

_____. 2013. Report of the Special Rapporteur on the human right to safe drinking water and sanitation. sixty-eighth session,  

5 august 2013. a/68/264. new York, un.

_____. 2014. Report of the Open Working Group on Sustainable Development Goals established pursuant to General Assembly 

resolution 66/288. 12 september 2014. resolution a/res/68/309. new York, un.

un-Habitat (united nations Human settlements Programme). 2010. State of the World's Cities 2010/2011 Report: Bridging the Urban 

Divide. nairobi, un-Habitat.

_____. 2011. World Water Day 2011: Water and urbanization. Water for Cities: Responding to the urban challenge. Final Report 

nairobi, un-Habitat.

_____. 2013. State of the World's Cities 2012/2013: Prosperity of Cities. nairobi, un-Habitat.

uniCef (united nations Children's fund). 2013. WASH Sector, Syria. PPt presentation. damascus, october 2013. 

unido (united nations industrial development organization). 2008. Policies for Promoting Industrial Energy Efficiency in Developing 

Countries and Transition Economies, Executive Summary. Vienna, unido.

_____. 2011a. UNIDO Green Industry Policies for supporting Green Industry. Vienna, unido.  

http://www.unido.org/fileadmin/user_media/services/Green_industry/web_policies_green_industry.pdf

_____. 2011b. UNIDO Green Industry Initiative for Sustainable Industrial Development. Vienna, unido.  

http://www.greenindustryplatform.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/05/Green-industry-initiative-for-sustainable-industrial-
development.pdf 

_____. 2013. the lima declaration. 15th session of unido General Conference. lima, Peru, 2 december 2013. Vienna, unido.  
http://www.unido.org/fileadmin/user_media_upgrade/Media_center/2013/news/GC15/unido_GC15_lima_declaration.pdf

WWDR 2015

115

_____. 2014. UNIDO-Industry Partnerships. Presentation by i. Volodin at 2014 un-Water annual international Zaragoza Conference. 

Preparing for World Water day 2014: Partnerships for improving water and energy access, efficiency and sustainability. 13-16 
January 2014. Vienna, unido.  
http://www.un.org/waterforlifedecade/water_and_energy_2014/presentations.shtml

unisdr (united nations office for disaster risk reduction). 2012. Infographic on Impacts of Disasters since the 1992 Rio de Janeiro 

Earth Summit.  
http://www.unisdr.org/files/27162_infographic.pdf

unosd/unu (united nations office for sustainable development/ united nations university). 2013. Water for Sustainability: Framing 

Water within the Post-2015 Development Agenda. incheon/Hamilton, republic of Korea/Canada, unosd/unu.

un-Water. 2012. The UN-Water Status Report on the Application of Integrated Approaches to Water Resources Management.  

new York, un-Water.

_____. 2013. The Post-2015 Water Thematic Consultation Report: The World We Want. new York, un-Water.  

http://www.unwater.org/downloads/final9aug2013_Water_tHeMatiC_Consultation_rePort.pdf 

_____. 2014. A Post-2015 Global Goal for Water: Synthesis of key findings and recommendations from UN-Water. new York, un-Water.  

http://www.un.org/waterforlifedecade/pdf/27_01_2014_un-water_paper_on_a_post2015_global_goal_for_water.pdf

un-Water/fao. 2007. 2007 World Water Day: Coping with Water Scarcity: Challenge of the twenty-first century.  

http://www.fao.org/nr/water/docs/escarcity.pdf

un-Women. 2012. The Future Women Want: A Vision of Sustainable Development for All. new York, united nations (un).

usCb (united states Census bureau). 2012. International Programs. World Population.  
http://www.census.gov/population/international/data/worldpop/table_population.php

usGs (united states Geological survey). 2013. Land subsistence.  

http://ga.water.usgs.gov/edu/earthgwlandsubside.html.

van den berg, C. and danilenko, a. 2011. The IBNET Water and Sanitation Performance Blue Book 2011. Washington, dC,  

the World bank.

van der Gun, J. 2012. Groundwater and global change: Trends, opportunities and challenges. WWdr4 side Publication series no. 01. 

Paris, unesCo.

Viviroli, d., archer, d.r., buytaert, W., fowler, H.J., Greenwood, G.b., Hamlet, a.f., Huang, Y., Koboltschnig, G., litaor, M.i., lópez-
Moreno, J.i., lorentz, s., schädler, b., schreier, H., schwaiger, K., Vuille, M. and Woods, r. 2011. Climate change and mountain 
water resources: overview and recommendations for research, management and policy. Hydrology and Earth System Sciences, 15: 
471-504.

Vörösmarty, C.J., Mcintyre, P.b., Gessner, M.o., dudgeon, d., Prusevich, a., Green, P., Glidden, s., bunn, s.e., sullivan, C.a., reidy 

liermann, C. and davies, P.M. 2010. Global threats to human water security and river biodiversity. Nature, 467: 555-561.

Wang, J., rothausen, s., Conway, d., Zhang l., Xiong, W.,  Holman, i. and li, Y. 2012. China's water–energy nexus: Greenhouse-gas 

emissions from groundwater use for agriculture. Environmental Research Letters, 7014035.  

V

W

Wateraid india. 2008. Feeling the Pulse: A study of the Total Sanitation Campaign in Five States. new delhi, Wateraid india.

WbCsd (World business Council for sustainable development). 2012. Water valuation: Building the business case. Geneva, 

switzerland, WbsCd.  
http://www.wbcsd.org/Pages/edocument/edocumentdetails.aspx?id=15099&nosearchContextKey=true 

 Wef (World economic forum). 2014a. Global Risks 2014: Ninth edition. Geneva, switzerland, Wef.

 _____. 2014b. Outlook on the Global Agenda 2014. Geneva, switzerland, Wef. 

WGf (Water Governance facility). 2012. Human Rights-Based Approaches and Managing Water Resources: Exploring the potential for 

enhancing development outcomes. WGf report no. 1. stockholm, stockholm international Water institute (siWi).

_____. 2013. Mutual Rights and Shared Responsibilities in Water Services Management: Enhancing the User-Provider Relation. WGf 

report no. 2. stockholm, stockholm international Water institute (siWi).

_____. 2014. Mainstreaming Gender in Water Governance Programmes: From Design to Results. WGf report no. 4. stockholm, 

stockholm international Water institute (siWi).

WHo (World Health organization). 2011. Guidelines for Drinking Water Quality: Fourth edition. Geneva, switzerland, WHo.

_____. 2012a. UN-Water Global annual assessment of sanitation and drinking-water (GLAAS) 2012 report: The challenge of extending 

and sustaining services. Geneva, switzerland, WHo.

116

referenCes

_____. 2012b. Global costs and benefits of drinking-water supply and sanitation interventions to reach the MDG target and universal 

coverage. Geneva, switzerland, WHo.

_____. 2014. Investing in water and sanitation: Increasing access, reducing inequalities. Geneva, switzerland, WHo.

_____. n.d. Definition of food security (World food summit of 1996). WHo  

http://www.who.int/trade/glossary/story028/en/ 

WHo/dfid (World Health organization/department for internal development). 2009. Vision 2030: The resilience of water supply and 

sanitation in the face of climate change. Geneva, switzerland, WHo. 

WHo and uniCef (World Health organization/united nations Children's fund). 2011. Drinking water: Equity, Safety and 

Sustainability. Geneva/new York, WHo/uniCef.

_____. 2012. Progress on drinking water and sanitation: 2012 update. new York, WHo/uniCef Joint Monitoring Programme for 

Water supply and sanitation.

_____. 2013. Progress on Drinking Water and Sanitation: 2013 Update. new York, WHo/uniCef Joint Monitoring Programme for 

Water supply and sanitation.

_____. 2014a. Progress on drinking water and sanitation: 2014 Update. new York, WHo/uniCef Joint Monitoring Programme for 

Water supply and sanitation. 

_____. 2014b. data and estimates. new York, WHo/uniCef Joint Monitoring Programme for Water supply and sanitation.  

http://www.wssinfo.org/

Williams, e.d. and simmons, J.e. 2013. Water in the energy industry: An introduction. london, bP (british Petroleum) international ltd. 

WMo (World Meteorological organization). 2009. Guide to Hydrological Practices 6th edition. WMo Publication no. 168. Geneva, 

switzerland, WMo.

Wna (World nuclear association). 2013. nuclear Power in saudi arabia. updated december 2013.  

http://www.world-nuclear.org/info/Country-Profiles/Countries-o-s/saudi-arabia/

World bank. 2007a. World Development Report 2008. Agriculture for Development. Washington, dC, the World bank.  

_____. 2007b. Cost of pollution in China: Economic estimates of physical damages. Washington, dC, the World bank. 

_____. 2010a. Economics of Adaptation to Climate Change: Synthesis Report. Washington, dC, the World bank.  

http://www-wds.worldbank.org/external/default/WdsContentserver/WdsP/ib/2012/06/27/000425970_20120627163039/
rendered/Pdf/702670esW0P10800eaCCsynthesisreport.pdf

_____. 2010b. Climate Finance in the Urban Contex. issues brief no. 4. Washington, dC, the World bank.  

http://wbi.worldbank.org/wbi/data/wbi/wbicms/files/drupal-acquia/wbi/578590revised0101Public10dCfib0141a.pdf 

_____. 2010c. Climate Risks and Adaptation in Asian Coastal Megacities. Washington, dC, the World bank.

_____. 2011. Thailand environment monitor: Integrated water resources management - A way forward. Washington, dC, the World 

bank. 

_____. 2012. A Primer on Energy Efficiency for Municipal Water and Wastewater Utilities. technical report no. 1. Washington, dC, 

energy sector Management assistance Program, the World bank. 

_____. 2013. thirsty energy. Water Papers 78923. Washington, dC, Water unit, transportation, Water and iCt department, 

sustainable development Vice Presidency, the World bank.

World economics. 2014. World Economics: Global Growth Tracker.  

http://www.worldeconomics.com/papers/Global%20Growth%20Monitor_7c66ffca-ff86-4e4c-979d-7c5d7a22ef21.paper

Wouters, P. 2011. Climate Change and its implications for sustainable development and cooperation in the nile basin: threats 

and opportunities to nile basin Cooperation. Presentation at the 3rd nile basin development forum, 26-28 october 2011, Kigali, 
rwanda. 
http://www.slideshare.net/jmccaffery57/pat-wouters-kigali-keynote-talk-27-oct-2011-last 

WsP (Water and sanitation Program) 2013. Review of Community-Managed Decentralized Wastewater Treatment Systems in 

Indonesia. Washington, dC, the World bank.  
http://www.wsp.org/sites/wsp.org/files/publications/WsP-review-deWats-indonesia-technical-Paper.pdf  

WWaP (World Water assessment Programme). 2006. The United Nations World Water Development Report 2: Water: A Shared 

Responsibility. Paris/new York, unesCo/berghahn books.

_____. 2009. The United Nations World Water Development Report 3: Water in a Changing World. Paris/new York, unesCo/

earthscan.

WWDR 2015

117

_____. 2012. The United Nations World Water Development Report 4: Managing Water under Uncertainty and Risk. Paris, unesCo.

_____. 2014. The United Nations World Water Development Report 2014: Water and Energy. Paris, unesCo. 

_____. 2015. Facing the Challenges. Case Studies and Indicators. Paris, unesCo.

WWf (World Wide fund for nature). 2008. Water for life: Lessons for climate change adaptation from better management of rivers 

for people and nature. Gland, switzerland, WWf.

_____. 2012. Living Planet Report 2012: Biodiversity, Biocapacity and Better Choices. Gland, switzerland, WWf international.

WWf/deG KfW bankengruppe. 2011. Assessing Water Risk: A Practical Approach for Financial Institutions. berlin, WWf Germany. 

Z

Zekri, s., Karimi, a. and Madani, K. 2014. Groundwater Policing for a Sustainable Food Supply in Oman. Paper delivered to the 41st 

international association of Hydrologists (iaH) Congress: Groundwater: Challenges and strategies. Moroccan Chapter. 15-19 
september 2014, Marrakech.

118

referenCes

AbbREViATions AnD ACRonyMs

2030 WRG 
ACET 
AfDB 
AMCOW 
ASCE 
AU 
BAT 
BGR 
BRICS 
BRIICS 
CAP 
CBD 
CRED 
DALYs 
DEWATS 
DFID 
EAFRD 
EBM 
EC 
ECA 
ECCAS 
EEA 
EECCA 
EPA 
EU 
FAO 
GDP 
GEF 
GHG 
GWP 
HDI 
HDR 
HLPE 
ICARDA 
ICMM 
ICPDR 
ICRISAT 
IEA 
IFAD 
IGRAC 
IJC   
IPCC 
IRC 
IUCN 
IUWM 
IWMI 
IWRM 

2030 Water resources Group
african Centre for economic transformation 
african development bank Group 
african Ministers’ Council on Water 
american society of Civil engineers 
african union 
best available techniques/technology
bundesanstalt für Geowissenschaften und rohstoffe
brazil, russia, india, China and south africa
brazil, russia, india, indonesia, China and south africa 
european union Common agricultural Policy
Convention on biological diversity 
Centre for research on the epidemiology of disasters 
disability-adjusted life years
decentralized wastewater treatment systems
department for internal development (united Kingdom)
european agricultural fund for rural development 
ecosystem-based management
european Commission 
european Court of auditors 
economic Community of Central african states 
european environment agency 
eastern europe, the Caucasus and Central asia
environmental Protection agency 
european union 
food and agriculture organization of the united nations
Gross domestic Product
Global environment facility
Greenhouse gas 
Global Water Partnership
Human development index
Human development report
High level Panel of experts on food security and nutrition 
international Center for agricultural research in the dry areas
international Council on Mining and Metals
international Commission for the Protection of the danube river
international Crops research institute for the semi-arid-tropics
international energy agency
international fund for agricultural development
international Groundwater resources assessment Centre
international Joint Commission (Canada and united states)
intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
international Water and sanitation Centre
international union for Conservation of nature
integrated urban water management
international Water Management institute
integrated Water resources Management

119

WWDR 2015JMP 
LSALI 
MDGs 
MEA 
NI 
OECD 
OHCHR 
OWG 
PES 
PV 
RWSN 
SDGs 
SEI 
SIDS 
SIWI 
SMEs 
SRBC 
TNC 
UN 
UNCESCR 
UNCTAD 
UNDESA 
UNDP 
UN-DPAC 
UNECA 
UNECE 
UNECLAC 
UNEP 
UNESCAP 
UNESCO 
UNESCWA 
UNGA 
UN-Habitat 
UNIDO 
UNISDR 
UNOSD 
UNU 
USCB 
USGS 
WASH 
WBCSD 
WEF 
WFA 
WGF 
WHO 
WMO 
WNA 
WRI 
WSP 
WWAP 
WWF 

WHo/uniCef Joint Monitoring Programme for Water supply and sanitation
large-scale agricultural lease investments
Millennium development Goals 
Millennium ecosystem assessment 
natural infrastructure
organisation for economic Co-operation and development
office of the High Commissioner for Human rights 
open Working Group 
Payment for ecosystem/environmental services 
solar photovoltaic
rural Water supply network
sustainable development Goals 
stockholm environmental institute
small island developing states
stockholm international Water institute
small and medium-sized enterprises
international sava river basin Commission
the nature Conservancy
united nations
united nations Committee on economic, social and Cultural rights
united nations Conference on trade and development
united nations department of economic and social affairs 
united nations development Programme
united nations decade Programme on advocacy and Communication
united nations economic Commission for africa
united nations economic Commission for europe
united nations economic Commission for latin america and the Caribbean
united nations environment Programme
united nations economic and social Commission for asia and the Pacific
united nations educational, scientific and Cultural organization
united nations economic and social Commission for Western asia
united nations General assembly
united nations Human settlements Programme
united nations industrial development organization
united nations office for disaster risk reduction
united nations office for sustainable development
united nations university
united states Census bureau
united states Geological survey
Water, sanitation and Hygiene
World business Council for sustainable development
World economic forum
Water footprint assessment
Water Governance facility
World Health organization
World Meteorological organization
World nuclear association
World resources institute
Water and sanitation Program 
World Water assessment Programme
World Wide fund for nature/World Wildlife fund

120

abbrevIaTIons and aCronyMs

boxEs, TAblEs AnD FiGUREs

boxEs

the terms ‘safe’ and ‘improved’ in the MdG context 

transboundary collaboration for healthy ecosystems and community engagement 
examples of unsustainable WasH 

Pro-poor policies in Kampala 
forest conservation by a water utility in Costa rica 
Phnom Penh water supply: an example of good governance 

safeguarding the interests of poor people: Global trends with local effects  

investing in water infrastructure: When damages avoided become main benefits 
investing in water: a wise policy option that’s good for business 
still many opportunities to do more with less 
trade-offs in water and production 
investing in protecting water resources 
reconnecting lakes in the Central Yangtze river basin  

1.1 
2.1  Water supply investments: the importance of governance and financing for reducing poverty 
2.2 
3.1  opportunities for water investments to facilitate economic growth 
3.2 
3.3 
3.4 
3.5 
3.6 
4.1 
4.2  Wastewater treatment in the fynbos ecosystem, south africa  
4.3 
5.1 
5.2  a focus on providing for the poorest leads to more equitable WasH outcomes in south africa 
6.1 
6.2 
6.3 
6.4  deWats in indonesia  
7.1  deficit irrigation for high yield and maximum net profits 
7.2 
7.3 
7.4 
7.5  Groundwater governance in andhra Pradesh, india 
9.1  Mining and water sustainability: Minera esperanza, Chile 
9.2  Water and wastewater in eco-industrial parks 
9.3  united nations post-2015 global goal for water and what it means for industry 
15.1  Kofi annan on africa’s green and blue revolutions 
15.2  the Grand inga project  
15.3  large-scale agricultural lease investments 
16.1  Millennium development Goal 7: ensure environmental sustainability  
16.2  outcomes of a dedicated sdG for water as suggested by un-Water 
16.3  text related to water and sanitation in the final report of the open Working Group on sdGs 

rio rural: Payments for environmental services in a watershed management programme  
the Keita Project: exploring the range of water conservation options in western niger 
strengthening adaptive capacity of smallholder farmers through land and water management 

15
19
20
23
24
24
25
26
26
28
31
32
38
38
45
45
46
46
49
50
51
52
53
58
59
61
85
88
89
93
95
96

121

WWDR 2015TAblEs

4.1  overview of natural infrastructure solutions for water resources management 
9.1  unido’s Green industry initiative 

FiGUREs

1.1 
5.1 

total renewable water resources per capita (2013)  
 schematic of criteria for sustainable water, sanitation and hygiene services and their key impacts on  
sustainable development  
strong growth of bottled and sachet water as a main drinking water source in urban settings (2000-2012) 
sanitation coverage (%) in ethiopia, by province (2000-2012) 

trends in urban water supply coverage (1990-2012) 

5.2 
5.3 
6.1  Global water demand in 2000 and 2050 
6.2 
6.3  access to sanitation in urban Cambodia in different wealth quintiles 
6.4  access to water in Mombasa's informal settlements 
7.1 
9.1 
9.2 
9.3  Water stewardship strategy for industry 
12.1  Growth in agricultural groundwater use in selected countries (1940-2010) 
12.2  agricultural groundwater use in China (km3 per year) 
12.3  Map of arsenic traces in groundwater in asia 
13.1  Per capita share of renewable water resources in selected arab region countries (2011) 
15.1  the water-food-energy nexus in africa  

the five principles of sustainable agriculture 
examples of water hotspots in selected industries 
relative water footprint of various industry sectors 

33
63

12

37
39
41
42
43
43
44
48
60
62
63
75
76
77
78
86

122

boxes, Tables and fIgUres

The United Nations World Water Development Report

ISBN 978-92-3-104259-1
© UNESCO 2014
Set of two volumes
232 pages
Price: EUR 55.00

ISBN 978-92-3-100080-5
© UNESCO 2015
Set of two reports
216 pages
Price: EUR 45.00

Full colour, with photographs, tables, figures, maps, boxes, notes, 
references and abbreviations list as well as Forewords by United Nations 
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, UNESCO Director General Irina Bokova 
and UN-Water Chair and WMO Secretary-General Michel Jarraud.

WWDR 2015 Full colour, with photographs, tables, figures, maps, boxes, 
notes, references and abbreviations list as well as Forewords by United 
Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, UNESCO Director General Irina 
Bokova and UN-Water Chair and WMO Secretary-General Michel Jarraud.

Case Studies and Indicators Report Full colour, with photographs, tables, 
figures, maps, boxes, notes, references and abbreviations list as well as a 
Preface by WWAP Coordinator a.i. and Author.

To purchase a printed copy of the book, please visit: http://publishing.unesco.org
To request a CD-ROM containing the report and associated publications, please write to: wwap@unesco.org
To download the PDF and e-book (.epub format) formats of the report and associated publications, previous WWDRs and media material, 
please visit: http://www.unesco.org/water/wwap
CD-ROM 2015 content: WWDR 2015, Case Studies and Indicators Report, Executive Summary in 10 languages, Facts & Figures in 4 languages

Associated publications

Executive Summary of the 
WWDR 2014
12 pages
Available in English, French 
and Spanish

Facts and Figures from the 
WWDR 2O14
16 pages
Available in English, French 
and Spanish

Executive Summary of the 
WWDR 2015
8 pages
Available in Arabic, Chinese, 
English, French, German, Italian, 
Korean, Portuguese, Russian  
and Spanish

Facts and Figures from the 
WWDR 2015
12 pages
Available in English, French, 
Spanish and Italian

To download these documents, please visit: http://www.unesco.org/water/wwap

Un-WATER REPoRTs 

UN-Water is the United Nations (UN) inter-agency coordination mechanism for freshwater related issues, including sanitation. it was formally 
established in 2003 building on a long history of collaboration in the UN family. UN-Water is comprised of UN entities with a focus on, or 
interest in, water related issues as Members and other non-UN international organizations as Partners.

The work of UN-Water is organized around Thematic Priority Areas and Task Forces as well as awareness-raising campaigns such as World 
Water Day (22 March) and World Toilet Day (19 November). 

The main purpose of UN-Water is to complement and add value to existing programmes and projects by facilitating synergies and joint efforts, 
so as to maximize system-wide coordinated action and coherence. by doing so, UN-Water seeks to increase the effectiveness of the support 
provided to Member States in their efforts towards achieving international agreements on water. 

PERioDiC REPoRTs

World Water Development Report (WWDR)

is the reference publication of the UN system on the status of the freshwater resource. The Report 
is the result of the strong collaboration among UN-Water Members and Partners and it represents 
the coherent and integrated response of the UN system to freshwater-related issues and emerging 
challenges. The report production coordinated by the World Water Assessment Programme and the 
theme is harmonized with the theme of World Water Day (22 March). From 2003 to 2012, the WWDR was 
released every three years and from 2014 the Report is released annually to provide the most up to date 
and factual information of how water-related challenges are addressed around the world. 

  Strategic outlook
  State, uses and management of 

water resources

  global 
  Regional assessments
  Triennial (2003-2012)
  Annual (from 2014)
  Links to the theme of World 

Water Day (22 March)

UN-Water global Analysis and Assessment of Sanitation and Drinking-Water (gLAAS)

is produced by the World health organization (Who) on behalf of UN-Water. it provides a global update 
on the policy frameworks, institutional arrangements, human resource base, and international and 
national finance streams in support of sanitation and drinking water. it is a substantive input into the 
activities of Sanitation and Water for All (SWA).

  Strategic outlook
  Water supply and sanitation
  global
  Regional assessments
  biennial (since 2008)

The progress report of the Who/UNiCEF Joint Monitoring
Programme for Water Supply and Sanitation (JMP)

is affiliated with UN-Water and presents the results of the global monitoring of progress towards MDg 7 
target C: to halve, by 2015, the proportion of the population without sustainable access to safe drinking-
water and basic sanitation. Monitoring draws on the findings of household surveys and censuses usually 
supported by national statistics bureaus in accordance with international criteria.

  Status and trends
  Water supply and sanitation
  global
  Regional and national 

assessments

  biennial (1990-2012)
  Annual updates (since 2013)

Un-WATER PlAnnED PUbliCATions 2015

•  UN-Water Analytical brief on Wastewater Management 
•  UN-Water Analytical brief on Water Efficiency
•  UN-Water Analytical brief on Water quality Monitoring
•  UN-Water Country briefs
•  UN-Water Policy brief on Discrimination and the Right to Water and Sanitation
•  UN-Water Report on the international Decade for Action 'Water for Life' 2005-2015

More information on Un-Water Reports at: http://www.unwater.org/publications

125

WWDR 2015ChapteR titleThe United Nations World Water Assessment Programme (WWAP) is hosted and led by UNESCo. WWAP brings 
together the work of 31 UN-Water Members as well as 37 Partners to publish the United Nations World Water 
Development Report (WWDR) series.

Under the theme Water for Sustainable Development, the WWDR 2015 has been prepared as a contribution 
from UN-Water to the discussions surrounding the post-2015 framework for global sustainable development. 
highlighting water’s unique and often complex role in achieving various sustainable development objectives, 
the WWDR 2015 is addressed to policy- and decision-makers  inside and outside the water community, as well 
as to anyone with an interest in freshwater and its many life-giving benefits.

The report sets an aspirational yet achievable vision for the future of water towards 2050 by describing how 
water supports healthy and prosperous human communities, maintains well functioning ecosystems and 
ecological services, and provides a cornerstone for short and long-term economic development. it provides an 
overview of the challenges, issues and trends in terms of water resources, their use and water-related services 
like water supply and sanitation. The report also offers, in a rigorous yet accessible manner, guidance about 
how to address these challenges and to seize the opportunities that sound water management provides in 
order to achieve and maintain economic, social and environmental sustainability.

this publication is financed by  
the Government of italy and umbria region.

126

9 789231 000805

Chapter 1 STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES