Global Biodiversity 
Outlook ʇ

A mid-term assessment of progress towards the implementation 
of the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011-2020

4

3

2

Global Biodiversity 
Outlook 4

A mid-term assessment of progress towards the implementation 
of the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011-2020

© Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity.

Global Biodiversity Outlook 4 (ISBN- 92-9225-540-1) is an open access publication, subject to the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0/).
Copyright is retained by the Secretariat.

Global Biodiversity Outlook 4 is freely available online: www.cbd.int/GBO4.  Users may download, reuse, reprint, modify, 
distribute, and/or copy text, figures, graphs and photos from Global Biodiversity Outlook 4, so long as the original source is 
credited.

The designations employed and the presentation of material in Global Biodiversity Outlook 4 do not imply the expression of any 
opinion whatsoever on the part of the Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity concerning the legal status of any 
country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.

Citation:
Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity (2014) Global Biodiversity Outlook 4.
Montréal, 155 pages.

For further information, please contact:
Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity
World Trade Centre
413 St. Jacques Street, Suite 800
Montreal, Quebec, Canada H2Y 1N9
Phone: 1(514) 288 2220
Fax: 1 (514) 288 6588
E-mail: secretariat@cbd.int
Website: http://www.cbd.int

All photographs © used under license of Shutterstock.com

Layout and design: Em Dash Design www.emdashdesign.ca 
Printed by ICAO on chlorine-free paper made of pulp from sustainably managed forests and using vegetable-based inks and 
water-based coatings.

Acknowledgements
T he preparation of the fourth edition of 

Global Biodiversity Outlook (GBO-4) began 
in 2010 following the tenth meeting of 

the Conference of the Parties to the Convention 
on Biological Diversity. GBO-4, like the previous 
editions of the report, is an output of the processes 
under the Convention. Parties to the Convention, 
other Governments, and observer organizations 
have helped to shape the Outlook through their 
contributions during various meetings as well as 
through their comments and inputs to earlier drafts 
of GBO-4.

GBO-4 has been prepared by the Secretariat of 
the Convention on Biological Diversity with the 
support of the GBO-4 Advisory Group and the 
SBSTTA Bureau, and in close collaboration with 
numerous partner organizations and individuals 
from Governments, non-governmental organiza-
tions and scientific networks that have generously 
contributed their time, energy and expertise to the 
preparation of GBO-4. As such GBO-4 is a product 
of the collective efforts of this community. The 
sheer number of organizations and people involved 
in GBO-4 makes it difficult to thank all contributors 
by name and doing so runs the risk that some may 
be overlooked. We sincerely apologize to anyone 
who may have been unintentionally omitted.

The fifth national reports submitted by the Parties 
to the Convention have been key sources of infor-
mation in the preparation of GBO-4. These reports 
have influenced the entire report. The Secretariat 
would like to thank the Parties who submitted 
their fifth national reports by the time GBO-4 was 
finalized.

GBO-4 is underpinned by a technical report, 
published as CBD Technical Series 78, that contains 
information on the scientific and technical findings 
and methodologies used in GBO-4. This technical 
report has been prepared by a consortium of 
partners led by DIVERSITAS, UNEP-WCMC, 
PBL-Netherlands, the University of British 
Colombia Fisheries, Centre Faculty of Science, 
Lisbon and the German Centre for Integrative 
Biodiversity Research (iDIV). The Secretariat 
would like to thank Paul Leadley who coordinated 
the preparation of the report as well as the lead 
authors involved: Rob Alkemade, Patricia Balvanera, 
Céline Bellard Ben ten Brink, Neil Burgess, Silvia 
Ceausu, William Cheung, Villy Christensen, 
Franck Courchamp, Barbara Gonçalves, Stephanie 
Januchowski-Hartley, Marcel Kok, Jennifer van 
Kolck, Cornelia Krug, Paul Lucas  Alexandra 
Marques, Peter Mumby, Laetitia Navarro, Tim 
Newbold, Henrique Pereira, Eugenie Regan, Carlo 
Rondinini, Louise Teh, Derek Tittensor, U. Rashid 
Sumaila, Peter Verburg, Piero Visconti, and Matt 
Walpole.  The preparation of GBO-4 also drew on 
information and scenarios prepared by the PBL 
Netherlands Environmental Assessment Agency 
on possible contributions of sectors to the conser-
vation and sustainable use of biodiversity.  The 
preparation of this technical document was led by 
Marcel Kok and Rob Alkemade and has been made 
available as CBD Technical Series 79.

The assessment in GBO-4 is also based on data and 
analyses provided by the Biodiversity Indicators 
Partnership, a network of organizations which 
have come together to provide the most up-to-
date biodiversity information possible for tracking 
progress towards the Aichi Targets. The Partnership 

3

Global Biodiversity Outlook 4is coordinated by UNEP-WCMC. Indicator partners 
include Biodiversity International, BirdLife 
International, Cardiff University, Convention 
on International Trade in Endangered Species, 
Food and Agricultural Organisation of the 
United Nations, Forest Peoples Programme, 
Forest Stewardship Council, Global Biodiversity 
Information Facility, Global Footprint Network, 
International Nitrogen Initiative, IUCN, IUCN 
SSC Invasive Species Specialist Group; University 
of Auckland, Marine Stewardship Council, McGill 
University, National Centre for Ecological Analysis 
and Synthesis, Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation, TEAM Network, Terralingua, 
TRAFFIC International, UBC Fisheries Centre 
(University of British Columbia), UNEP GEMS 
Water Programme, Union for Ethical BioTrade, 
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural 
Organization, University of Queensland, Australia, 
and WWF. 

The preparation of GBO-4 has been overseen by 
the GBO-4 Advisory Group and the Secretariat is 
grateful for the guidance and support provided 
by its members: Adjima Thombiano, Risa Smith, 
Haigen Xu, Teresita Borges Hernández, Jan Plesnik, 
Moustafa Mokhtar Ali Fouda, Anne Teller, Asghar 
Mohammadi Fazel, Tohru Nakashizuka, Roxana Solis 
Ortiz, Yvonne Vizina, Joji Carino, David Morgan, 
Linda Collette, Tim Hirsch, Thomas Lovejoy, Stuart 
Butchart, and Matt Walpole. The report has also 
been prepared under the guidance of the SBSTTA 
Bureau and its Chair Gemedo Dalle Tussie. 

Drafts of the main GBO-4 report as well as the 
technical underlying studies were made available 
for peer review. The preparation of the report was 
greatly enhanced by the comments received during 
this peer-review process. 

GBO-4 was written and edited by Tim Hirsch, 
Kieran Mooney, Robert Höft, and David Cooper. 
Braulio F. de Souza Dias provided guidance. Its 
production was managed by Robert Höft, Kieran 
Mooney, David Cooper, and David Ainsworth. In 
addition many Secretariat staff, interns and consul-
tants provided input and feedback on GBO-4 as well 
as participated in the preparation of the underlying 
technical studies, including, Joseph Appiott, Didier 
Babin, Jennifer Bansard, Katherine Blackwood, 
Mateusz Banski, Charles Besancon, Catherine 
Bloom, Lijie Cai, Adam Charette Castonguay, 
Monique Chiasson, Annie Cung, David Coates, 
Edwin Correa, Gilles Couturier, Olivier de Munck, 
Matthew  Dias, David Duthie, Joshua Dutton, 
Amy Fraenkel, Kathryn Garforth, Sarat Babu 
Gidda, Beatriz  Gómez -Castro, Julie Freeman, 
Jennifer Gobby, Jacquie Grekin,  Oliver Hillel, 
Lisa Janishevski, Elena Kennedy, Sakhile Koketso 
Kerri Landry, Jihyun Lee, Markus Lehmann,  
Andre Mader, Manoela Pessoa de Miranda, Ian 
Martin, Johany  Martinez, Praem Mehta, Leah  
Mohammed, Brianne Miller, Jessica Pawly, Aliya 
Rashid, Chantal  Robichaud, Cristina Romanelli,  
Nadine Saad, Atena Sadegh, Djeneba Sako, Catalina  
Santamaria, Simone  Schiele, John Scott, Mitchell 
Seider, Junko Shimura , David Steuerman, Andrew 
Stevenson, , Gisela Talamas, Tristan Tyrrell, 
Ardeshir Vafadari, Paige Yang,  Atsuhiro Yoshinaka, 
Yibin Xiang and Tatiana Zavarzina.

While the Secretariat has taken great care to ensure 
that all statements made in GBO-4 are backed up by 
credible scientific evidence, it assumes full responsi-
bility for any errors or omission in this work.

The production of GBO-4 was enabled through 
financial and in kind contributions from Canada, 
the European Union, Germany, Japan, Netherlands, 
Republic of Korea, Switzerland, and the United 
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. 

4

Global Biodiversity Outlook 4Table of Contents

Forewords

Secretary General .............................................................................................................................. 6
Executive Director ............................................................................................................................. 7
Executive Secretary ........................................................................................................................... 8

Executive Summary

Background ..................................................................................................................................... 10
Summary of progress and key actions related to the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011–2020 .......... 11
The way forward .............................................................................................................................. 17
Target ‘dashboard’—A summary of progress towards the Aichi Biodiversity Targets, broken down 
into their components ..................................................................................................................... 18

Part I: Introduction

The Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011–20 and the Aichi Biodiversity Targets .................................. 24
About GBO-4 .................................................................................................................................. 26

Part II: Evaluation of Progress Towards the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011–2020 
and the Aichi Biodiversity Targets

Strategic Goal A ............................................................................................................................... 30
Strategic Goal B ............................................................................................................................... 48
Strategic Goal C ............................................................................................................................... 80
Strategic Goal D .............................................................................................................................. 94
Strategic Goal E .............................................................................................................................. 108

Part III: Synthesis

Summary of progress towards the goals of the strategic plan and the Aichi Biodiversity Targets ......... 128
Interactions among the Aichi Biodiversity Targets  ........................................................................... 132
Achievement of the 2050 vision for biodiversity .............................................................................. 134
Contribution to the Millennium Goals and the post-2015 development agenda  ............................... 140

Conclusions ...................................................................................................................................... 143

Notes ................................................................................................................................................. 144

5

Global Biodiversity Outlook 4Forewords 
T he international community is increasingly 

aware of the link between biodiversity and 
sustainable development.  More and more 

people realize that the variety of life on this planet, 
its ecosystems and their impacts form the basis for 
our shared wealth, health and well-being.  

This positive trend must be expanded as part of our 
efforts to counter worrying evidence of biodiversity 
loss, which has its greatest impact on the poor and 
ultimately affects all societies and economies.

During the first years of the 2011–2020 United 
Nations Decade on Biodiversity, Parties to the 
Convention on Biological Diversity made great 
strides in addressing loss. Still, much more action is 
needed to meet the Aichi Biodiversity Targets. 

This Global Biodiversity Outlook 4 demonstrates 
that with concerted efforts at all levels, we can 
achieve the goals and targets of the Strategic Plan 
for Biodiversity 2011–2020.  Success will signifi-
cantly contribute to the broader global priorities of 
eliminating poverty, improving human health and 
providing energy, food and clean water for all. 

I urge Member States and stakeholders 
everywhere to take GBO4’s conclusions into 
account in their planning, recognize that 
biodiversity contributes to solving the sustainable 
development challenges we face, and redouble 
efforts to achieve our shared goals.

6

This is all the more important at this critical time, as 
the world intensifies action to meet the Millennium 
Development Goals, craft a successor agenda for 
sustainable development, and adopt a meaningful 
legal climate change agreement—all by the year 
2015.

I commend this publication to all those interested 
in an action-oriented approach to halting the loss of 
biodiversity and setting the world on course to the 
future we want. 

Ban Ki-moon
Secretary-General, United Nations

Global Biodiversity Outlook 4T he responsible management of our planet’s 

biodiversity is motivated not only by a shared 
sense of responsibility to future generations. 

The factors prompting policymakers to safeguard 
biodiversity are increasingly economic in nature.  

Biodiversity is a cornerstone of developed and 
developing economies. Without healthy concen-
trations of biodiversity, livelihoods, ecosystem 
services, natural habitats, and food security can be 
severely compromised. 

Take deforestation as an example. Although halting 
deforestation may carry costs in terms of lost 
agricultural and logging opportunities, these are far 
outweighed by the value of the ecosystem services 
provided by forests. This report finds that reducing 
deforestation rates have been estimated to result in 
an annual benefit of US$183 billion in the form of 
ecosystem services.  In addition, many households 
in developing countries, especially in Asia, derive 
as much as 50–80 per cent of annual household 
income from non-timber forest products.  

Action to reduce negative impacts on biodiversity 
can support a broad range of societal benefits, and 
lay the groundwork for the socio-economic transi-
tion to a more sustainable and inclusive model 
of development. Under this model the economic 
value of biodiversity is directly accounted for, 
providing policymakers with very real incentives 
to ensure that our forests, oceans, rivers and the 
rich variety of species contained within them are 
responsibly managed. 

Global Biodiversity Outlook 4 provides us with 
an opportunity to take stock of our progress, and 
recommit ourselves to bringing ecosystems back 
from dangerous thresholds of degradation and 
exploitation. This necessitates a dismantling of 
the drivers of biodiversity loss, which are often 
embedded deep within our systems of policy-
making, financial accounting, and patterns of 
production and consumption. 

The 20 Aichi Biodiversity Targets ultimately aim at 
achieving a 2050 vision of a world without biodiver-
sity loss or degradation of ecosystems. As part of the 
Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011–2020, they 
form the basis of a challenging but achievable 
roadmap for the remainder of the UN Decade of 
Biodiversity—one that can advance global efforts to 
value, conserve, and make wise use of biodiversity by 
all sectors of society, and for the benefit of all people. 

Achim Steiner 
United Nations Under-Secretary-General 
and UNEP Executive Director

7

Global Biodiversity Outlook 4In Nagoya, Japan, in 2010, the international 

community made a commitment to future 
generations and adopted the Strategic Plan for 
Biodiversity 2011–2020 and 20 Aichi Biodiversity 
Targets. This watershed moment was a recogni-
tion that biodiversity is not a problem to be solved, 
but essential for sustainable development, and the 
foundation for human well-being.

Four years later, as we approach the mid-way mark 
of the United Nations Decade on Biodiversity, 
Global Biodiversity Outlook 4 provides an impor-
tant measure of how we are faring.  The good news 
is that Parties are making progress, and concrete 
commitments to implement the Aichi Biodiversity 
Targets are being taken.  

However, GBO4 also shows us that this effort needs 
to be redoubled if the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 
2011–2020 is to be implemented and the Aichi 
Biodiversity Targets achieved.  Additional pressures 
will be placed on the life-support systems of our 
planet by a greater population, by climate change, 
and land degradation.  The work of the Parties will 
need to overcome these.

GBO4 shows us that action does not come from 
‘silver bullet’ solutions, but from those strategies 
that simultaneously address the multiple causes of 
biodiversity loss.  The actions needed are varied: 
integrating the values of biodiversity into policy, 
changes in economic incentives, enforcing rules and 
regulations, involving indigenous and local commu-
nities and stakeholders and the business sector and 

8

conserving threatened species and ecosystems.  Our 
efforts can and must be strengthened by under-
standing the critical links between biodiversity and 
sustainable development. Measures required to 
achieve the Aichi Biodiversity Targets also support 
the goals of greater food security, healthier popula-
tions and improved access to clean water and 
sustainable energy for all. The Strategic Plan for 
Biodiversity 2011–2020 is a strategy for sustainable 
development.  We must continue our efforts to not 
only achieve the mission of the Strategic Plan for 
Biodiversity, but the social, economic and environ-
mental goals of sustainable development, and to 
achieve human well-being in harmony with nature.

Braulio Ferreira de Souza Dias
Executive Secretary, Convention on Biological 
Diversity

Global Biodiversity Outlook 4Executive 
Summary

9

Global Biodiversity Outlook 4Background

Published almost at the halfway point of the 
2011–2020 Strategic Plan for Biodiversity, this 
fourth edition of the Global Biodiversity Outlook 
(GBO-4) provides a timely report: on progress 
towards meeting the 20 Aichi Biodiversity Targets 
and potential actions to accelerate that progress; on 
prospects for achieving the 2050 Vision on ‘Living 
in Harmony with Nature’; and on the importance 
of biodiversity in meeting broader goals for sustain-
able human development during this century. 

Key messages 
There has been significant progress towards meeting 
some components of the majority of the Aichi 
Biodiversity Targets. Some target components, such 
as conserving at least 17 per cent of terrestrial and 
inland water areas, are on track to be met.

However, in most cases this progress will not be 
sufficient to achieve the targets set for 2020, and 
additional action is required to keep the Strategic 
Plan for Biodiversity 2011–2020 on course. Key 
potential actions for accelerating progress towards 
each target are listed below.

Extrapolations for a range of indicators suggest 
that based on current trends, pressures on biodi-
versity will continue to increase at least until 2020, 
and that the status of biodiversity will continue 
to decline. This is despite the fact that society’s 
responses to the loss of biodiversity are increasing 
dramatically, and based on national plans and 
commitments are expected to continue to increase 
for the remainder of this decade. This may be partly 
due to time lags between taking positive actions 
and discernable positive outcomes. But it could also 
be because responses may be insufficient relative 
to pressures, such that they may not overcome the 
growing impacts of the drivers of biodiversity loss 

Each of the Aichi Biodiversity Targets cannot be 
tackled in isolation, as some targets are strongly 
dependent on other targets being achieved. Actions 
towards certain targets will have an especially 

strong influence on the achievement of the rest. In 
particular there are targets relating to addressing 
the underlying causes of biodiversity loss (generally 
those targets under Strategic Goal A), developing 
national frameworks for implementing the Aichi 
Biodiversity Targets (Target 17), and mobilizing 
financial resources (Target 20).

Meeting the Aichi Biodiversity Targets would 
contribute significantly to broader global priorities 
addressed by the post-2015 development agenda; 
namely, reducing hunger and poverty, improving 
human health, and ensuring a sustainable supply 
of energy, food and clean water. Incorporating 
biodiversity into the sustainable development goals, 
currently under discussion, provides an opportu-
nity to bring biodiversity into the mainstream of 
decision making.

Plausible pathways exist for achieving the 2050 
vision for an end to biodiversity loss, in conjunc-
tion with key human development goals, limiting 
climate change to two degrees Celsius warming and 
combating desertification and land degradation. 
However, reaching these joint objectives requires 
changes in society including much more efficient 
use of land, water, energy and materials, rethinking 
our consumption habits and in particular major 
transformations of food systems. 

Analysis of the major primary sectors indicates 
that drivers linked to agriculture account for 70 per 
cent of the projected loss of terrestrial biodiversity. 
Addressing trends in food systems is therefore 
crucial in determining whether the Strategic Plan 
for Biodiversity 2011–2020 will succeed. Solutions 
for achieving sustainable farming and food 
systems include sustainable productivity increases 
by restoring ecosystem services in agricultural 
landscapes, reducing waste and losses in supply 
chains, and addressing shifts in consumption 
patterns.

10

Global Biodiversity Outlook 4Summary of progress and key actions related to the Strategic Plan 
for Biodiversity 2011–2020

The following summarizes the conclusions of 
GBO-4 and includes the recent trends, current 
status and projections to 2020 relating to the 
five overarching goals of the Strategic Plan for 
Biodiversity 2011–2020 and their corresponding 
Aichi Biodiversity Targets, and identifies some key 
potential actions that would accelerate progress 
towards the targets, if more widely applied.

This report brings together multiple lines of 
evidence derived from a wide range of sources. It 

draws upon targets, commitments and activities 
of countries as reported in national biodiversity 
Strategies and action plans (NBSAPS) and national 
reports, as well as Parties’ own assessments of 
progress towards the Aichi biodiversity Targets. It 
takes into account information on the status and 
trends of biodiversity reported by Parties and in 
the scientific literature, and makes use of indicator-
based statistical extrapolations to 2020 as well as 
longer term model based scenarios.

11

Global Biodiversity Outlook 4stocks (such as forests and water) and where 
possible, integrating these into national financial 
accounts. 

 • Developing and implementing policy plans, 
including priorities and timelines, leading to 
the removal, phasing out, or reform of harmful 
subsidies in cases where candidate incentives and 
subsidies for elimination, phase-out or reform are 
already known, taking timely action.

 • Better targeting and integration of agri-environ-
mental schemes and other policy instruments 
towards desired biodiversity outcomes.

 • Strengthening partnerships among companies 
and industry associations, civil society and govern-
ment agencies, in an accountable and transparent 
manner, to promote sustainable practices that 
address biodiversity.

Strategic Goal A 
Address the underlying causes of biodiversity loss by 
mainstreaming biodiversity across government and society

Recent trends, current status and projections
Based on the limited evidence available, public 
awareness of biodiversity and its importance 
appears to be increasing in both the developed and 
developing world, although it remains at a low level 
in some countries (Target 1). Important progress 
has been achieved in incorporating biodiversity 
values into planning processes and strategies to 
reduce poverty. There has also been progress when 
it comes to integrating natural capital into national 
accounts. Wide variations among countries remain, 
but international initiatives are helping to reduce 
these differences (Target 2). Governments continue 
to provide subsidies harmful to biodiversity, and 
while agricultural subsidies are increasingly shifting 
towards positive incentives for conserving biodi-
versity, the evidence on whether these incentives 
will achieve their aims is inconclusive (Target 3). 
While natural resources are being used much more 
efficiently to produce goods and services, this 
progress is overwhelmed by our greatly increased 
total levels of consumption. It is unlikely that 
ecosystems can be kept within safe ecological limits 
given current patterns of consumption (Target 4).

Key potential actions that could accelerate 
progress towards this goal, if more widely applied
 • Coherent, strategic and sustained communica-
tion efforts, strategies and campaigns to increase 
awareness of biodiversity and its values, and of ways 
to support its conservation and sustainable use.

 • Better use of the social sciences, including an 
understanding of the social, economic and cultural 
drivers motivating behaviour and their interplay, in 
order to improve the design of communication and 
engagement campaigns and of relevant policies.

 • The further compilation of environmental statis-
tics and building environmental-economic accounts, 
including developing and maintaining national 
accounts of biodiversity-related natural resource 

12

Global Biodiversity Outlook 4Strategic Goal B 
Reduce the direct pressures on biodiversity and promote 
sustainable use 

Recent trends, current status and projections
Loss of forest habitats in some regions, for example 
the Brazilian Amazon, has been significantly slowed. 
However, deforestation in many other tropical 
areas of the world is still increasing, and habitats of 
all types, including grasslands, wetlands and river 
systems, continue to be fragmented and degraded 
(Target 5). Overfishing continues to be a major 
problem, with an increasing percentage of fish 
stocks overexploited, depleted or collapsed, and 
inappropriate fishing practices causing damage to 
habitats and non-target species. On the other hand, 
an increasing number of fisheries, concentrated in 
the developed countries, are certified as sustainable 
(Target 6). Increased certified forestry, especially in 
boreal and temperate zones, and increased adoption 
of good agricultural practices signify more sustainable 
production. Nevertheless, unsustainable practices 
in agriculture, aquaculture and forestry still cause 
substantial environmental degradation and biodiver-
sity loss (Target 7). Nutrient pollution has stabilized 
in parts of Europe and North America but is projected 
to increase in other regions, and remains a significant 
threat to aquatic and terrestrial biodiversity. Other 
forms of pollution such as from chemicals, pesticides 
and plastics are increasing (Target 8). Governments 
are increasingly taking steps to control and eradicate 
invasive alien species. For example a growing number 
of eradications, particularly from islands, show that 
reversing the threat from invasive species is often 
feasible and effective. However the overall rate of 
invasions, with great economic and ecological costs, 
shows no sign of slowing. Preventive measures have 
been taken in a limited number of countries (Target 
9). Multiple land and marine based pressures on coral 
reefs continue to increase, although some large coral 
areas are being incorporated into marine protected 
areas. Less information is available regarding trends 
for other ecosystems especially vulnerable to climate 
change, including mountain ecosystems such as cloud 
forest and páramos (high altitude tundra in tropical 
Americas) as well as low-lying ecosystems vulnerable 
to sea-level rise (Target 10). 

Key potential actions that could accelerate 
progress towards this goal, if more widely applied
 • Developing integrated policies to address habitat 
loss and degradation, covering positive and negative 
incentives; engagement with sectoral groups, 
indigenous and local communities, landowners, 
other stakeholders and the general public; effec-
tive protected area networks and other area based 
conservation measures; and enforcement of 
relevant regulations and laws.  

 • Making greater use of innovative fisheries manage-
ment systems, such as community co-management, 
that provide fishers and local communities with a 
greater stake in the long-term health of fish stocks 
combined with the elimination, phasing out or reform 
of subsidies that contribute to excess fishing capacity, 
phasing out destructive fishing practices and further 
developing marine protected area networks.

 • Making agriculture more efficient, including 
through improved targeting and efficiency of fertil-
izer, pesticide and water use, reducing post harvest 
losses and minimizing food waste, and promoting 
sustainable diets.

 • Reducing nutrient pollution by improving 
nutrient use efficiency in agriculture to reduce 
losses to the environment, enhancing treatment 
and recycling of sewage and industrial waste water, 
eliminating phosphates from detergent’s and the 
conservation and restoration of wetlands. 

 • Increasing efforts to identify and control the 
main pathways responsible for species invasions, 
including through the development of border 
control or quarantine measures to reduce the likeli-
hood of potentially invasive alien species being 
introduced, and making full use of risk analysis and 
international standards.

 • Sustainably managing fisheries on coral reefs 
and closely associated ecosystems, combined with 
managing coastal zones and inland watersheds in 
an integrated manner in order to reduce pollution 
and other land-based activities that threaten these 
vulnerable ecosystems. 

13

Global Biodiversity Outlook 4Strategic Goal C 
To improve the status of biodiversity by safeguarding 
ecosystems, species and genetic diversity 

Recent trends, current status and projections
Taking current commitments into account, the 
element of Target 11 on conserving 17 per cent of 
terrestrial areas by 2020 is likely to be met globally, 
although protected area networks remain ecologically 
unrepresentative and many critical sites for biodiver-
sity are poorly conserved. The element to protect 10% 
of coastal and marine areas is on course to be met 
in coastal waters, although open ocean and deep sea 
areas, including the high seas, are not well covered. 
Inadequate management of protected areas remains 
widespread. Despite individual success stories, the 
average risk of extinction for birds, mammals and 
amphibians is still increasing (Target 12). Genetic 
diversity of domesticated livestock is eroding, with 
more than one-fifth of breeds at risk of extinction 
and the wild relatives of domesticated crop species are 
increasingly threatened by habitat fragmentation and 
climate change (Target 13). 

Key potential actions that could accelerate 
progress towards this goal, if more widely applied
 • Expanding protected area networks and other 
effective area based conservation measures to 
become more representative of the planet’s ecolog-
ical regions, of marine and coastal areas (including 

deep sea and ocean habitats), of inland waters and 
of areas of particular importance for biodiversity, 
including those that contain unique populations of 
threatened species

 • Improving and regularly assessing management 
effectiveness and equitability of protected areas and 
other area-based conservation measures

 • Developing species action plans aimed directly at 
particular threatened species

 • Ensuring that no species is subject to unsustain-
able exploitation for domestic or international trade, 
including by actions agreed under the Convention on 
International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES)

 • Promoting public policies and incentives that 
maintain local varieties of crops and indigenous 
breeds in production systems, including through 
increased cooperation with, and recognition of, 
the role of indigenous and local communities and 
farmers in maintaining in situ genetic diversity 

 • Integrating the conservation of the wild relatives 
of domesticated crops and livestock in management 
plans for protected areas, conducting surveys of the 
location of wild relatives, and including this infor-
mation in plans for the expansion or development 
of protected area networks

14

Global Biodiversity Outlook 4Strategic Goal D 
Enhance the benefits to all from biodiversity and 
ecosystem services

Recent trends, current status and projections
Habitats important for ecosystem services, for 
example wetlands and forests, continue to be lost 
and degraded (Target 14). However, restoration is 
under way for some depleted or degraded ecosys-
tems, especially wetlands and forests, sometimes on 
a very ambitious scale, as in China. Many countries, 
organizations and companies have pledged to 
restore large areas. Abandonment of farmland in 
some regions including Europe, North America 
and East Asia is enabling ‘passive restoration’ on a 
significant scale (Target 15). The Nagoya Protocol 
on Access to Genetic Resources and the Fair and 
Equitable Sharing of Benefits Arising from their 
Utilization enters into force on 12 October 2014, 
opening up new opportunities for the fair and 
equitable sharing of the benefits arising from the 
utilization of genetic resource (Target 16).

Key potential actions that could accelerate 
progress towards this goal, if more widely applied
 • Identifying, at the national level, with the 
involvement of relevant stakeholders, those ecosys-
tems that are particularly important in providing 
ecosystem services, with particular attention to 
ecosystems upon which vulnerable groups are 

directly dependent for their health, nutrition and 
general well-being and livelihoods, as well as ecosys-
tems that help to reduce risks from disasters.

 • Reducing the pressures on and, where neces-
sary, enhancing the protection and restoration of 
those ecosystems providing essential services (for 
example wetlands, coral reefs, rivers and forests and 
mountain areas as “water towers” among others).

 • Identifying opportunities and priorities for 
restoration, including highly degraded ecosys-
tems, areas of particular importance for ecosystem 
services and ecological connectivity, and areas 
undergoing abandonment of agricultural or other 
human-dominated use.

 • Where feasible, making restoration an economi-
cally viable activity, by coupling employment and 
income generation with restoration activities.

 • Putting in place, by 2015, legislative, administra-
tive or policy measures and institutional structures 
for implementing the Nagoya Protocol; and under-
taking associated awareness-raising and capacity 
building activities including by engaging with indig-
enous and local communities and the private sector.

15

Global Biodiversity Outlook 4Strategic Goal E 
Enhance implementation through participatory planning, 
knowledge management and capacity-building 

Recent trends, current status and projections
National biodiversity strategies and action plans 
are expected to be in place for most Parties by 
2015 (Target 17), helping to translate the aims of 
the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011–2020 into 
national actions. Traditional knowledge continues 
to decline as indicated by the loss of linguistic diver-
sity and large-scale displacement of indigenous and 
local communities, although this trend is reversed in 
some places through growing interest in traditional 
cultures and involvement of local communities in 
management of protected areas (Target 18). Data 
and information on biodiversity are being shared 
much more widely through initiatives promoting 
and facilitating free and open access to digitized 
records from natural history collections and obser-
vations, including through citizen science networks; 
however, much data and information remain 
inaccessible and capacity is lacking to mobilize them 
in many countries (Target 19). There is insufficient 
data to report with confidence on progress towards 
the mobilization of financial resources from all 
sources. However, based on the data that is avail-
able, further efforts will be needed to significantly 
increase the financial resources, from all sources, for 
effective implementation of the Strategic Plan for 
Biodiversity 2011–2020 (Target 20).  

16

Key potential actions that could accelerate 
progress towards this goal, if more widely applied
 • Ensuring that national biodiversity strategies 
and action plans are up to date and aligned with the 
Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011–2020 and the 
Aichi Biodiversity Targets, for example by setting 
national targets with corresponding indicators and 
monitoring mechanisms, with the participation of 
all stakeholders

 • Promoting initiatives that support traditional 
and local knowledge of biodiversity and promote 
customary sustainable use, including traditional 
health care initiative, strengthening opportunities 
to learn and speak indigenous languages, research 
projects and data collection using community based 
methodologies, and involving local and indigenous 
communities in the creation, control, governance 
and management of protected areas 

 • Strengthening and promoting the further 
mobilization of and access to data by, for example, 
encouraging the use of common informatics 
standards and protocols, promoting a culture of 
data sharing, investing in digitization of natural 
history collections and promoting citizen scien-
tists’ contributions to the body of biodiversity 
observations 

 • Establishing or strengthening monitoring 
programmes, including monitoring of land-use 
change, providing near-real time information where 
possible, in particular for “hotspots” of biodiversity 
change

 • Developing national financial plans for biodiver-
sity, as part of national biodiversity strategies and 
action plans, aligned, where possible, with national 
annual and multi-annual financial planning cycles 

 • Increasing national and international flows of 
resources for biodiversity, broadening biodiversity 
funding sources including by exploring innova-
tive financial mechanisms, such as subsidy reform 
and payment for ecosystem services schemes, 
recognizing that a range of funding sources will be 
needed 

Global Biodiversity Outlook 4The way forward

This mid-term report on the Strategic Plan for 
Biodiversity 2011–2020 suggests that the majority 
of its targets are still achievable, if challenging to 
meet. Achieving these targets requires innovative 
and bold action in many areas, and a sustained 
focus on biodiversity in a wide range of policy areas 
for the second half of this decade. Success stories 
have demonstrated that effective action comes 
from simultaneously addressing multiple causes 
of biodiversity loss through monitoring and data 
analysis, changing economic incentives, applying 
market pressures, enforcing rules and regula-
tions, involving indigenous and local communities 
and stakeholders and targeting conservation of 

threatened species and ecosystems—among many 
other routes to biodiversity conservation and 
sustainable use. 

Many of the measures required to achieve the Aichi 
Biodiversity Targets will also support the goals of 
greater food security, healthier populations and 
improved access to clean water and sustainable 
energy for all. The Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 
2011–2020 is thus part of the agenda for sustain-
able development. There is a need to accelerate our 
actions to seize the opportunity to live in harmony 
with nature. 

17

Global Biodiversity Outlook 4Target ‘dashboard’—a summary of progress towards the aichi Biodiversity 
Targets, broken down into their components

The table below provides an assessment of progress made towards individual components of each of the 
), based on the available evidence. It aims 
Aichi Biodiversity Targets, as well as the level of confidence (
to provide summary information on whether or not we are on track to achieve the targets. The assessment 
uses a five-point scale: 

5

4

3

2

1

On track to exceed target 
(we expect to achieve 
the target before its 
deadline)

On track to achieve 
target (if we continue 
on our current trajectory 
we expect to achieve the 
target by 2020)

Progress towards target 
but at an insufficient rate 
(unless we increase our 
efforts the target will not 
be met by its deadline)

No significant overall 
progress (overall, we are 
neither moving towards 
the target nor away 
from it)

                        Moving 
away from target (things 
are getting worse rather 
than better).

TargeT elemenTs

sTaTus

CommenT

People are aware of the values of biodiversity

Limited geographical coverage of indicators. 
Strong regional differences

1
 
T
e
g
r
a
T

 

2
T
e
g
r
a
T

 

3
T
e
g
r
a
T

People are aware of the steps they can take to conserve and 
sustainably use biodiversity

Biodiversity values integrated into national and local 
development and poverty reduction strategies

Biodiversity values integrated into national and local 
planning processes

Biodiversity values incorporated into national accounting, 
as appropriate

Biodiversity values incorporated into reporting systems

Incentives, including subsidies, harmful to biodiversity, 
eliminated, phased out or reformed in order to minimize or 
avoid negative impacts

Positive incentives for conservation and sustainable use of 
biodiversity developed and applied

3

3

3

3

3

3

2

3

18

Evidence suggests a growing knowledge of 
actions available, but limited understanding of 
which will have positive impacts

Differences between regions. Evidence largely 
based on poverty reduction strategies

The evidence shows regional variation and it 
is not clear if biodiversity is actually taken into 
consideration

Initiatives such as WAVES show growing trend 
towards such incorporation

Improved accounting implies improvement in 
reporting

No significant overall progress, some advances 
but some backward movement. Increasing 
recognition of harmful subsidies but little action

Good progress but better targeting needed. Too 
small and still outweighed by perverse incentives

Global Biodiversity Outlook 4TargeT elemenTs

sTaTus

CommenT

 

4
T
e
g
r
a
T

 

5
T
e
g
r
a
T

 

6
T
e
g
r
a
T

 

7
T
e
g
r
a
T

Governments, business  and stakeholders at all levels have 
taken steps to achieve, or have implemented, plans for 
sustainable production and consumption…

… and have kept the impacts of use of natural resources 
well within safe ecological limits

The rate of loss of forests is at least halved and where 
feasible brought close to zero

The loss of all habitats is at least halved and where feasible 
brought close to zero

Degradation and fragmentation are significantly reduced

All fish and invertebrate stocks and aquatic plants are 
managed and harvested sustainably, legally and applying 
ecosystem based approaches

Recovery plans and measures are in place for all depleted 
species

Fisheries have no significant adverse impacts on threatened 
species and vulnerable ecosystems

The impacts of fisheries on stocks, species and ecosystems 
are within safe ecological limits, i.e. overfishing avoided

Areas under agriculture are managed sustainably, ensuring 
conservation of biodiversity

Areas under aquaculture are managed sustainably, ensuring 
conservation of biodiversity

Areas under forestry are managed sustainably, ensuring 
conservation of biodiversity

3

2

3

2

1

3

3

2

2

3

3

3

Many plans for sustainable production and 
consumption are in place, but they are still 
limited in scale

All measures show an increase in natural 
resource use

Deforestation significantly slowed in some 
tropical areas, although still great regional 
variation

Varies among habitat types, data scarce for some 
biomes

Habitats of all types, including forests, 
grasslands, wetlands and river systems, continue 
to be fragmented and degraded.

Great regional variation, positive for some 
countries but data limited for many developing 
countries

Variable, progress in some regions

Some progress e.g. on long-lining used in tuna 
fisheries, but practices still impacting vulnerable 
ecosystems

Overexploitation remains an issue globally, but 
with regional variation

Increasing area under sustainable management, 
based on organic certification and conservation 
agriculture. Nutrient use flattening globally. 
No-till techniques expanding

Progress with sustainability standards being 
introduced, but in the context of very rapid 
expansion. Questions about sustainability of 
expansion of freshwater aquaculture

Increasing forest certification and criterion 
indicators. Certified forestry mostly in northern 
countries, much slower in tropical countries

19

Global Biodiversity Outlook 4TargeT elemenTs

sTaTus

CommenT

Pollutants (of all types) have been brought to levels that are 
not detrimental to ecosystem function and biodiversity

No clear evaluation Highly variable between pollutants

Pollution from excess nutrients has been brought to 
levels that are not detrimental to ecosystem function and 
biodiversity

Invasive alien species identified and prioritized

Pathways identified and prioritized

Priority species controlled or eradicated

Introduction and establishment of IAS prevented

Multiple anthropogenic pressures on coral reefs are 
minimized, so as to maintain their integrity and functioning

Multiple anthropogenic pressures on other vulnerable 
ecosystems impacted by climate change or ocean 
acidification are minimized, so as to maintain their integrity 
and functioning

At least 17 per cent of terrestrial and inland water areas are 
conserved

1

3

3

3

2

1

4

3

Nutrient use leveling off in some regions, e.g. 
Europe and North America, but at levels that 
are still detrimental to biodiversity. Still rising in 
other regions. Very high regional variation

Measures taken in many countries to develop 
lists of invasive alien species

Major pathways are identified, but not efficiently 
controlled at a global scale

 

Some control and eradication, but data limited

Some measures in place, but not sufficient to 
prevent continuing large increase in IAS

Pressures such as land-based pollution, 
uncontrolled tourism still increasing, although 
new marine protected areas may ease overfishing 
in some reef regions

Not evaluated

Insufficient information was available to evaluate 
the target for other vulnerable ecosystems 
including seagrass habitats, mangroves and 
mountains

Extrapolations show good progress and the target 
will be achieved if existing commitments on 
designating protected areas are implemented. 
Inland water protection has distinct issues.

Marine protected areas are accelerating but 
extrapolations suggest we are not on track to 
meet the target. With existing commitments, the 
target would be met for territorial waters but not 
for exclusive economic zones or high seas

Progress for protected Key Biodiversity Areas, 
but still important gaps. No separate measure for 
ecosystem services

Progress, and possible to meet this target for 
terrestrial ecosystems if additional protected 
areas are representative. Progress with marine 
and freshwater areas, but much further to go

At least 10 per cent of coastal and marine areas are 
conserved

Areas of particular importance for biodiversity and 
ecosystem services conserved

Conserved areas are ecologically representative

biodiversity
ecosystem services

3

terrestrial and marine
inland waters

3

 

8
T
e
g
r
a
T

 

9
T
e
g
r
a
T

0
1
 
T
e
g
r
a
T

1
1
 
T
e
g
r
a
T

20

Global Biodiversity Outlook 4TargeT elemenTs

sTaTus

CommenT

Conserved areas are effectively and equitably managed

Conserved areas are well connected and integrated into the 
wider landscape and seascape

Extinction of known threatened species has been prevented

The conservation status of those species most in decline 
has been improved and sustained

The genetic diversity of cultivated plants is maintained

The genetic diversity of farmed and domesticated animals 
is maintained

The genetic diversity of wild relatives is maintained

The genetic diversity of socio-economically as well as 
culturally valuable species is maintained

Strategies have been developed and implemented for 
minimizing genetic erosion and safeguarding genetic 
diversity

Ecosystems that provide essential services, including 
services related to water, and contribute to health, 
livelihoods and well-being, are restored and safeguarded …

… taking into account the needs of women, indigenous and 
local communities, and the poor and vulnerable

Ecosystem resilience and the contribution of biodiversity to 
carbon stocks have been enhanced through conservation 
and restoration

3

3

2

1

3

3

2

3

2

1

2

1
1
 
T
e
g
r
a
T

2
1
 
T
e
g
r
a
T

3
1
 
T
e
g
r
a
T

4
1
 
T
e
g
r
a
T

5
1
 
T
e
g
r
a
T

Reasonable evidence of improved effectiveness, 
but small sample size. Increasing trend towards 
community involvement in protection. Very 
dependent on region and location

Initiatives exist to develop corridors and 
transboundary parks, but there is still not 
sufficient connection. Freshwater protected areas 
remain very disconnected

Further extinctions likely by 2020, e.g. for 
amphibians and fish. For bird and mammal 
species some evidence measures have prevented 
extinctions

Red List Index still declining, no sign overall 
of reduced risk of extinction across groups of 
species. Very large regional differences

Ex situ collections of plant genetic resources 
continue to improve, albeit with some gaps. 
There is limited support to ensure long term 
conservation of local varieties of crops in the face 
of changes in agricultural practices and market 
preferences

There are increasing activities to conserve breeds 
in their production environment and in gene 
banks, including through in-vitro conservation, 
but to date, these are insufficient

Gradual increase in the conservation of wild 
relatives of crop plants in ex situ facilities but 
their conservation in the wild remains largely 
insecure, with few protected area management 
plans addressing wild relatives

Not evaluated

Insufficient data to evaluate this element of the 
target

The FAO Global Plans of Action for plant and 
animal genetic resources provide frameworks for 
the development of national and international 
strategies and action plans

High variation across ecosystems and services. 
Ecosystems particularly important for services, 
e.g. wetlands and coral reefs, still in decline

Poor communities and women especially 
impacted by continuing loss of ecosystem 
services

Despite restoration and conservation efforts, 
there is still a net loss of forests, a major global 
carbon stock

21

Global Biodiversity Outlook 4TargeT elemenTs

sTaTus

CommenT

5
1
 
T
e
g
r
a
T

6
1
 
T
e
g
r
a
T

7
1
 
T
e
g
r
a
T

8
1
 
T
e
g
r
a
T

9
1
 
T
e
g
r
a
T

 

0
2
T
e
g
r
a
T

At least 15 per cent of degraded ecosystems are restored, 
contributing to climate change mitigation and adaptation, 
and to combating desertification

The Nagoya Protocol is in force

The Nagoya Protocol is operational, consistent with national 
legislation

Submission of NBSAPs to Secretariat by (end of) 2015

NBSAPs adopted as effective policy instrument

NBSAPs are being implemented

Traditional knowledge, innovations and practices of 
indigenous and local communities are respected

Traditional knowledge, innovations and practices are 
fully integrated and reflected in implementation of the 
Convention …

… with the full and effective participation of indigenous and 
local communities

Knowledge, the science base and technologies relating to 
biodiversity, its values, functioning, status and trends, and 
the consequences of its loss, are improved

Biodiversity knowledge, the science base and technologies 
are widely shared and transferred and applied

Mobilization of financial resources implementing the 
Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011–2020 from all sources 
has increased substantially from 2010 levels

3

55

4

4

3

3

3

3

3

4

3

3

22

Many restoration activities under way, but 
hard to assess whether they will restore 15% of 
degraded areas

The Nagoya Protocol will enter into force on 12 
October 2014, ahead of the deadline set.

Given progress that has been made, it is likely 
that the Nagoya Protocol will be operational by 
2015 in those countries that have ratified it

For those Parties for which information is 
available, about 40% are expected to have 
completed their NBSAP by October 2014 and 
about 90% by the end of 2015

The adequacy of available updated NBSAPs in 
terms of following COP guidance is variable

The degree of implementation of updated 
NBSAPs is variable

Processes are under way internationally and 
in a number of countries to strengthen respect 
for, recognition and promotion of, traditional 
knowledge and customary sustainable use

Traditional knowledge and customary sustainable 
use need to be further integrated across all 
relevant actions under the Convention

Efforts continue to enhance the capacities of 
indigenous and local communities to participate 
meaningfully in relevant processes locally, 
nationally and internationally but limited funding 
and capacity remain obstacles

Significant effort on delivery of information and 
knowledge relevant to decision makers is being 
made, and relevant processes and institutions are 
in place

Improvements in analysis and interpretation 
of data gathered from disparate collecting and 
monitoring systems. However, coordination to 
guarantee models and technologies that can 
integrate this knowledge into functional applied 
systems needs to be improved

Limited information on many funding sources, 
including domestic funding, innovative financial 
mechanisms, and the private sector. General 
increase in bilateral ODA against 2006–2010 
baseline.

Global Biodiversity Outlook 4Part I
Introduction
This Outlook is the fourth in the series of global 

assessments of the state of biodiversity 
produced by the Secretariat of the Convention 

on Biological Diversity (CBD) (see Box 0.1). The 
Third Global Biodiversity Outlook (GBO-3), 
published in 2010, presented some stark messages 
for the global community.1 

23

Global Biodiversity Outlook 4A t the heart of GBO-3 was the conclusion 

that the target adopted by countries in 
2002 to reduce significantly the rate of 

biodiversity loss by 2010 had been missed.

GBO-3 found that all major pressures on 
biodiversity were increasing. These included:

 • Loss, degradation and fragmentation of natural 
habitats

 • Overexploitation of biological resources

 • Pollution, in particular the buildup of nutri-
ents such as nitrogen and phosphorus in the 
environment

 • The impacts of invasive alien species on ecosys-
tems and the services they provide to people

 • Climate change and acidification of the oceans, 
associated with the buildup of greenhouse gases in 
the atmosphere.

GBO-3 also warned that some ecosystems were 
being pushed towards critical thresholds or tipping 
points. If these thresholds were passed, there was 
a real risk of dramatic loss of biodiversity and 
degradation of a broad range of services on which 
people depend for their livelihoods and well-being. 

24

The poor would suffer the earliest and most severe 
impacts, but ultimately all societies and economies 
would be affected. 

GBO-3 concluded, however, that biodiversity loss 
could still be slowed and, in time, even halted, if 
Governments and society took coordinated action 
at a number of levels. This meant addressing 
the underlying causes or drivers of biodiversity 
loss, often embedded deep within our systems of 
decision-making, financial incentives and patterns 
of production and consumption. It also meant 
understanding and minimizing the pressures 
on biodiversity and ecosystems, and targeting 
measures directly at conservation and restoration of 
ecosystems critical to the survival of species and the 
provision of important services.

The Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 
2011–20 and the aichi Biodiversity 
Targets

The conclusions from GBO-3 formed the 
background to the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 
2011–2020, agreed at the tenth meeting of the 
CBD Conference of Parties (COP10) in Nagoya, 
Japan in 2010.3

The basis of the Strategic Plan is that biodiver-
sity loss can only be effectively addressed with 

Global Biodiversity Outlook 4simultaneous and coordinated action at a number 
of levels, each of which is essential to achieve 
a lasting impact and to set us on a sustainable 
path to keep human societies within the limits 
of the planet’s biological resources. The Strategic 
Plan includes an ambitious yet achievable set of 
20 targets (the Aichi Biodiversity Targets), most 
with an end-point of 2020, ultimately aimed at 
achieving a 2050 vision of a world where biodi-
versity is valued, conserved, restored and wisely 
used, maintaining ecosystem services, sustaining a 
healthy planet and delivering benefits essential for 
all people (see Figure 0.1). 

The Strategic Plan includes five interdependent 
Strategic Goals, addressing:

focusing on the buildup of nutrients; the introduc-
tion and establishment of invasive alien species; 
and the multiple pressures on ecosystems, such as 
coral reefs, especially vulnerable to the impacts of 
climate change

 • Actions aimed at safeguarding ecosystems, 
species and genetic diversity through direct 
interventions such as increasing the coverage, 
effectiveness and representativeness of protected 
areas and other area-based conservation measures 
in terrestrial, inland water and marine ecosystems; 
measures specifically targeting species at risk of 
extinction; and maintaining genetic diversity 
especially in plants and animal species used for 
crops and livestock, and their relatives in the wild

 • The underlying causes or indirect drivers of 
biodiversity loss, including the lack of awareness 
of biodiversity and its values; the incorporation of 
those values into accounting systems, and decisions 
on economic development and planning; the 
subsidies and financial incentives that influence 
decisions affecting biodiversity; and patterns of 
consumption and production that determine how 
natural resources are used to meet the demands of 
our everyday lifestyles

 • The pressures or direct drivers on biodiversity, 
including habitat loss, degradation and fragmenta-
tion; overexploitation of biological resources with a 
particular emphasis on overfishing; unsustainable 
forms of production in key activities such as agricul-
ture, aquaculture and forestry; pollution especially 

 • The safeguarding and enhancement of the 
benefits of biodiversity and ecosystem services 
to human societies through conservation and resto-
ration of ecosystems especially important for the 
provision of essential services such as those related 
to fresh water and contributing to health and 
livelihoods; improving and restoring the resilience 
of ecosystems important for adaptation to and 
mitigation of climate change; and implementing 
globally-agreed norms for the equitable sharing of 
benefits from access to and use of genetic resources, 
for example through commercialization of drugs 
and other products, derived from biodiversity

 • The means to enhance the implementation of 
all other goals within the Strategic Plan, through 
development and application of national strategies 

Box 0.1. The Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD)

The Convention on Biological Diversity is one of the three ‘Rio Conventions’, emerging from the UN 
Conference on Environment and Development, also known as the Earth Summit, held in Rio de Janeiro in 
1992. It came into force at the end of 1993, with the following objectives: “The conservation of biological 
diversity, the sustainable use of its components and the fair and equitable sharing of the benefits arising 
out of the utilization of genetic resources, including by appropriate access to genetic resources and by 
appropriate transfer of relevant technologies, taking into account all rights over those resources and to 
technologies, and by appropriate funding.” There are currently 194 Parties to the Convention (193 countries 
and the European Union).2

25

Global Biodiversity Outlook 4By 2050, biodiversity is valued, conserved, restored and wisely used, maintaining ecosystem services, sustaining a healthy planet  

and delivering benefits essential for all people.

vision

Take effective and urgent action to halt the loss of biodiversity…

mission

strategic goal a
Address the underlying 

causes of biodiversity loss by 
mainstreaming biodiversity 
across government and society

strategic goal b

Reduce the direct pressures  
on biodiversity and promote  

sustainable use

strategic goal c
Improve the status of  

biodiversity by safeguarding 

ecosystems, species and 

genetic diversity

strategic goal d
Enhance the benefits to  
all from biodiversity and 

ecosystem services

 Enhance implementation through participatory planning, knowledge management and capacity building

strategic goal e

implementation support mechanisms

Figure 0.1. This diagram shows the structure of the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011–2020. Progress towards a 2050 Vision is achieved 
through a 2020 Mission. In turn, the Mission is addressed through five Strategic Goals under which the 20 Aichi Biodiversity Targets are 
organized, and supported by implementation mechanisms. The Strategic Plan serves as a flexible framework for the establishment of national 
and regional targets and it promotes the coherent and effective implementation of the three objectives of the Convention on Biological 
Diversity.

and action plans on biodiversity; through respecting 
traditional knowledge and involving local and indig-
enous communities; through effective sharing and 
application of data, information and knowledge 
relating to biodiversity; and through adequate 
resourcing to support the actions needed to imple-
ment the plan

Convention on International Trade in Endangered 
Species of Wild Fauna and Flora, the Convention 
on the Conservation of Migratory Species of 
Wild Animals, the Convention on Wetlands of 
International Importance, the International 
Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and 
Agriculture and the World Heritage Convention.5 

The Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011–2020 
is now accepted as the overarching frame-
work for action on biodiversity, and the United 
Nations General Assembly designated the period 
2011–2020 as the United Nations Decade on 
Biodiversity. In 2012, the General Assembly encour-
aged all parties, stakeholders, institutions and 
organizations to consider the plan and its targets 
in the elaboration of the post-2015 United Nations 
development agenda, taking into account the social, 
economic and environmental pillars of sustainable 
development.4 

Other biodiversity-related conventions recognizing 
the importance of the Strategic Plan include the 

about gBO-4 

The Fourth Global Biodiversity Outlook (GBO-4) is 
published almost at the halfway point towards the 
2020 deadline set for most of the Aichi Biodiversity 
Targets. It is therefore an appropriate opportunity 
to review progress towards the goals of the Strategic 
Plan, and to assess what further action govern-
ments may need to take to achieve the targets they 
collectively committed to in 2010.

GBO-4 addresses a range of questions relating 
to the achievement of the Strategic Plan for 
Biodiversity including available pathways towards 
the 2050 Vision for biodiversity and its relevance to 

26

Global Biodiversity Outlook 4the forthcoming Sustainable Development Goals. 
Over the following pages, progress towards each of 
the 20 Aichi Biodiversity Targets is also addressed, 
including:

 • An overall assessment of the likelihood of 
reaching each component of the target based on our 
current trajectory

 • A summary of the recent trends, current status 
and future projections relating to the targets

 • Examples of actions and issues helping to illus-
trate both the progress made and the challenges still 
faced

 • Key actions available to governments to help 
achieve each target. Where these actions contribute 
to several targets is also indicated

This report brings together multiple lines of 
evidence derived from a wide range of sources (see 
Box 0.2). It draws upon targets, commitments 
and activities of countries as reported in national 
biodiversity strategies and action plans (NBSAPS) 
and national reports, as well as Parties’ own assess-
ments of progress towards the Aichi biodiversity 
Targets. It takes into account information on the 

status of trends of biodiversity reported by Parties 
and in the scientific literature, and makes use of 
indicator-based statistical extrapolations to 2020 as 
well as longer term model based scenarios. GBO-4 
is underpinned by a detailed assessment by a group 
of international experts as well as a scenario assess-
ment related to different economic sectors. Both 
of these have been compiled as technical volumes 
accompanying GBO-4.6 GBO-4 has also consid-
ered the results of the High Level Panel on Global 
Assessment of Resources for Implementing the 
Strategic Plan for Biodiversity.7

Just as GBO-3 played a major role in developing 
the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity and the Aichi 
Biodiversity Targets, GBO-4 provides evidence that 
should prompt renewed action by governments, 
the international community and all stakeholders 
to achieve the goals of the Plan. Its conclusions can 
inform not only the CBD at its upcoming meeting 
on how to chart new actions for the coming years, 
but also governments developing the post-2015 
development agenda and sustainable development 
goals, whose success will depend crucially on the 
state of biodiversity and ecosystem services in the 
decades ahead.

27

Global Biodiversity Outlook 4Box 0.2. Sources of information for gBO-4

The fourth edition of the Global Biodiversity Outlook and its underlying technical reports8 draw upon 
several sources of information, thus providing multiple lines of evidence to the assessment of progress and 
the identification of actions to accelerate progress:

National Biodiversity Strategies and action Plans (NBSAPS) are the principal instruments for 
implementing the Convention at the national level. The Convention requires countries to prepare a 
national biodiversity strategy or equivalent instrument, and to ensure that this strategy is mainstreamed 
into the planning and activities of all those sectors whose activities can have an impact, whether positive 
or negative, on biodiversity (see the assessment of Target 17 for further information). NBSAPs provide 
important information on national targets and commitments and on the activities planned to achieve them. 
GBO-4 draws upon the information provided in 26 NBSAPs that have been updated since 2010.

National reports are periodic reports provided by Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity. These 
reports address a number of issues including the status and trends of biodiversity at the national level, the 
implementation of national biodiversity strategies and action plans, the mainstreaming of biodiversity, as 
well as the successes and challenges encountered. The fifth national reports, due in 2014, have a particular 
focus on assessing progress made towards the implementation of the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity. They 
provide information on the status and trends of biodiversity in each country as well as activities underway 
and planned, including case studies. Many Parties provide a self-assessment of progress towards the Aichi 
Targets (see Part III of GBO-4). For countries that have not yet updated their NBSAPs, the national reports 
provide important information on national targets and commitments under development.

Indicator-based extrapolations of recent and current trends to 2020. The assessment of progress towards 
the Aichi Biodiversity Targets in GBO-4 is informed by recent trends in 55 biodiversity-related indicators 
and their statistical extrapolation to 2020. These indicators were selected from over 170 candidate 
indicators, including those identified by the Convention,9 according to criteria of relevance, scientific 
credibility, and temporal and geographical coverage. 

Model-based scenarios to 2050. Numerous socio-economic scenarios up to 2050 and beyond were 
examined to inform the assessment of potential progress towards the 2050 Vision of the Strategic Plan. 
The scenarios also helped to identify actions for the achievement of the Aichi Biodiversity Targets as well as 
the feasibility of simultaneously meeting other socio-economic goals, including those for food security and 
climate mitigation, and for mainstreaming biodiversity considerations in productive sectors. 

Scientific literature and other reports. GBO-4 also draws upon an extensive review of the published and 
peer-reviewed scientific literature to inform the assessment of current trends and future prospects as well 
as the identification of promising actions to achieve the Aichi Biodiversity Targets. 

28

Global Biodiversity Outlook 4Part II

Evaluation of Progress 
Towards the Strategic 
Plan for Biodiversity 
2011–2020 and the  
Aichi Biodiversity Targets

29

Global Biodiversity Outlook 4Strategic Goal A

Address the underlying causes of biodiversity loss 
by mainstreaming biodiversity across government 
and society 

targets

30

Strategic Goal A

Achieving this goal is critical to all other parts of the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity. It 

demands policy coherence and the integration of biodiversity into decisions at all levels. 
Failure to address the underlying causes of biodiversity loss would threaten to undermine 

many positive actions resulting from policies directly targeting conservation and sustainable 
use. GBO-4 has identified important progress towards some of the targets included in this goal, 
for example on awareness of biodiversity in some countries, in the integration of biodiversity 
into some systems of national accounting and planning, and on the creation of positive financial 
incentives for protecting biodiversity and ecosystem services. This progress varies greatly among 
countries and regions, however. It is also still counterbalanced by negative drivers such as 
widespread subsidies harmful to biodiversity, and continuing unsustainable patterns of production 
and consumption. Stepping up action to address these underlying causes will be essential if the 
Aichi Biodiversity Targets are to be achieved.

 : 

31

T
e
g
r
a
T

awareness of biodiversity 
increased

By 2020, at the latest, people are aware of 
the values of biodiversity and the steps they 
can take to conserve and use it sustainably.

Summary of progreSS towardS the target

TargeT elemenT s (by 2020)

sTaTus

why this target is important10
Addressing the direct and underlying drivers of 
biodiversity loss will require behavioral change 
by individuals, organizations and governments. 
Understanding, awareness and appreciation of the 
diverse values of biodiversity help to underpin the 
willingness of individuals to make such changes. 
Public awareness also underpins the political will 
for governments to act. Meeting this target requires 
that people are aware not only of the values of 
biodiversity in an abstract way, but know the concrete 
contributions of biodiversity to their lives, as well 
as the actions that can be taken to conserve and 
sustainably use biodiversity.

People are aware of the 
values of biodiversity

People are aware of the 
steps they can take to 
conserve and sustainably 
use biodiversity

3

3

32

Strategic Goal A

recent trends, current status and future projections

Based on geographically limited survey results, 
public awareness of biodiversity and its impor-
tance appears to be increasing in both developed 
and developing countries, although with consider-
able variation. Surveys such as the Biodiversity 
Barometer (see Box 1.1) show a high variation in 
the awareness of biodiversity and its values among 
people in different countries and regions. Such 
surveys suggest that while people are aware that 
biodiversity is important for human well-being, 
they do not necessarily view biodiversity protection 
as an important contribution to human wellbeing. 
With important national differences, survey respon-
dents see biodiversity loss as a global problem but 
not one that is of great local concern. People are still 
not certain which actions have a negative impact 
on biodiversity, and fewer still are able to connect 
specific actions to biodiversity protection.11

Analysis of the national reports submitted to 
the CBD suggests that the majority of countries 
are taking steps to increase public awareness 
of biodiversity. Fewer reports provide evidence 
of programmes that focus on the actions that 
individuals can take to conserve and sustainably use 
biodiversity. Some examples of what countries have 
done to promote such actions are given in Box 1.2.

For the few countries where recent trends are 
available, projections for 2020 would suggest a 
continuing improvement, but not to a level where 
this target could be considered reached (see Figure 
1.1). There is low confidence in this conclusion 
because of the limited data, but a wide consensus 
among Parties to the CBD that more needs to be 
done to improve awareness of biodiversity and its 
values. 

a

100

t
n
e
c
r
e
P

80

60

40

20

B

100

t
n
e
c
r
e
P

80

60

40

20

0
2009

2010

2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

0
2009

2010

2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

Figure 1.1. Statistical extrapolations to 2020 for the percentage of respondents giving a correct definitions of biodiversity and b the 
percentage of respondents that had heard of the term biodiversity (“Biodiversity Barometer”). Both show a significant increase in the trend 
between 2010 and 2020. The extrapolation assumes underlying processes remain constant and are based on data from Germany, France, the 
United Kingdom and the United States of America. The solid line represents the model fit for the period with data and the extrapolation, dots 
represent data points and the shaded band illustrates the 95% confidence interval.

Target 1: Awareness of biodiversity increased

33

actions to enhance progress towards the target 

Based on the various lines of evidence used in 
GBO-4, the following actions are effective and 
would help to accelerate progress towards Target 1, 
if more widely applied. They would also contribute 
to other targets, shown in parentheses:

 • Integrating awareness and understanding of 
biodiversity and its values, including for human 
wellbeing into national educational curricula, taking 
into account approaches related to Education for 
Sustainable Development (ESD)

 • Facilitating and encouraging the engagement of 
citizens in biodiversity issues, including activities to 
monitor biodiversity (Target 19) and to promote its 
conservation and sustainable use (Targets 4 to 15)

 • Developing and implementing coherent, 
strategic and sustained communication efforts, 
strategies and campaigns, with messages and 
techniques adapted appropriately for different 
target audiences, drawing upon social-marketing 
expertise, and publicising nationally relevant 
examples or case studies on the importance of 
biodiversity

 • Making better use of the social sciences, 
including in developing a greater understanding of 
the social, economic and cultural drivers motivating 
behavioural change and their interplay, in order to 
improve the design of communication and engage-
ment campaigns and of relevant policies (Targets 2, 
3, and 4)

 • Undertaking periodic, consistent and compa-
rable assessments of biodiversity awareness, 
understanding, and willingness to take actions to 
conserve and sustainably use biodiversity, and the 
extent to which any desired behavioural change has 
been achieved, to provide a basis for more targeted 
efforts

Box 1.1. union for ethical Bio trade (ueBt)—Biodiversity Barometer results in 2013

Since the first edition of the Biodiversity Barometer in 2009, the global research organization IPSOS, on 
behalf of UEBT, has interviewed 31,000 consumers in 11 countries. Some highlights of the surveys include:12 

 • Brazil: There is 96% awareness of biodiversity in Brazil. Correct definitions of biodiversity are slowly 
rising. Awareness is driven by documentaries, school and advertising.

 • China: 94% of respondents had heard of biodiversity and 64% could define biodiversity correctly. This 
is the highest rate measured in any country. 

 • france: 95% of respondents have heard of biodiversity. There is high overall awareness of sustainability: 
98% are aware of sustainable development, deforestation, endangered species and fair trade.

 • germany: Results show a strong increase in consumer awareness of biodiversity: from 29% in 2009, to 
48% in 2013. 91% of respondents know of related terms like ‘preservation of ecosystems’.

 • united Kingdom: There is high awareness of ethics and trade (over 80%), but slightly less awareness of 
environmental terms (around 70%).

 • united States of america: Biodiversity awareness is slowly rising among consumers (48% in 2009 to 
54% in 2013). Correct definitions amongst respondents went from 26% to 39%.

34

Strategic Goal A

Box 1.2. Some national approaches to public engagement on biodiversity

Belgium: The campaign ‘I give life to my planet’ aims to engage people with biodiversity by inspiring 
individuals to take small and simple steps that will have long-term positive impacts. The campaign presents 
tools and information about potential actions—for each day or week of the year—relating to issues 
including overconsumption, over-exploitation, awareness of biodiversity values and invasive species. By 
2014, nearly 24,000 people had signed up to more than 87,000 actions for biodiversity. The campaign 
is a close collaboration between the Royal Belgian Institute of Natural Sciences, the Ministry for Public 
Health, Food Chain Safety and the Environment and several partners at the regional, provincial, local and 
NGO-level.13 

Benin: The Ministry of Environment of Benin initiated a project ‘12 gestes pour la biodiversité’ (12 actions 
for biodiversity). The project presents information in the form of a wall calendar, and a booklet showing a 
set of actions that can be carried out each month, as well as some of the important international days. The 
product has been used in schools and linked to capacity development activities. Plans are under way for an 
SMS text messaging service and other ways of spreading the message through social networks.14 

India: The Science Express Biodiversity Special (SEBS) is a mobile exhibition mounted on a specially 
designed train for creating awareness about biodiversity and other environmental issues in the country. 
The first phase of SEBS was launched on World Environment Day on 5th June 2012, and was the brand 
ambassador of the CBD’s COP-11 meeting hosted by India in Hyderabad in October 2012. The SEBS, during 
its first phase from June to December 2012, travelled to 51 locations and received over 2,300 000 visitors, 
including students and teachers from 7,000 schools. The second phase of SEBS travelled from New Delhi 
and visited 62 stations from October to April 2013.15

Japan: The Japanese Committee for the United Nations Decade on Biodiversity (UNDB-J), established in 
2011 by a range of stakeholders to promote action to achieve the Aichi Biodiversity Targets, operates a ‘My 
Declaration’ programme to help people understand the connections they have with biodiversity, and to take 
positive action in their everyday lives. Participants choose from a list of five actions and make a declaration 
explaining their choice. During 2012, the programme was used at 91 events including national meetings and 
regional seminars, attended by a total of around 20,000 people.16

Target 1: Awareness of biodiversity increased

35

T
e
g
r
a
T

Biodiversity values integrated

By 2020, at the latest, biodiversity values 
have been integrated into national and 
local development and poverty reduction 
strategies and planning processes and are 
being incorporated into national accounting, 
as appropriate, and reporting systems.

Why this target is important
One of the persistent challenges related to the 
conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity 
is to include it as a significant consideration 
when decisions are being taken on economic 
development and reducing poverty. Without such 
‘mainstreaming’, the best conservation measures 
can be jeopardized as development activities may 
threaten habitats and contribute to other pressures 
on biodiversity. A key step towards meeting this 
challenge is to ensure that the values of biodiversity 
to economies and livelihoods, often ignored in 
conventional accounting, are incorporated in the 
strategies and processes that drive decisions about 
development. 

Summary of progreSS toWardS the target

TargeT elemenTs (by 2020)

sTaTus

Biodiversity values 
integrated into national 
and local development and 
poverty reduction strategies

Biodiversity values 
integrated into national and 
local planning processes

Biodiversity values 
incorporated into national 
accounting, as appropriate

Biodiversity values 
incorporated into 
reporting systems

3

3

3

3

36

Strategic Goal A

recent trends, current status and future projections

Important progress has been achieved recently in 
incorporating biodiversity values into planning 
processes and strategies to reduce poverty, and 
integrating natural capital into national accounts. 
Wide variations among countries remain, but 
international initiatives are helping to reduce these 
differences. 

Of 54 poverty reduction strategies examined in a 
study, nearly one third (30 per cent) showed a high 
level of recognition of the importance of biodi-
versity in development strategies.17 In a different 
study around half of all countries that responded to 
a survey had systems of environmental-economic 
accounting, a framework for integrating statistics 
on the environment and its relationship with the 
economy.18 An increasing number of developing 
countries are incorporating natural capital into their 
accounting systems, including eight members of the 
World Bank’s WAVES partnership (see Box 2.1).19 
However, the great majority of studies assigning 

monetary values to biodiversity (88 per cent) have 
been carried out in high income or upper middle 
income countries.20

Around seventy per cent of the latest national 
reports submitted to the CBD include information 
suggesting some progress towards this target. These 
include the development of policies taking biodiver-
sity into account in land use and spatial planning, 
local development and poverty reduction plans. 
Relatively little attention is given to the integra-
tion of biodiversity into national accounting and 
reporting systems. An example of how Kenya has 
accounted for the ecosystem services provided by 
its forests is given in Box 2.2. 

Bringing all these factors together, GBO-4 
concludes that while important progress has been 
made towards achieving all components of Target 2, 
significant additional actions are required to meet 
the target by the 2020 deadline.

Box 2.1. the world Bank’s waVeS partnership

In 2010, the World Bank initiated the WAVES partnership (Wealth Accounting and the Valuation of Ecosystem 
Services). Its main objective is “to promote sustainable development by ensuring that natural resources are 
mainstreamed in development planning and national economic accounts”. WAVES helps countries to adopt 
and implement the System of Environmental-Economic Accounting (SEEA)—Central Framework, to develop 
an ecosystem accounting methodology. By 2014, eight countries had received support from WAVES to 
implement natural capital accounts. Botswana, Colombia, Costa Rica, Madagascar, and the Philippines were 
the first countries under the WAVES partnership, each applying natural capital accounting to particular sectors 
and economic indicators (Table 2.1).21 In 2013, Guatemala, Indonesia and Rwanda joined the partnership.

table 2.1. accounts being implemented by waVeS partners.
CouNtry

aCCouNt S

progreSS

Botswana

Water, land and ecosystems, mineral and energy and 
macroeconomic indicators of sustainable development

Detailed water accounts for 2010–11 and 
2011–12.

Colombia

Water and forests

Costa Rica

Water and forests

Water and forest accounts developed.

Established tec hnical working groups for 
both the water and forest accounts

Madagascar Mining, water and forests/protected areas and coastal

—

Philippines

Water, mineral, mangroves, land and ecosystem (at 
two identified sites) and macroeconomic Indicators of 
Sustainable Development.

Land cover change matrixes (for the two 
identified sites).
Water use supply and use table

Target 2: Biodiversity values integrated

37

Key actions for the future

Based on the various lines of evidence used in 
GBO-4, the following actions are effective and 
would help to accelerate progress towards Target 2, 
if more widely applied. They would also contribute 
to the other targets shown in parentheses:

 • Assessing existing and planned policies, across 
government, affecting biodiversity, and identifying 
opportunities and options for addressing biodiver-
sity concerns

 • Widely sharing information on the values 
of biodiversity and related ecosystem services 
to enable the better reflection of biodiversity in 
decision making across sectors (Target 19)

 • The further compilation of environmental statis-
tics and building environmental-economic accounts, 
including by further developing and maintaining 
national accounts of biodiversity-related natural 
resource stocks (such as forests, and water) and 
where possible, integrating these into national 
financial accounts (Target 5)

 • Reflecting the values of biodiversity in spatial 
planning and resource management exercises 
including through the mapping of biodiversity and 
related ecosystem services (Targets 5, 6 and 7)

 • Integrating biodiversity into environmental 
assessment processes and making wider use of 
strategic environmental assessment (Target 4) 

38

Strategic Goal A

Box 2.2. Kenya’s forest accounts22

One of the main objectives of Kenya’s initiative to build a forestry account was to capture information on 
the following:

 • Value added to forest products through the manufacturing sector

 • Provision of goods (timber and non-timber) to the subsistence economy (also referred to as the 
non-monetary economy)

 • Supply of a set of cultural services to residents of and visitors to Kenya 

 • Supply of a set of ecosystem services that regulate ecological processes 

A preliminary assessment concluded that the value of the forestry sector value chain to the economy 
of Kenya was at least three times larger than currently estimated by Kenya National Bureau of 
Statistics (KNBS), accounting for some 3.6 per cent of the national economy. The value was most likely 
underestimated as it did not consider some ecosystem services. 

Some key policy recommendations from the forestry accounting exercise included: 

 • Reducing the loss of ecosystem services, especially regulating services, as the cost of not doing so was 
4.2 times higher than the actual cash revenue from deforestation

 • Ensuring that Kenya has in place a fully functioning forest resource account in order to fully capture the 
various benefits provided by the forest

 • Encouraging investment in the forestry sector in order to increase efficiency in production, especially in 
sawn timber and charcoal production

 • Promoting adequate regeneration after harvest and an increased forest plantation growth in the long 
term, together with better coordination of regulating institutions, producers and consumers of forest 
products

 • Mainstreaming the use of instruments and incentives such as payment for ecosystem services, trading 
and insurance schemes

Target 2: Biodiversity values integrated

39

T
e
g
r
a
T

Incentives reformed

By 2020, at the latest, incentives, including 
subsidies, harmful to biodiversity are 
eliminated, phased out or reformed in order 
to minimize or avoid negative impacts and 
positive incentives for the conservation and 
sustainable use of biodiversity are developed 
and applied, consistent and in harmony 
with the Convention and other relevant 
international obligations, taking into account 
national socio-economic conditions.

why this target is important
Incentives created by government regulations and 
programmes have a powerful influence on behaviour 
affecting biodiversity, from private individuals to large 
corporations. A well-designed system of positive 
incentives can encourage better stewardship of 

land, inland waters and oceans; conversely the best 
conservation policies can easily be undermined 
by incentives that encourage overexploitation of 
resources. Reforming these incentives is critical to 
addressing underlying causes of biodiversity loss. 

Summary of progreSS towardS the target

TargeT elemenT s (by 2020)

sTaTus

Incentives, including 
subsidies, harmful to 
biodiversity, eliminated, 
phased out or reformed 
in order to minimize or 
avoid negative impacts

Positive incentives 
for conservation and 
sustainable use of 
biodiversity developed 
and applied

2

3

40

Strategic Goal A

recent trends, current status and future projections

Incentives relating to biodiversity take many forms, 
but global information on non-financial incen-
tives is limited. For this reason, the assessment of 
progress towards this target concentrates mainly 
on trends relating to financial incentives, including 
both subsidies harmful to biodiversity and positive 
incentives rewarding behaviour that benefits 
biodiversity.

Subsidies in the fisheries sector, especially relating 
to fuel use, continue to encourage overcapacity, and 
if not reformed, phased out or eliminated will lead 
to continued declines in marine fish populations 
and ecosystems. Fisheries subsidies also create 
trade distortions, harming livelihoods in regions 
such as Africa where subsidies are relatively low.23 
Eliminating or reforming all harmful fishing subsi-
dies would save billions of dollars per year, and 
increase both the size and value of catches in the 
long term.24

There is some evidence that agricultural subsidies 
are progressively moving away from support for 
production towards incentives intended to reward 
farming practices that safeguard the environment 
(see Figure 3.1).25 However, agri-environmental 
schemes are not always effective in achieving 
their aims in conserving biodiversity.26 Subsidies 
promoting biofuel use contributed to a four-fold 
increase in production of bioethanol and a tenfold 
increase in biodiesel production in the past decade, 
with some significant negative impacts on biodiver-
sity (see box 3.1).27

Actions taken as part of the REDD+ climate change 
mitigation mechanisms28 have the potential to 
bring considerable benefits to biodiversity and 
to contribute to the attainment of several Aichi 
Biodiversity Targets. However, if carbon storage is 
maximized at the expense of biodiversity they could 
potentially have undesirable impacts (see Box 3.2).29

The most recent national reports to the CBD 
provide little evidence of actions to remove 

subsidies harmful to biodiversity. Much more 
emphasis is put on positive incentives for conserva-
tion and sustainable use of biodiversity for example 
through tax incentives to landowners who enter 
into contractual arrangements for formal protec-
tion of their lands (South Africa), tax benefits 
for landowners who donate land for conserva-
tion (Canada) and support for municipalities that 
formulate local biodiversity strategies (Japan). An 
example of using price incentives to encourage 
more sustainable use of fertilizers in India is given 
in Box 3.3. 

Overall, progress towards this target shows a very 
mixed picture. While there is increasing recogni-
tion of the need to remove harmful subsidies, 
there is limited action to phase them out and some 
backward steps in creating new ones. The devel-
opment and application of positive incentives, 
especially for agricultural practices that protect the 
environment, are steps in the right direction, but 
on the current trajectory are not judged sufficient to 
meet this component of the target by 2020.

800

700

600

500

400

300

200

100

s
e
c

 

i
r
p
0
1
0
2
 
t
n
a
t
s
n
o
c

 
,

n
o

i
l
l
i

 

b
D
S
U

0
1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

2020

Figure 3.1. Statistical extrapolation of WTO green box spending 
to 2020. ‘Green box’ refers to agricultural subsidies including 
environmental protection and regional development programmes 
that do not distort trade and do not involve price support. The 
extrapolation assumes underlying processes remain constant. The 
solid line represents the model fit for the period with data and the 
extrapolation, dots represent data points and the shaded band 
illustrates the 95% confidence interval.30

Target 3: Incentives reformed

41

Box 3.1. Increase in biofuel production

The rapid increase in biofuel production has been stimulated by subsidies aimed at meeting targets for 
reducing dependence on fossil fuels (see Figure 3.2).31 Removing or reforming bio-energy subsidies so that 
they take into account the full impacts of biofuel crops on greenhouse gas emissions, land use change and 
biodiversity is important in ensuring that they do not have unintended negative impacts. 

100,000

s
e
r
t
i
l
 

n
o

i
l
l
i

m

80,000

60,000

40,000

20,000

0

s
e
r
t
i
l
 

n
o

i
l
l
i

m

25,000

20,000

15,000

10,000

5,000

0

USA

Brazil

Rest of World

A

1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011

USA

EU

Rest of World

B

1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011

Figure 3.2. Development of A World Ethanol Production, 1991–2012. B World Biodiesel Production, 1991–2012. 

Box 3.2. redd+ and biodiversity32

The REDD+ mechanism was launched by the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) 
in 2007 and its methodology was finalized by the UNFCCC in 2013. Its scope includes the reduction of 
emissions from deforestation, reductions of emissions from forest degradation, the conservation of forest 
carbon stocks, the sustainable management of forests, and the enhancement of forest carbon stocks. 

A number of initiatives to help implement REDD+ have been established, among them UN-REDD. At the end 
of 2011, total support to countries implementing UN-REDD programmes totalled US$ 108.1 million. By 2014, 
18 countries were partners of UN-REDD, receiving support for national programmes, and a further 31 countries 
were also receiving support. For the period 2011–2015, the aim of the UN-REDD Programme is to support 
countries in the development and implementation of their REDD+ strategies in order to speed up their REDD+ 
readiness. Another initiative, the BioCarbon Fund Initiative for Sustainable Forest Landscapes was launched in 
2013 at the UNFCCC COP19 in Warsaw, with funding pledges from Norway, the United Kingdom, the United 
States and Germany. Funding for the first year of this initiative will exceed US$ 280 million.

REDD+ mitigation mechanisms carry both opportunities and risks for biodiversity. Opportunities include 
slowing habitat loss (Target 5) and recovery of degraded forest ecosystems (Target 15), while risks 
include displacement of land use change to other ecosystems including savannahs and grasslands, and 
afforestation or reforestation with non-native species or forests with low species diversity.

42

Strategic Goal A

actions to enhance progress towards the target

Based on the various lines of evidence used in 
GBO-4, the following actions are effective and 
would help to accelerate progress towards Target 3, 
if more widely applied: They would also contribute 
to other targets, shown in parentheses:

 • Undertaking national, and, as appropriate, 
regional, analytical studies to identify candidate 
incentives, including subsidies, for elimination, 
phase-out or reform, as well as opportunities to 
promote the design and implementation of positive 
incentive measures (Target 2)

 • Developing policy plans, including a prioritized 
list of measures, with timelines, leading to the 
eventual removal, phase-out, or reform of harmful 
incentives, including subsidies, and the introduc-
tion, or strengthening, of positive incentives for the 
conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity 
(Target 17)

 • In cases where candidate incentives and subsi-
dies for elimination, phase-out or reform are already 
known, taking timely policy action (Targets 6 and 7)

 • Making greater use of social incentives (for 
example, the establishment of awards or recogni-
tion programmes promoting behaviours beneficial 
to biodiversity)

 • Better targeting and integration of agri-environ-
mental schemes and other policy instruments 
towards desired biodiversity outcomes (Targets 4 
and 7) 

Box 3.3. fertilizer subsidy reform in India

The Government of India is taking steps to 
encourage balanced fertilizer use so as to 
maintain soil biodiversity and to sustain and 
increase the rate of agricultural productivity. 
A recent reform of fertilizer pricing has been 
brought into effect to liberalize the prices of 
potassium and phosphate while increasing 
the price of urea by 10%. This is to encourage 
the use of potassium, phosphorus and micro-
nutrient based fertilizers while reducing the use 
of urea which has more damaging effects on the 
environment.33

Target 3: Incentives reformed

43

T
e
g
r
a
T

Sustainable production and 
consumption

Summary of progreSS towardS the target

TargeT elemenT s (by 2020)

sTaTus

Governments, business and 
stakeholders at all levels 
have taken steps to achieve, 
or have implemented, plans 
for sustainable production 
and consumption…

… and have kept the 
impacts of use of natural 
resources well within 
safe ecological limits.

3

2

By 2020, at the latest, Governments, business 
and stakeholders at all levels have taken 
steps to achieve or have implemented plans 
for sustainable production and consumption 
and have kept the impacts of use of natural 
resources well within safe ecological limits.

why this target is important
Underlying all the direct pressures on biodiversity 
is the unsustainable demand for natural resources 
generated by our present patterns of producing and 
consuming goods and services. With a rising human 
population and increasing per capita consumption, 
such pressures can only increase unless there 
is a determined effort to make production and 
consumption more sustainable. To meet the objective 
of keeping the impacts of natural resource use well 
within safe ecological limits, actions must address the 
efficiency of using resources, and limit total demand 
for goods and services. 

44

Strategic Goal A

recent trends, current status and future projections

While natural resources are being used much more 
efficiently to produce goods and services, this 
progress is overwhelmed by our greatly increased 
total levels of consumption. If current trends 
continue the intensity of resource use is expected 
to decrease further in the short term, that is more 
goods and services will be produced using fewer 
resources per unit of output.34 Figure 4.1 shows 
that natural resource use per person, and per dollar 
of the economy, has become more efficient in recent 
decades, with the exception of water use. 

However even with this it is unlikely that 
maintaining current patterns of consumption 
can keep ecosystems within safe ecological limits 
by 2020. Overall use of resources is projected to 
continue to increase in absolute terms until 2020. 
Humans are appropriating between 30 and 40 per 
cent of the entire planet’s plant production, more 
than double the amount appropriated a century 

ago.35 The ecological footprint of our societies 
continues to grow,36 and use of fresh water is rising 
unsustainably. 

Urban populations account for a large portion 
of humanity’s ecological footprint, and this is 
projected to increase further. Having more than 
half the global population, cities account for around 
three quarters of the world’s resource consump-
tion. With the urban population forecast to double 
by 2050, new urban infrastructure will place huge 
demands on resources, and the decisions made by 
subnational governments and urban citizens there-
fore have great implications for the achievement 
of sustainable production and consumption (see 
Box 4.1).

The recent adoption of the 10-Year Framework 
Programmes on Sustainable Consumption and 
Production, led by the United Nations Environment 

A

HANPP (PgC) 
EF with CF (bilion gha) 
EF without CF (bilion gha) 
Water Footprint (1000 km3) 
GDP (billion 2005 constant USD) 
Population (billion) 

25 

20 

15 

10 

5 

 

 

e
s
u
e
c
r
u
o
s
e
R

70,000 

60,000 

50,000 

40,000 

30,000 

20,000 

10,000 

0 
1960 

1970 

1980 

1990 

2000 

2010 

0 
2020 

 
)
P
D
G
(
 
t
c
u
d
o
r
P
c

 

i
t
s
e
m
o
D
 
s
s
o
r
G

4 

3.5 

3 

2.5 

2 

1.5 

1 

0.5 

 

 

e
s
u
e
c
r
u
o
s
e
r
 
a
t
i
p
a
c
 
r
e
P

B

HANPP (ton) 
EF with CF (gha) 
GDP (2005 constant USD) 
Water Footprint (m3) 
EF without CF (gha) 

9,000 

8,000 

7,000 

6,000 

5,000 

4,000 

3,000 

2,000 

1,000 

 

 

P
D
G
a
t
i
p
a
c
 
r
e
P

0 
1960 

1970 

1980 

1990 

2000 

2010 

0 
2020 

 

P
D
G

 

 

 
r
e
p
e
s
u
e
c
r
u
o
s
e
R

0.8 

0.7 

0.6 

0.5 

0.4 

0.3 

0.2 

0.1 

0 
1970 

c

HANPP (ton) 
EF with CF (gha) 
Water Footprint (m3) 
EF without CF (gha) 

1980 

1990 

2000 

2010 

2020 

Figure 4.1. These graphs demonstrate that all indicators of resource 
use are rising in absolute terms, even though the intensity of 
resource use in most cases is decreasing (i.e. efficiency is improving), 
measured both in terms of resources per person and resources per 
dollar of the economy. However use of water is increasing both in 
absolute terms and in intensity. Key: A Extrapolations of currents 
trends of population, Gross Domestic Product (GDP), Ecological 
Footprint (with and without the Carbon Footprint component), Water 
Footprint and Human Appropriation of Net Primary Production; 
B per capita extrapolations of current trends of GDP (secondary 
axis), Ecological Footprint (with and without the Carbon Footprint 
component), Water Footprint and Human Appropriation of Net 
Primary Production, C extrapolations of currents trends of intensity 
resource use of Ecological Footprint (with and without the Carbon 
Footprint component), Water Footprint and Human Appropriation of 
Net Primary Production intensities (resource use per unit GDP).38

Target 4: Sustainable production and consumption

45

Programme, may help to accelerate progress 
towards this target.37 Further about seventy per 
cent of countries provided information through 
their fifth national reports on progress towards this 
target. Generally the actions that have been taken 
have tended to focus on creating enabling environ-
ments to facilitate sustainable production. Some of 
the different types of action taken include the devel-
opment of laws related to environmental impact 
assessment (Mongolia), the development of “green 
fees” related to tourism (Palau), and the formula-
tion of guidelines for different sectors (Belgium, 
Japan, South Africa, Uganda). Few countries refer 
to progress or actions related to keeping the impacts 

of the use of natural resources within safe ecological 
limits or on issues associated with consumption. 

GBO-4 can report progress towards part of this 
target as steps are being taken in many areas to 
implement plans for more sustainable production 
and consumption (see for example Box 4.2 and 
certification schemes under Target 7), although not 
on a scale that would achieve this element of the 
target by 2020. There is, however, ample evidence 
that we are currently moving in the wrong direction 
regarding the objective of keeping the impacts of 
natural resource use within safe ecological limits, 
especially with regard to water use.

Box 4.1. Cities and Biodiversity

Subnational governments have a great potential to influence the implementation of the Convention on 
Biological Diversity (CBD). Since 2007 the majority of the world’s population has lived in cities43 and urban 
people are responsible for about three quarters of the world’s consumption of resources44 .The ‘top 600’ 
cities alone account for more than half of global GDP, and their dominance of global production is predicted 
to increase.45 The global urban population as a whole is due to increase from 3.5 billion urban dwellers 
worldwide in 2010, to 6.3 billion in 205046. The urban infrastructure required for this unprecedented 
increase is more than double the world’s current infrastructure and, in order for this to be accomplished, we 
will need to build as much infrastructure as we have built over the past 4,000 years.47 Given this a growing 
number of organizations, governments and other institutions are recognizing that the mode of urbanization 
will determine the sustainability of not only cities but the planet as a whole.48

With these formidable challenges to sustainability and biodiversity, come opportunities. Cities have the 
vast majority of wealth, knowledge institutions, communication networks, and direct contact with people. 
These factors allow city governments to affect rapid change. Environmental impact assessments and similar 
studies by local governments can often generate high-resolution data, often in places where biodiversity 
loss is most severe. Some subnational governments, such as the State and City of São Paulo in Brazil have 
quantified their ecological footprint in order to determine their local effect on the global environment and 
identify ways to reduce it.49

46

Strategic Goal A

actions to enhance progress towards the target

Based on the various lines of evidence used in 
GBO-4, the following actions are effective and 
would help to accelerate progress towards Target 4, 
if more widely applied. They would also contribute 
to other targets, shown in parentheses:

 • Strengthening partnerships among companies 
and industry associations, civil society and govern-
ment agencies, in an accountable and transparent 
manner, to promote sustainable practices that 
address biodiversity

 • Developing incentives, regulations and guidelines 
to encourage business development in sustainable 
production and consumption (Target 3)39

 • Promoting action on the demand side by 
raising awareness about environmental impacts 
(Target 1)40

 • Encouraging companies and local authorities 
to calculate and disclose their environmental and 
biodiversity-related externalities (footprints) to 
enable them to identify priorities for reducing 
impacts

 • Establishing government sustainable procure-
ment policies that are in line with the objectives of 
the CBD

 • Developing sector specific sustainable produc-
tion and consumption plans (Targets 6 and 7)41

 • Gathering more data and establishing harmo-
nized indicators to measure effectiveness and track 
progress of policies on sustainable consumption 
and production (Target 19)42

 • Promoting the inclusion of conservation and 
sustainable use in corporate sustainability plans

Box 4.2. the european union’s 
Sustainable timber action programme

Starting in March 2013 the EU Timber 
Regulation (EUTR) makes it unlawful in the EU 
to import timber harvested illegally anywhere 
in the world. The goal of the Sustainable Timber 
Action (STA) programme is to use public 
procurement to increase awareness in Europe 
about the human and environmental issues 
caused by deforestation and forest degradation 
in developing countries, and about the impact 
of unsustainable consumption and production 
of forest products on climate change, 
biodiversity and people dependent on forests. 
STA has developed a toolkit for sustainable 
timber procurement, and has enabled the 
establishment of the European Sustainable 
Tropical Timber Coalition, a coalition of 
European local governments who aim to use 
public procurement to boost the market for 
sustainable tropical timber.50

Target 4: Sustainable production and consumption

47

Strategic Goal B

Reduce the direct pressures on biodiversity and 
promote sustainable use.

targets

48

Strategic Goal B

It is only possible to reduce or halt the loss of biodiversity if the drivers and pressures on biodiversity 

are themselves reduced or eliminated. GBO-4 is able to report only limited progress towards 
targets aimed at reducing the direct pressures on biodiversity. In some tropical regions there has 
been significant success in reducing previously high rates of deforestation, but habitats around the 
world continue to be destroyed, degraded and fragmented. Overfishing remains a major threat to 
marine ecosystems, although an increasing number of fisheries especially in developed countries 
are moving towards more sustainable management. Successes in limiting pollution from excessive 
use of nutrients in some regions are currently outweighed by rising nutrient pollution in parts of 
the developing world. Important progress has been made in identifying invasive alien species and 
the pathways by which they are spread, but this has not so far had an impact in reducing the actual 
number of invasions. The one target within this goal with a deadline set at 2015, reducing multiple 
pressures on coral reefs, is certain to be missed. 

Target 4: Sustainable production and consumption

49

T
e
g
r
a
T

habitat loss halved or reduced

By 2020, the rate of loss of all natural 
habitats, including forests, is at least halved 
and where feasible brought close to zero, 
and degradation and fragmentation is 
significantly reduced.

why this target is important
The destruction and degradation of natural habitats 
represents the single most important driver of 
biodiversity loss.51 Economic, demographic and social 
pressures are likely to lead to continued conversion of 
habitats, but reducing the rate of that loss is critical 
to implementing the Strategic Plan. Preventing further 
fragmentation of habitats is also essential to avoid 
species populations becoming isolated and to enable 
essential movements across landscapes and aquatic 
environments. This is especially important in the face 
of climate change. 

Summary of progreSS towardS the target

TargeT elemenT s (by 2020)

sTaTus

The rate of loss of 
forests is at least halved 
and where feasible 
brought close to zero

The loss of all habitats 
is at least halved and 
where feasible brought 
close to zero

Degradation and 
fragmentation are 
significantly reduced

3

2

1

50

Strategic Goal B

recent trends, current status and future projections

Globally rates of deforestation are declining but are 
still alarmingly high. The loss of forest habitats in 
some regions, for example the Brazilian Amazon, 
has significantly slowed in recent years, through a 
combination of policies targeting multiple drivers 
of deforestation (see Box 5.1). Significant gain in 
forest area has been reported in some areas, with 
especially high rates of gain in China and Vietnam.52 
However, deforestation in many other tropical areas 
of the world is still increasing.53 Deforestation in 
Southeast Asia is mainly attributed to large-scale 
agro-industry, especially oil palm plantations, while 
in other areas increased demand for land for local 
food production is a major driver.54

While data is scarce for other terrestrial habitats, 
grasslands and savannas continue to witness large-
scale conversion to intensive agricultural and other 
uses.55 While no globally-agreed measure exists 
for the extent of coastal and freshwater wetlands, 
the majority of relevant studies suggest high rates 
of decline for global wetland area.56 The total 
area of land remaining in natural or semi-natural 
conditions has shown a downward trend in recent 
decades and would decline further by 2020 if 
recent trends continue.57 Coastal habitats such as 
mangroves continue to be lost through activities 
such as aquaculture, land reclamation and urban 
development, but global trends are difficult to 
discern due to variable data.58

Habitats of all types, including forests, grass-
lands, wetlands and river systems, continue to be 
fragmented and degraded (see Figure 5.1).59 While 
data on habitat degradation are not available on a 
global scale, populations of wild birds specializing 
in habitats such as grasslands and forests in North 
America and Europe show a decline of around 
one fifth since 1980, an indicator of long-term 
degradation.60 Extrapolations based on current 
trends suggest this decline will continue but that 
the rate will slow by 2020.61 While there is a trend 
towards removing small dams in some industrial-
ized countries, rates of new large dam construction 
are increasing rapidly in South America, Asia and 
Africa, threatening further fragmentation of fresh-
water habitats.62

Most countries have set national targets relating 
to habitat loss, although few specify the scale of 
reduction being sought. About sixty per cent of the 
national reports analysed for GBO-4 suggest that 
progress is being made on reducing loss of habitats. 
Less information is available regarding national 
action to reduce fragmentation and degradation.63

Overall, while GBO-4 can report limited progress 
towards this target with respect to tropical forests 
in some regions, indicators suggest a highly variable 
picture in different parts of the world and among 
different biomes, with data still scarce for many 
types of ecosystems. 

Forest status

Intact forests

Managed forests 

Degraded (partially deforested)

Deforested

Figure 5.1. The extent of deforestation 
and forest degradation worldwide69. 
Intact forests refers to unbroken 
expanses of natural ecosystems greater 
than 50,000 hectares. Managed forests 
refer to forest that is fragmented 
by roads and/or managed for wood 
production. Degraded or partially 
deforested refers to landscapes where 
there has been a significant decrease in 
tree canopy density. Deforested refers 
to previously forested landscapes which 
have been converted into non-forest. 

Target 5: Habitat loss halved or reduced

51

Box 5.1. pathways for reductions in habitat loss

Between the end of the 20th century and 2004 the Brazilian Amazon and Atlantic Forest had very high and 
rapidly rising deforestation rates. However with the use of a broad range of actions, corresponding to the Aichi 
Biodiversity Targets and Strategic Goals, deforestation rates have been greatly reduced (see Figure 5.2). 

The rapid decline in deforestation in the Brazilian Amazon is the result of a wide range of interrelated 
public and private policy initiatives, coordinated through the Action Plan for the Prevention and Control 
of Deforestation in the Amazon launched in 2004.71 The action plan was a cross-ministry initiative, 
coordinated by the President’s office. It includes a range of activities that relate to a number of Aichi 
Biodiversity Targets across all of the Strategic Goals, as indicated in the list below:

 • Monitoring of land-cover (Target 19), both near real time coarse resolution and annual high resolution 
satellite monitoring. The information generated through this monitoring was made publicly available 

 • Enforcement campaigns by Brazil’s environmental agency to crack down on illegal deforestation and 
logging, with interventions informed by near-real time monitoring. Businesses and stakeholders have also 
implemented plans to reduce deforestation to within safe limits. 

Incentive measures (Target 3), including restricting credit for rural landowners with the highest rates of 

 •
deforestation. 

 • Expansion of protected areas and demarcation of indigenous lands72,73 (Targets 11, 18). Approximately 
40% of natural vegetation is legally protected by parks and indigenous reserves. From 2002 to 2009, 
the Brazilian Amazon Protected Area network expanded by 60%; a large part of these new areas were 
created in regions of intense land conflict to act as green barriers against deforestation, establishing a new 
protected area paradigm.74 

In addition, as people have become more aware of the values of biodiversity (Target 1), NGO and business 
initiatives have implemented moratoria on soya and meat produced on recently-cleared land. Public 
prosecutors have also acted to require the industry to exclude deforesters from their supply chains (Target 4). 

km2 year–1
(Am., Cer.)

 30,000

 25,000

 20,000

 15,000

 10,000

 5,000

0

 27,772  

 25,396  

 21,651  

 18,165  

 18,226  

 19,014  

 8,173  

 8,913  

 14,286  

 12,911  

 11,651  

 7,464  

 7,000  

 4,823  

 3,511  

 4,444  

 3,757  

 2,989  

 1,001  

 621  

 343  

 3,725  

 155  

 141  

km2 year–1
(At. Fl.)

Atlantic Forest 
Cerrado 
Amazon 

 6,000

 5,000

 4,000

 3,000

 7,416  

 7,652  

 2,000

 6,418  

 220  

 5,843  

 1,000

 4,571  

 4,234  

 239  

0

2000 

2001 

2002 

2003 

2004 

2005 

2006 

2007 

2008 

2009 

2010 

2011 

2012 

2013 

Figure 5.2. Deforestation trajectories in Brazil’s major biomes. Recent efforts have reduced Amazon deforestation in 2013 by 70% 
below the historical 1996–2005 baseline of 19,600 km2 per year. Deforestation in the Cerrado has remained high. Deforestation has 
steadily declined in the Atlantic Forest despite a slight increase in 2013.70 

52

Strategic Goal B

Action to control deforestation, and also to require restoration, takes place in the framework of the 
Law of Native Vegetation Protection (LNVP)—previously known as Brazil’s Forest Code—which 
requires the maintenance of sensitive areas such as riversides, hilltops and slopes as well as a 
certain proportion of private property under native vegetation.

By combining these different approaches the government of Brazil was able to address both the 
underlying and direct causes of habitat loss and bring about positive change. However despite the 
progress that has been made in reducing deforestation in the Brazilian Amazon and Atlantic Forest, 
challenges remain including balancing competing demands for expanding agricultural production 
and enforcing forest conservation. This is particularly the case for the Cerrado biome where, 
unlike the Amazon and Atlantic forests, deforestation rates remain high.75 Conversion of Cerrado 
vegetation has occurred in over 50% of the biome and continues at a rate of 5000 km2 per year 
(average for 2003–2013).76 However, it has been shown that projected increases in agricultural 
production in Brazil could be easily accommodated within the existing area devoted to crops and 
pasturelands with plausible increases in the productivity of those lands, while also allowing for 
forest restoration.77 

Target 5: Habitat loss halved or reduced

53

actions to enhance progress towards the target

Based on the various lines of evidence used in 
GBO-4, the following actions are effective and 
would help to accelerate progress towards Target 5, 
if more widely applied. They would also contribute 
to other targets, shown in parentheses:

 • Identifying at the national level the direct and 
indirect causes of habitat loss with the greatest 
impact on biodiversity, to inform policies and 
measures to reduce loss

 • Developing a clear legal or policy framework for 
land use or spatial planning that reflects national 
biodiversity objectives (Target 2)

 • Engaging with and supporting indigenous and 
local communities, landowners, other stakeholders 
and the general public in activities to conserve 
biodiversity, to reduce illegal and unplanned land 
use change to prevent access to products produced 
from illegally sourced commodities and illegally 
cleared land, including by addressing issues related 
to commodity supply chains (Targets 1, 4 & 18)66

 • Developing effectively-managed protected 
area networks and other area based conservation 
measures, identified as being among the most effec-
tive instruments for conserving forests and other 
habitats (Target 11)67

 • Monitoring land use and land-cover, including, 
where possible, near-real-time monitoring to inform 
enforcement actions, as well as regular comprehen-
sive assessments of land use and land-cover change 
(Target 19)

 • Implementing law enforcement activities for 
relevant laws and regulations relating to habitat 
protection and conservation68

 • Aligning existing incentives to national objec-
tives for land use and spatial planning, and, the 
use of further incentives to reduce habitat loss, 
degradation and fragmentation, including as appro-
priate, payments for ecosystem services and REDD+ 
mechanisms (Target 3)64 

 • Facilitating a sustainable increase or intensifi-
cation in the productivity of existing agricultural 
land and rangeland, within a land use or spatial 
planning framework, combined with more 
moderate meat consumption and reduced waste 
from food systems, with a view to reducing 
the demand for conversion of natural habitats 
(Target 7)65 

54

Strategic Goal B

Target 5: Habitat loss halved or reduced

55

T
e
g
r
a
T

Sustainable management of 
aquatic living resources

By 2020, all fish and invertebrate stocks 
and aquatic plants are managed and 
harvested sustainably, legally and applying 
ecosystem based approaches, so that 
overfishing is avoided, recovery plans and 
measures are in place for all depleted 
species, fisheries have no significant 
adverse impacts on threatened species and 
vulnerable ecosystems and the impacts of 
fisheries on stocks, species and ecosystems 
are within safe ecological limits.

why this target is important
Overexploitation of fish and other marine and 
inland water organisms is a significant pressure on 
biodiversity. Unsustainable harvesting threatens not 
just marine and inland water biodiversity, but the 
profitability of fishing businesses around the world 
and the livelihoods of millions dependent on the 
resources of the ocean and inland waters. Finding 
and applying management approaches that avoid 
unsustainable fishing practices and that enable 
stocks to recover are therefore essential elements in a 
strategy to conserve and sustainably use biodiversity. 

Summary of progreSS towardS the target

TargeT elemenT s (by 2020)

sTaTus

All fish and invertebrate 
stocks and aquatic plants 
are managed and harvested 
sustainably, legally and 
applying ecosystem 
based approaches 

Recovery plans and 
measures are in place for 
all depleted species

Fisheries have no significant 
adverse impacts on 
threatened species and 
vulnerable ecosystems

The impacts of fisheries 
on stocks, species and 
ecosystems are within 
safe ecological limits, i.e. 
overfishing avoided

3

3

2

2

56

Strategic Goal B

recent trends, current status and future projections

Globally there is relatively little information on the 
management and harvest of aquatic invertebrates and 
plants, and there is little globally-consistent informa-
tion on inland water fisheries. For these reasons, this 
assessment focuses mostly on marine fisheries.

Overfishing continues to be a major problem, with 
around 30% of fish stocks defined as overfished. 
FAO figures show a small improvement for 2011 
(28.8 per cent “overfished”) compared to 2008 (32.5 
per cent “overfished”) (see Figure 6.1).78 However, 
recent decades show an overall declining trend for 
fisheries within biologically sustainable levels (see 
figures 6.1 and 6.2). 

While recent studies provide a range of estimates on 
the status and trends of global marine fisheries, the 
overall conclusions are broadly similar. For instance, 
Worm et al. (2009) showed that 63% of 166 
assessed fish stocks (the majority of which were well 
managed, developed country fisheries) have lower 
biomass levels than required to obtain maximum 
sustainable yield (MSY).79 However, these assessed 
stocks were found to have the potential to recover 
where low exploitation rates were maintained, 
although rebuilding had not yet led to overall 
biomass recovery, nor reversed the general trend 
of increasing depletion of many individual stocks. 
Branch et al. (2011) reported that 28–33% of 
assessed stocks are overexploited, including 7–13% 
which are collapsed. They also reported that the 
proportion of fished stocks that are overexploited 

or collapsed has remained stable in recent years, 
and that rebuilding efforts for these fisheries have 
reduced exploitation rates.80 In a recent study of 
over 1793 previously unassessed fisheries, Costello 
et al. (2012) found that 64% of these fisheries had 
lower stock biomass than required to support MSY, 
including 18% that were collapsed. While all the 
stocks studied were on a declining trend, 64% of 
them could potentially increase sustainable harvest 
if they were rebuilt.81

Persistent overfishing has a severe impact on 
marine biodiversity, driving the collapse and local 
extinction of several species, and reducing the total 
biomass of predator fish species by more than half 
(52 per cent) between 1970 and 2000.82 Destructive 
fishing practices such as dynamite fishing and 
bottom trawling in vulnerable habitats, continue 
to cause damage to coral reefs, seagrasses, cold 
water corals and sponge grounds.83 Unselective 
gear results in the capture of large quantities of 
non-targeted species (bycatch), estimated at some 
40% of total global catch, and including over 
600,000 marine mammals and 85,000 turtles a 
year, with serious consequences for the conserva-
tion of some species including seabirds.84

On the positive side, in some regions where 
exploitation rates have been significantly reduced, 
depleted stocks have rebounded, as in the case 
of the Northeast Atlantic (see Box 6.1, Figure 
6.4). There has also been a marked trend towards 

 
 

d
e
s
s
e
s
s
a
 
s
k
c
o
t
s
 
f
o
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
P

 

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

Underfished

Overfished

Fully fished

Figure 6.1: Global trends in the 
state of world marine fish stocks 
between 1974 and 2011.94

1974 

1978 

1982 

1986

1990 

1994 

1998 

2002 

2006 

2011

Target 6: Sustainable management of aquatic living resources

57

certification of sustainably-managed fisheries. 
The number of fisheries certified by the Marine 
Stewardship Council (MSC) increased by more than 
400 per cent from 2008–13, now accounting for 
some 9% of wild fisheries.85 However, MSC-certified 
fisheries are concentrated in developed countries 
(see Figure 6.3).

Management systems such as Individual Transferable 
Quotas (ITQ) that give fishing businesses a stake 
in the long-term health of fish stocks, can be effec-
tive in improving catch trends, but they need to be 
designed carefully to avoid unwanted socio-economic 
impacts.86 Co-management of fisheries involving 
local communities help to give legitimacy to fishery 
regulations, especially in small-scale fisheries in 
developing countries, and can lead to successful 
outcomes (see Box 6.2).

There has been some progress at the global level 
in the past decade in terms of establishing global 
policies and setting out guidance for improved 
fisheries, although there is relatively little compre-
hensive information on the implementation of 
these measures. For example UN General Assembly 
Resolutions 61/105 and 64/72 oblige countries 
that fish on the high seas to take specific measures 
to avoid significant adverse impacts on vulnerable 
marine ecosystems.87,88 Guidelines for sustain-
able fisheries include the FAO Code of Conduct on 
Responsible Fishing and the FAO International 
Guidelines on Bycatch Management and Reduction 
of Discards89,90 and the EU Common Fisheries 
Policy which was recently updated in 2013.91 
Some regional fisheries management organisa-
tions have also taken measures to address bycatch 
and discards, although widespread progress is still 
lacking in this area.92 

National action in the form of periodic fresh-
water fishing bans (China and Mongolia), fisheries 
management plans (Niue) and sustainable seafood 
initiatives (South Africa) are among the measures 
included in the latest reports from CBD Parties. 
Around sixty per cent of these reports include 
information suggesting that some progress is being 
made towards the attainment of this target.93

58

Strategic Goal B

e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
P

100

80

60

40

20

0

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

2020

Figure 6.2: Proportion of fish stocks within safe biological limits, 
based on data from the FAO, with extrapolation to 2020 assuming 
underlying processes remain constant. The solid line represents 
the model fit for the period with data and the extrapolation, dots 
represent data points and the shaded band illustrates the 95% 
confidence interval.96

10

s
n
o

i
l
l
i

m

 
)
T
M

(
 
e
g
a
n
n
o
T
C
S
M

 

8

6

4

2

0

100

MSC Certified (includes suspended) Tonnage

MSC engaged fisheries %*

80

60

40

20

0

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

10%

h
s
i
f
 
t
h
g
u
a
c
d

 

l
i

w
 
s
d
l
r
o
w
e
h
t
 
f
o
%
C
S
M

 

 

 

Figure 6.3. Trend in Marine Stewardship Council (MSC) certified 
fisheries.100 There has been a substantial increase in the tonnage of 
certified fish caught and some 10% fisheries are MSC certified. 

Overall, based on current trends, the proportion of 
fish stocks within safe ecological limits is projected 
to decline slightly at least until 2020 though there 
is uncertainty around the exact trajectory. Some 
progress towards sustainable management and stock 
recovery in some areas is overwhelmed by continuing 
unsustainable practices in fishing worldwide. 
Significant changes in policy and practice are there-
fore required if this target is to be met.

Box 6.1. moves towards sustainability in North east atlantic fisheries97

50

40

30

20

10

 

e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
P

From the late 19th Century, the United 
Kingdom led the development of industrialized 
fisheries. As a result fisheries around the 
British Isles were severely overexploited by the 
late 20th Century. This situation is changing 
throughout the northeast Atlantic, including 
around the UK, where the proportion of fish 
stocks that are being harvested sustainably 
and are at full reproductive capacity has 
shown an increasing trend since 1990 (see 
Figure 6.4). This sustainability indicator 
reached a maximum in 2011, at 47% of the 15 
stocks for which accurate time series data are 
obtainable from stock assessment reports. 
Many of these indicator stocks are being 
fished at or within the rate that will provide 
long-term maximum sustainable yield (MSY). 
The benefits of a push towards sustainability 
can be seen in stocks for which long-term 
management plans based on the MSY principle have been applied. In the North Sea, for example, haddock, 
herring and Norway lobster are currently being fished with increased landings and incomes for fishermen 
and coastal communities. The proportion of fish stocks being harvested sustainably may further increase 
following reforms to the European Union’s Common Fisheries Policy (CFP) which came into effect in 
January 2014 and introduced a legally binding commitment to fish at sustainable levels, achieving MSY by 
2015 where possible, and by 2020 at the latest. These measures may help to buffer the adverse impacts of 
climate change and promote resilience within the marine ecosystem and fishing communities.

Figure 6.4. The percentage of UK fish stocks harvested 
sustainably and at full reproductive capacity, 1990 to 2011.95

0
1990

2000

1995

2005

2010

Target 6: Sustainable management of aquatic living resources

59

actions to enhance progress towards the target

Based on the various lines of evidence used in 
GBO-4, the following actions are effective and 
would help to accelerate progress towards Target 6, 
if more widely applied. They would also contribute 
to other targets, shown in parentheses:

 • Promoting and enabling dialogue and enhanced 
cooperation and information exchange between 
fishing and conservation communities and the 
corresponding national agencies and associations;

 • Making greater use of innovative fisheries 
management systems, such as community 
co-management, that provide fishers and local 
communities with a greater stake in the long-term 
health of fish stocks (Target 18)

 • Eliminating, reforming or phasing out those 
subsidies which are contributing to excess fishing 
capacity (Target 3)

 • Enhancing, in each country, monitoring and 
enforcement of regulations to prevent illegal, unreg-
ulated and unreported fishing by flag-vessels

 • Phasing out fishing practices and gear which 
cause serious adverse impacts to the seafloor or to 
non-target species (Targets 5 and 12)

 • Further developing marine protected area 
networks and other effective area based conser-
vation measures, including the protection of 
areas particularly important for fisheries, such as 
spawning grounds, and vulnerable areas (Targets 10 
and 11)

Box 6.2. Community governance and management of fisheries

Fisheries regulations need to be viewed as legitimate by stakeholders, in order to gain their support and 
compliance. Devolution of governance to indigenous and local communities, shared governance, and 
co-management arrangements are a means to attain this legitimacy, and have contributed to successful 
fisheries management outcomes, especially in small-scale fisheries in developing countries. For example, 
coastal communities have demonstrated the ability to responsibly steward and manage marine ecosystems 
through a network of several hundred Locally Managed Marine Areas (LMMAs) in the South Pacific, as 
have similar initiatives in Madagascar, Kenya, Spain, and Japan, among others.98 Initiatives such as these 
can also help to make progress towards a number of Aichi Biodiversity Targets, including Targets 11 and 18. 

One specific example of community fisheries management is a community conserved area in the estuary 
of the Casamance river in Senegal.99 An association uniting the fishermen of eight villages established an 
area called Kawawana (an abbreviation of the Djola expression “Kapooye Wafolal Wata Nanang” or “our 
patrimony, for us all to preserve”). The purpose of the area was to improve the quantity and quality of 
local fish catch. The fishermen demarcated their traditional fishing territory and devised a zoning system, 
a management plan, a surveillance system and a governing structure—all combining both traditional and 
modern elements. For instance, surveillance comprises both placing fetishes and patrolling for violators 
whose boats and gear can be legally seized. With municipal and regional government approval, Kawawana 
has now been in operation for about five years—on a purely volunteer basis. The results include restored 
fisheries and biodiversity (e.g. for twenty types of coastal fish, rare humpbacked dolphins and manatees), 
enhanced solidarity in the villages, and improved local diets and income. The zoning system includes a 
strict no-take zone coinciding with ancient sacred areas, a sustainable use zone open to everyone fishing 
with boats without engines; and a sustainable use zone open only to the paddling canoes of local residents. 

60

Strategic Goal B

Target 6: Sustainable management of aquatic living resources

61

T
e
g
r
a
T

Sustainable agriculture, 
aquaculture and forestry

By 2020, areas under agriculture, 
aquaculture and forestry are managed 
sustainably, ensuring conservation of 
biodiversity.

why this target is important
The increasing demand for food, fibre and fuel is 
putting ever-greater pressure on our ecosystems 
and biodiversity. To help ease that pressure the key 
sectors of agriculture, aquaculture and forestry need 
to adopt practices that minimize negative impacts, 
making their activities more sustainable over the 
long term. There is a need to decouple production 
from environmental impacts, including through 
the use of innovation and scientific and technical 
advances. This target challenges governments and 
businesses to define sustainable practices, and to 
adopt them as widely as possible. 

Summary of progreSS towardS the target

TargeT elemenT s (by 2020)

sTaTus

Areas under agriculture 
are managed sustainably, 
ensuring conservation 
of biodiversity.

Areas under aquaculture 
are managed sustainably, 
ensuring conservation 
of biodiversity.

Areas under forestry are 
managed sustainably, 
ensuring conservation 
of biodiversity.

3

3

3

62

Strategic Goal B

recent trends, current status and future projections

Unsustainable practices in agriculture, aquacul-
ture and forestry continue to be responsible for 
substantial environmental degradation, including 
biodiversity loss.101 This represents a challenge for 
the global community, with the need to find ways 
of meeting growing demands for resources while 
avoiding negative environmental impacts. 

In agriculture, impacts of pollution from nutrients 
used as fertilizer remain high, but appear to be 
stabilizing in some regions (see Target 8). Indicators 
of farmland biodiversity, such as the condition of 
farmland bird populations in Europe, continue to 
decline, but projections indicate the rate of decline 
may be slowing (see Figure 7.1).

The area covered by agricultural certification 
schemes, for example organic and conservation 
agriculture, is growing, but still covers a small 
proportion of farmed land (see Figure 7.2).102 
The area of forestry managed sustainably under 
the criteria of certification schemes continued to 
increase, but is still very strongly concentrated in 
temperate and boreal regions (see Figure 7.3).103 

Aquaculture is expanding rapidly, with large 
environmental impacts, and a small but growing 
fraction of this activity is adopting sustainability 
criteria (see Box 7.1).104 

While most national biodiversity strategies and 
action plans examined for GBO-4 included targets 
or commitments relating to sustainable manage-
ment of agriculture or forestry, few of these 
targets were quantitative.105 Around 60% of the 
fifth national reports assessed provide informa-
tion suggesting that some progress is being made 
towards the achievement of this target. Examples 

of the actions being taken include increased 
support for certification programmes (Japan, and 
Myanmar), the development and support of partici-
patory forest resource management (Nepal) and the 
promotion of sustainable agricultural practices and 
organic agriculture (Niue).106

Scenario analysis (see Part III) and numerous 
studies107 indicate that it is feasible to simultane-
ously protect biodiversity and achieve food security 
while also meeting climate mitigation and other 
socioeconomic objectives. 

Overall GBO-4 can report progress in introducing 
sustainable management to areas under agriculture, 
aquaculture and forestry, but not to the extent that 
would achieve this target by 2020 given current 
trends. 

120

100

80

60

40

20

 

l

e
u
a
v
x
e
d
n
I

0

1980

1990

2000

2010

2020

Figure 7.1. Trend in the Wild Bird Index for common farmland birds in 
Europe, 1980–2011 with statistical extrapolation 2011–2020 assuming 
underlying pressures remain constant. It suggests a continuing 
decline in the status of these species populations but the rate of 
decline may be slowing. The solid line represents the model fit for the 
period with data and the extrapolation, dots represent data points 
and the shaded band illustrates the 95% confidence interval.108

Target 7: Sustainable agriculture, aquaculture and forestry

63

actions to enhance progress towards the target

Based on the various lines of evidence used in 
GBO-4, the following actions are effective and 
would help to accelerate progress towards Target 7, 
if more widely applied. They would also contribute 
to other targets, shown in parentheses:

 • Making agriculture more efficient, including 
through improved targeting and efficiency of fertil-
izer, pesticide and water use (Target 8), and through 
the use of diverse and well-adapted crop varieties 
(Target 13) and the greater use and rehabilitation of 
ecological processes at the landscape level to replace 
chemical inputs and reduce water consumption 
(“ecological intensification”) (Targets 5, 14 and 15)

 • Reducing waste at all stages of production and 
consumption, including reducing post harvest 
losses and minimizing food waste (Target 4)112

A

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

B

50

40

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

)
a
h
n
o

 

i
l
l
i

m

(
 
a
e
r
A

0
2001

)
a
h
n
o

 

i
l
l
i

m

(
 
a
e
r
A

150

120

90

60

30

0

1988-1992

1993-1997

1998-2002

2003-2007

2008-2012

 • Promoting sustainable diets, with appropriate 
caloric and nutrient intake, for example through the 
promotion of sustainable food cultures (Target 4)

 • Making greater use of existing certification 
schemes for sustainably produced goods and the 
further development of certification schemes to fill 
current gaps113

 • Supporting customary sustainable use, for 
example through education, and, where appro-
priate, delegating governance and responsibility for 
land management to indigenous and local commu-
nities (Target 18)

 • Enhancing the understanding of local farmers 
and fishers of the status of biodiversity and ecosys-
tems they rely on for their agricultural production, 
and engaging them in the planning process (Target 1)

 • Promoting integrated landscape-level planning, 
taking into account the role of biodiversity in 
providing ecosystem services, including services 
that contribute to agricultural production such 
as pollination, pest control, water provision and 
erosion control (Targets 5 and 14)

Boreal
       PEFC 
       FSC 

Temperate
       PEFC 
       FSC 

Tropical
       PEFC 
       FSC 

500

400

300

200

100

s
e
r
a
t
c
e
h
n
o

 

i
l
l
i

m

0
2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

2010

2012

Figure 7.2. Area of agricultural land under A organic production109 
and B conservation agriculture.110

Figure 7.3. Total area of forestry under the Forest Stewardship Council 
(FSC) and Programme for the Endorsement of Forest Certification 
(PEFC) schemes in boreal, temperate and tropical regions.111

64

Strategic Goal B

Box 7.1. minimising negative impacts from aquaculture114

Aquaculture, the farming of fish and other aquatic species, is forecast to account for an increasing 
proportion of food production in coming decades. Following sustainability guidelines can significantly 
reduce its negative impacts on biodiversity, including:

 • Giving priority to farming native species, so as to avoid possible to invasions of native habitats by 
escaped alien species, and species lower down the food chain (e.g. herbivorous fish rather than carni-
vores). This can be achieved through a combination of regulations and promoting changes in consumer 
preferences

 • Minimizing pollution by improving management practices, for example by reducing overfeeding

 • Adopting practices such as ‘multitrophic aquaculture’ in which seaweed can be produced for human 
food, fish feed and pharmaceuticals, reducing feed demand and pollution

 • Using waste from one species to be converted to protein by another species, thereby reducing nutrient 
pollution

 • Adopting enclosed systems and better waste treatment, also reducing pollution

 • Minimizing the modification of habitats, especially in mangroves, maintaining ecosystem services and 
preserving nursery habitat for many commercially-important wild marine species 

Target 7: Sustainable agriculture, aquaculture and forestry

65

T
e
g
r
a
T

pollution reduced

By 2020, pollution, including from excess 
nutrients, has been brought to levels that 
are not detrimental to ecosystem function 
and biodiversity.

why this target is important
Pollution, in particular the accumulation of reactive 
nitrogen and phosphorus nutrients in the environment, 
is among the most significant causes of biodiversity 
loss and of damage to the ecosystems on which we 
depend. Wetland, coastal, marine and dryland areas 
are especially vulnerable, through a range of impacts 
including the creation of marine ‘dead zones’ as 
algae build up, die and decompose and in the process 
deprive large areas of oxygen. The target encourages 
decision makers to take the necessary actions to 
minimize the release of these and other pollutants. 

Summary of progreSS towardS the target

TargeT elemenT s (by 2020)

sTaTus

Pollutants (of all types) 
have been brought to levels 
that are not detrimental 
to ecosystem function 
and biodiversity.

No clear evaluation—

highly variable 

between pollutants

Pollution from excess 
nutrients has been brought 
to levels that are not 
detrimental to ecosystem 
function and biodiversity. 

1

66

Strategic Goal B

recent trends, current status and future projections

Nitrogen and phosphorus pollution continues to 
pose a very significant threat to biodiversity and 
ecosystem services globally.115 Measures taken in 
some regions to limit release of nutrients to the 
environment have caused a stabilization of nutrient 
pollution, especially in Europe and North America, 
but at levels that are still detrimental to biodiver-
sity (see box 8.1). Globally, the surplus of nitrogen 
and phosphorus in the environment is projected to 
continue rising beyond 2020, with growth concen-
trated in Asia, South and Central America, and 
sub-Saharan Africa (see Figures 8.1 and 8.2).116

Some toxic contaminants of wildlife are declining 
in part due to successful international action to 
restrict their use, but other existing and newly-
developed contaminants are still widely used (see 
box 8.2).117 Other pollutants of continuing or 
growing concern include plastics, in particular their 
impacts on marine ecosystems,118 heavy metals, 
endocrine disrupters119 and pesticides, which have 
been implicated by some studies in damage to polli-
nating insect and bird populations.120

Overall, damage from marine oil spills has 
declined, due to better tanker design and 
improved navigation, but pollution from pipelines, 
mainly land-based, has increased due to ageing 
infrastructure.121

More than sixty per cent of the national reports 
analysed for GBO-4 indicate that countries are 
making progress towards achieving this target, 
with measures including reduction in the use of 
pesticides (Belgium), phasing out the use of some 
harmful products (Mongolia) and putting pollu-
tion monitoring systems in place (Myanmar).122 
However, the overall evaluation is that current 

trends are moving us further away from the target 
of bringing excess nutrients to levels not detri-
mental to ecosystem function and biodiversity. 
It was not possible to evaluate overall trends 
regarding other forms of pollutants, due to limited 
information.

a

200

150

r
a
e
y
/
N
g
T

100

50

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

2020

)
y
/
p
a
c
/
g
k
n
i
(
 
s
s
o

 

l
 

N

100

80

60

40

20

0

B

Energy use

Food consumption
Food processing
Food production

Europe

North
America

South
America

Asia

Africa

World

Figure 8.1. A The global surplus of nitrogen in the environment, since 
1970 and with statistical extrapolations from 2010–2020, assuming 
underlying processes remain constant. The solid line represents 
the model fit for the period with data and the extrapolation, dots 
represent data points and the shaded band illustrates the 95% 
confidence interval and B The average loss of reactive nitrogen to 
the environment per capita per continent124

Target 8: Pollution reduced

67

actions to enhance progress towards the target

Based on the various lines of evidence used in 
GBO-4, the following actions are effective and 
would help to accelerate progress towards Target 8, 
if more widely applied. They would also contribute 
to other targets, shown in parentheses:

 • Eliminating phosphates from detergents to 
reduce nutrient loss to water bodies127

 • Enhancing treatment and recycling of sewage 
and industrial waste water128

 • Developing and enforcing national water and air 
quality guidelines and/or concentration thresholds 
for different pollutants, for example by reducing the 
level of emissions per unit of combustion125

 • Conserving and restoring wetlands and other 
ecosystems which play an essential role in nutrient 
cycling, to reduce nutrient losses to the environ-
ment (Targets 5,11, 14 and 15)129

 • Improving nutrient use efficiency to reduce 
losses to the environment, for example through 
coupling livestock and crop systems and minimizing 
emissions from animal housing and feedlots 
(Target 7)126 

 • Promoting the reuse and recycling of plastics 
and the use of biodegradable alternatives to reduce 
marine debris

Box 8.1. european nitrogen legislation

The European Union’s legislation to reduce nitrogen (N) loading consists of actions to reduce atmospheric 
deposition and leaching of nutrients into the aquatic environment. The three most important pieces of EU 
legislation for reducing nitrogen loading to ecosystems are:

 • The Nitrates Directive which caps the total application of N from animal manures to 170 kg N/ha and 
restricts application of manure and inorganic fertilizer in situations with high risk of N loss.

 •
 The National Emissions Ceilings Directive (NECD) which caps emissions of ammonia and nitric oxide 
at national levels to reduce acidification and eutrophication. This directive also defines best management 
practices to reduce ammonia losses.

 • The Urban Waste Water Treatment Directive which sets targets for efficient removal of nitrogen. 

Due to these and other regulations, ammonia emissions in the European Union declined 30% between 
1980 and 2011. On average, the gross nitrogen balance (an indicator of losses to the environment) 
decreased by 36 per cent between 1980 and 2005. Emissions reduction effects of the NECD and Nitrates 
Directive after the year 2000 were small. However, individual EU member states including Denmark, 
Belgium and the Netherlands with strict national nitrate and ammonia policies achieved higher reduction 
of ecosystem loadings. Nevertheless, levels generally remain well above those that cause ecological 
damage and total nitrogen loads to EU rivers have remained relatively high and stable since 1990, despite 
substantial improvements for some rivers such as the Rhine. 130

68

Strategic Goal B

Box 8.2. pollutants in arctic biodiversity

International agreements on toxic substances have made significant contributions to some pollutant 
reductions, as certain legacy chemicals have diminished in some Arctic wildlife populations. The Stockholm 
Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants is often credited as a driving force behind lower levels of 
legacy persistent organic pollutants (POPs) in species. However levels can still remain high enough in some 
species, such as polar bear and some seabirds, to affect wildlife and human health. 

Continued use of existing pollutants and emerging pollutants pose complex problems for species in 
the Arctic, an area of the world where ocean and atmospheric currents result in a high deposit and 
accumulation of substances. A variety of recently emerging, but poorly studied, contaminants, such as 
polybrominated diphenyl ethers (PBDEs), are increasing. In addition, mercury concentrations are increasing 
in parts of the Arctic, including areas in Canada and Greenland, and remain a concern, especially for top 
predator species. Further complicating the issue is the unpredictable interaction between contaminants and 
climate change, and the largely unknown sensitivities of Arctic species to contaminants.131

Target 8: Pollution reduced

69

T
e
g
r
a
T

Invasive alien species 
prevented and controlled

By 2020, invasive alien species and 
pathways are identified and prioritized, 
priority species are controlled or 
eradicated and measures are in place 
to manage pathways to prevent their 
introduction and establishment.

why this target is important
The movement of animals, plants and other 
organisms around the planet represents one 
of the greatest threats to biodiversity. Species 
introduced into new environments, whether 
deliberately or accidentally, have contributed to 
more than half of the animal extinctions for which 
the cause is known.132 Species invasions also carry 
enormous economic costs.133 Through this target, 
governments aim to reduce these costs to society 
and to biodiversity, by addressing prevention, 
control and eradication of invasive alien species.

Summary of progreSS towardS the target

TargeT elemenT s (by 2020)

sTaTus

Invasive alien species 
identified and prioritized

Pathways identified 
and prioritized

Priority species controlled 
or eradicated

Introduction and 
establishment of 
IAS prevented

3

3

3

2

70

Strategic Goal B

recent trends, current status and future projections

The number of invasive alien species continues to 
increase globally as do their impacts on biodiversity 
(see Figure 9.1). However, where undertaken, measures 
to combat invasive alien species have often had striking 
success, for example in New Zealand where policies are 
starting to turn the tide against centuries of species 
invasions (see Box 9.1). Eradication programmes 
for invasive vertebrates on islands globally have 
been especially successful, with 87 per cent of such 
campaigns achieving their objective. On the other 
hand, very few programmes to eradicate invasive 
species from mainland areas have succeeded.134 

Progress has been made in identifying the pathways 
through which both terrestrial and aquatic species 
enter alien environments and become invasive (See 
Figure 9.2).135,136 However, weak border controls in 
many countries prevent this knowledge from being 
acted upon. 

A

Governments are increasingly taking steps to 
prevent, control and eradicate alien species 
invasions. More than half (55 per cent) of the 
Parties to the CBD currently have national policies 
relevant to tackling this major threat to biodiver-
sity.137 Around 60 per cent of the national reports 
assessed for this Outlook suggest that progress is 
being made towards this target. Among the actions 
that have been taken are efforts to eradicate various 
invasive alien species, such as water hyacinth 
(Rwanda) and mongoose (Japan), the development 
of black lists (Belgium and Norway) and the collec-
tion of information on invasive alien speices (Iraq). 
Generally the reports suggest that actions tend to 
be concentrated on control and eradication, with 
relatively few examples of actions to identify, priori-
tize and manage the pathways of introduction.138

30-50
51-100

101-200

201-500

501-2048

geometric mean index

B

2.0

1.8

1.6

1.4

1.2

1.0

Figure 9.1. A Cumulative 
number of species introductions 
with known introduction dates, 
across 21 countries and B Trend 
indicator showing the geometric 
mean of cumulative number of 
invasive alien species across 
these 21 countries. The value 
has been set to 1 for 1970 and 
the shaded area represents the 
95% confidence interval.141

1970

1976

1982

1988

1994

2000

2006

2012

Target 9: Invasive alien species prevented and controlled

71

Cost-effective strategies are starting to be imple-
mented to prioritize control and eradication of 
invasive alien species. Nevertheless, the efforts 
taken so far are still overwhelmed by the global rate 
of alien species introductions, which shows no sign 
of slowing.139 Longer-term, climate change is likely 
to have a significant impact on the distribution 

of invasive alien species in different regions 
(See Figure 9.3).140

Overall, there has been some progress towards 
achieving Target 9 but additional actions are 
required if it is to be met by the 2020 deadline. 

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

110

120

130

140

150

Release
Landscape/flora/fauna improvement
Biological control
Erosion control/ dune stabilization
Fishery in the wild
Release in nature for use
Hunting in the wild
Other Intentional release
Escape
Horticulture 
Pet/aquarium species
Agriculture
Aquaculture/mariculture
Botanical garden/zoo/aquaria
Live food and live baits
Forestry
Ornamental purpose
Farmed animals
Other escape from confinement
Research (in facilities)
Fur farms
Transport – Contaminant
Transportation of habitat material
Food contaminant
Contaminant nursery material
Contaminant on plants
Contaminant on animals
Seed contaminant
Parasites on plants
Parasites on animals
Contaminated bait
Timber trade
Transport – Stowaway
Ship/boat ballast water
Ship/boat hull fouling
Hitchhikers on ship/boat
Vehicles
Machinery/equipment
Container/bulk
People and their luggages
Organic packing material
Hitchhikers in or on plane
Angling/fishing equipement
Other means of transport

Corridors
Interconnected waterways/seas

Figure 9.2. Frequencies of introduction pathways of known cases of introduction of over 500 invasive alien species profiled in the Global 
Invasive Species Database (GISD).142 

72

Strategic Goal B

Potential number of IAS that are predicted  
to find suitable conditions in 2014–2060

Difference of the number of IAS that are predicted to find 
suitable conditions between 2014–2060 and 1950–2000

50

0

-50

50

0

60

40

20

0

-50

20

10

-10

-20

-100

0

100

-100

0

100

Figure 9.3. Projected changes in the occurrence of invasive alien species due to climate change based on species distribution models and 
future projections of climate and land use change.143

actions to enhance progress towards the target

Based on the various lines of evidence used in 
GBO-4, the following actions are effective and 
would help to accelerate progress towards Target 9, 
if more widely applied. They would also contribute 
to other targets, shown in parentheses:

 • Raising awareness among policy makers, the 
general public and potential importers of alien 
species, of the impacts of invasive alien species, 
including the possible socio-economic costs and 
the benefits of taking action to prevent their 
introduction or to mitigate their impacts, such 
as by publicizing nationally relevant case studies 
(Target 1)144

 • Developing lists of alien species known to 
be invasive (or assessing existing lists for their 
completeness and accuracy) and making them 
widely available (Target 19), such as through 
the Global Invasive Alien Species Information 
Partnership

 • Increasing efforts to identify and control the 
main pathways responsible for the introduction of 
alien species, including through the development of 
border control or quarantine measures to reduce the 
likelihood of potentially invasive alien species being 
introduced and making full use of risk analysis and 
existing relevant international standards145

 • Putting in place measures for the early detection 
and rapid response to species invasions146

 • Identifying and prioritizing those invasive 
alien species with the greatest potential to cause 
negative impact on biodiversity that are established 
in the country, and developing and implementing 
plans for their eradication or control, prioritizing 
protected areas and other areas of high biodiversity 
value for eradication or control measures

Figure 9.3

Target 9: Invasive alien species prevented and controlled

73

Box 9.1. New Zealand: turning the tide against centuries of species invasions

New Zealand is among the countries most affected by invasive alien species. European colonists intending 
to recreate a familiar landscape and lifestyle established a legacy of species introductions going back 
centuries.147 Today, New Zealand has leveraged its isolation, as an island nation distant from major trading 
partners, to turn the tide on unwanted species invasions (See Figure 9.4).148 The country’s strong policy 
of border protection originated from the desire to protect its agriculture from pests and diseases.149 New 
Zealand is also rich in endemic biodiversity. As the negative impacts of invasive species were recognized, 
the agricultural border protection measures translated readily to measures in support of conservation.

Even with these border control measures, many alien species have been and continue to be introduced 
to New Zealand, and some become invasive. New Zealand has developed tools to respond to invasions 
once alien species enter the country.150 New Zealand’s small size and governance structures have helped 
in successful implementation of these tools to prevent invasive species from spreading and establishing. 
Two strong legal frameworks have been implemented in New Zealand: the Hazardous Substances and New 
Organisms Act and the Biosecurity Act.

For protection of biodiversity from invasive species impacts, New Zealand has focused on using islands 
as ‘arks’ where threatened species can be reintroduced.151 The country has also pioneered methods to 
eradicate species introduced to islands, particularly mammals, to increase the amount of pest-free land 
area.152 New Zealand has eradicated non-native mammals in more than over 100 islands. 

Following its success on smaller islands, New Zealand has developed ‘mainland islands’, which allow the 
technologies developed for the irradiation of invasive species on smaller islands to be applied in a larger 
landscape context. Some of these technologies use mammal-proof fences to create enclosures within 
larger landscapes, and others use sustained pest control methods to maintain pest density at close to zero 
for agricultural or biodiversity benefits.153 There are currently over 25 fenced, and 100 unfenced ‘mainland 
islands’, across New Zealand. By increasing pest control connectivity among these sites it is predicted that 
pest control may be scaled up to the entire country with appropriate governance guidance.154

40

35

30

25

20

15

1870

1873

1874

1875

1879

1884

1885

1904

1905

1907

1910

1920

1954

1990

1994

2005

Figure 9.4. Number of non-native mammal species in New Zealand between 1876 and 2005. Dots represent data points and the shaded 
band illustrates the 95% confidence interval.155

74

Strategic Goal B

Target 9: Invasive alien species prevented and controlled

75

T
e
g
r
a
T

ecosystems vulnerable  
to climate change

By 2015, the multiple anthropogenic 
pressures on coral reefs, and other vulnerable 
ecosystems impacted by climate change or 
ocean acidification are minimized, so as to 
maintain their integrity and functioning.

why this target is important
Climate change and ocean acidification (which is 
due to increased atmospheric carbon dioxide) are 
becoming increasingly serious threats to ecosystems 
and the services they provide. Some habitats including 
coral reefs, mountains and rivers are especially 
vulnerable to one or both of these pressures. While 
mitigating climate change is clearly the key long-term 
priority, urgent measures to relieve other pressures 
can make these ecosystems more resilient, protecting 
their biodiversity and the livelihoods of millions of 
people who depend on them. The urgency of this 
action was reflected in the decision to make 2015 the 
deadline for meeting this target, instead of 2020 as 
with most of the other targets. 

Summary of progreSS towardS the target

TargeT elemenT s (by 2020)

sTaTus

Multiple anthropogenic 
pressures on coral reefs 
are minimized, so as to 
maintain their integrity 
and functioning.

1

Multiple anthropogenic 
pressures on other 
vulnerable ecosystems 
impacted by climate change 
or ocean acidification 
are minimized, so as to 
maintain their integrity 
and functioning.

Not evaluated — Insufficient 

information available to 

evaluate the target for other 

vulnerable ecosystems 

including seagrass habitats, 
mangroves and mountains

76

Strategic Goal B

recent trends, current status and future projections

Multiple pressures on coral reefs, including 
pressures from both land-based and marine activi-
ties, continue to increase. This makes it unrealistic 
to believe that the target will be met by 2015 
as agreed by Parties to the CBD. The percentage 
of reefs rated as threatened increased by nearly 
one-third (30 per cent) in the decade to 2007, the 
latest period assessed. Overfishing and destructive 
fishing methods are the most pervasive threats, 
affecting around 55 per cent of reefs. Coastal 
development and pollution from land, including 
nutrients from farming and sewage, each affect 
about one-quarter of reefs. Around one-tenth suffer 
from marine-based pollution. Local pressures are 
most severe in Southeast Asia, where nearly 95 per 
cent of coral reefs are threatened.156

Large marine protected areas (MPAs) already in place 
or pending establishment offer opportunities for 
better protection of coral reefs. Where well-enforced 
and combined with land-based protection measures, 
MPAs have succeeded in rebuilding reef fish stocks 
and even helping corals to recover after bleaching.157 
However, to date some MPAs have proven ineffec-
tive in easing pressure on reefs, with only some 
15 per cent reducing the threats from fishing.158

A recent study of the Caribbean suggests that effec-
tive action to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, 
combined with management of local threats such 
as overfishing and poor water quality, would create 
favourable conditions for coral reefs to regenerate 
by the end of this century, and survive the impacts 
of ocean acidification (see Figure 10.1).159

While assessment for GBO-4 has focused on coral 
reefs, other ecosystems especially vulnerable to 
climate change include mountain ecosystems such 
as cloud forest and páramos (high altitude tundra in 
tropical Americas) as well as low-lying ecosystems 
vulnerable to sea-level rise. 

Few national biodiversity strategies and action 
plans (NBSAPs) or national reports to the CBD 
include specific measures to reduce multiple 
pressures on coral reefs and other ecosystems 
vulnerable to climate change. Exceptions include 
Brazil, Finland and Japan, which have all estab-
lished targets to reduce human-induced pressures 
on vulnerable ecosystems.160 

Box 10.1. reducing local threats through private coral reef management

Local human-created threats pose the greatest risk to coral reefs in Southeast Asia. However, reef 
management in the region is often limited by lack of resources. One approach for overcoming this challenge 
is the use of private sector resources for coral reef conservation. The establishment of the Sugud Islands 
Marine Conservation Area (SIMCA) in Sabah, Malaysia was initiated by owners of the sole dive resort 
situated within SIMCA, for the purpose of protecting the area’s coral reefs and marine environment. Reef 
Guardian, a conservation organization, manages conservation activities to reduce local threats to the coral 
reefs within SIMCA. These include enforcement patrols to regulate illegal fishing, turtle monitoring and 
conservation, coral reef and environmental monitoring, sewage and wastewater treatment, removal of coral 
predators (crown of thorns), and conducting education programmes for schoolchildren to raise awareness 
about marine conservation. Reef Guardian’s conservation work is funded by conservation fees charged 
to visitors to the dive resort, as well as donations and grants. Coral cover and fish abundance are greater 
within SIMCA compared to fished areas, and the number of turtle nestings shows an increasing trend 
through time.161

Target 10: Ecosystems vulnerable  to climate change

77

 

h
s
i
f
 
f
e
e
r
 
n
o
e
r
u
s
s
e
r
p
w
o
L

 

 

h
s
i
f
 
f
e
e
r
 
n
o
e
r
u
s
s
e
r
p
h
g
H

i

Low CO2 Emissions

High CO2 Emissions

3

2

1

0

-1

-2

-3

3

2

1

0

-1

-2

-3

2010

2020

2030

2040

2050

2060

2070

2080

2010

2020

2030

2040

2050

2060

2070

2080

3

2

1

0

-1

-2

-3

3

2

1

0

-1

-2

-3

2010

2020

2030

2040

2050

2060

2070

2080

2010

2020

2030

2040

2050

2060

2070

2080

Figure 10.1. How early action can buy time for coral reefs. In scenarios of high greenhouse gas emissions, failure to control overfishing leaves 
Caribbean corals unable to maintain their skeletons by the 2020s due to ocean acidification, while protection of grazing fish such as parrotfish 
delays that situation by around a decade. With compelling action to curb greenhouse gas emissions, corals are still left in a vulnerable condition 
by the 2030s if overfishing is not addressed, whereas combined action on emissions and overfishing offers Caribbean reefs good conditions to 
regenerate for the rest of this century.162 

78

Strategic Goal B

actions to enhance progress towards the target

As noted, the 2015 deadline for meeting this target 
will not be met. It is therefore especially urgent that 
countries and relevant institutions take action to 
achieve the target at the earliest opportunity and 
before 2020. Based on the various lines of evidence 
used in GBO-4, the following actions are effec-
tive and would help to accelerate progress towards 
Target 10, if more widely applied. Such measures 
would enhance the resilience of coral reefs and 
closely associated ecosystems through ecosystem-
based adaptation to enable the continued 
provisioning of goods and services. They would also 
contribute to other targets, shown in parentheses:

 • Sustainably managing fisheries on coral 
reefs and closely associated ecosystems (such as 
mangroves and seagrass systems), including by 
empowering local and indigenous communities and 
individuals involved in local fisheries (Target 6)

 • Managing coastal zones and inland watersheds 
in an integrated manner in order to reduce pollu-
tion and other land-based activities that threaten 
coral reefs (Target 8)

 • Increasing the spatial coverage and effectiveness 
of marine and coastal protected and managed areas 
in coral reefs and closely associated ecosystems 
(Target 11)

 • Managing coastal development to ensure that 
the health and resilience of coral reef ecosystems 
are not adversely impacted and promoting sustain-
able coral reef tourism, including through the use of 
guidelines for tourists and tour operators

 • Maintaining sustainable livelihoods and food 
security in reef-dependent coastal communities 
and provide for viable alternative livelihoods, where 
appropriate (Target 14)

 • At a national level, identifying other ecosystems 
that are vulnerable to climate change and related 
impacts, implementing measures to improve their 
resilience, and monitoring their effectiveness

Target 10: Ecosystems vulnerable  to climate change

79

Strategic Goal C

To improve the status of biodiversity by safeguarding 
ecosystems, species and genetic diversity

targets

Accompanying longer-term actions to address underlying causes of biodiversity loss and the 

pressures described in the previous sections, direct interventions to safeguard ecosystems, species 
and genetic diversity are an essential part of the policy mix required to prevent biodiversity loss. 
There are contrasting trends in progress towards the targets within this strategic goal. The area of land 
and coastal waters protected for biodiversity is likely to reach the thresholds set by governments in 
2010, if current commitments for new protected areas are realized by the target date of 2020. However, 
significant additional measures are needed if these areas are to be representative of ecological regions 
and areas of particular importance for biodiversity, well connected, well managed and carry the support 
of local populations. Although actions to support particular threatened species have proven effective 
in preventing extinctions, these have not been enough to reverse the overall trend towards extinction 
for many species groups. Success in this regard will be highly dependent on further progress to address 
underlying causes and direct pressures. Actions to conserve the genetic diversity of plants through ex 
situ collections have advanced some aspects of this goal, but threats remain significant for the genetic 
diversity of domesticated plants and animals, and their wild relatives.

T
e
g
r
a
T

protected areas

By 2020, at least 17 per cent of terrestrial 
and inland water areas and 10 per cent of 
coastal and marine areas, especially areas 
of particular importance for biodiversity 
and ecosystem services, are conserved 
through effectively and equitably managed, 
ecologically representative and well-connected 
systems of protected areas and other effective 
area-based conservation measures, and 
integrated into the wider landscapes and 
seascapes.

why this target is important
As human activities come to dominate ever-increasing 
areas of the planet’s land and water surface, 
governments have recognized the need to enlarge the 
network of protected areas and other effective area-
based conservation measures, as a means to reconcile 
development with conservation of biodiversity. This 
target represents a modest increase in the proportion 
of land protected, and a more ambitious increase for 
marine protected areas which begin from a much 
lower level. The target also recognizes that biodiversity 
will not be safeguarded simply by establishing more 
protected areas. They need to represent the diversity 
of the planet’s ecological regions and include the most 
critical sites for threatened species, they need to be 
connected, to be effectively managed and to command 
the support of local populations. 

Summary of progreSS towardS the target

TargeT elemenT s (by 2020)

sTaTus

At least 17 per cent of 
terrestrial and inland water 
areas are protected.

At least 10 per cent 
of coastal and marine 
areas are protected

4

3

biodiversity
ecosystem services

Areas of particular 
importance for biodiversity 
and ecosystem 
services protected

3

terrestrial and marine
inland waters

Protected areas are 
ecologically representative

Protected areas 
are effectively and 
equitably managed

Protected areas are 
well connected and 
integrated into the wider 
landscape and seascape

3

3

3

82

Strategic Goal C

recent trends, current status and future projections

The terrestrial area of the planet protected for biodi-
versity is increasing steadily, and designation of 
marine protected areas is accelerating (see Figures 
11.1, A and B). Nearly a quarter of countries have 
already passed the target of protecting 17 per cent 
of their land area.163 At the current rate of growth, 
the percentage targets would be met for terrestrial 
areas by 2020 and this is reinforced by existing 
commitments to designate additional terrestrial 
protected areas.164 Overall, the extrapolations 
suggest that the marine target is not on course to 
be met. However, progress is higher in coastal areas, 
while open ocean and deep sea areas, including the 
high seas, are much less covered.165

The protected area network is becoming more repre-
sentative of the world’s diverse ecological regions, 
but around one-quarter of terrestrial regions and 
more than half of marine regions have less than five 
per cent of their area protected (see Figures 11.1, C 
to E).166 Further today’s protected areas will not be 
adequate to conserve many species whose distribu-
tions will shift in the future due to climate change.167 

Although 17 per cent of the world’s river 
length were within protected areas in 2010, the 

effectiveness of that protection is less certain due 
to upstream and downstream impacts (see Box 
11.1).168

A minority of protected areas enjoy effec-
tive management, although this appears to be 
improving over time according to the limited infor-
mation available.169 Further actions are needed 
to ensure that protected areas are effectively and 
equitably managed.170

Recent national biodiversity strategies and action 
plans indicate that most countries have targets 
relating to improvement of protected area coverage, 
although relatively few address issues of ecological 
representativeness, connectedness or management 
effectiveness.171 Almost all fifth national reports 
assessed for GBO-4 suggest that some progress is 
being made towards the attainment of this target. 
Among the actions being taken by countries include 
plans for the establishment of new protected areas 
(Azerbaijan, Nepal, New Zealand and Pakistan), and 
undertaking vulnerability assessment of existing 
protected areas (Dominica) among other things.172

Box 11.1. protecting inland water ecosystems: special challenges

There are few targeted protected areas for inland waters and in many cases where protection does exist 
(for example on Ramsar sites) upstream areas are not protected or managed in a way that will effectively 
abate threats. Furthermore, the pervasiveness of barriers such as dams can prevent fish movement into and 
out of protected areas. Regional-scale assessments of the coverage and effectiveness of protected areas 
have shown that freshwater habitats are not only under-protected, but that the placement of protected 
areas is ineffective for conserving these habitats and their species. For inland waters, climate change could 
exacerbate the negative effects of drying conditions that are currently natural in many temporal river 
systems. It will be essential to protect refugia in order to maintain individuals that can repopulate a wider 
range of habitats when more favourable conditions are restored after seasonal or prolonged droughts. 
Minimizing and managing upstream and downstream threats from changes in human land use, expansions 
of dams and water extraction will also be critical for protected areas to be effective for inland waters and 
the species that they support.173

Target 11: Protected areas

83

Terrestrial protected area

Marine protected area

d
e
t
c
e
t
o
r
p
a
e
r
a
d
n
a

 

 

l
 

e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
P

20

15

10

5

0
1960

A

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

2020

 

 

d
e
t
c
e
t
o
r
p
a
e
r
a
n
a
e
c
o
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
P

 

12

10

8

6

4

2

0
1960

b

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

2020

Protected area coverage of terrestrial ecoregions

Protected area coverage of marine ecoregions

c

100

80

60

40

20

t
e
g
r
a
t
 
g
n
i
t
e
e
m
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
P

 

d

100

80

60

40

20

t
e
g
r
a
t
 
g
n
i
t
e
e
m
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
P

 

0
1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

2020

0
1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

2020

Protected area coverage of freshwater ecoregions

Protected area coverage of bird, mammal and amphibian 
species (mean)

100

80

60

40

20

t
e
g
r
a
t
 
g
n
i
t
e
e
m
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
P

 

0

1960

e

F

t
e
g
r
a
t
 
g
n
i
t
e
e
m
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
P

 

50

40

30

20

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

2020

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

2020

Figure 11.1. Recent trends and extrapolations to 2020, assuming constant underlying processes, in the cumulative percentage of global 
terrestrial A and marine B area covered by protected areas, suggesting a continued and significant increase in the underlying trend for both, 
with marine protected areas increasing at an accelerating rate; in the percentage of terrestrial C, marine D and freshwater E ecoregions that 
meet a threshold level of protection (17% for terrestrial; 10% for marine and freshwater), all showing a significant increase; and in the coverage 
of the distributions of bird, mammal and amphibian species by protected areas F, also increasing but at a decelerating rate. The solid lines 
represents the model fit for the periods with data and the extrapolations, dots represent data points and the shaded bands illustrates the 95% 
confidence intervals. 

84

Strategic Goal C

actions to enhance progress towards the target

Based on the various lines of evidence used in 
GBO-4, the following actions are effective and 
would help to accelerate progress towards Target 11, 
if more widely applied. They would also contribute 
to the other target, shown in parentheses:

 • Implementing adequate protection for inland 
water environments through additional measures 
to protect rivers upstream and downstream from 
existing terrestrial protected areas, and to maintain 
connectivity to enable migration within river basins 

 • Expanding protected area networks and other 
effective area based conservation measures to 
become more representative of the planet’s ecolog-
ical regions, of marine and coastal areas (including 
deep sea and ocean habitats), of inland waters and 
of areas of particular importance for biodiversity

 • Improving and regularly assessing management 
effectiveness and equitability of protected areas and 
other area-based conservation measures

 • Enhancing cooperation with indigenous 
and local communities in the creation, control 
and management of protected areas (Target 18) 
(see Box 11.2.)

 • Designing and managing protected areas 
and the connections between them with a view 
to addressing the impacts of climate change on 
shifting species distributions

Box 11.2. Co-management of a national park in thailand

In Ob Luang National Park, Northern Thailand, indigenous communities and park authorities are engaged 
in a process to achieve a more equitable and effective management of the protected area (a component 
of Target 11). The park, established in 1991, overlapped with the ancestral lands of Karen and Hmong 
indigenous communities. While Thailand’s 2007 constitution allows indigenous peoples and local 
communities to manage their natural resources, they are not legally allowed to live in protected areas. Being 
restricted in using their customary farming areas in the park caused severe conflict between officials and 
community members during the late 1990s.

To address the tensions and concerns, a pilot project for joint management in Ob Luang National Park was 
set up in 2005, and since 2009 a voluntary open-ended co-management process has been in place. This 
involves mapping and land demarcation of farmland surveys of conflict areas, discussions about problems 
encountered by the villagers, and collaborative monitoring of actual land use practices by indigenous 
peoples. Indigenous peoples are also admitted to meetings of park’s management committees and 
informed and consulted on the work plans.

The joint management approach has clearly had visible positive effects, such as reduced tensions between 
the government and communities, increased protection of forests and watersheds, and improved livelihood 
security for indigenous peoples and local communities. Based on the positive experiences in Ob Luang, 
there is interest among the National Park authorities and communities to explore the expansion of the joint 
management approach to other protected areas in Thailand. Major progress has been achieved in moving 
from conflict to collaboration, benefiting both biodiversity and people. An important further step is to revise 
relevant national laws to support innovative collaborative management of protected areas for effective 
implementation of Target 11.174

Target 11: Protected areas

85

T
e
g
r
a
T

reducing risk of extinction

By 2020, the extinction of known threatened 
species has been prevented and their 
conservation status, particularly of those most 
in decline, has been improved and sustained.

why this target is important
Reducing the threat of human-induced extinction 
requires action to address the direct and indirect 
drivers of change. Achievement of this target is 
therefore highly dependent on most of the other 
Aichi Biodiversity Targets. Nevertheless, imminent 
extinctions of known threatened species can in many 
cases be prevented by protecting the sites where 
such threatened species are located, by combating 
particular threats, and through ex situ conservation. 

Summary of progreSS towardS the target

TargeT elemenT s (by 2020)

sTaTus

Extinction of known 
threatened species 
has been prevented

The conservation status 
of those species most 
in decline has been 
improved and sustained.

2

1

86

Strategic Goal C

recent trends, current status and future projections

Multiple lines of evidence give high confidence that 
based on our current trajectory, this target would 
not be met by 2020, as the trend towards greater 
extinction risk for several taxonomic groups has 
not decelerated since 2010. Despite individual 
success stories, the average risk of extinction for 
birds, mammals, amphibians and corals shows no 
sign of decreasing (see Figure 12.1). Nevertheless, 
dedicated conservation efforts have demonstrably 
prevented the extinction of several species in these 
groups, and further action might prevent some 
extinctions that would otherwise occur by 2020.175

The rate of increase in observed extinctions of 
birds and mammals has apparently slowed over the 
past 50 years, although lags in reporting time may 
lead to an underestimate of recent extinctions. For 
some groups such as freshwater fish, the number of 
observed extinctions has continued unabated for 
the past century.176

Short-term future projections of the extinction 
risk of species as a result of projected habitat loss 

generally predict a worsening situation. However, 
under some scenarios in which natural habitats 
are protected and restored, and greenhouse gas 
emissions are reduced, extinctions both globally and 
locally may be significantly reduced in the longer 
term.177

One positive trend related to this target is that an 
increasing proportion of sites critical to the survival 
of threatened species are being included within 
protected areas, although 75 per cent of such sites 
remain inadequately covered by protected areas (see 
Figures 12.1, D and E).

About two thirds of national reports assessed for 
GBO-4 suggest that some progress is being made 
towards the attainment of this target. Reported 
actions include reducing the threat from poaching 
(South Africa), breeding programmes for particular 
species (Japan), providing protected status for some 
species (Mongolia, and Nepal) and the development 
of species red lists (Morocco).178

Box 12.1. preventing extinction of vultures in South asia

Once present in numbers ranging over tens of millions across India, Pakistan, Bhutan, Nepal and 
Bangladesh; vultures today are on the brink of extinction. Since the 1990s the vulture population has 
witnessed one of the most dramatic declines of a wild species in human history. Across the Indian 
subcontinent, the populations of three formerly common species of vultures—Oriental White-
backed Vulture (Gyps bengalensis), Long-billed Vulture (Gyps indicus) and Slender-billed Vulture (Gyps 
tenuirostris)—have declined precipitously. Extensive studies have identified the cause of declines to be 
Diclofenac, an anti-inflammatory drug commonly used for treating domestic livestock that is highly toxic to 
vultures, causing death due to kidney failure. In response to the crisis, the Indian government has approved 
an alternative vulture-safe drug, Meloxicam, and has established a directive to phase out Diclofenac 
within a stipulated time frame—starting with a ban on its veterinary use in 2006. Despite this, there is 
mounting evidence that Diclofenac continues to be available and used for veterinary purposes, resulting in a 
continuation of vulture deaths and losses in valuable ecosystems services in the region.181

Target 12: Reducing risk of extinction

87

 

 

i

s
r
a
e
y
5
2
 
s
u
o
v
e
r
p
g
n
i
r
u
d
 
s
n
o
i
t
c
n
i
t
x
e
 
f
o
 
r
e
b
m
u
N

Mammal and bird extinctions

A

40

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0
1840

1860

1880

1900

1920

1940

1960

1980

2000

2020

 

l

e
u
a
v
x
e
d
n
I

Living Planet Index

C

 

 

s
A
P
y
b
d
e
r
e
v
o
c
 
s
e
t
i
s
 
f
o
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
P

 

Red List Index for birds, mammals, corals and 
amphibians (aggregate)

B

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

2020

Protected area coverage of AZE sites

D

1.0

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

30

25

20

15

10

5

1.2

1.1

1.0

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

30

25

20

15

10

5

 

l

e
u
a
v
x
e
d
n
I

 

 

s
A
P
y
b
d
e
r
e
v
o
c
 
s
e
t
i
s
 
f
o
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
P

 

1980

1990

2000

2010

2020

0
1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

2020

Protected area coverage of IBA sites

Funds towards species protection

E

F

350

300

250

200

150

100

50

)
s
n
o

i
l
l
i

m

(
 
D
S
U

 
t
n
a
t
s
n
o
C

0
1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

2020

0
2001

2005

2010

2015

2020

Figure 12.1. Recent trends in key measures of the extinction, extinction risk and conservation status of species, with extrapolations to 2020 
assuming constant underlying processes: A observed extinction rates of birds and mammals, showing a rising trend;179 B the aggregate Red 
List Index of birds, mammals, amphibians and corals—significant decrease suggesting a continuing movement towards extinction; C the Living 
Planet Index, with a significant decrease reflecting declines in species populations; D protected area coverage of sites whose protection could 
avert the extinction of known threatened species: Alliance for Zero Extinction sites (AZEs) and E Important Bird and Biodiversity Areas (IBAs), 
with significant increases suggesting progress towards averting future extinctions, although 75% of such sites remain inadequately covered 
by protected areas;180 and F funds for the protection of species showing no significant change in the underlying trend between 2010 and 
2020. The solid lines represents the model fit for the periods with data and the extrapolations, dots represent data points and the shaded bands 
illustrates the 95% confidence intervals. 

88

Strategic Goal C

actions to enhance progress towards the target

Based on the various lines of evidence used in 
GBO-4, the following actions are effective and 
would help to accelerate progress towards Target 12, 
if more widely applied. Reducing the risk of species 
extinctions depends crucially on taking actions 
directly relevant to the achievement of several other 
targets, shown in parentheses:

 • Identifying and prioritizing species for conser-
vation activities based on assessments of species 
conservation status (Target 19)

 • Filling gaps in existing national, regional and 
global species conservation status assessments 
(Target 19)

 • Developing and implementing species action 
plans that include specific conservation actions 
aimed directly at particular threatened species, 
for example through restrictions on trade, captive 
breeding and reintroductions

 • Developing more representative and better-
managed protected area systems prioritizing sites of 
special importance to biodiversity, especially those 
that contain unique populations of threatened 
species, (Target 11)

 • Reducing loss, degradation and fragmentation of 
habitats (Target 5), and actively restoring degraded 
habitats (Target 15)

 • Promoting fishing practices that take account of 
the impact of fisheries on marine ecosystems and 
non-targeted species (Target 6) 

 • Controlling or eradicating invasive alien species 
and pathogens (Target 9), especially crucial to avoid 
extinctions of species on islands and those with 
small global ranges 

 • Reducing pressures on habitats through sustain-
able land-use practices (Target 7) 

 • Ensuring that no species is subject to unsus-
tainable exploitation for domestic or international 
trade, including by taking actions agreed under the 
Convention on International trade in Endangered 
Species (CITES), and taking measures to prevent 
and deter illegal killing and trade and reducing 
demand for products derived from such actions 
(Target 4)

Target 12: Reducing risk of extinction

89

T
e
g
r
a
T

Safeguarding genetic diversity

By 2020, the genetic diversity of cultivated 
plants and farmed and domesticated 
animals and of wild relatives, including 
other socio-economically as well as 
culturally valuable species is maintained 
and strategies have been developed and 
implemented for minimizing genetic erosion 
and safeguarding their genetic diversity.

why this target is important
Genetic diversity offers options for increasing the 
resilience of agricultural systems and for adapting 
to changing conditions, including the escalating 
impacts of climate change. Genetic diversity is 
also an important component of cultural heritage. 
Maintaining this diversity requires conservation of 
the many varieties of cultivated plants and breeds 
of domesticated livestock bred by farmers over 
thousands of years and of the wild relatives of 
crops whose traits may be essential for future plant 
breeding and thereby underpin food security. 

Summary of progreSS towardS the target

TargeT elemenT s (by 2020)

sTaTus

The genetic diversity 
of cultivated plants 
is maintained

The genetic diversity of 
farmed and domesticated 
animals is maintained

The genetic diversity of wild 
relatives is maintained

3

3

2

The genetic diversity of 
socio-economically as 
well as culturally valuable 
species is maintained

Insufficient data  
to evaluate this  

component

Strategies have been 
developed and implemented 
for minimizing genetic 
erosion and safeguarding 
genetic diversity

3

90

Strategic Goal C

recent trends, current status and future projections

Ex situ collections of genetic resources continue 
to improve, particularly for plants, and there are 
increasing activities to conserve genetic resources 
in their production environment.182 Major initia-
tives on ex situ conservation include the Svalbard 
Global Seed Vault, which in 2014 stored more than 
824,000 seed samples of over 4,700 species and the 
Millennium Seed Bank Partnership which currently 
stores nearly two billion seed samples of over 
33,000 species.

About two thirds of the fifth national reports 
assessed for GBO-4 provide information which 
suggests that some progress is being made towards 
the attainment of this target. National action 
as documented in these reports to the CBD has 
focused primarily on conserving the genetic 
diversity of cultivated plants with few reports 
providing information on measures to conserve 
the genetic diversity of livestock or crop wild 
relatives. An example of national action includes 
China’s National Crop Germplasm Bank, containing 
423,000 accessions, and its Southwestern 
Germplasm Bank of Wild Species containing 
108,000 accessions from 12,800 wild species.185

Considerable crop genetic diversity continues 
to be maintained on farms, in the form of tradi-
tional crop varieties. However, there is currently 
limited support to ensure long term conservation 
of local varieties of crops in the face of changes in 
agricultural practices and market preferences that 
are tending, in general, to promote a narrowing 
genetic pool. The wild relatives of domesticated 
crop species are increasingly threatened by habitat 
loss and fragmentation and climate change, and 
few protected areas or management plans address 
these threats.186 Erosion of traditional crops and 
their wild relatives is greatest in cereals, followed by 
vegetables, fruits and nuts and food legumes.187 

Genetic diversity of domesticated livestock is 
eroding, with more than one-sixth of the 8,200 
assessed breeds (16%) at risk of extinction.188 Based 
on recent trends and assuming current pressures 
continue, this proportion is projected to increase 
further by 2020 (see Figure 13.1). 

The FAO Global Plans of Action for plant and 
animal genetic resources provide frameworks for 
the development of national and international 
strategies and action plans for minimizing genetic 
erosion and vulnerability and safeguarding genetic 
diversity.189 However, existing conservation efforts 
have important gaps. 

A

15%

21%

7%

57%

17%

18%

7%

58%

2006

2014

at risk

not at risk

extinct

unknown

B

10000

s
d
e
e
r
b
 
f
o
 
r
e
b
m
u
N

7500

5000

2500

0

25

20

15

10

5

0

k
s
i
r
 
t
a
 
s
d
e
e
r
b
 
f
o
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
P

 

2000

2005

2010

2015

2020

Figure 13.1. A Number of the world’s terrestrial animal breeds 
reported to the FAO by risk status,190 and B the percentage 
of breeds classified as at risk, including extrapolation to 2020 
assuming constant underlying processes. The solid lines represents 
the model fit for the periods with data and the extrapolations, dots 
represent data points and the shaded bands illustrates the 95% 
confidence intervals.

Target 13: Safeguarding genetic diversity

91

actions to enhance progress towards the target

Based on the various lines of evidence used in 
GBO-4, the following actions are effective and 
would help to accelerate progress towards Target 13, 
if more widely applied. They would also contribute 
to other targets, shown in parentheses:

 • Promoting public policies and incentives to 
maintain local varieties of crops and indigenous 
breeds in production systems (Targets 2, 3 and 7), 
including through increased cooperation with, and 
recognition of, the role of indigenous and local 
communities and farmers in maintaining genetic 
diversity in situ (see Box 13.1)

 • Enhancing the use and maintenance of genetic 
diversity in plant and animal breeding programmes, 

and raising awareness of the importance of genetic 
diversity and its contribution to food security 
(Targets 1 and 7)

 • Integrating the conservation of the wild relatives 
of domesticated crops and livestock in management 
plans for protected areas, conducting surveys of the 
location of wild relatives, and including this infor-
mation in plans for the expansion or development 
of protected area networks (Target 11) 

 • Maintaining support for national and interna-
tional ex situ conservation, such as genebanks of 
plant and animal genetic resources including in vitro 
conservation

Box 13.1. maintaining traditional crop diversity on small family farms

In one study, data from 27 crop species from five continents were drawn together to determine overall 
trends in diversity of crop varieties on farms. Measurements of richness, evenness, and divergence showed 
that considerable crop genetic diversity continues to be maintained on farms, in the form of traditional crop 
varieties. The research suggested that in some cases, diversity may be maintained as a form of insurance to 
meet future environmental changes or social and economic needs. In other cases, farmers were apparently 
selecting varieties to service a diversity of current needs and purposes. It underscores the importance of 
a large number of small farms adopting diverse strategies regarding crop varieties, as a major force that 
maintains crop genetic diversity on farms.191

92

Strategic Goal C

Target 13: Safeguarding genetic diversity

93

Strategic Goal D

Enhance the benefits to all from biodiversity and 
ecosystem services

targets

Biodiversity underpins the services provided by ecosystems vital to humankind, such as the 

provision of food, clean water, the removal of wastes and the mitigation of the impacts of 
extreme events. The Strategic Plan for Biodiversity recognizes that special attention is needed 

to safeguard and restore those ecosystems of particular importance to human well-being due to 
the benefits they provide to people. The continued decline of many ecosystems providing multiple 
services, especially to the poor and vulnerable, suggests the need for significant additional action 
to achieve this goal. On the other hand, significant steps have been made or are planned to restore 
degraded ecosystems, and the Nagoya Protocol aimed at more equitable sharing of benefits arising 
from access to genetic resources enters into force on October 12, 2014.

T
e
g
r
a
T

ecosystem services

Summary of progreSS towardS the target

TargeT elemenT s (by 2020)

sTaTus

Ecosystems that provide 
essential services, 
including services related 
to water, and contribute 
to health, livelihoods and 
well-being, are restored 
and safeguarded …

… taking into account the 
needs of women, indigenous 
and local communities, and 
the poor and vulnerable.

2

1

By 2020, ecosystems that provide essential 
services, including services related to water, 
and contribute to health, livelihoods and 
well-being, are restored and safeguarded, 
taking into account the needs of women, 
indigenous and local communities and the 
poor and vulnerable.

why this target is important
All terrestrial, freshwater and marine ecosystems 
provide multiple ecosystem services. However 
some ecosystems are particularly important in that 
they provide services that directly contribute to 
human health and wellbeing by providing services 
and goods to fulfill daily physical, material, cultural 
and spiritual needs. This target directs attention 
towards the need for policies to focus specifically on 
restoring and safeguarding such ecosystems, thus 
linking biodiversity conservation with goals related to 
sustainable development and the needs of the poor, 
women and indigenous and local communities.

96

Strategic Goal D

recent trends, current status and future projections

Habitats important for ecosystem services, for 
example wetlands and forests, continue to be lost 
and degraded. Recent sub-global assessments 
have confirmed the global trend in the decline of 
services provided to people by ecosystems. For 
example, the United Kingdom National Ecosystem 
Assessment in 2011 concluded that some 30 per 
cent of ecosystem services were declining, largely 
as the result of declines in the extent and condi-
tion of habitats providing those services. However, 
such assessments have also identified scenarios 
in which ecosystem services would improve in the 
longer term.192

The state of marine ecosystems as measured by the 
Ocean Health Index, falls far short of their poten-
tial to provide for human needs through a wide 
variety of services including food provision, recre-
ation, coastal protection and carbon storage (see 
Box 14.1).193 The decline of Arctic sea ice, linked to 
climate change, presents particular challenges to 
northern local and indigenous communities (see 
Box 14.2). 

A number of countries are taking action to 
safeguard ecosystems providing essential services 
such as water provision to urban populations (see 
Box 14.3). However, few have set national targets 
explicitly addressing this global target. About two 
thirds of the recent national reports assessed for 
GBO-4 contain information which suggests that 
some progress is being made towards the attain-
ment of this target. The types of actions taken 
include the development of management plans for 
ecosystems, the maintenance of critical watersheds 
or the development of plans for their management. 
In the national reports there was little mention of 
the needs of women, indigenous and local commu-
nities and the poor and vulnerable being taken into 
account.194

Overall, available evidence shows little sign of 
progress towards meeting this target by the 
deadline of 2020, and in the case of services of 
particular importance to local and indigenous 
communities, women, the poor and vulnerable, 
trends appear to be moving in the wrong direction.

Box 14.1. the ocean health Index

The Ocean Health Index uses a portfolio of ten 
public goals (artisanal fishing opportunities, 
biodiversity, coastal protection, carbon storage, 
clean waters, food provision, coastal livelihoods 
and economies, natural products, sense of place 
and tourism and recreation) for measuring the 
overall condition of marine ecosystems within 
Exclusive Economic Zones (EEZ).195 Each of 
these goals is assessed by considering their 
present status and trends, the pressures on 
them and their resilience. The overall index is 
then determined by averaging these different 
scores, giving the same weight to each. In 
2013 the index score for the ocean within 
Exclusive Economic Zones (EEZ) was 65 out 
of 100, providing an important benchmark and 
indicating substantial room for improvement 
across the goals. Index scores vary greatly by 
country, ranging from 41 to 94.

Carbon storage

74

Natural 
products

31

                                         

Coastal

 protection

69

Tourism and 
recreation

39

65

 

 

C

o

a

s

t

a

Livelihoods

81

          

l
 
l
i

v

e

l
i

h

o

o

d

s
 
a

n

Economies

83

d

 e
c

o

n

o

m

Lasting 
special
places

Iconic
species

Clean waters

78

61

ies                          Sense of Place                                        

60

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Artisanal 
Fishing 

Opportunities

95

Wild 
Caught 
fisheries

31

 

n
o

i

s

i

 

v
o
r
p
d
o
o
F
 
 
 
 
 
 

Mariculture

26

82

Species

Habitats

                                                                 Biodiversity                                          

89

Figure 14.1. The Ocean Health Index score (inner circle) and 
individual goal scores (coloured petals) for global area-weighted 
average of all countries.196 

Target 14: Ecosystem services

97

Box 14.2. the decline of arctic sea ice habitat and its impact on ecosystem services

Disappearing sea ice is affecting the building blocks of life in the Arctic Ocean with changes resonating 
throughout entire food webs. These changes affect everything from ice-dependent algae to birds, fish, 
marine mammals and human communities that rely on sea ice for travel, food, economic opportunities and 
cultural activities. 

Such changes in environments and wildlife have implications for northern people’s food security and for 
wildlife and habitat management. Adaptation is already occurring, with some indigenous peoples adjusting 
to different hunting seasons. But the knowledge and reliability of these environments that indigenous and 
local peoples hold is being tested by the nature of the rapid changes underway.

Safeguarding sea ice habitat and associated biodiversity is connected to climate change. International 
cooperation is increasingly needed to fully address the conservation challenges that face Arctic 
biodiversity.197

actions to enhance progress towards the target

Based on the various lines of evidence used in 
GBO-4, the following actions are effective and 
would help to accelerate progress towards Target 14, 
if more widely applied. They would also contribute 
to other targets, shown in parentheses:

 • Identifying, at the national level, with the 
involvement of relevant stakeholders, those ecosys-
tems that are particularly important in providing 
ecosystem services, with particular attention to 
ecosystems upon which vulnerable groups are 
directly dependent for their health, nutrition 
and general well-being and livelihoods, as well as 
ecosystems that help to reduce risks from disasters, 
employing, as appropriate, integrated assessment 
and/or participatory appraisal methodologies 
(Target 19)

 • Improving monitoring of the status of ecosys-
tems that are particularly important and of the 
essential services that they provide to facilitate 
targeted actions (Target 19)

 • Removal of perverse subsidies and other forms 
of public support for infrastructure that destroys, 
fragments or degrades ecosystems (Targets 2 and 3)

 • Reducing the pressures on and, where neces-
sary, enhancing the protection and restoration of 
those ecosystems providing essential services (for 
example wetlands, coral reefs, rivers and forests 
and mountain areas acting as “water towers” among 
others) (Targets 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 and 15)

 • Investing in and making better use of traditional 
knowledge, about ecological systems, processes and 
uses held by indigenous and local communities, and 
promoting customary sustainable use (Target 18) 

98

Strategic Goal D

Box 14.3. restoring rivers to protect urban water supplies in South africa

South Africa’s second largest city, Durban, faces major water security challenges. Durban’s water comes 
mainly from the greater uMngeni catchment, where industry and intensive agriculture combine with 
challenges such as failing waste water treatment and water-thirsty invasive plants, to compromise the 
quantity and quality of water delivered to Durban. The eThekwini Municipality’s Water and Sanitation 
Department, together with the KZN Regional Office of the Department for Water Affairs, Umgeni Water, 
the uMgungundlovu District Municipality, the Msunduzi Local Municipality and the South African 
National Biodiversity Institute (SANBI), have spearheaded the establishment of a partnership to foster 
better collaboration and coordination of ecological infrastructure investments aimed at improving water 
security in the greater uMngeni catchment. The uMngeni Ecological Infrastructure Partnership, launched 
in 2013, comprises 36 government and civil society organisations, 17 of which have signed a memorandum 
of understanding. On the same day of the MoU signing, three pilot projects on restoring ecological 
infrastructure were launched (Palmiet River Rehabilitation Project, Bayne’s Spruit Rehabilitation Project, and 
Save the Midmar Dam Project). Lessons from the uMngeni Ecological Infrastructure Partnership are helping 
to inform investment in the maintenance and restoration of ecological infrastructure in other parts of South 
Africa, through partnerships at the landscape scale.198

Target 14: Ecosystem services

99

T
e
g
r
a
T

ecosystem restoration  
and resilience

Summary of progreSS towardS the target

TargeT elemenT s (by 2020)

sTaTus

Ecosystem resilience 
and the contribution of 
biodiversity to carbon 
stocks have been enhanced 
through conservation 
and restoration

At least 15 per cent of 
degraded ecosystems are 
restored, contributing to 
climate change mitigation 
and adaptation, and to 
combating desertification

2

3

By 2020, ecosystem resilience and the 
contribution of biodiversity to carbon stocks 
has been enhanced, through conservation 
and restoration, including restoration of at 
least 15% of degraded ecosystems, thereby 
contributing to climate change mitigation and 
adaptation and to combating desertification.

why this target is important
The reversal of habitat loss, fragmentation and 
degradation, through ecosystem restoration, 
represents an immense opportunity for both 
biodiversity restoration and carbon sequestration. 
Restored landscapes and seascapes can improve 
resilience, including the adaptive capacity of 
ecosystems and societies, contributing to climate 
change adaptation and generating ecosystem services 
and associated benefits for people, in particular 
indigenous and local communities and the rural poor. 

100

Strategic Goal D

recent trends, current status and future projections

The science and practice of ecosystem restora-
tion has advanced significantly in recent decades, 
providing a range of tools and techniques that 
greatly increase the likelihood of success, for 
example in the choice of seeds for planting, control 
of grazing, and management of water, fire and 
invasive species.199

Restoration is under way for some depleted or 
degraded ecosystems, especially wetlands and 
forests, sometimes on a very ambitious scale, as in 
China (see Box 15.1).200 Many countries, organi-
zations and companies have pledged to restore 
large areas (see Figure 15.1).201 Abandonment of 
farmland in some regions including Europe, North 
America and East Asia is enabling ‘passive restora-
tion’ on a significant scale (see Box 15.2). 

A number of countries have set targets related 
to ecosystem restoration. For example Belgium, 
Belarus, Brazil, Dominica, Japan, Malta, the United 

Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and 
the European Union, have set targets to restore at 
least 15 per cent of degraded lands while Australia 
has a target to restore 100,000 ha by 2015, Iraq 
has a target to restore 100,000 ha by 2020, and 
Namibia has a target to restore 15 per cent of 
priority areas by 2022.202 About three quarters of 
the national reports assessed for GBO-4 suggest 
that some progress is being made towards the 
attainment of this target.203 

The combined initiatives currently under way or 
planned may put us on track to restore 15% of 
degraded ecosystems, but it is hard to assess and we 
cannot be confident that this part of the target will 
be met by 2020 on our current trajectory. Despite 
restoration and conservation efforts, there is still 
a net loss of forests, a major global carbon stock, 
suggesting no overall progress on this component 
of the target.

A

B

Area of restoration projects 
included in the Global Restoration 
Network database (sq. km.)

0-5

6-25

26-50

51-130

131-700

701-3500

3501-15000

15001-20000

20001-50000

50001-100000

Figure 15.1. A Active restoration projects in 
the Global Restoration Network Database 
(February 2014). The size of the dot 
represents the area of the restoration 
project. B Restoration projects by 
degradation types.204 

0

20

40
80
Number of restoration projects

60

100

120

Target 15: Ecosystem restoration  and resilience

101

Infrastructure

Agriculture & Livestock

Extractive Industries

Deforestation

Fragmentation

Invasive Species

Other

Fisheries & Aquaculture

Contaminants 

Climate Change

Box 15.1. ecosystem restoration in China

Desertification, sandstorms and floods in China have been attributed to extensive land degradation in 
the country, including in the upper reaches of the two largest rivers of China, the Yangtze River and the 
Yellow River.205 Pilot projects were initiated in 1999 and subsequently extended, including the Natural 
Forest Resources Conservation Program and the Restoring Farmland into Forest Program. More than USD 
80 billion has been invested in these key ecological projects. Logging has been prohibited in most natural 
forests, and cultivated land on areas with slopes of more than 25 degrees have to be terraced or restored 
with vegetation that will protect against erosion.206 To compensate for the loss of agricultural fields, farmers 
receive subsidies and grain. They also keep all the profits arising from restored forests and pastures.207 
Since 2001, ecological conditions of key project regions have improved. Forest resources across the country 
have increased consistently with reforestation of 482,000 km2 and forest coverage increased by 23% over 
that of a decade ago. The current forest coverage rate has reached 20.4%, nearly 4% more than a decade 
ago. The forest reserves have reached 13.72 billion m3, over 20% more than a decade ago. These projects 
have also enhanced restoration of habitats and contributed to a rise in the population of wild species.208 
However, there are indications that although the local population recognizes the need for environmental 
rehabilitation,209 some habitats could be degraded if the state subsidies are eliminated.

actions to enhance progress towards the target

Based on the various lines of evidence used in this 
report, the following actions are effective and would 
help to accelerate progress towards Target 15, if 
more widely applied. They would also contribute to 
other targets, shown in parentheses:

 • Environmental permitting procedures and 
market instruments such as wetland mitiga-
tion banking, payments for ecosystem services 
and appropriate non market based mechanisms 
(Targets 2 and 3)

 • Developing a comprehensive land-use 
mapping and planning approach which provides 
for the protection, and if necessary, the restora-
tion of native vegetation on vulnerable sites (eg: 
waterways, coastal areas, sloping land, hilltops), 
enables increased ecological connectivity, and, as 
appropriate, specifies minimum areas for native 
vegetation (Targets 5 and 11)

 • Increasing the contribution of biodiversity 
to carbon sequestration through state or private 
sponsored passive and active afforestation 
programs, such as the REDD+ mechanism 

 • Where feasible, making restoration an economi-
cally viable activity, by coupling income generation 
with restoration activities (Targets 2 and 3)

 • Identifying opportunities and priorities for 
restoration, including highly degraded ecosys-
tems, areas of particular importance for ecosystem 
services and ecological connectivity, and areas 
undergoing abandonment of agricultural or other 
human-dominated use, taking into full account the 
current use of land, including by indigenous and 
local communities (Target 14)

 • Promoting an integrated landscape approach 
with stakeholder engagement with a view to 
promoting large scale restoration while also 
meeting the long-term socioeconomic needs of local 
communities, for example, by providing support for 
sustainable increases of agricultural and rangeland 
productivity in neighboring areas and generating 
employment (Target 7)

102

Strategic Goal D

Box 15.2. agricultural abandonment and rewilding in the european union210

The European landscape is marked by millennia 
of human pressure on the land. Over the last 
few decades, as market competition increased 
globally, agriculture became less profitable for 
European farmers in areas that are both less 
productive and harder to cultivate. This led to 
substantial rural depopulation since the mid 
20th century, feeding a “circle of decline” of 
remote agricultural areas, only tempered by 
the subsidies system of the European Common 
Agricultural Policy. Between 1990 and 2000, 
nearly half a million hectares were converted 
from agriculture to (semi) natural areas. Future 
scenarios predict that the aging rural population 
in remote areas will not be replaced, hence 
increasing the contraction in Europe’s farmland 
area on semi-natural grasslands and mountain 
areas. Some scenarios project a further decrease 
of up to 15% in the total agricultural area of the 
EU27 by 2030, consistent with projections of up 
to 20% loss in the area used by the main food 
crops in developed countries by 2050.The areas 
projected to be abandoned are mainly located 
in mountain ranges, but also more generally in 
central Europe, Northern Portugal and Southern 
Scandinavia (see Figure 15.2). 

< 2%

2-6%

6-12%

12-25%

25-50%

> 50%

No data

Figure 15.2: Areas projected for transition from agriculture to forest 
or semi-natural habitats 2000–2030. Figures are percentage of the 
area of each 100km2 grid cell.211

Rewilding aims at restoring natural ecological succession, leading to self-sustaining ecosystems and 
ecosystem processes, and emphasizes process-based conservation approaches. Most European arable 
land would need 12 to 20 years to go from abandoned to (semi) natural, but some areas would require 
more than 40 years, to which another 15 to sometimes over 50 more years must be added until forest 
becomes the dominant cover. Moreover, the withdrawal of agriculture might leave land vulnerable to 
species invasions and fire. These limits to ‘passive restoration’ can be overcome by active measures in early 
post-abandonment stages, such as the localized establishment of seed banks or even the reinforcement or 
reintroduction of disturbance agents, for example grazing and browsing animals, and prescribed burning. 

A recent review, identified 60 bird species, 24 mammal species and 26 invertebrate species that would 
benefit from land abandonment and rewilding while another 101 “loser” species were identified. Europe is 
currently witnessing a wildlife comeback, especially of species of European megafauna, most of which were 
locally extinct in many regions, such as Iberian ibex, Eurasian elk, roe deer, red deer, wild boar, golden jackal, 
and grey wolf. Nonetheless, land abandonment has also been identified as a threat to some bird species 
such as the Barnacle goose, white stork, lesser kestrel, saker falcon, bearded vulture, and eastern imperial 
eagle. Still, the impacts of rewilding on farmland-associated species will likely be attenuated by their 
adaptation to alternative habitats and by the maintenance of habitat mosaics at regional scales.

Target 15: Ecosystem restoration  and resilience

103

T
e
g
r
a
T

access to and sharing benefits 
from genetic resources

By 2015, the Nagoya Protocol on Access 
to Genetic Resources and the Fair and 
Equitable Sharing of Benefits Arising from 
their Utilization is in force and operational, 
consistent with national legislation.

why this target is important
The fair and equitable sharing of the benefits 
arising out of the utilization of genetic resources 
is one of the three objectives of the Convention on 
Biological Diversity. The Nagoya Protocol, adopted 
in 2010, provides a transparent legal framework for 
the effective implementation of this objective. The 
Protocol covers genetic resources and associated 
traditional knowledge, as well as the benefits arising 
from their utilization by setting out core obligations 
for its contracting Parties to take measures in 
relation to access, benefit-sharing and compliance. 

Bringing this Protocol into force and making it 
operational within countries is an important target for 
implementing the Strategic Plan on Biodiversity and 
for achieving the third objective of the Convention. 

Summary of progreSS towardS the target

TargeT elemenT s (by 2020)

sTaTus

The Nagoya Protocol 
is in force

The Nagoya Protocol is 
operational, consistent 
with national legislation.

55

4

104

Strategic Goal D

recent trends, current status and future projections

The Nagoya Protocol on Access to Genetic 
Resources and the Fair and Equitable Sharing of 
Benefits Arising from their Utilization enters into 
force on 12 October 2014 following its ratification 
by 51 Parties212 to the Convention on Biological 
Diversity (see figure 16.1). Thus this component of 
the target has been met in advance of the deadline 
set. This opens up new opportunities for the fair 
and equitable sharing of the benefits arising from 
the utilization of genetic resources.

Examples are already available of agreements 
following the principles of the Nagoya Protocol, 
in which providers of genetic resources receive 
benefits arising from the use of these resources. 
There are also many examples of access and benefit 
sharing agreements which provide benefits to indig-
enous and local communities from the development 
of products and services derived from the use of 
their traditional knowledge concerning local plant 
and animal species (see Box 16.1). 

 

Figure 16.1 The Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity that had ratified, approved or acceded to the Protocol by 14 July 2014, thereby 
enabling it to enter into force (dark green) or have signed it (light green).

Target 16: Access to and sharing benefits from genetic resources

105

Box 16.1. access and benefit sharing in action—researching traditional bone-healing 
techniques in the Cook Islands

Dr Graham Matheson, a medical researcher from the Cook Islands, observed the traditional application of 
plant-based extracts for treatment of bone fractures and other medical and therapeutic applications, by 
members of his community, friends and family. In 2003 he developed a proposal for the investigation and 
potential commercialization of medical and therapeutic remedies and cosmetic applications based on those 
plant extracts and reached a benefit-sharing agreement with the recognized indigenous representative 
body—the Koutu Nui. This led to the establishment of the company ‘CIMTECH’ which incorporates the 
Koutu Nui as a shareholder.213 

The Koutu Nui shareholding value is estimated to be at least $150,000. The research income to CIMTECH 
includes: $264,000 in grants received from the Australian Government, and $74,000 from University 
of New South Wales. It also includes employment of 12 people on a part time basis in the Cook Islands, 
$560,000 in pre-seed investment in 2010 and a further $800,000 in 2011 for research and development. 
The project is expected to contribute to the local economy through the laboratory and processing facility in 
Raratonga, as well as through sales, marketing and tourism, including use of products in spas and hotels. 

Matheson and CIMTECH have filed for a number of patents covering three distinct areas: bone and 
cartilage treatment, wound healing, and skin care treatments. Preliminary production and processing of 
essential oil solutions has begun and a skincare line called “Te Tika” has been launched.214

actions to enhance progress towards the target

The following actions would support the full 
achievement of Target 16

 • Making national information available through 
the ABS Clearing House (see Box 16.2)

 • For countries that have not yet done so, to 
deposit their instrument of ratification, acceptance, 
approval or accession to the Nagoya Protocol as soon 
as possible to ensure full participation in the Protocol

 • Putting in place, by 2015, legislative, administra-
tive or policy measures and institutional structures 
for implementing the Nagoya Protocol

 • Undertaking awareness raising and capacity 
building activities, including by engaging with indig-
enous and local communities and the private sector

Box 16.2. the access and Benefit-sharing Clearing-house

Article 14 of the Nagoya Protocol establishes an ABS Clearing-House as part of the clearing-house 
mechanism of the Convention. The Secretariat of the CBD is currently implementing the pilot phase of 
the ABS Clearing-House. Once fully operational, the ABS Clearing-House will serve as a means for Parties 
to share information related to access and benefit-sharing, including relevant legislative, administrative 
and policy measures, national focal points and competent national authorities, and permits or their 
equivalents, among other things. The ABS Clearing-House will play a key role in enhancing legal certainty 
and transparency and in promoting compliance. Having a fully functional ABS Clearing-House by the time 
of entry into force is essential for making the Protocol operational, and will significantly contribute towards 
achieving Aichi Target 16.215

106

Strategic Goal D

Target 16: Access to and sharing benefits from genetic resources

107

Strategic Goal E

Enhance implementation through participatory planning, 
knowledge management and capacity-building

targets

This goal within the Strategic Plan aims to create the enabling environment for the other 

targets to be effectively addressed. In this respect, an important and necessary step has 
been the drawing up and revising of national biodiversity strategies and action plans, 
which most countries will have completed by the target date of 2015. However, the level of 
implementation of these plans remains to be proven, and it will be crucial to use them as a way 
of turning the Aichi Biodiversity Targets into reality at national level. Respect for and inclusion 
of traditional knowledge in biodiversity action also remains variable, with some indicators 
suggesting a continued erosion of cultural diversity for example through the loss of indigenous 
languages. Important progress has been made in the sharing of and access to data, information 
and knowledge on biodiversity, but capacity to share and use that knowledge remains an obstacle. 
An overriding concern relating to the entire Strategic Plan is the lack of any sign of a substantial 
increase in resources towards its implementation.

T
e
g
r
a
T

Biodiversity strategies  
and action plans

By 2015, each Party has developed, 
adopted as a policy instrument, and has 
commenced implementing an effective, 
participatory and updated national 
biodiversity strategy and action plan.

why this target is important
National biodiversity strategies and action plans 
(NBSAPs) are the key instrument for translating 
the Convention on Biological Diversity and the 
decisions of its Conference of the Parties into 
national action. The attainment of this target 
would, therefore, facilitate the achievement of all 
of the Aichi Biodiversity Targets.

Summary of progreSS towardS the target

TargeT elemenT s (by 2020)

sTaTus

Submission of NBSAPs to 
Secretariat by (end of) 2015

NBSAPs adopted as 
effective policy instrument

NBSAPs are being 
implemented

4

3

3

110

Strategic Goal E

recent trends, current status and future projections

179 of the 194 Parties to the Convention have devel-
oped NBSAPs, at least 57 of which are still current. 
Parties are currently updating their NBSAPs in line 
with the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011–2020. 
Twenty six had done so by August 1, 2014. For other 
Parties for which information is available, more than 
40% are expected to have completed their NBSAP 
by October 2014 and about 90% by the end of 2015. 
This part of the target is, therefore, expected to be 
largely met by the deadline.

However, the adequacy of available updated 
NBSAPs in terms of following the guidance set 
by the CBD’s Conference of the Parties (COP) is 
variable. The degree to which countries are imple-
menting their updated strategies and action plans is 
also variable, suggesting that, while progress can be 
reported on these components of the target, they 
will not be achieved by 2015. 

Box 17.1. examples of processes to revise national biodiversity strategies and  
action plans (NBSaps)

Japan: Japan’s fifth NBSAP was finalized in September 2012. An inter-ministerial committee drafted the 
revised NBSAP and the Central Environmental Council conducted interviews with sectors including NGOs, 
businesses and local authorities. Local briefings and consultation meetings were also organized on this 
draft and public comments on the draft NBSAP were invited prior to it being finalized. 

Suriname: Suriname’s updated NBSAP was finalized in February 2013 and was based on the National 
Biodiversity Strategy finalized six years earlier. A variety of ministries were involved in the development of 
the NBSAP, including the Ministries of Labour, Technological Development and Environment, of Physical 
Planning, Land and Forest Management and of Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Fisheries among others. 
Experts in different sectors were consulted on the relevance and feasibility of the proposed actions. Prior to 
finalizing the NBSAP a validation workshop was held.

Cameroon: As part of the process of revising its NBSAP, the country undertook country studies and 
stocktaking exercises which, among other things, analysed gaps between the previous NBSAP and the 
current situation in the country, identified the causes and consequences of biodiversity loss in Cameroon 
and explored the specific contributions that NGOs have made to biodiversity.218

Target 17: Biodiversity strategies  and action plans

111

actions to enhance progress towards the target

The following actions would allow the full achieve-
ment of Target 17:

 • Ensuring that the NBSAP is developed through 
an open, consultative and participatory process 
involving a wide range of rights-holders and 
stakeholders from across the country, including 
indigenous and local communities

 • Ensuring that the NBSAP is up to date and 
aligned with the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 
2011–2020 and the Aichi Biodiversity Targets, for 
example by setting national targets with corre-
sponding indicators and monitoring mechanisms, 
and keeping it under review once it has been 
developed and is being implemented, with the 
participation of all stakeholders

 • Ensuring that the NBSAP is adopted as an effec-
tive policy instrument recognized across the whole 
of government

 • Ensuring that the necessary institutional 
structures are in place to implement the NBSAP, 
including a mechanism for inter-ministerial and 
inter-sectoral coordination, and mechanisms to 
secure the necessary human and financial resources

table 17.1. A Number of countries that have developed and revised NBSapS and B effectiveness of 
updated NBSapS (as of 27 July 2014)

n=194

Parties that have developed at least one NBSAP

Parties that have not developed an NBSAP

A

Parties that have revised their NBSAP at least once

Parties that currently have targets in their NBSAP with timelines extending to 2014 or beyond 216

Parties with NBSAPs adopted since 2010

n=26

Updated NBSAPs containing national targets

Updated NBSAPs clearly linking national targets to Aichi Biodiversity Targets

B

Updated NBSAPs containing indicators217

NBSAP supported (or plan to be) by a monitoring system

112

Strategic Goal E

NBSap

179

15

45

57

26

effectiveness 

of NBSap

Yes

No

Yes

No

22

4

8

10

10

21

Target 17: Biodiversity strategies  and action plans

113

T
e
g
r
a
T

traditional knowledge

By 2020, the traditional knowledge, 
innovations and practices of indigenous 
and local communities relevant for the 
conservation and sustainable use of 
biodiversity, and their customary use of 
biological resources, are respected, subject to 
national legislation and relevant international 
obligations, and fully integrated and reflected 
in the implementation of the Convention 
with the full and effective participation of 
indigenous and local communities, at all 
relevant levels.

why this target is important
Traditional knowledge contributes to both the 
conservation and the sustainable use of biological 
diversity. This target aims to ensure that traditional 
knowledge and customary sustainable use is 
respected, protected and encouraged with the 
effective participation of indigenous and local 

communities and reflected in the implementation 
of the Convention. Given the cross cutting nature of 
this target, actions taken to fulfill it will contribute to 
several of the other Aichi Biodiversity Targets. 

Summary of progreSS towardS the target

TargeT elemenT s (by 2020)

sTaTus

Traditional knowledge, 
innovations and practices 
of indigenous and local 
communities are respected

Traditional knowledge, 
innovations and practices 
are fully integrated and 
reflected in implementation 
of the Convention …

… with the full and effective 
participation of indigenous 
and local communities

3

3

3

114

Strategic Goal E

recent trends, current status and future projections

Processes are under way internationally and in 
a number of countries to strengthen respect for, 
and recognition and promotion of, traditional 
knowledge and customary sustainable use. Efforts 
to enhance the capacities of indigenous and local 
communities to participate meaningfully in relevant 
processes locally, nationally and internationally are 
progressing, but limited support, recognition and 
capacity remain obstacles. 

Overall, traditional knowledge continues to decline 
as illustrated by the loss of linguistic diversity (see 
Figure 18.1 and Box 18.1) and large-scale displace-
ment of indigenous and local communities.219 
However, this trend is reversed in some places 
through growing interest in traditional cultures 
and involvement of local communities in the gover-
nance and management of protected areas and the 
growing recognition of the importance of commu-
nity conserved areas.220

More than 60% of the national reports assessed for 
GBO-4 indicate progress towards this target, with 
actions including support for traditional natural 
resources management (Japan, Myanmar, and 
South Africa) and participatory management of 
forests and protected areas (Nepal).221

While progress has been made in all components 
of this target, current trends as far as they can be 
assessed suggest that the actions taken to date are 
insufficient to achieve the target by 2020.

10%
Vulnerable

4%
Extinct since 
1950

9%
Severely
endangered 

10%
Critically endangered

11% 
Definitely endangered

57%
Safe or 
data-deficient

Figure 18.1. Level of threat to the world’s languages. According to 
UNESCO’s Atlas of World Languages in Danger, at least 43 per cent 
of languages are in danger of disappearing, based on the degree of 
transmission between generations.222 

actions to enhance progress towards the target

Based on the various lines of evidence used in 
GBO-4, the following actions are effective and 
would help to accelerate progress towards Target 18, 
if more widely applied. They would also contribute 
to other targets, shown in parentheses:

 • Developing national guidelines or action plans, 
aligned with relevant guidance under the CBD, on 
recognizing and safeguarding the rights of indig-
enous and local communities over their knowledge

 • Promoting local initiatives that support tradi-
tional and local knowledge of biodiversity and 
promote customary sustainable use, including 
traditional health care initiatives, strengthening 
opportunities to learn and speak indigenous 
languages, research projects and data collection 
based on traditional methodologies (Target 19), and 

involving indigenous and local communities in the 
creation, control, governance and management of 
protected areas (Target 11)

 • Raising awareness of the importance of tradi-
tional knowledge to conservation and sustainable 
use of biodiversity (Target 1)

 • Supporting and cooperating in the organization 
of capacity-building activities on relevant issues 
under the Convention for indigenous and local 
communities, as well as cultural awareness raising 
programmes 

 • Promoting effective participation of indigenous 
and local communities, at all levels, in issues related 
to biodiversity and of interest to them

Target 18: Traditional knowledge

115

Box 18.1. risk to indigenous languages in the arctic

Twenty-one northern languages have become extinct since the 1800s and ten of these extinctions have 
taken place since 1990, indicating an increasing rate of language extinction. Of these extinctions, one was in 
Finland, one in Alaska, one in Canada and 18 in the Russian Federation. Twenty-eight languages classified as 
critically endangered are in dire need of attention before they, too, are lost forever. 

Revitalization efforts of various kinds are taking place in different regions and are strong testimony to the 
interest of indigenous peoples in revitalizing and promoting their languages and cultures. Revitalization 
programs are largely grassroots movements with a variety of activities, such as intensive summer school 
programs, language use in local schools and special courses aimed at adult learners.

Status of language
  Vulnerable
  Definitely endangered
  Severely endangered
  Critically endangered
  Extinct

Figure 18.2. Status of languages among linguistic families in the Arctic region.223

116

Strategic Goal E

Box 18.2. monitoring of traditional knowledge in the philippines

Indigenous Kalanguya communities in Tinoc, Ifugao Philippines have been revitalizing customary land use 
and territorial management using culturally-defined ecosystems-based approaches. Tinoc is one of the pilot 
communities of the Philippine Traditional Knowledge Network (PTKN) where community-based monitoring 
of traditional knowledge is being conducted using multiple indicators, e.g. on linguistic diversity, traditional 
occupations, land tenure and land use change. 

Data generated includes cultural mapping of multiple land and forests uses, documentation of customary 
tenure systems, traditional occupations, status of traditional knowledge holders and cultural transmission. 
The status of flora and fauna, productivity of major crops and soil fertility has also been investigated. Some 
findings include: contraction of watershed forests to 60 per cent of their size in 1970 due to conversion to 
vegetable farming and up to 30–50 per cent decline in rice yields due to weakening of traditional knowledge 
about soil enhancement practices as well as increased pest damage due to moving away from traditional 
pest control such as through synchronized farming activities.

The information gathered through the project is being used to stimulate community actions on 
conservation, sustainable use and customary governance over lands, forests and waters. Plans have been 
developed for revitalizing traditional knowledge and strengthening customary practices and law, including 
biodiversity management plans and demarcation of protected watershed areas and to strictly control the 
privatization of common lands critical for community wellbeing and biodiversity. It has led to the adoption 
of a covenant (by the local community and local government) to prevent environmental degradation and 
promote peoples’ wellbeing through the revival of indigenous knowledge practices and systems of territorial 
management.224

Target 18: Traditional knowledge

117

T
e
g
r
a
T

Sharing information and 
knowledge

By 2020, knowledge, the science base and 
technologies relating to biodiversity, its 
values, functioning, status and trends, and the 
consequences of its loss, are improved, widely 
shared and transferred, and applied.

why this target is important
Biodiversity-related information is vital to identify 
threats to biodiversity, to determine priorities for 
conservation and sustainable use and to enable 
targeted and cost effective action. Given this, progress 
towards this target can contribute to the attainment 
of the other Aichi Biodiversity Targets. This target is a 
general commitment to increase the amount and quality 
of biodiversity relevant information and technologies 
available, to make better use of these in decision 
making, and to share them as widely as possible.

Summary of progreSS towardS the target

TargeT elemenT s (by 2020)

sTaTus

Knowledge, the science 
base and technologies 
relating to biodiversity, 
its values, functioning, 
status and trends, and 
the consequences of its 
loss, are improved

Biodiversity knowledge, 
the science base and 
technologies are widely 
shared and transferred 
and applied

4

3

118

Strategic Goal E

recent trends, current status and future projections

Data and information on biodiversity are being 
shared much more widely through a range of 
national, regional and global initiatives. They include 
networks to promote and facilitate free and open 
access to digitized records from natural history collec-
tions and observations, including through citizen 
science initiatives; collaboration to build a complete 
catalogue of the world’s species; and the development 
of ‘DNA barcoding’ as a means of identifying species 
(see Figure 19.1).225 However, much data and infor-
mation remain inaccessible and capacity is lacking to 
mobilize them in many countries.

The need for more coordinated efforts to monitor 
biodiversity, using standard or harmonized proto-
cols is recognized in the work of the Group on Earth 
Observations Biodiversity Observation Network 
(GEO BON), envisaging a global network to link in 
situ and remotely sensed information. GEO BON is 
developing a set of Essential Biodiversity Variables 
(EBVs) aimed at improving the efficiency of 
monitoring by focussing observations on a limited 
number of key attributes.226

Knowledge on biodiversity has advanced tremen-
dously in the past 20 years, and networks such 
as DIVERSITAS have helped to bring scientists 
together to collaborate on research of relevance 
to society and decision making. This process is 
further enhanced with the establishment of the 
Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on 
Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (IPBES), whose 
programme of assessments, knowledge generation, 
capacity building and policy tools aims to enable 
better informed decisions at all scales.

Countries have made considerable investments in 
improving national information and monitoring 
systems on biodiversity, and in international 
data-sharing infrastructures such as the Global 
Biodiversity Information Facility (see Box 19.1) and 
its national nodes, and through regional initiatives 
(see Box 19.2). 

With the advances made in building systems to 
share data, information and knowledge on biodiver-
sity, a significant part of this target is judged to be 
on track. However, to meet all components of the 
target, further efforts are needed on investment in 
data mobilization and the coordination of models 
and technologies that can be readily applied to 
decision making.

A

Grand Total

unknown

Other

Plantae

Animalia

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

B

2002

2004

2006

2008

2010

2012

2014

C

)
s
n
o

i
l
l
i

 

m
n
i
(
 
s
e
c
n
a
r
u
c
c
o
 
f
o
 
r
e
b
m
u
N

500

400

300

200

100

0
2008

2,000,000

1,500,000

1,000,000

500,000

0

400,000

300,000

200,000

100,000

0
2003

2005

2007

2009

2011

2013

Figure 19.1. Growth in A Species occurrence records published 
through the Global Biodiversity Information Facility,227 B Species 
covered in the Catalogue of Life annual checklist228 and C Number of 
animal species represented in the Barcode of Life Data System global 
reference library.229 

Target 19: Sharing information and knowledge

119

Box 19.1. the global Biodiversity Informatics outlook: delivering biodiversity 
knowledge in the information age230

The Global Biodiversity Informatics partnership has developed the Global Biodiversity Informatics Outlook 
(GBIO) as a framework and concept to promote mobilization, access, use and analysis of primary data and 
distilling policy-relevant information. It identifies the need for organized activity based on four focus areas:

 • Creating a culture of shared expertise, robust common data standards, policies and incentives for data 
sharing and a system of persistent storage and archiving of data.

 • Mobilizing biodiversity data from all available sources, to make them promptly and routinely available. 
Data should be gathered only once, but used many times. This includes data in all forms from historic litera-
ture and collections to the observations made by citizen scientists; from the readings of automated sensors 
to the analysis of the genetic signatures of microbe communities.

 • Providing the tools to convert data into evidence by enabling those data to be discovered, organizing 
them into views that give them context and meaning. This includes major collaborative efforts to improve 
the accuracy of data and their fitness to be used in research and policy; to provide a taxonomic framework; 
and to organize information about the traits of species and the interactions between them.

 • Generating understanding of biodiversity and our impacts upon it, by applying the evidence in models, 
tools for visualization and identifying gaps to prioritize future data gathering.

120

Strategic Goal E

actions to enhance progress towards the target

Based on the various lines of evidence used in this 
report, the following actions are effective and would 
help to accelerate progress towards Target 19, if 
more widely applied. They would also contribute to 
other targets, shown in parentheses:

 • Establishing or strengthening monitoring 
programmes, including monitoring of land-use 
change, providing near-real time information where 
possible, in particular for “hotspots” of biodiversity 
change,

 • Developing inventories of existing biodiversity 
information as a means of identifying knowledge 
gaps and defining research priorities, and making 
greater use of existing national and international 
research networks to help address these

 • Engaging indigenous and local communities 
as well as relevant stakeholders in information 
collection and use, including through support for 
community-based monitoring and information 
systems (Target 18)

 • Strengthening and promoting the further 
mobilization of and access to data by, for example, 
encouraging the use of common informatics 
standards and protocols, promoting a culture 
of data sharing (for example, requirements for 
publicly-funded research and recognition for the 
publication of datasets), investing in digitization of 
natural history collections and promoting citizen 
scientists’ contributions to the body of biodiversity 
observations;

 • Facilitating the use of biodiversity related informa-
tion by decision makers at national and local levels

 • Supporting communities of practice and stake-
holders in relevant skill fields, and strengthening 
cooperation among relevant national institu-
tions, national and regional centres of expertise in 
biodiversity and other relevant stakeholders and 
initiatives

 • Ensuring that relevant biodiversity informa-
tion is made available in a way that it can be 
easily accessed and improving national, regional 
and international Clearing House Mechanisms, 
strengthening thematic information-based services 
and establishing interconnections in order to 
contribute to the development of a global biodiver-
sity knowledge network

Box 19.2. Sharing information on the forests of the Congo Basin: observatoire des 
forêts d’afrique Centrale (ofaC)

In Central Africa, data availability about the state of the forests and forest biodiversity has always been 
a critical issue. Under the authority of COMIFAC (Commission Ministérielle des Forêts d’Afrique Centrale), 
the OFAC (Observatoire des Forêts d’Afrique Centrale) is a unique regional observatory to monitor forest 
resources spanning 10 countries, and 187 million hectares of rain forests). OFAC annually collects, verifies 
and harmonizes general data on forests through a network of partners and disseminates information 
through a web-based information system. This data is analysed by experts to produce the “State of the 
Congo Basin Forests” reports (SOF), including information on forest cover, biodiversity and other issues. 
Recently OFAC became part of the global Digital Observatory for Protected areas (DOPA) conceived as 
a set of ‘critical biodiversity informatics infrastructures’ to provide users such as park managers, decision 
makers and observers with the means to assess, monitor and possibly forecast the state of and pressures 
on protected areas at the global scale.231

Target 19: Sharing information and knowledge

121

T
e
g
r
a
T

mobilizing resources from  
all sources

By 2020, at the latest, the mobilization 
of financial resources for effectively 
implementing the Strategic Plan for 
Biodiversity 2011–2020 from all sources, 
and in accordance with the consolidated and 
agreed process in the Strategy for Resource 
Mobilization, should increase substantially 
from the current levels. This target will be 
subject to changes contingent to resources 
needs assessments to be developed and 
reported by Parties.

why this target is important
The overall objective of this target is to increase 
the amount of resources available to implement 
the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity. The fulfillment of 
this target will have implications on the feasibility 
of achieving the other 19 targets contained in the 
Strategic Plan.

Summary of progreSS towardS the target

TargeT elemenT s (by 2020)

sTaTus

Mobilization of financial 
resources implementing 
the Strategic Plan for 
Biodiversity from all sources 
have increased substantially 
from 2010 levels

3

122

Strategic Goal E

recent trends, current status and future projections

In its first assessment the High-Level Panel on 
Global Assessment of Resources for Implementing 
the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011–2020 
concluded that the cost of attaining the twenty 
Aichi Biodiversity Targets would be somewhere 
between US$ 150 billion and US$ 440 billion per 
year.232 However the Panel also noted that these 
figures needed to be regarded as broad approxima-
tion of the resources required to attain the targets 
rather than exact estimates. The second assessment 
of the High Level Panel concluded that the available 
evidence broadly supports these estimates but that 
for some targets the estimates may be conserva-
tive.233 Both assessments concluded that most of 
the investments required to attain the targets will 
deliver multiple benefits and should not be financed 
from biodiversity budgets alone and that many 
activities could be jointly funded through budgets 
for agriculture, forestry, fisheries, water, pollution 
control and climate action as these benefits would 
extend to biodiversity.

Other estimates related to funding, both at the 
national level (See box 20.1) and in relation to 
specific Aichi Biodiversity Targets (see Box 20.2), 
have also been undertaken. These estimates gener-
ally support the conclusion that there is currently 
a significant funding gap related to the implement 
the Strategic Plan. 

There is limited information on domestic funding 
in support to biodiversity. However some estimates 
suggest that globally it is around US$ 20 billion a 
year or more.234 More than 30 Parties have reported 
on domestic biodiversity funding through a prelimi-
nary reporting framework developed under the 
Convention.235 While this information does not 
allow for a comprehensive global assessment of 
domestic biodiversity funding at this stage, most 
of these countries report stable or moderately 
increasing levels of domestic funding over recent 
years (see, for example, Box 20.3). There is also 
limited information related to resources provided 

through other channels such as the private sector 
and non-government organizations, as well as 
through innovative financial mechanisms. 

There has been a general increase in bilateral 
biodiversity-related official development assis-
tance (ODA) against the 2006–2010 baseline. The 
amount of resources devoted to activities that have 
biodiversity marked as a principle objective has 
remained relatively flat between 2006 and 2012. 
The general increase in bilateral biodiversity related 
ODA over this time period is largely attributable to 
an increase in ODA marked as targeting biodiversity 
as a “significant” objective (see Figure 20.1). While 
there was a small decline in biodiversity-related aid 
in 2012, overall, aid to developing countries reached 
an all-time high in 2013.

Multilateral ODA is also a significant source of 
funding for biodiversity however there is limited 
information on the total amount of funds provided 
through this channel. One example of multilat-
eral ODA is the funding provided through the 
Global Environment Facility (GEF). The amount of 
resources to the GEF has been increasing over time, 
with a particularly large increase between GEF-4 
and GEF-5. However the amount of resources 
provided specifically to the biodiversity focal areas 
has remained relatively flat in absolute terms 
since GEF-3 (See Figure 20.2). During the GEF-6 
replenishment meeting donor countries pledged 
to provide US$ 4.43 billion to support developing 
countries over a four year period, in preventing the 
degradation of the global environment, including 
US$ 1.30 billion for biodiversity.236 

Recent trends and the limited information available, 
suggest that while some progress has been made 
towards this target, progress to date is not sufficient 
to meet the target by 2020. 

Target 20: Mobilizing resources from  all sources

123

 

)
D
S
U
2
1
0
2
(
 
n
o

i
l
l
i

b
n

 

i
 

A
D
O

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

5%

A
D
O

 
l

 

 

 

 

a
t
o
t
 
f
o
%
a
 
s
a
A
D
O
d
e
k
r
a
m
y
t
i
s
r
e
v
d
o
B

i

i

 

4%

3%

2%

1%

0%

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

Figure 20.1. Biodiversity marked official development assistance 
(ODA) between 2006 and 2012 in billions of USD (2012 constant 
prices) and as a percentage of total ODA.237 Principal official 
development assistance refers to funding which is provided 
specifically to address issues related to biodiversity. Signifigant 
official development assistance refers to funding which may have 
other primiairy pruposes but is nontheless relevant to biodiversity.

s
r
a

l
l

o
d
 
f
o
 
s
n
o

i
l
l
i

M

4,000

3,500

3,000

2,500

2,000

1,500

1,000

500

0

Pilot

GEF-1

GEF-2

GEF-3

GEF-4

GEF-5

Total funds

Biodiversity funds

Figure 20.2. Total GEF funding and the funds for the biodiversity focal 
area between the pilot phase and GEF-5 expressed in millions of 
dollars as of September 2013. Where possible multifocal areas funds 
have been disaggregated and attributed to the biodiversity focal 
areas as appropriate.238

Box 20.1. evidence of funding gaps in the united Kingdom239

The costs for meeting the United Kingdom´s environmental targets for “biodiversity, landscape, climate 
change mitigation, flood risk management, farmland historic environment, soil quality, water quality, 
resource protection and public access” was estimated based on the established UK targets and current 
agri-environment payment rates, and assumes management on all 16,2 million hectares of agricultural and 
forestry land in the UK. The total costs are estimated to reach 1.986 billion per year [US$ 2.906 billion per 
year], which is three times the existing annual agri environment budget. Furthermore it is stated that costs 
are probably significantly underestimated. 

124

Strategic Goal E

actions to enhance progress towards the target

Based on the various lines of evidence used in this 
report, the following actions are effective and would 
help to accelerate progress towards Target 20, if 
more widely applied. They would also contribute to 
other targets, shown in parentheses: 

 • Articulating the various values of biodiversity 
for the economy and society through national, and 
where relevant, sub-national, assessments (Targets 
1 and 2) This should include assessment of the 
co-benefits of investments in biodiversity, and of 
the long-term costs of inaction

 • Developing national financial plans for biodiver-
sity, as part of NBSAPs (Target 17), aligned, where 
possible, with national annual and multi-annual 

financial planning cycles. The plans should clearly 
identify funding needs, gaps and priorities to allow 
for more targeted resource use

 • Integrating biodiversity in national develop-
ment plans and/or national plans for development 
cooperation (Target 2);

 • Broadening biodiversity funding sources 
including by exploring innovative financial mecha-
nisms, such as subsidy reform and payment for 
ecosystem services schemes (Target 3), recognizing 
that no single source of funding will be sufficient to 
meet the full needs (see Box 20.4)

Box 20.2. funding needs for reducing the extinction risk of birds240

An assessment considering the costs of improving the conservation status of threatened bird species 
(specifically, to “downlist” each by one IUCN threat category) estimated, that for 1115 globally threatened 
species the costs would be between US 0.875 and 1.23 billion over the next decade. 12% of this need 
is currently being funded. When globally threatened species on the IUCN Red List beyond birds were 
considered the estimated costs increased to between US 3.41 to 4.76 billion per year over this decade. 
The costs of effectively protecting all Important Bird Areas (IBA) would be US 65.1 billion annually. Also 
protecting sites important for other taxa would increase this to US 76.1 billion annually. These estimates 
support the general conclusion that funding increases of an order of magnitude are needed.

Target 20: Mobilizing resources from  all sources

125

Box 20.3. Biodiversity funding in India

17%
Ministry of the 
Environment 
and Forests 
(Core funding) 

3%
Ministry of Environment 
and Forests (Non core 
funding) 

55%
States

25%
National (other Ministries 
and Departments)

India has undertaken a detailed assessment of the 
amount of funding that it provides to biodiversity 
conservation. The assessment considered various 
sources of funding including direct core and 
non-core funding from the Ministry of Environment 
and Forests as well as indirect peripheral funding, 
which comprises resources that are allocated 
by other ministries and departments that have 
an impact on biodiversity conservation. The 
funding provided through peripheral sources was 
calculated using a multiplier that expressed how 
directly related to biodiversity conservation the 
resource use was. Resources provided through state 
governments were also considered. The assessment 
found that during 2013–2014 more than USD 1.48 billion was spent on biodiversity conservation, 55% at 
the state level, 20% through the Ministry of Environment and Forests, and 25% through 24 other ministries 
and departments at the national level (see Figure 20.3). Core funding from central government increased 
from 2006 to 2013, with funds after 2010 showing an increase of about 30% compared to the 2006–2010 
baseline.241 

Figure 20.3: Funding provided to biodiversity conservation 
during 2013–2014, through different channels expressed as a 
percentage of total biodiversity funding.

Box 20.4. raising resources through environmental payments: water fund in 
Cauca Valley, southwestern Colombia 

Valle del Cauca (Cauca Valley) is a high productive and fertile region, with a huge number of sugarcane 
producers. Sugarcane is also an important export and domestic crop for the country. This region lies in 
a very rich hydrological system containing important watersheds supplying water to 900,000 people 
residing in the cities, including the city capital Cali. This region is quite sensitive to climate factors causing 
water scarcity during the summer. A water fund was implemented to secure biodiversity and water-related 
services benefits, particularly reduction in sedimentation and maintenance of water flows. Activities 
carried out through investments by the fund include conserving at least 125,000 hectares of the natural 
ecosystems and improving management of the landscape. These activities will benefit 920,000 people 
downstream and sugar cane production.242

126

Strategic Goal E

Part III
Synthesis
This final part of GBO-4 provides a synthesis of 

progress across the Aichi Biodiversity Targets 
towards 2020 and also explores the prospects 

for achieving the 2050 Vision of the Strategic 
Plan as well as the contribution to the broader 
sustainable development agenda

127

Global Biodiversity Outlook 4Summary of progress towards the goals of the strategic plan and the 
Aichi Biodiversity Targets

This sub-section provides an overview of progress 
towards the implementation of the Goals of the 
Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011-2020 and the 
Aichi Biodiversity Targets, based on two specific 
sources of information: (1) extrapolations of 
current trends towards the five goals of the Strategic 
Plan according to a set of indicators, and (2) infor-
mation provided by Parties to the CBD through 
their fifth national reports to the Convention. 
These sources formed part of the assessment of 
progress towards the individual components of all 
the targets provided in the preceding sections, and 
collated in the target ‘dashboard’ shown on page 18. 
Complementing the target-by-target expert assess-
ments, the combined indicators, extrapolations 
and national reports help to provide a synthesis 
of progress towards the implementation of the 
Strategic Plan for Biodiversity, its Strategic Goals 
and the Aichi Biodiversity Targets.

Extrapolations of current trends
Several of the target assessments in the previous 
section of this Outlook and the underlying technical 
report243 include graphs showing extrapolation of 
trends in indicators to 2020, based on past data and 
using statistical techniques to take the projection 

forward to the date when most Aichi Biodiversity 
Targets have their end point. These are not predic-
tions, as they assume that all the drivers remain 
constant, and they cannot take account of possible 
changes in policies or behaviour. However, they 
give an indication of where some trends are likely 
to lead, if recent drivers and practices continue 
without change.

In all, 55 indicators were chosen that had relevance 
to the 20 Aichi Biodiversity Targets. Figure 21.1 
shows a synthesis of all of these indicators, grouped 
according to the Strategic Goals and whether 
they represent the actual state of biodiversity, the 
pressures upon biodiversity or policy responses. 
The overall message of these indicators remains 
similar to the situation analysed in GBO-3: in 
general, positive responses to biodiversity issues are 
increasing (19 out of 32 response indicators); but 
indicators of pressures on biodiversity also show a 
projected increase (six out of seven pressure indica-
tors); and projections of the state of biodiversity 
show a significant deterioration (13 of 16 state 
indicators) between 2010 and 2020 – all assuming 
that current drivers remain constant. Across the 
five strategic goals, the messages of these extrapola-
tions can be summarized as follows:

128

Global Biodiversity Outlook 4Strategic Goal A: Address underlying causes

+100%

-100%

+100%

-100%

2000

2005

2010

2015

2020

2000

2005

2010

2015

2020

2000

2005

2010

2015

2020

Strategic Goal B: Reduce direct pressures

+100%

-100%

+100%

-100%

2000

2005

2010

2015

2020

2000

2005

2010

2015

2020

2000

2005

2010

2015

2020

Strategic Goal C: Improve status

+100%

-100%

+100%

-100%

2000

2005

2010

2015

2020

2000

2005

2010

2015

2020

2000

2005

2010

2015

2020

Strategic Goal D: Enhance benefits to all

+100%

-100%

2000

+100%

-100%

2005

2010

2015

2020

2000

2005

2010

2015

2020

2000

2005

2010

2015

Strategic Goal E: Enhance implementation

+100%

-100%

2020

+100%

-100%

2000

2005

2010

2015

2020

2000

2005

2010

2015

2020

2000

2005

2010

2015

2020

Figure 21.1. Trends in indicators from 2000 and projected to 2020 for the five Strategic Goals of the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011-2020. 
State measures (the left column) are coloured orange, pressure measures (the middle column) are coloured red, and response measures (the 
right column) are coloured green. For state and response indicators, a decline over time represents an unfavourable trend (falling biodiversity, 
declining response) whereas for the pressure indicators a decrease over time represents a favourable trend (reducing pressure). A dashed 
line represents a non-significant trend, whereas a solid line represents a significant projected change between 2010 and 2020. These graphs 
suggest generally negative trends for both the state of biodiversity and pressures upon it, despite positive trends in the responses made to 
conserve and sustainably use biodiversity. Where indicators were not available for extrapolation the graphs were left blank.244 

Strategic Goal A (Addressing underlying causes)

The targets in this goal focus mainly on responses 
to the underlying drivers of biodiversity loss. The 
response indicators relating to Goal A, for example 
on measures to promote sustainable consumption 
and production, show a positive trend. However, 
the extrapolations show a continuing increase in all 
of the indicators of pressures relating to the goal: 

the ecological footprint, the water footprint and 
human appropriation of net primary productivity 
(the proportion of the planet’s plant growth used 
by people). These contrasting trends may indicate 
time lags in the impacts of positive changes – or 
that moves towards sustainable practices are still 
outweighed by contrasting pressures.

129

Global Biodiversity Outlook 4Strategic Goal B (Reducing direct pressures)

Indicators within this goal also show the contrast 
between improving responses, increasing pressures 
and declining state of biodiversity. While certifica-
tion of sustainability is increasingly being used for 
forest products and fisheries, pressures of fishing 
effort, nitrogen use and invasive species are all 
projected to increase until 2020. Eleven separate 
measures of the state of habitats and species 
relating to this goal show a continuing decline.

Strategic Goal C (Improve status of biodiversity)

Two indicators of the state of biodiversity within 
this goal, the Living Planet Index and the Red List 
Index, show current declines and an extrapolation 
of continuing decline to 2020 based on current 
drivers. On the other hand, responses with positive 
trends include the coverage of protected areas, 
including their effectiveness, ecological repre-
sentativeness, and degree of protection for key 
biodiversity sites.

Strategic Goal D (Enhance benefits)

Very few quantitative indicators directly cover 
the targets within this strategic goal. The only 
indicator directly relevant to this Strategic Goal 
that was available for this assessment is the Red 
List Indicator for pollinators which showed that 
these species are on average moving closer towards 
extinction, suggesting that this ecosystem service 
is in decline. However there are some indicators for 
the other Strategic Goals that provide evidence of 
progress towards the targets under this Strategic 
Goal. These include indicators relating to habitat 
extent, fishing and other pressures. The current 
status of these indicators suggests that ecosystems 
and the service they provide are in decline and are 
projected to continue declining up to 2020. 

Strategic Goal E (Enhance implementation)

All indicators used for this goal related to 
responses and include indicators on the avail-
ability of data and knowledge, funding for 
conservation and development assistance. All of 

these showed recent increases, indicating positive 
action towards the goal, and projected continuing 
increases to 2020. 

Conclusions

These indicators complement the more compre-
hensive assessments summarized in the previous 
section. The set of indicators is more compre-
hensive than those available for GBO-3, but they 
provide only a partial picture of progress towards 
the Aichi Biodiversity Targets. The indicators, and 
their statistical extrapolations to 2020, suggest 
that the impacts of responses supporting biodiver-
sity conservation and sustainable use cannot yet 
be discerned in the form of reduced pressures or 
improved state of biodiversity. Part of this may be 
explained by time lags between the actions taken 
and the positive outcomes they will eventually bring 
about—but it also suggests that actions need to 
be stepped up and accelerated if the goals of the 
Strategic Plan are to be achieved.

Information from the Fifth National Reports
The fifth national reports that have been assessed 
for GBO-4 (64 in total by July 2014) provide an 
additional line of evidence of the progress that has 
been made towards the attainment of the Aichi 
Biodiversity Targets. These reports reinforce the 
overall assessment that while progress is being 
made towards the achievement of all targets, it 
is insufficient on current trajectories to meet 
the targets by the 2015 and 2020 deadlines (see 
Figure 21.2). Also, consistent with the results from 
the indicators, the information in the national 
reports suggests that most progress has been 
made in relation to Aichi Biodiversity Targets 
11, 16 and 17, relating to protected areas, on the 
Nagoya Protocol on access and benefit sharing, 
and national biodiversity strategies and action 
plans; while progress is particularly limited for 
targets 3 and 10, relating to reform of incentives 
and pressures on ecosystems vulnerable to climate 
change and ocean acidification. 

130

Global Biodiversity Outlook 40

10%

20%

30%

40%

50%

60%

70%

80%

90%

100%

Target 1

Target 2

Target 3

Target 4

Target 5

Target 6

Target 7

Target 8

Target 9

Target 10

Target 11

Target 12

Target 13

Target 14

Target 15

Target 16

Target 17

Target 18

Target 19

Target 20

0

10%

20%

30%

40%

50%

60%

70%

80%

90%

100%

No information

No progress

On track to meet the target

Moving away from  target

Progress but at insufficient rate 

On track to exceed the target

Figure 21.2. Assessment of progress towards the attainment of the Aichi Biodiversity Targets based on the information contained in 64 fifth 
national reports.245 Almost 60 per cent of these reports explicitly assessed national progress towards the Aichi Biodiversity Targets. Where 
this is the case, the country’s assessment has been applied to the same five point scale used in the target ‘dashboard’ shown on page 18 of this 
report. In the other cases the assessment has been inferred from the information contained in the report. A number of these reports did not 
contain information that allowed for an assessment of progress. These cases are represented in the figure as “No Information”. 

131

Global Biodiversity Outlook 4Interactions among the Aichi Biodiversity Targets 

The Aichi Targets are deeply inter-connected but 
the relationships among targets vary in strength 
and are often asymmetric (see Figure 21.3). These 
interactions will vary with national circumstances 
and they can be positive or negative for biodiversity 
depending on the types of actions taken. For this 
reason it is useful to consider them when designing 
national actions to implement the Strategic Plan 
for Biodiversity 2011-2020. Coordinated actions 
that maximize the positive interactions amongst 
targets can potentially reduce the overall costs of 
implementation of a NBSAP and optimize its imple-
mentation and execution time. 

Some targets mostly have impacts on other 
targets (downstream interactions), while others 
are primarily impacted by other targets (upstream 
interactions). In particular, actions taken to attain 
targets 2 (Biodiversity Values), 3 (Incentives) and 
4 (Production and Consumption), 17 (Adoption of 
NBSAPs), 19 (Knowledge Base), and 20 (Financial 
Resources), potentially have large effects on other 
targets. These targets should therefore be seen 
as strategically important because they influence 

the achievement of a broad range of targets and 
Strategic Goals. 

On the other hand, achieving Target 5 on reducing 
habitat loss, and thereby addressing the largest 
current pressure on terrestrial biodiversity loss, will 
require a concerted approach that draws upon actions 
focused on most of the other targets. For example, 
as set out in the summary of Target 5, a strategy 
to reduce deforestation or other land use change 
might require: public awareness and engagement 
(Target 1), a legal or policy framework for land use 
or spatial planning (Target 2), incentives measures, 
both positive and negative (Target 3), addressing 
commodity supply chains to restrict products from 
illegal or unsustainable sources (Target 4), promoting 
sustainable increases in the productivity of existing 
agricultural land and rangeland (Target 7), devel-
oping protected area networks (Target 11); engaging 
with indigenous and local communities (target 18), 
monitoring land use and land-cover (Target 19), and 
mobilizing resources (Target 20).

132

Global Biodiversity Outlook 4Several other targets are primarily impacted by 
other targets. For example, targets 12 (Species 
Conservation), 13 (Genetic Diversity), 10 
(Vulnerable Ecosystems) and 15 (Ecosystem 
Restoration and Resilience) are heavily affected by 
actions focused on other targets, so they benefit 
most from progress towards all other targets, albeit 
indirectly. Nevertheless, implementing actions 

that are directly related to a particular target (e.g. 
implementing policies to maintain genetic diver-
sity of livestock, or preventing further extinctions 
of species) are the first, urgent steps to making 
progress towards these targets and are amongst the 
actions which will produce fastest positive effects 
on biodiversity.

T1

T2

T3

T4

T5

T6

T7

T8

T9

T10 T11 T12 T13 T14 T15 T16 T17 T18 T19 T20

T1

T2

T3

T4

T5

T6

T7

T8

T9

T10

T11

T12

T13

T14

T15

T16

T17

T18

T19

T20

Figure 21.3. Strength of interactions between the Aichi targets, at the global level, based on expert opinion, depicted as the effect of row on 
column. The intensity of the color indicates the strength of the relationship (pale – low, mid – intermediate, dark – high). For example, the 
impact of Target 2 (T2) on Target 10 (T10) is strong, while the impact of T10 on T2 is rather weak.246

133

Global Biodiversity Outlook 4Achievement of the 2050 vision for biodiversity

The role of biodiversity in supporting human 
well-being is recognized in broad terms in the 
2050 Vision of the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 
2011-2020: “By 2050, biodiversity is valued, 
conserved, restored and wisely used, maintaining 
ecosystem services, sustaining a healthy planet and 
delivering benefits essential for all people”. 

Challenges of business as usual scenarios
Future scenarios explored in the underlying 
technical report247 suggest five major challenges 
for the period to 2050 under a business as usual 
scenario. The following challenges must be 
addressed if the Vision of the Strategic Plan is to be 
attained:

To help analyse the longer-term dependencies 
between action related to biodiversity and broader 
challenges facing human societies, GBO-4 looked 
at trends based on “business as usual” as well as 
plausible scenarios for simultaneously meeting 
biodiversity, climate and poverty reduction objec-
tives, consistent with the 2050 Vision of the 
Strategic Plan. 

 • Climate change is projected to become a major driver 
of biodiversity loss and ecosystem change by 2050. 
Global temperature increases of 0.4 to 2.6°C by 
2055 and 0.3 to 4.8 °C by 2090 would be accompa-
nied by rising sea levels, changes in precipitation 
patterns, substantial loss of summer Arctic sea ice 
and increasing ocean acidification. These changes 
would have a broad range of impacts on biodiversity 

134

Global Biodiversity Outlook 4at genetic, species and ecosystem levels including 
shifts in the distribution of species and ecosystems, 
changes in species abundance and increased risk 
of extinctions. Efforts to mitigate climate change 
could also have very large impacts, both positive 
and negative, on biodiversity.

 • Demand for fertile land is projected to increase 
substantially by 2050. The combination of expanded 
agriculture and bioenergy in business as usual 
scenarios could result in a global land squeeze in 
which there is not sufficient room to conserve 
natural terrestrial habitats, leading to large declines 
in biodiversity. 

 • Many wild fisheries are likely to collapse and 
aquaculture is foreseen to dominate fish production 
by 2050. If harmful subsidies are not reduced and 
management of territorial and non-territorial 
marine systems do not improve, negative impacts 
of wild-capture marine fisheries are projected to 
increase substantially by 2050 in many regions, 
including the collapse of exploited fish popula-
tions. The large increases in global fish production 
foreseen for 2050 are projected to come primarily 
from aquaculture. This rapid expansion raises a 
variety of concerns including pollution, increased 
demand for high protein feed and competition for 
land or coastal areas.

 • Water scarcity is foreseen to increase in many 
regions of the globe by 2050. Global water 
withdrawals from freshwater systems are projected 
to nearly double by 2050 in most business as 
usual scenarios. This would result in reduced water 
flow for freshwater ecosystems, which are highly 
dependent on water flow to maintain biodiversity 
and ecosystem functions. Water for food produc-
tion currently accounts for 84% of global water 
consumption and dominates projected future global 
water consumption.

 • Combinations of drivers could push some systems 
beyond tipping points at regional scales by 2050. 
There is evidence that several large-scale regime 
shifts have already started and scenarios suggest 

that these could cause substantial disruption of 
social-ecological systems. The two best under-
stood examples are degradation of coral reefs due 
to combinations of pollution, destructive fishing, 
invasive alien species, ocean acidification and global 
warming, and loss of summer Arctic sea ice due 
to global warming. More speculative regime shifts 
include degradation of the Amazonian tropical 
humid forest due to combinations of deforesta-
tion, use of fire and global warming, and collapse 
of some tropical fisheries due to combinations 
of overfishing, pollution, sea level rise and global 
warming. These relatively rapid and large shifts in 
ecosystem structure and function at regional scale 
are projected to have large negative impacts on 
biodiversity, ecosystem services and human well-
being if they are not averted.248 

Alternative pathways to the 2050 vision
Scenarios for 2050 indicate that very substantial 
changes from business-as-usual trends are needed 
in order to address the challenges highlighted in the 
previous section and to meet three key global objec-
tives: slow and then stop the loss of biodiversity; 
keep average global temperature increases below 
2°C; and attain other human development goals. As 
many examples of recent environmental successes 
illustrate, solutions for a sustainable future will 
require a wide range of deep societal transforma-
tions—there is no individual, simple policy tool 
available to address all of these challenges. 

Global scenarios developed in the context of the 
“Rio+20” United Nations Conference on Sustainable 
Development help to illustrate the diversity, 
complexity and feasibility of pathways to a sustain-
able future249 (see Box 21.1). They provide an 
insight into the major transformations in develop-
ment pathways that are required to meet all three 
objectives for 2050; and that will need to be fully 
engaged over the current decade in order to meet 
these objectives, because of the long lag times 
inherent in social and technical transitions and in 
the biological, climate and oceans systems of the 
Earth. 

135

Global Biodiversity Outlook 4Scenarios suggest that these biodiversity goals can be 
attained while also reaching broader socio-economic 
objectives that include strong climate mitigation, 
improved diets and the eradication of hunger. Several 
indicators of biodiversity are improved in the alter-
native scenarios: population abundance, status of 
threatened species and mean species abundance, as 
well as the status of marine fish stocks (See Figures 
21.4). Such outcomes can be achieved by various 
mixes of polices; the three pathways explored in the 
scenario analysis point to some common elements 
(with the emphasis on each differing among the 
alternative scenarios; see Box 21.1). 

The actions that contribute most significantly to 
pathways for long-term sustainability fall into two 
major areas of activity and decision making.

 • Climate change and energy systems: Halting 
deforestation and appropriately implementing 
reforestation could make important contributions 
to climate mitigation and protection of biodiversity. 
Major reductions in greenhouse gas emissions and 
improved energy efficiency are required to keep 
global warming below 2°C, while also reaching 
human development goals. Biodiversity objectives 
can only be attained if massive deployment of 
biofuels is avoided. A substantial degree of climate 
change by 2050 and beyond is already committed 
due to long lags in the Earth’s climate system, 
so adaptation plans for biodiversity are needed. 
For example, adaptation will require anticipating 
climate change in the design of protected area 
systems.

B

100

80

60

40

20

0

Proportion in 2006

Proportion in 2050 averaged 
across three response scenarios

A

C

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

Population Size

Red List Index

Species Richness

Mean Species 

Abundance

Values in 2010

Values in 2050 under business as usual

Levels in 2050 averaged across the three 
responses scenarios 

D

r
a
e
y
 
r
e
p
 
s
e
n
n
o
t
 
0
0
0
1

8,000,000

7,000,000

6,000,000

5,000,000

4,000,000

3,000,000

2,000,000

1,000,000

0

l

t
n
e
a
v
u
q
e

i

 

2

O
C
 
t

G

Current levels

Food production in 2000

Levels in 2050 under buisness as usual

Food production in 2050 under buisness as usual

Levels in 2050 averaged across the response scenarios

Food production in 2050 averaged across the three response scenarios

Figure 21.4 Projected future status of biodiversity, greenhouse gas emissions and food production in 2050 according to baseline and alternative 
socio-economic scenarios. The projections show that relative to the baseline (or “business-as-usal” trends), significant improvement can 
be achieved in the status of marine biodiversity A (as indicated by proportion of fish stocks overexploited), and terrestrial biodiversity B 
(according to four indicators), at the same time as reducing greenhouse gas emissions C and improving food production D. 

136

Global Biodiversity Outlook 4 • Food systems: Major transformations to food 
systems are among the key areas of actions for 
achieving sustainability. First, food waste needs to 
be reduced: roughly a third of harvested food is lost 
either in the food transport and transformation 
chain (primarily in developing countries) or in the 
home (primarily in developed countries). Second, 
diverse diets combined with global convergence 
to moderate levels of calorie and meat consump-
tion would improve health and food security in 
many areas and also substantially reduce impacts 
on biodiversity. Third, there is a need for improved 
management of agriculture, aquaculture and wild-
capture fisheries. Realistic changes in management 
of crops and livestock could substantially reduce 
both water consumption and pollution. Significant 

reductions in fishing pressure and changes in fishing 
techniques in most marine fisheries would lead 
to rebuilding of fisheries over the next one to two 
decades.

The analysis emphasizes the crucial importance 
of major changes in our systems of food produc-
tion, distribution and consumption, as well as in 
energy use, if we are to reach a more balanced and 
sustainable relationship between human aspirations 
and the capacity of the planet to provide them. 
Achieving these transformational changes will thus 
require engagement of key economic sectors (see 
Box 21.2). 

69%

67%

65%

63%

61%

59%

Target

Baseline

}

2010

2020

2030

2040

2050

Restore abandoned lands

Reduce nitrogen emmissions

Mitigate climate change

Reduce nature fragmentation

Reduce infrastructure expansion

Expand protected areas

Reduce consumption and waste

Increase agricultural productivity

Global 

Technology

Decentralised 

Solutions

Consumption

Change

Figure 21.5 Contrasting pathways to sustainability using the Rio+20 socio-economic scenarios. The scenarios illustrated here would each 
reach by 2050 the goals of slowing and eventually halting biodiversity loss, while also keeping global average temperature increases within 
two degrees Celsius, and achieving a range of socio-economic development goals including ending hunger, providing universal access to safe 
drinking water, basic sanitation and modern energy sources. The goals can be reached by three different pathways (see Box 21.1)

137

Global Biodiversity Outlook 4Box 21.1. A diversity of pathways for reaching the 2050 vision: the “Rio+20” scenarios

The pathways presented here were designed to achieve a broad set of targets that are based on existing 
international agreements on environmental and development topics. The overarching goal with respect to 
biodiversity might be phrased as ‘by 2050 eradicate global hunger while avoiding further biodiversity loss’. 
The goal is based on the CBD 2050 vision, the Aichi targets and the MDG target 1c ‘Halve, between 1990 
and 2015, the proportion of people who suffer from hunger’. The 2050 vision is interpreted as slowing the 
rate of biodiversity loss until 2030 and bringing it down to zero loss by 2050. The MDG hunger target is 
extended to zero hunger by 2050. These targets are accompanied by goals to limit global long-term mean 
temperature increase to 2°C, providing universal access to safe drinking water, basic sanitation and modern 
energy sources, and reducing urban air pollution and fertilizer use. This forced the analysis to take into 
account synergies and trade-offs with goals in other themes. The trade-offs include limited biofuel use for 
climate mitigation to avoid competition for land and improved fertilizer-use efficiency to reduce nitrogen 
emissions resulting from agricultural intensification. Synergies include reduced deforestation due to lower 
fuel-wood demand resulting from the transition to modern energy sources, and reduced meat consumption 
reduces biodiversity loss and climate change. These scenarios contrast with the “climate mitigation 
scenarios” contained in the fifth assessment report of the International Panel on Climate Change (IPPC). 
Very high rates of loss of primary habitats in the IPCC scenarios are associated with the low greenhouse 
emissions scenario as a result of massive deployment of bioenergy as a means of climate change mitigation 
and by an absence of pro-active measures to control land cover change.250

The following three pathways that all meet these goals are distinguished (Figure 21.5):

 • Global Technology: Focus on large-scale technologically optimal solutions, such as intensive agriculture, 
and a high level of international coordination

 • Decentralized solutions: Focus on decentralized solutions, such as agriculture that is interwoven with 
natural corridors and national policies that regulate equitable access to food

 • Consumption Change: Focus on changes in human consumption patterns, most notably by limiting meat 
intake per capita and by ambitious efforts to reduce losses in food systems

The pathways differ in their emphasis on human behavior as leverage for change, in the relative weight of 
regulation versus markets, in coordination versus competition and on the characteristics and scale of the 
stimulation of technology. 

138

Global Biodiversity Outlook 4Box 21.2. Addressing sustainability through key sectors

From the analysis above, and from further analysis carried out in parallel with GBO-4, it is clear that 
achieving long-term sustainability will require fundamental changes in the operation of several primary 
sectors of the global economy: principally agriculture, forestry, fisheries, energy, and water and sanitation.251

These sectors already exert significant direct pressures on biodiversity. Larger and more affluent 
populations mean they will be primarily responsible for the projected future losses in biodiversity and 
degradation of ecosystems, based on ‘business as usual’ scenarios. Addressing these pressures therefore 
requires a rethink of the way food systems operate worldwide, how energy is produced, how wood is 
extracted and produced, and how inland waters and oceans are managed.

These primary sectors also rely on the natural resource base to operate. Loss of ecosystems and 
their services harm them in different ways, incurring costs and requiring changes to their operations. 
Increasingly, actors within these sectors are aware of their dependence on natural resources, assess their 
vulnerability to changes in their natural resource base and look for ways to limit their impact and exposure. 
Effectively engaging these primary sectors represents a critical opportunity to advance progress towards 
long-term sustainability goals.

Such engagement involves embedding biodiversity concerns within sectors (mainstreaming). This is more 
likely to succeed when biodiversity is aligned with the core values and interests of primary producers and 
other actors in the value chain. This in turn requires sectors to recognize the opportunities that biodiversity 
provides, such as improved availability of fish and wood, improved soils for agricultural production systems 
and cost-effective, nature-based solutions in water management.

Four key strategies could improve, accelerate and scale up integration or mainstreaming of biodiversity 
concerns within sectors:

 • Application of integrated approaches to reap benefits of ecosystem services across landscapes, inland 
water and marine environments, dealing with cross-sectoral issues, protecting the interest of smallholders 
and enhancing current conservation efforts

 • Strengthening the biodiversity component of emerging voluntary sustainability initiatives such as 
standard-setting and certification within international supply chains

 • Strengthening the perspective of buyers and consumers on biodiversity by raising awareness of the 
impacts of different products, as well as the importance of biodiversity for food security and healthy diets. 
Adoption of less meat intensive diets and reduction of food losses and waste can be promoted as critical 
steps for reducing pressure on biodiversity, while bringing additional benefits including improved health and 
reduced costs

 • Mobilizing finance by improving the business case for biodiversity and green investments. This requires 
anchoring natural capital in the reporting of companies, thus influencing the decisions of executives and 
investors, thus shifting sectoral flows into a direction more beneficial to conservation and sustainable use of 
biodiversity.

These strategies require joint efforts between the private and public sectors, with governments able to 
influence biodiversity mainstreaming in sectors through a range of policies including: raising awareness; 
improved valuation, accounting and reporting of biodiversity and ecosystem services; realizing the full 
potential of emerging sustainability standards and certification; integrated land-use planning; payments for 
ecosystem services; incentives to align sector activities with biodiversity conservation and sustainable use; 
green taxation and reforming environmentally-harmful subsidies; and leveraging the power of consumer 
choice by emphasizing the health and cost benefits of choices that also benefit biodiversity.

139

Global Biodiversity Outlook 4Contribution to the Millennium Goals and the post-2015 development agenda 

This Outlook is published at an opportune time to 
consider the critical links between biodiversity and 
long-term goals for human development. Progress 
towards the 2015 targets of the Millennium 
Development Goals is being assessed, and discus-
sions are underway to develop the post-2015 
United Nations development agenda.

The links between biodiversity, economic 
development and poverty reduction
Ecosystem services are essential for human well-
being in providing food, water, energy and other 
benefits. These services all depend on the ecological 
processes of functioning ecosystems which are 
underpinned by biodiversity.252

However, the relationship between biodiversity 
and ecosystem services is not straightforward and 
depends largely on the type of ecosystem service 
considered. Biodiversity plays a crucial role in the 
provision of regulating services; examples include 
the role of pollinators and a large variety of predator 
species that reduce outbreaks of pests in agricul-
tural fields. Furthermore, biodiversity is important 
to some degree for cultural services, especially for 
indigenous communities. However, there are often 
choices to be made between the delivery of one kind 
of service over another – management decisions 
that favor the provision of agricultural goods, for 
example, may do so at the expense of maintaining 
regulating services. 253

While we all depend in different ways on biodiver-
sity, poor and vulnerable people generally rely more 
directly on biodiversity than others because of their 
limited ability to purchase alternatives.254 In many 
regions people are dependent on food, water and 
energy derived directly from natural areas such 
as forests, coral reefs, etc.255 Biodiversity often 
acts as a safety net for the poor in times of crisis, 
although it may provide a route out of poverty in 
some circumstances. In the short term it is the 
availability of natural resources that is most benefi-
cial to the poor, although diversity, including for 
example different crop varieties, is important from 
a risk management perspective and for sustaining 
benefits by ensuring resilience to shocks and longer 
term change.256 

Coastal habitats such as mangroves, salt marshes, 
sea grasses and coral reefs provide protection from 
storm surges and flooding and human communities 
exposed to such risks are inevitably more vulner-
able.257 A recent global synthesis and meta-analysis 
of the contributions of coral reefs to risk reduction 
and adaptation across reefs in the Indian, Pacific 
and Atlantic Oceans reveals that coral reefs are very 
effective in protecting against natural hazards, by 
reducing wave energy by 97% on average. The study 
estimates, that over 100 million people worldwide 
may receive risk reduction benefits from reefs or 
bear the costs of hazard mitigation and adaptation 
if they are degraded.258

140

Global Biodiversity Outlook 4Various economic sectors rely on biodiversity and 
ecosystem services such as fisheries, agriculture 
and tourism. Yet both poverty and economic devel-
opment can negatively affect global biodiversity 
and the provision of important ecosystem goods 
and services.259 More food, water and firewood are 
needed to sustain on-going population growth in 
especially the poorer parts of the world that are not 
always endowed with the resources and technolo-
gies to produce these in a sustainable manner. 
At the same time, continuing economic growth, 
including growth of the global middle class, will 
add to the demand for products like meat, timber, 
bio-energy and paper. Our historical development 
pathway has been built on transforming natural 
capital (and eroding biodiversity) to fuel economic 
growth. Thus, under prevailing production and 
consumption patterns, biodiversity loss and natural 
resource degradation will continue unabated or 
accelerate without additional policies, with the poor 
being disproportionally affected. The provision of 
food, water, and energy to the poor becomes more 
difficult when available natural resources are not 
managed sustainably or degrade. The existence of 
thresholds and tipping points increases the risk of 
difficult-to-reverse negative biodiversity change 
with societal implications.260

However, there are alternative development 
pathways, with more promising potential futures 
as are illustrated in the previous section. Moreover, 
evidence suggests that actions to conserve biodi-
versity offers solutions to a range of societal 
challenges including climate change, food and 
water security, and can benefit the poor if designed 
appropriately.261

The relationships between biodiversity and devel-
opment and between biodiversity and poverty 
reduction are not simple, and mutually beneficial 
outcomes are by no means assured. Measures to 
conserve biodiversity and reduce poverty can be 
complementary, although trade-offs are sometimes 
inevitable.262 However, many of the underlying 
causes of both sustained poverty and biodiver-
sity loss are similar and stem from the way that 

economic growth and development has progressed. 
Addressing those causes will help both agendas, and 
within the right enabling environment biodiversity 
itself can be a foundation for sustainable develop-
ment and poverty reduction. 

Biodiversity and the Millennium 
Development Goals
The Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) came 
into being in September 2000. They prioritize basic 
needs in global efforts to reduce poverty. MDG1 
focuses on poverty and hunger, MDGs 2 and 3 
focus on education and empowerment, MDGs 
4-6 focus on health, whilst MDG7 (environmental 
sustainability) and MDG8 (global partnership for 
development) provide something of the enabling 
environment.

As noted in the preceding section, the relation-
ship between biodiversity and poverty operates 
in two directions: biodiversity provides important 
opportunities for poverty reduction and economic 
development, while loss of biodiversity and natural 
resources will exacerbate current risks. For example, 
actions to conserve biodiversity can positively 
contribute to MDGs 1 and 6.

MDG1 – Eradicate Extreme Poverty and Hunger. Poor 
people, especially rural communities, rely more 
directly on biodiversity than others because of their 
limited ability to purchase alternatives. In many 
regions people are dependent on food, water and 
energy derived directly from natural areas such 
as forests and coral reefs. Biodiversity can act as 
a safety net for the poor in times of crisis, and it 
may provide a route out of poverty in some circum-
stances. In the short term it is the availability of 
natural resources that is most beneficial to the poor, 
although diversity, including for example different 
crop varieties, is important from a risk management 
perspective and for sustaining benefits by ensuring 
resilience to shocks and longer term change. 

MDG6 – Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria and other 
diseases. Biodiversity is a source of traditional 
medicines relied upon by a great majority of people 

141

Global Biodiversity Outlook 4in developing countries. In addition, although 
natural ecosystems, particularly in the tropics, 
often support pathogens and disease vectors, there 
is increasing evidence that ecosystem degrada-
tion and fragmentation is linked with increased 
risk for disease transmission. Biodiversity can 
also contribute to addressing the increasing global 
burden of non-communicable diseases, through 
its contribution to nutrition and related human 
microbiota. 

The importance of biodiversity for development 
is explicitly recognized by the MDGs under goal 
7 (ensure environmental sustainability) which 
includes the CBD biodiversity target to ‘reduce 
biodiversity loss, achieving, by 2010, a significant 
reduction in the rate of loss’. However, in the imple-
mentation of the MDGs, and in particular through 
the creation of a distinct, ‘separate’ goal for environ-
mental issues, the importance of biodiversity for 
the achievement of the other MDGs (including the 
high-profile goals on poverty, food, and health) has 
not been sufficiently recognized and promoted.

Integration of biodiversity in the post-2015 
development agenda
One of the main outcomes of the United Nations 
Conference on Sustainable Development (Rio+20), 
held in Rio de Janeiro in June 2012, was the agree-
ment by Member States to launch a process to 
develop a set of sustainable development goals 
(SDGs). The goals were to be limited in number, 
aspirational and easy to communicate, and address 
all three dimensions of sustainable development in 
a balanced way. 

Among the key messages from the analysis for 
GBO-4 on this issue are:

 • Biodiversity and ecosystem services can 
contribute to economic growth and poverty 
reduction. Equally, biodiversity loss has negative 
consequences for society, and action to reduce 
pressures on biodiversity can support a broad range 
of societal benefits.

 • Meeting the Aichi Biodiversity Targets would 
help achieve goals for other global development 
priorities including poverty, hunger, health and a 
sustainable supply of clean energy, food and water.

 • The direct contribution of the Millennium 
Development Goal on environmental sustainability 
(MDG7) to achieving the other goals was not suffi-
ciently clear, possibly diverting attention and action 
away from biodiversity issues.

 • The current sustainable development agenda 
provides an opportunity to bring biodiversity 
into the mainstream of the broader development 
agenda. 

The Open Working Group (OWG), established 
by the General Assembly to prepare a proposal 
on the sustainable development goals proposes 
17 such goals, each supported by targets speci-
fying outcomes and means of implementation.263 
Two of the proposed goals address, respectively 
biodiversity in marine and terrestrial ecosystems, 
and the proposed targets under these goals draw 
heavily on several of the Aichi Biodiversity Targets. 
Biodiversity and ecosystems are also reflected under 
other proposed goals, notably those on food, nutri-
tion and agriculture and on water and sanitation. 
Biodiversity is also important for the proposed 
goals on poverty eradication, health, settlements, 
disaster risk reduction and climate change, and 
references therein could be strengthened. The need 
for sustainable consumption and production is also 
reflected in the proposed goals as is more equitable 
access to natural resources. Notably, the proposed 
text calls for the integration of biodiversity values 
into national and local planning, development 
processes and poverty reduction strategies and 
accounts. The text also calls for enhanced policy 
coherence for sustainable development and the 
development of measurements of progress on 
sustainable development that complement GDP. It 
is expected that the SDGs will be finalized by the 
United Nations in 2015 as part of the post-2015 
development agenda. 

142

Global Biodiversity Outlook 4Conclusions

This Outlook provides a timely reminder that 
continuing with ‘business as usual’ in our present 
patterns of behaviour, consumption, production 
and economic incentives will not allow us to realize 
the vision of a world with ecosystems capable of 
meeting human needs into the future.

Since the agreement of the Strategic Plan on 
Biodiversity in 2010, encouraging steps have been 
taken around the world to tackle biodiversity loss 
at many levels. Nevertheless, it is clear from this 
mid-term review that, on their current trajectory, 
they will not be sufficient to meet most of the Aichi 
Biodiversity Targets by the deadlines committed to.

The Strategic Plan and the Aichi Biodiversity Targets 
remain a solid framework on which to concentrate 
action that will lead us towards a world in harmony 
with nature. They also point the way towards 
many actions that will meet multiple needs of 
human societies including the aspirations currently 
being discussed in the context of the Sustainable 
Development Goals.

The following general conclusions can be drawn 
from the assessment carried out for this Outlook:

 • Meeting the Aichi Biodiversity Targets would 
contribute significantly to broader global priorities 
addressed by current discussions on the post-2015 
development agenda: namely, reducing hunger 
and poverty, improving human health, ensuring a 
sustainable supply of energy, food and clean water, 
contributing to climate-change mitigation and 
adaptation, combating desertification and land 
degradation, and reducing vulnerability to disasters

 • Actions to achieve the various Aichi Biodiversity 
Targets should be undertaken in a coherent 
and coordinated manner; the individual Aichi 
Biodiversity Targets should not be addressed in 
isolation. Actions towards certain targets, notably 
those that address the underlying causes of biodi-
versity loss, the development and implementation 
of national biodiversity strategies and action 
plans, the further development and sharing of 

information, and the mobilization of financial 
resources, will have an especially strong influence 
on the achievement of the other targets

 • Attaining most of the Aichi Biodiversity Targets 
will require implementation of a package of 
actions, typically including: legal or policy frame-
works; socioeconomic incentives aligned to such 
frameworks; public and stakeholder engagement; 
monitoring; and enforcement. Coherence of policies 
across sectors and the corresponding government 
ministries, is necessary to deliver an effective 
package of actions

 • It will be necessary to broaden political 
and general support for the Strategic Plan for 
Biodiversity 2011-2020 and the objectives of the 
Convention. This will require working to ensure that 
all levels of government and stakeholders across 
society are aware of the multiple values of biodiver-
sity and related ecosystem services

 • Partnerships at all levels are required for effec-
tive implementation of the Strategic Plan for 
Biodiversity 2011-2020, to leverage broad-scale 
actions, to garner the ownership necessary to 
ensure the mainstreaming of biodiversity across 
sectors of government, society and the economy 
and to enable synergies in the national implemen-
tation of the various multilateral environmental 
agreements

 • There are opportunities to support implemen-
tation of the Strategic Plan through enhanced 
technical and scientific cooperation among Parties. 
Further capacity-building support will also be 
needed, especially for developing countries, in 
particular the least developed countries and small 
island developing States, as well as countries with 
economies in transition

 • An overall substantial increase in total 
biodiversity related funding, is needed for 
the implementation of the Strategic Plan for 
Biodiversity 2011–2020.

143

Global Biodiversity Outlook 4Notes

1. 

2. 

Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity (2010) 
Global Biodiversity Outlook 3. Montréal, 94 pages. http://www.
cbd.int/gbo3/ 
Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity (2014).
History of the Convention on Biological Diversity. http://
www.cbd.int/history/default.shtml 

3.  COP 10 Decision X/2, http://www.cbd.int/decision/

cop/?id=12268

4.  United Nations General Assembly Resolution 67/212, 

http://www.un.org/en/ga/search/view_doc.asp?symbol=A/
RES/67/212 

5.  CMS Resolution 10.18; CITES Resolution 16.4; Ramsar 

6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

Resolution XI.6; ITPGRFA Resolution 8/2011; WHC Decision: 
37COM 5A;
Leadley et al (2014). Technical Series 78 - Progress towards 
the Aichi Biodiversity Targets: An assessment of biodiversity 
trends, policy scenarios and key actions. Secretariat of 
the Convention on Biological Diversity; PBL Netherlands 
Environmental Assessment Agency (2014). Technical Series 
79 - How sectors can contribute to sustainable use and 
conservation of biodiversity. Secretariat of the Convention on 
Biological Diversity
Second Report of the High Level Panel on Global Assessment 
of Resources for Implementing the Strategic Plan for 
Biodiversity 2011-2020. UNEP-WCMC, ICF GHK and the 
Secretariat of the CBD.
Leadley et al (2014). Technical Series 78 - Progress towards 
the Aichi Biodiversity Targets: An assessment of biodiversity 
trends, policy scenarios and key actions. Secretariat of 
the Convention on Biological Diversity; PBL Netherlands 
Environmental Assessment Agency (2014). Technical Series 
79 - How sectors can contribute to sustainable use and 
conservation of biodiversity. Secretariat of the Convention on 
Biological Diversity
Tittensor D, et al (2014) A mid-term analysis of progress 
towards international biodiversity targets, Science 
(forthcoming).

10.  These introductory notes on the importance of each target are 

drawn from UNEP/CBD/COP/10/27/ADD1 Strategic Plan 
for Biodiversity 2011-2020: Provisional Technical Rationale, 
Possible Indicators and Suggested Milestones for the Aichi 
Biodiversity Targets. https://www.cbd.int/doc/meetings/cop/
cop-10/official/cop-10-27-add1-en.pdf 

11.  Union of Ethical Biotrade Biodiversity Barometer (2013) 

http://ethicalbiotrade.org/dl/barometer/UEBT%20
BIODIVERSITY%20BAROMETER%202013.pdf; 
Eurobarometer Attitudes Towards Biodiversity (2013) http://
ec.europa.eu/public_opinion/flash/fl_379_en.pdf ; World 
Association of Zoos and Aquariums, Measuring Biodiversity 
Literacy in World Zoo and Aquarium Visitors (2013) http://
www.cbd.int/cepa/doc/waza-sbstta17.pdf 

12.  Union for Ethical Biotrade (2013). Biodiversity Barometer 
(2013). http://ethicalbiotrade.org/dl/barometer/UEBT%20
BIODIVERSITY%20BAROMETER%202013.pdf

13.  Belgium’s 5th National Report to the CBD- http://www.cbd.
int/doc/world/be/be-nr-05-en.pdf . See campaign website at 
http://www.ikgeeflevenaanmijnplaneet.be ; / http://www.
jedonnevieamaplanete.be . 

144

14.  Benin’s Clearing House Mechanisms - http://bj.chm-cbd.

net/cooperation/coop/cooperation-bilaterale/
partenariat-benin-belgique/cooperation-dgfrn-irscnb/
sensibilisation-sur-les-gestes-utiles-pour-la-biodivesite-et-l-
eau-au-benin.
 India’s 5th National Report to the CBD - http://www.cbd.
int/doc/world/in/in-nr-05-en.pdf. See campaign website at 
http://www.sciencexpress.in/.

15. 

16.  Japan’s 5th National Report to the CBD - http://www.cbd.int/

doc/world/jp/jp-nr-05-en.pdf 

17.  Roe, D. (2010). Whither biodiversity in development? The 

integration of biodiversity in international and national 
poverty reduction policy. Biodiversity 11, 13–18.

18.  UNSD (2007). Global Assessment of Environment Statistics 
and Environmental-Economic Accounting (United Nations 
Statistics Division); UNSD (2013). Proposal for 2013 SEEA 
Implementation Global Assessement Survey (New York, US: 
United Nations Statistics Division). 

19.  WAVES (2012). Moving beyond GDP. How to factor natural 
capital into economic decision making (Wealth Accounting 
and the Valuation of Ecosystem Services); WAVES (2014). The 
Global Partnership on Wealth Accounting and the Valuation 
of Ecosystem Services. https://www.wavespartnership.org/en

20.  Christie, M., Fazey, I., Cooper, R., Hyde, T., and Kenter, 

J.O. (2012). An evaluation of monetary and non-monetary 
techniques for assessing the importance of biodiversity and 
ecosystem services to people in countries with developing 
economies. Ecol. Econ. 83, 67–78.

21.  WAVES (2014). The Global Partnership on Wealth Accounting 

and the Valuation of Ecosystem Services. https://www.
wavespartnership.org/en

22.  Republic of Kenya (2007). Kenya Vision 2030. A Globally 

Competitive and Prosperous Kenya (Kenya, Nairobi: 
Government printers); UNEP (2012a). Kenya: Integrated 
forest ecosystem services (Nairobi, Kenya: United Nations 
Environment Programme); UNEP (2012b). Kenya: Economy-
wide impact - Technical Report (Kenya, Nairobi: United 
Nations Environment Programme); Mutimba, S. (2005). 
National Charcoal Survey of Kenya 2005.

23.  Sumaila UR, Khan AS, Dyck AJ, Watson R, Munro G, 

Tydemers P, Pauly D (2010) A bottom-up re-estimation 
of global fisheries subsidies. Journal of Bioeconomics 
12:201-225.

24.  Sumaila UR, Cheung W, Dyck A et al. (2012). Benefits of 
Rebuilding Global Marine Fisheries outweigh Costs. PLoS 
ONE 7, e40542, doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0040542; 
Heymans JJ, Mackinson S, Sumaila UR, Dyck A, Little 
A (2011) The Impact of Subsidies on the Ecological 
Sustainability and Future Profits from North Sea Fisheries. 
PLoS ONE 6(5): e20239. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0020239.

25.  Leadley et al (2014). Technical Series 78 - Progress towards 

the Aichi Biodiversity Targets: An assessment of biodiversity 
trends, policy scenarios and key actions. Secretariat of 
the Convention on Biological Diversity; PBL Netherlands 
Environmental Assessment Agency (2014).

Notes26.  Armsworth, P. R., Acs, S., Dallimer, M., Gaston, K. J., Hanley, 

N., & Wilson, P. (2012). The cost of policy simplification 
in conservation incentive programs. Ecology letters, 
15(5), 406–14. doi:10.1111/j.1461-0248.2012.01747.x; 
Whittingham, M. J. (2011). The future of agri-environment 
schemes: biodiversity gains and ecosystem service 
delivery? Journal of Applied Ecology, 48(3), 509–513. 
doi:10.1111/j.1365-2664.2011.01987.x

27.  Doornbusch, R. & Steenblik R. (2007). Biofuels: Is the cure 
worse than the disease? OECD Round Table on Sustainable 
Development. SG/SD/RT (3007)3; Searchinger, T., Heimlich, 
R., Houghton, R.A., Dong, F.X., El Obeid, A., Fabiosa, J., 
Tokgoz, S., Hayes, D. and T.H.Yu. 2008. Use of US croplands 
for biofuels increases greenhouse gases through emissions 
from land-use change. Science, 319: 1238-1240; Webb A and 
Coates D, 2012. Biofuels and Biodiversity. Secretariat of the 
Convention on Biological Diversity, Montreal. Technical Series 
No. 65, 69 pages

28.  REDD+ is used as a shorthand for “reducing emissions 

from deforestation and forest degradation, conservation of 
forest carbon stocks, sustainable management of forests and 
enhancement of forest carbon stocks in developing countries”, 
consistent with paragraph 70 of decision 1/CP.16 of the 
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
(UNFCCC). The acronym REDD+ is used for convenience 
only, without any attempt to pre-empt ongoing or future 
negotiations under the UNFCCC

29.  Miles, L., Trumpera, K., Ostia, M., Munroea, R. & Santamaria, 

C. (2013). REDD+ and the 2020 Aichi Biodiversity Targets : 
Promoting synergies in international forest conservation 
efforts. UN-REDD policy brief #5. Geneva. Switzerland

30.  Leadley et al (2014). Technical Series 78 - Progress towards 

the Aichi Biodiversity Targets: An assessment of biodiversity 
trends, policy scenarios and key actions. Secretariat of 
the Convention on Biological Diversity; PBL Netherlands 
Environmental Assessment Agency (2014).

31.  Earth Policy Institute with 1991-1999 data from F.O. Licht 

data, cited in Suzanne Hunt and Peter Stair, “Biofuels 
Hit a Gusher,” Vital Signs 2006-2007 (Washington, DC: 
Worldwatch Institute, 2006), pp. 40-41; 2000-2004 data from 
F.O. Licht, World Ethanol and Biofuels Report, vol. 7, no. 2 
(23 September 2008), p. 29; 2005-2012 data from F.O.Licht, 
World Ethanol and Biofuels Report, vol. 10, no. 14 (27 March 
2012), p. 281.

32.  UN-REDD Programme Strategy 2011-2015, approved by 

the Policy Board in November 2010; UN-REDD Programme 
Year in Review Report for 2011; Miles, L., Trumpera, K., 
Ostia, M., Munroea, R. & Santamaria, C. 2013. REDD+ and 
the 2020 Aichi Biodiversity Targets : Promoting synergies in 
international forest conservation efforts. UN-REDD policy 
brief #5. Geneva. Switzerland
 India’s 5th National Report to the CBD. http://www.cbd.int/
doc/world/in/in-nr-05-en.pdf

33. 

34.  Hoekstra, A.Y., and Mekonnen, M.M. (2012). The water 

footprint of humanity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 109, 3232–3237; 
Arto, I., Genty, A., Rueda-Cantuche, J.M., Villanueva, A., 
and Andreoni, V. (2012). Global resources use and pollution, 
Volume 1/Production, consumption and trade (1995-2008) 
(European Commission).

35.  Haberl, H., Erb, K.-H., Plutzar, C., Fischer-Kowalski, M., 
and Krausmann, F. (2007). Human Appropriation of Net 
Primary Production (HANPP) as an Indicator for Pressures 
on Biodiversity. In Sustainability Indicators. A Scientific 

Assessment, T. Hák, B. Moldan, and A.L. Dahl, eds. 
(Washington DC: Island Press); Krausmann, F., Erb, K.-H., 
Gingrich, S., Haberl, H., Bondeau, A., Gaube, V., Lauk, C., 
Plutzar, C., and Searchinger, T.D. (2013). Global human 
appropriation of net primary production doubled in the 20th 
century. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.

36.  Global Footprint Network (2012). National Footprint 

Accounts, 2011 Edition.

37.  UNEP. The 10 Year Framework Programmes on 
SCP. - http://www.unep.org/resourceefficiency/
Policy/SCPPoliciesandthe10YFP/
The10YearFrameworkProgrammesonSCP.aspx

38.  UN (2013). World Population Prospects: the 2012 revision. 
DVD Edition; UN (2013)National accounts main aggregates 
database; Global Footprint Network (2012). National 
Footprint Accounts, 2011 Edition; Krausmann, F., Erb, 
K.-H., Gingrich, S., Haberl, H., Bondeau, A., Gaube, V., Lauk, 
C., Plutzar, C., and Searchinger, T.D. (2013). Global human 
appropriation of net primary production doubled in the 20th 
century. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.; Arto, I., Genty, A., Rueda-
Cantuche, J.M., Villanueva, A., and Andreoni, V. (2012). 
Global resources use and pollution, Volume 1/Production, 
consumption and trade (1995-2008) (European Commission).

39.  OECD (2008). Promoting sustainable consumption. Good 
practices in OECD countries. (Paris, France); UNEP (2012). 
Global Outlook on SCP Policies: taking action together 
(United Nations Environment Programme).

40.  Lebel, L., and Lorek, S. (2008). Enabling Sustainable 

Production-Consumption Systems. Annu. Rev. Environ. 
Resour. 33, 241–275; OECD (2008). Promoting sustainable 
consumption. Good practices in OECD countries. (Paris, 
France); UNEP (2012). Global Outlook on SCP Policies: taking 
action together (United Nations Environment Programme).

41.  PBL Netherlands Environmental Assessment Agency 

(2014). Technical Series 79 - How sectors can contribute to 
sustainable use and conservation of biodiversity. Secretariat 
of the Convention on Biological Diversity.

42.  UNEP (2012). Global Outlook on SCP Policies: taking action 

43. 

together (United Nations Environment Programme).
 UN (2011). World population prospects: The 2010 revision . New 
York: Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population 
Division, United Nations.

44.  UNEP. Global Initiative for Resource Efficient Cities - Engine 
to Sustainability. - http://www.unep.org/pdf/GI-REC_4pager.
pdf

45.  McKinsey Global Institute. (March 2011). Urban world: 

Mapping the economic power of cities. http://www.mckinsey.
com/insights/urbanization/urban_world

46.  United Nations. (2010). World urbanization prospects: The 2009 

revision. New York: United Nations.

47.  World Economic Forum (2011). Outlook on the Global 

Agenda - http://reports.weforum.org/outlook-2011/ 

48.  Crutzen, P. P. J. (2004). New directions: The growing urban 
heat and pollution ‘island’ effect: Impact on chemistry and 
climate. Atmospheric Environment, 38 (21), 3539–3540; Oke, 
T. R. (1974). Review of urban climatology, 1968 – 1973 (WMO 
Technical Note No. 134, WMO No. 383). Geneva: World 
Meteorological Organization; Arnfield, A. J. (2003). Two 
decades of urban climate research: A review of turbulence, 
exchanges of energy and water, and the urban heat island. 
International Journal of Climatology, 23 (1), 1–26; Anderson, 
L. M., & Cordell, H. K. (1985). Residential property values 

145

Notesimproved by landscaping with trees. Southern Journal of 
Applied Forestry, 9 (3), 162–166; Voicu, I., & Been, V. (2008). 
The effect of community gardens on neighboring property 
values. Real Estate Economics, 36 , 241–283; Konijnendijk, 
C. C., Annerstedt, M., Busse Nielsen, A., & Maruthaveeran, 
S. (2013). Benefits of urban parks a systematic review . 
Copenhagen/Alnarp: International Federation of Parks and 
Recreation Administration (IFPRA); Tzoulas, K., Korpela, 
K., Venn, S., et al. (2007). Promoting ecosystem and human 
health in urban areas using Green Infrastructure: A literature 
review. Landscape and Urban Planning, 81 (3), 167–178; van 
den Berg, A. E., Maas, J., Verheij, R. A., et al. (2010a). Green 
space as a buffer between stressful life events and health. 
Social Science & Medicine, 70 (8), 1203–1210; Ehrenfeld, J. 
G. (2008). Natural communities – coping with climate change. 
ANJEC report (pp. 9–11), Winter; Boyer, T., & Polasky, S. 
(2004). Valuing urban wetlands: A review of non-market 
valuation studies. Wetlands, 24 , 744–755

49.  WWF 2012: The Ecological Footprint of São Paulo, State and 
Capital. Available at http://d3nehc6yl9qzo4.cloudfront.net/
downloads/sao_paulo_ecological_footprint_web.pdf

50.  STA (2013). Sustainable Timber Action: Using the power of 

public procurement to support forests and their communities. 
http://www.sustainable-timber-action.org/news/ 

51.  Millennium Ecosystem Assessment (2005). Ecosystems and 

Human Well-being. Island Press, Washington, DC..

52.  FAO (2010) Global Forest Resources Assessment 2010, Main 

report. In: FAO forestry paper 163. Rome, FAO.

53.  Lambin EF, Meyfroidt P (2011) Global land use change, 
economic globalization, and the looming land scarcity. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 108, 
3465-3472; Malingreau JP, Eva HD, Miranda EE (2012) 
Brazilian Amazon: A Significant Five Year Drop in 
Deforestation Rates but Figures are on the Rise Again. Ambio, 
41, 309-314; Soares-Filho B, Moutinho P, Nepstad D et al. 
(2010) Role of Brazilian Amazon protected areas in climate 
change mitigation. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, 107, 10821-10826; Hansen MC, Potapov PV, Moore 
R et al. (2013) High-resolution global maps of 21st-century 
forest cover change. Science, 342, 850-853.

54.  Hansen MC, Stehman SV, Potapov PV et al. (2008) Humid 

tropical forest clearing from 2000 to 2005 quantified by 
using multitemporal and multiresolution remotely sensed 
data. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 105, 
9439-9444; Koh LP, Miettinen J, Liew SC, Ghazoul J (2011) 
Remotely sensed evidence of tropical peatland conversion to 
oil palm. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 108, 
5127-5132; Egoh BN, O’farrell PJ, Charef A et al. (2012) An 
African account of ecosystem service provision: Use, threats 
and policy options for sustainable livelihoods. Ecosystem 
services, 2, 71-81.

55.  Verburg PH, Neumann K, Nol L (2011) Challenges in using 

land use and land cover data for global change studies. Global 
Change Biology, 17, 974-989; White RP, Murray S, Rohweder 
M (2000) Pilot Analysis of Global Ecosystems: Grassland 
Ecosystems, washington, D.C., World Resources Institute.

56.  Talberth J, Gray E (2012) Global costs of achieving the Aichi 

Biodiversity Targets; a scoping assessment of anticipated 
costs of achieving targets 5,8 and 14. Washington, D.C., 
Centre for sustainable economy; Hansen MC, Stehman 

146

SV, Potapov PV et al. (2008) Humid tropical forest clearing 
from 2000 to 2005 quantified by using multitemporal and 
multiresolution remotely sensed data. Proceedings of the 
National Academy 41 of Sciences, 105, 9439-9444.

57.  Leadley et al (2014). Technical Series 78 - Progress towards 

the Aichi Biodiversity Targets: An assessment of biodiversity 
trends, policy scenarios and key actions. Secretariat of 
the Convention on Biological Diversity; PBL Netherlands 
Environmental Assessment Agency (2014).

58.  Polidoro BA, Carpenter KE, Collins L et al. (2010) The loss 

of species: mangrove extinction risk and geographic areas of 
global concern. PLoS ONE, 5, e10095; Donato DC, Kauffman 
JB, Murdiyarso D, Kurnianto S, Stidham M, Kanninen M 
(2011) Mangroves among the most carbon-rich forests in the 
tropics. Nature Geoscience, 4, 293-297; Duke NC, Meynecke 
J-O, Dittmann S et al. (2007) A world without mangroves? 
Science, 317, 41–42; Friess DA, Webb EL (2013) Variability 
in mangrove change estimates and implications for the 
assessment of ecosystem service provision. Global Ecology and 
Biogeography; FAO (2007) The world’s mangroves 1980-2005: 
A thematic study prepared in the framework of the Global 
Forest Resources Assessment 2005; FAO (2010) Global 
Forest Resources Assessment 2010, Main report. In: FAO 
forestry paper 163. Rome, FAO; Grainger A (2008) Difficulties 
in tracking the long-term global trend in tropical forest area. 
PNAS, 105, 818-823.

59.  Laurance WF, Camargo JLC, Luizão RCC et al. (2011) The 

fate of Amazonian forest fragments: A 32-year investigation. 
biological conservation, 144, 56-67; Laestadius L, Minnemeyer 
S, Leach A (2012) Assessment of Global Forest Degradation. 
Washington D.C., World Resource Institute; FAO (2005) 
Grasslands of the World. (eds Suttie JM, Reynolds SG, Batello 
C) Rome, FAO; FAO (2006) Livestock’s Long Shadow. Rome, 
FAO; Rada N (2013) Assessing Brazil’s Cerrado agricultural 
miracle. Food Policy, 38, 146-155; Romero-Ruiz MH, Flantua 
SGA, Tansey K, Berrio JC (2012) Landscape transformations 
in savannas of northern South America: Land use/cover 
changes since 1987 in the Llanos Orientales of Colombia. 
Applied Geography, 32, 766-776;

60.  Biodiversity Indicators Partnership (2014), Global Wild Bird 

Index (UNEP-WCMC) http://www.bipindicators.net/WBI; 
61.  Leadley et al (2014). Technical Series 78 - Progress towards 

the Aichi Biodiversity Targets: An assessment of biodiversity 
trends, policy scenarios and key actions. Secretariat of 
the Convention on Biological Diversity; PBL Netherlands 
Environmental Assessment Agency (2014).

62.  World Bank (2013) FISH TO 2030 Prospects for Fisheries and 

Aquaculture. Washington, D.C., The World Bank; Grumbine 
RE, Pandit MK (2013) Threats from India’s Himalaya Dams. 
Science, 339, 36-37; Kareiva PM (2012) Dam choices: Analyses 
for multiple needs. PNAS, 190, 5553-5554.

63.  Fifth national reports to the Convention on Biological 

Diversity (http://www.cbd.int/reports/nr5/ and national 
biodiversity strategies and actions plans (http://www.cbd.int/
nbsap/)

64.  Angelsen A, Brockhaus M, Kanninen M, Sills E, Sunderlin 

WD, Wertz-Kanounnikoff S (2009) Realising REDD+: 
National strategy and policy options; Parrotta JA, Wildburger 
C, Mansourian S (2012) Understanding Relationships between 
Biodiversity, Carbon, Forests and People: The Key to Achieving 
REDD+ Objectives. A Global Assessment Report. Prepared by the 
Global Forest Expert Panel on Biodiversity, Forest Management, 
and REDD+, Austria, IUFRO.

Notes65.  PBL Netherlands Environmental Assessment Agency 

(2014). Technical Series 79 - How sectors can contribute to 
sustainable use and conservation of biodiversity. Secretariat 
of the Convention on Biological Diversity.

66.  Soares-Filho B, Moutinho P, Nepstad D et al. (2010) Role 

of Brazilian Amazon protected areas in climate change 
mitigation. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 
107, 10821-10826; 

67.  Beresford AE, Eshiamwata GW, Donald PF et al. (2012) 
Protection reduces loss of natural land-cover at sites of 
conservation importance across Africa. PLoS ONE, 8, e65370.

68.  Hardcastle P, Hagelberg N (2012) Assessing the financial 

resources needed to implement the strategic plan for 
biodiversity 2012-2020 and archive the aichi biodiversity 
targets - forest cluster report. UNEP/ CBD.

69.  Laestadius L, Minnemeyer S, Leach A (2012) Assessment of 
Global Forest Degradation. Washington D.C., World Resource 
Institute.

70.  Soares-Filho B. et al. (2010). Role of Brazilian Amazon 

protected areas in climate change mitigation. PNAS 107, 
10821

71.  BMMA. Brasil, Ministério do Meio Ambiente. (2013). Plano 

de Ação para prevenção e controle do desmatamento na 
Amazônia Legal (PPCDAm): 3ª fase (2012-2015) Ministério 
do Meio Ambiente e Grupo Permanente de Trabalho 
Interministerial. Brasília, MMA, 2013.

72.  J. Börner, S. Wunder, S. Wertz-Kanounnikoff, G. Hyman, N. 
Nascimento. (2011). REDD sticks and carrots in the Brazilian 
Amazon. Assessing costs and livelihood implications. Working 
Paper No. 8. (CGIAR Research Program on Climate Change, 
Agriculture and Food Security, 2011). http://cgspace.cgiar.
org/bitstream/handle/10568/10723/ccafs-wp-08-redd-sticks-
and-carrots-in-the-brazilian-amazon-v3.pdf?sequence=6.
73.  Lapola et al. (2014). Pervasive transition of the Brazilian 

land-use system. Nature and Climate Change,4, 27

74.  Soares-Filho B. et al. (2010). Role of Brazilian Amazon 

protected areas in climate change mitigation. PNAS 107, 
10821; Shahabuddin G, M. R (2010) Do community-
conserved areas effectively conserve biological diversity? 
Global insights and the Indian context. Biodiversity 
conservation, 143, 2926-2936.

75.  Lapola et al. (2014). Pervasive transition of the Brazilian 

land-use system. Nature and Climate Change,4, 27 

76.  LPIG - Laboratório de Processamento de Imagens e 

Geoprocessamento. (2013). Dados Vetoriais de alertas de 
desmatamento no período de 2002 a 2012 (Universidade 
Federal de Goiás, Goiânia, 2013. www.lapig.iesa.ufg.br/lapig/
index.php/produtos/dados-vetoriais).

77.  Strassburg, BBN, Latawiec AE, Barioni LG, Nobre CA, da 

Silva VP, Valentim JF, Vianna M and Assad ED (2014) When 
enough is enough: improving the use of current agricultural 
lands could meet production demands and spare natural 
habitats in Brazil. Global Environmental Change 28. 84-97

78.  FAO (2014). The State of World Fisheries and Aquaculture 2014. 

Rome. 223 pp.

79.  Worm, B., Hilborn, R., Baum, J.K. et al., (2009). Rebuilding 

global fisheries. Science 325, 578-585.

80.  Branch, T.A., Jensen, O.P., Ricard, D. et al., (2011). 

Contrasting global trends in marine fishery status obtained 
from 14 catches and from stock assessments. Conservation 
Biology 25, 777-786.

81.  Costello, C., Ovando, D., Hilborn, R. et al. (2012). Status and 

solutions for the worlds unassessed fisheries. Science 338, 
517-520.

82.  Christensen, V., Piroddi, C., Coll, M., Steenbeek, J., Buszowski, 

J. & Pauly, D. Fish biomass in the world ocean: a century of 
decline. Marine Ecology Progress Series, (submitted)

83.  Turner, S.J., Thrush, S.F., Hewitt, J.E., Cummings, V.J., 

Funnell, G. (1999). Fishing impacts and the degradation or 
loss of habitat structure. Fisheries Management and Ecology 
6: 401-420; Watson, R.A., Cheung, W.W., Anticamara, J.A. 
et al., (2012). Global marine yield halved as fishing and 
intensity redoubles. Fish and Fisheries, doi: 10.1111/j.1467-
2979.2012.00483.x; Waycott, M., Duarte, C.M., Carruthers, 
T.J.B., Orth, R.J., Dennison, W.C. 2009. Accelerating loss of 
seagrasses across the globe threatens coastal ecosystems. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0905620106; Burke, L., Reytar, K., Spalding, 
M., Perry, A. 2011 Reefs at Risk Revisited. Washington DC, 
World Resources Institute. 114p. 

84.  Wallace, B.P., Lewison, R.L., McDonald, S.L., McDonald, 

R., Kot, C.Y. et al. (2010). Global patterns of marine 
turtle bycatch. Conservation Letters doi: 10.1111/j.1755-
263X.2010.00105.x; Read, A.J., Drinker, P., Northridge, 
S. 2006. Bycatch of marine mammals in US and global 
fisheries. Conservation Biology 20: 163-169; Croxall,J., 
Butchart,S. et al (2012). Seabird conservation status, threats 
and priorityactions: a global assessment. Bird Conservation 
International 22:1-34.

85.  Marine Stewardship Council. http://www.msc.org/

track-a-fishery/fisheries-in-the-program/fisheries-by-species 

86.  Chu, C. 2009. Thirty years later: the global growth of ITQs 

and their influence on stock status in marine fisheries. 
Fish and Fisheries 10: 217-223; Pinkerton, E. Edwards, 
D.N. 2009. The elephant in the room: the hidden costs of 
leasing individual transferable quotas. Marine Policy 33:707-
713; Sumaila, U.R. 2010. A cautionary note on individual 
transferable quotas. Ecology and Society 15 (3): 36. http://
www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol15/iss3/art36/; Hilborn R, 
Orensanz JM, Parma AM. 2005. Institutions, incentives and 
the future of fisheries. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 
360: 47–57; Pascoe S, Innes J, Holland D et al. (2010). Use 
of incentive-based management systems to limit bycatch 
and discarding. International Review of Environmental 
and Resource Economics 4:123-161; Gelcich, S., Hughes, 
T.P., Olsson, P., et al. 2010. Navigating transformations in 
governance of Chilean marine coastal resources. Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Science 107: 16794-16799.

87.  General Assembly resolution 61/105, Sustainable fisheries, 
including through the 1995 Agreement for the Implementation 
of the Provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Law 
of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to the Conservation and 
Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory 
Fish Stocks, and related instruments, A/RES/61/105 (6 March 
2007), undocs.org/A/RES/61/105

88.  General Assembly resolution 64/72, Sustainable fisheries, 

including through the 1995 Agreement for the Implementation 
of the Provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Law 
of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to the Conservation and 
Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory 
Fish Stocks, and related instruments, A/RES/64/72 (19 March 
2010), undocs.org/A/RES/64/72

89.  FAO. Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries. Rome, FAO. 

1995. 41 p. ISBN 92-5-103834-5

147

Notes90.  FAO. International Guidelines on Bycatch Management 

91. 

and Reduction of Discards. Rome, FAO. (2011). 74 p. ISBN 
978-92-5-006952-4
 Regulation (EU) No 1380/2013 Of The European Parliament 
and of the Council of 11 December 2013 on the Common 
Fisheries Policy, amending Council Regulations (EC) No 
1954/2003 and (EC) No 1224/2009 and repealing Council 
Regulations (EC) No 2371/2002 and (EC) No 639/2004 and 
Council Decision 2004/585/EC

92.  Gilman, E., Passfield, K., Nakamura, K. 2014. Performance 
of regional fisheries management organizations: ecosystem-
based governance of bycatch and discards. Fish and Fisheries 
15(2): 327-351.

93.  Fifth national reports to the Convention on Biological 

Diversity (http://www.cbd.int/reports/nr5/) and national 
biodiversity strategies and actions plans (http://www.cbd.int/
nbsap/)

94.  FAO. 2014. The State of World Fisheries and Aquaculture 2014. 

Rome. 223 pp.

95.  Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (2013). 
UK Biodiversity Indicators in Your Pocket - http://jncc.defra.
gov.uk/pdf/BIYP_2013.pdf

96.  Leadley et al (2014). Technical Series 78 - Progress towards 

the Aichi Biodiversity Targets: An assessment of biodiversity 
trends, policy scenarios and key actions. Secretariat of the 
Convention on Biological Diversity;

97.  Leadley et al (2014). Technical Series 78 - Progress towards 

the Aichi Biodiversity Targets: An assessment of biodiversity 
trends, policy scenarios and key actions. Secretariat of the 
Convention on Biological Diversity

98.  Cinner, J.E., McClanahan, T.R., MacNeil, M.A., Graham, 
N.A.J., Daw, T.M., et al. (2012). Comanagement of coral 
reef social-ecological systems. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences 109: 5219-5222; Gutiérrez NL, Hilborn 
R, Defeo O. 2011. Leadership, social capital and incentives 
promote successful fisheries. Nature 470: 386-389.
 Borrini-Feyerabend, G. and C. Chatelain, “Kawawana en 
marche!”, report for UNDP GEF SGP, Cenesta and the ICCA 
Consortium, May 31, 2009.

99. 

100.  Leadley et al (2014). Technical Series 78 - Progress towards 

the Aichi Biodiversity Targets: An assessment of biodiversity 
trends, policy scenarios and key actions. Secretariat of the 
Convention on Biological Diversity

101.  Gustavsson, J., Cederberg, C., Sonesson, U., van Otterdijk, 

R., Meybeck A. (2011). Global Food Losses and Food Waste: 
Extent, causes and Prevention. FAO, Rome, Italy; Hardcastle 
P, Hagelberg N (2012) Assessing the financial resources 
needed to implement the strategic plan for biodiversity 
2012-2020 and archive the aichi biodiversity targets - forest 
cluster report. pp Page, UNEP/ CBD; Beveridge MCM, 
Thilsted S, Phillips M, Metian M, Troell M, Hall S (2013) 
Meeting the food and nutrition needs of the poor: the role of 
fish and the opportunities and challenges emering from the 
rise of aquaculture. Journal of fish biology, 83, 1067-1084.
102.  Ifoam (2013) Global organic farming statistics and news; 

FAO (2013) Aquastat. (ed Fao) pp Page.; Ogle, S. M., 
Swan, A., & Paustian, K. (2012). No-till management 
impacts on crop productivity, carbon input and soil carbon 
sequestration. Agriculture Ecosystems & Environment, 
149, 37–49. doi:10.1016/j.agee.2011.12.010; Derpsch R, 
Friedrich T, Kassam A, Hongwen L (2010) Currents tatus 
of adoption of no-tll farming in the world and some of 

148

its main benefits. International journal of agriculture and 
biological engineering, 3, 1-25; Soane BD, Ball BC, Arvidsoon 
J, Basch G, Moreno F, Roger-Estrade J (2012) No-till in 
northern, western and south-western Europe: A review of 
problems and opportunities for crop production and the 
environment. soil & tillage research, 118, 66-87; Scopel, E., 
Triomphe, B., Affholder, F., Da Silva, F. A. M., Corbeels, M., 
Xavier, J. H. V, … De Tourdonnet, S. (2013). Conservation 
agriculture cropping systems in temperate and tropical 
conditions, performances and impacts. A review. Agronomy 
for Sustainable Development, 33(1), 113–130. doi:10.1007/
s13593-012-0106-9

103.  FSC. (2013) Facts and figures. pp Page; Pefc (2013); 
Marx, A., & Cuypers, D. (2010). Forest certification 
as a global environmental governance tool: What is 
the macro-effectiveness of the Forest Stewardship 
Council? Regulation & Governance, 4(4), 408–434. 
doi:10.1111/j.1748-5991.2010.01088.x

104.  Tacon AGJ, Metian M (2013) Fish matters: importance of 
aquatic foods in human nutrition and global food supply. 
reviews in fisheries science, 21, 22-38; Brummett, R. E., 
Beveridge, M. C. M., & Cowx, I. G. (2013). Functional 
aquatic ecosystems, inland fisheries and the Millennium 
Development Goals. Fish and Fisheries, 14(3), 312–324. 
doi:10.1111/j.1467- ; Troell M, Kautsky N, Beveridge M, 
Henriksson P, Primavera J, Rönnbäck P, Folke C (2013) 
Aquaculture. In: Encyclopedia of Biodiversity. (ed S.A. L) pp 
Page, Waltham, Academic Press; Beveridge MCM, Phillips 
MJ, Dugan P, Brummett R (2010) Barriers to aquaculture 
development as a pathway to poverty alleviation and 
food security. In: OECD Advancing the Aquaculture Agenda: 
Workshop proceedings. pp Page. PAris, OECD; Bush SR, Belton 
B, Hall D et al. (2013) Certify sustainable aquaculture? Science, 
341, 1067-1068; Jonell M, Phillips M, Rönnbäck, Troell M 
(2013) Eco-certification of farmed seafood: Will it make a 
difference? Ambio, 42, 659-674.

105.  Fifth national reports to the Convention on Biological 

Diversity (http://www.cbd.int/reports/nr5/) and national 
biodiversity strategies and actions plans (http://www.cbd.int/
nbsap/)

106.  Fifth national reports to the Convention on Biological 

Diversity (http://www.cbd.int/reports/nr5/) and national 
biodiversity strategies and actions plans (http://www.cbd.int/
nbsap/)

107.  Godfray, H.C.J., Beddington, J.R., Crute, I.R., Haddad, L., 
Lawrence, D., Muir, J.F., Pretty, J., Robinson, S., Thomas, 
S.M., Toulmin, C., 2010. Food security: the challenge of 
feeding 9 billion people. Science 327, 812–818.Foresight, 
2011. The Future of Food and Farming 2011. Final Project 
Report. The Government Office for Science, London. Mueller, 
N.D., Gerber, J.S., Johnston, M., Ray, D.K., Ramankutty, N., 
Foley, J.A., 2012. Closing yield gaps through nutrient and 
water management. Nature 490, 254–257. Strassburg, BBN, 
Latawiec AE, Barioni LG, Nobre CA, da Silva VP, Valentim 
JF, Vianna M and Assad ED (2014) When enough is enough: 
improving the use of current agricultural lands could meet 
production demands and spare natural habitats in Brazil. 
Global Environmental Change 28. 84-97

108.  Leadley et al (2014). Technical Series 78 - Progress towards 

the Aichi Biodiversity Targets: An assessment of biodiversity 
trends, policy scenarios and key actions. Secretariat of 
the Convention on Biological Diversity; PBL Netherlands 
Environmental Assessment Agency (2014).

Notes109.  Research Institute of Organic Agriculture (FiBL) and 

International Federation of Organic Agriculture Movements 
(IFOAM) (2014). Organic agricultural land and share of total 
agricultural land. http://www.organic-world.net; 

110.  FAO. 2014. AQUASTAT database - Food and Agriculture 

Organization of the United Nations (FAO). Website accessed 
on [23/07/2014 22:38] - http://www.fao.org/nr/water/
aquastat/main/index.stm 

111.  FSC (2013) Overview of FSC certified forests and CoC 

certificates, Denmark, FSC.; PEFC (2013) Facts and figures. 
http://www.pefc.org/about-pefc/who-we-are/facts-a-figures. 

112.  Hardcastle P, Hagelberg N (2012) Assessing the financial 

resources needed to implement the strategic plan for 
biodiversity 2012-2020 and archive the aichi biodiversity 
targets - forest cluster report. UNEP/ CBD; PBL Netherlands 
Environmental Assessment Agency (2014). Technical Series 
79 - How sectors can contribute to sustainable use and 
conservation of biodiversity. Secretariat of the Convention on 
Biological Diversity. 

113.  ATIBT, FAO, ITTO (2013) Towards a development strategy for 

the wood processing industry in the Congo Basin

114.  Harding S, Vierros M, Cheung W, Craigie I, Gravestock P 

(2012) Assessing the financial resources needed to implement 
the strategic plan for biodiveristy 2011-2020 and achieve 
the Aichi Biodiversity Targets (Targets 6, 7, 10, 11: marine 
cluster). Background report in support of the High-Level 
Panel on Global Assessment of Resources for Implementing 
the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011-2020; Diana JS, Egna 
HS, Chopin T et al. (2013) Responsible aquaculture in 2050: 
Valuing local conditions and humand innovations will be key 
to success. BioScience, 63, 255-262.; CBD (2004) Solutions for 
sustainable mariculture, CBD; Naylor R, Hindar K, Fleming IA 
et al. (2005) Fugitive Salmon: Assessing the Risks of Escaped 
Fish from Net-Pen Aquaculture. BioScience, 55, 427-437.; 
Staples, D. & Funge-Smith, S. (2009) Ecosystem approach 
to fisheries and aquaculture: Implementing the FAO Code 
of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries. FAO Regional Office 
for Asia and the Pacific, Bangkok, Thailand. RAP Publication 
2009/11, 48 pp.; Secretariat of the Convention on Biological 
Diversity (2004). Solutions for sustainable mariculture – 
Avoiding the adverse effects of mariculture on biological 
dveirsty. CBD Technical Series No. 12. 

115.  Fowler D, Coyle M, Skiba U et al. (2013) The global nitrogen 
cycle in the twenty-first century. Philosophical Transactions of 
the Royal Society Biological Sciences, 368; Sutton MA, Bleeker A, 
Howard CM et al. (2013) Our nutrient world: the challenge to 
produce more food and energy with less pollution. Edinburgh, 
Centre for Ecology and Hydrology; Pardo LH, Fenn ME, 
Goodale CL et al. (2011) Effects of nitrogen deposition and 
empirical nitrogen critical loads for ecoregions of the United 
States. Ecological Applications, 21, 3049-3082; IAASTD (2009) 
Agriculture at a crossroads. In: global report, Washington, D.C., 
International assessment of agricultural knowledge, science 
and technology for development; Conley DJ, Carstensen J, 
Aigars J et al. (2011) Hypoxia Is Increasing in the Coastal 
Zone of the Baltic Sea. Environ. Sci. Technol., 45, 6777-6783; 
Elser JJ, Bracken MES, Cleland EE et al. (2007) Global 
analysis of nitrogen and phosphorus limitation of primary 
producers in freshwater, marine and terrestrial ecosystem. 
Ecology letters, 10, 1135-1142.

116.  Bouwman AF, Van Drecht G, Knoop JM, Beusen AHW, 

Cmeinardi CR (2005) Exploring changes in river nitrogen 
expert to the world’s oceans. Global biogeochemical cycles, 19; 
Dentener F, Drevet J, Lamarque J-F et al. (2006) Nitrogen 
and sulfur deposition on regional and global scales: A 
multimodel evaluation. Global biogeochemical cycles, 20; 
Seitzinger SP, Mayorga E, Bouwman AF et al. (2010) Global 
river nutrient export: A scenario analysis of past and future 
trends. . Biogeochemical Cycles global, 24, GB0A08; Sutton MA, 
Bleeker A (2013) The shape of nitrogen to come. Nature, 494, 
435-437; Lamarque J-F, Dentener F, Mcconnell J et al. (2013) 
Multi-model mean nitrogen and sulfur deposition from the 
atmospheric chemistry and climate model intercomparison 
project (ACCMIP): evaluation of historical and projected 
future changes. Atmos. Chem. Phys, 13, 7997-8018; Paulot 
F, Jacob DJ, Henze DK (2013) Sources and processes 
contributing to nitrogen deposition: an adjoint mode analysis 
applied to biodiversity hotspots worldwide. Environ. Sci. 
Technol., 47, 3226-3233.

117.  CAFF (2013). Arctic Biodiversity Assessment. Status and 

trends in Arctic biodiversity. Conservation of Arctic Flora and 
Fauna, Akureyri

118.  Barnes DKA, Galgani F, Thompson RC, Barlaz M (2009) 

Accumulation and fragmentation of plastic debris in global 
environments. Philosophical transactions of the royal society, 
364, 1985-1998; Yamashita R, Tanimura A (2007) Floating 
plastic in the Kuroshio Current area, western North Pacific 
Ocean. Marine pollution bulletin, 54, 485-488; Gregory MR 
(2009) Environmental implications of plastic debris in marine 
settings - entangelement, ingestion, smothering, hangers-on, 
hitch-hiking and alien invasions. Philosophical transactions of 
the royal society, 364, 2013-2025

119.  Bergman et al. (2013) State of the Science of Endocrine 

Disrupting Chemicals 2012. UNEP & WHO.

120.  Zhang WJ, Jiang FB, Ou JF (2011) Global pesticide 

consumption and pollution: with China as a focus. Proceedings 
of the International Academy of Ecology and Environmental 
Sciences, 1, 125-144; Van Der Sluis JP, Simon-Delso N, 
Goulson D, Maxim L, Bonmatin J-M, Belzunces LP (2013) 
Neonicotinoids, bee disorders and the sustainability of 
polinator services. environmental sustainability, 5, 293-305; 
De A, Bose R, Kumar A, Mozumbar S (2014) Targeted delivery 
of pesticides using biodegradable polymeric nanoparticles, India, 
Springer. Van Der Sluijs JP, Amaral-Rogers V, Belzunces 
LP et al. (2014) Conclusions of the Worldwide Integrated 
Assessment on the risks of neonicotinoids and fipronil to 
biodiversity and ecosystem functioning. environ sci pollut res.
121.  Jernelöv A (2010) The threats from oil spills: now, then, and 

in the future. Ambio, 39, 353-366.

122.  Fifth national reports to the Convention on Biological 

Diversity (http://www.cbd.int/reports/nr5) and national 
biodiversity strategies and actions plans (http://www.cbd.int/
nbsap/)

124.  International Nitrogen Initiative (2014). Nitrogen loss - 

http://www.initrogen.org/node/14. 

125.  Seitzinger SP, Mayorga E, Bouwman AF et al. (2010) Global 
river nutrient export: A scenario analysis of past and future 
trends. . Biogeochemical Cycles global, 24, GB0A08.

126.  Bouwman AF, Beusen AHW, Griffioen J et al. (2013) Global 

trends and uncertainties in terrestrial denitrification and 
N2O emissions.Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of 
Britain, 368.

149

Notes127.  Sutton MA, Bleeker A, Howard CM et al. (2013) Our nutrient 

world: the challenge to produce more food and energy with 
less pollution. Edinburgh, Centre for Ecology and Hydrology.
128.  Sutton MA, Bleeker A, Howard CM et al. (2013) Our nutrient 

world: the challenge to produce more food and energy with 
less pollution. Edinburgh, Centre for Ecology and Hydrology.

129.  Carpenter SR, Stanley E, Vander Zanden MJ (2011) State 
of the world’s freshwater ecosystems: physical, chemical, 
and biological changes. Annual Review of Environment and 
Resources, 36, 75–99.

130.  Grinsven H, Ten Berge HFM, Balgaard T et al. (2012) 

Management, regulation and environmental impacts of 
nitrogen fertilization in northwestern Europe under the 
nitrate directive; a benchmark study. Biogeoscience, 9, 
5143-5160; EMEP (2013) Transboundary acidification, 
eutrophication and ground level ozone in Europe in 2011, 
Meteorologisk institutt; Bouwman AF, Beusen AHW, 
Griffioen J et al. (2013) Global trends and uncertainties in 
terrestrial denitrification and N2O emissions. philosophical 
transactions of the royal society of Britain, 368; Velthof GL, 
Lesschen JP, Webb J et al. (2014) The impact of the nitrates 
drective on nitrogen emissions from agriculture in the EU-27 
during 2000-2008. Science of The Total Environment, 468-469, 
1225-1233; Bouraoui F, Grizzette B (2011) Long term change 
of nutrient concentrations of rivers discharging in European 
seas. Science of The Total Environment, 409, 4899-4916.

131.  CAFF (2013). Arctic Biodiversity Assessment. Status and 

trends in Arctic biodiversity. Conservation of Arctic Flora and 
Fauna, AkureyriArctic Biodiversity Assessments

132.  Clavero, M., and E. García-Berthou. 2005. Invasive species are 
a leading cause of animal extinctions. Trends in 16 ecology & 
evolution 20:110. 

133.  Pimentel, D., R. Zuniga, and D. Morrison. 2005. Update 
on the environmental and economic costs associated 29 
with alien-invasive species in the United States. Ecological 
Economics 52:273–288.; High-Level Panel. 2014. Resourcing 
the Aichi Biodiversity Targets: An Assessment of Benefits, 
Investments and Resource needs for Implementing the 
Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011-2020. Second Report of 
the High Level Panel on Global Assessment of Resources for 
Implementing the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011-2020. 
UNEP-WCMC, ICF GHK and the Secretariat of the CBD.

134.  DIISE. (2014). The database of island invasive species 
eradications, developed by island conservation, costal 
conservation action. University of Auckland and Landcare 
Research, New Zealand. Available from http://diise.
islandcosnervation.org; Broome, K. (2009). Beyond Kapiti - A 
decade of invasive rodent eradications from New Zealand 
islands. Biodiversity 10:14–24. Taylor & Francis. Available 
from http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/14888386.2009.9712840 
(accessed April 7, 2014); Griffiths, R. 2011. Targeting multiple 
species – a more efficient approach to pest eradication. Pages 
172–176 (D. R. Clout, M.N. and Towns, editor)Island inv. 
Veitch, Gland, Switzerland; Glen, A. S., R. Atkinson, K. J. 
Campbell, E. Hagen, N. D. Holmes, B. S. Keitt, J. P. Parkes, A. 
Saunders, J. Sawyer, and H. Torres. 2013. Eradicating multiple 
invasive species on inhabited islands: the next big step in 
island restoration? Biological Invasions 15:2589–2603. 
http://link.springer.com/10.1007/s10530-013-0495-y; 
Baker, S. J. 2010. Control and eradication of invasive 
mammals in Great Britain The Neolithic period to the 18th 
Century 29:311–327; Courchamp, F., S. Caut, E. Bonnaud, K. 
Bourgeois, E. Angulo, and Y. Watari. 2011. Eradication of alien 

150

invasive species : surprise effects and conservation successes. 
In: Veitch, C. R.; Clout, M. N. and Towns, D. R.:285–289; 
Kessler, C. C., and W. Service. 2011. Invasive species removal 
and ecosystem recovery in the Mariana Islands ; challenges 
and outcomes on Sarigan and Anatahan. In: Veitch, C. R.; 
Clout, M. N. and Towns, D. R. 1999:320–324; Whitworth, D. 
L., H. R. Carter, and F. Gress. 2013. Recovery of a threatened 
seabird after eradication of an introduced predator: Eight 
years of progress for Scripps’s murrelet at Anacapa Island, 
California. Biological Conservation 162:52–59.- http://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0006320713000931.

135.  Bacon, S. J., S. Bacher, and A. Aebi. 2012. Gaps in border 
controls are related to quarantine alien insect invasions in 
Europe. PloS one 7:e47689. http://www.pubmedcentral.nih.
gov/articlerender.fcgi?artid= 3480426&tool=pmcentrez&ren
dertype=abstract (accessed November 12, 2013).

136.  Convention on Biological Diversity (2014) UNEP/CBD/

SBSTTA/18/9 - Review of work on invasive alien species and 
considerations for future work. Pathways of introduction of 
invasive alien species, their prioritization and management - 
http://www.cbd.int/doc/meetings/sbstta/sbstta-18/official/
sbstta-18-09-en.pdf 

137.  McGeoch, M. a., S. H. M. Butchart, D. Spear, E. Marais, E. J. 
Kleynhans, A. Symes, J. Chanson, and M. Hoffmann. 2010a. 
Global indicators of biological invasion: species numbers, 
biodiversity impact and policy responses. Diversity and 
Distributions 16:95–108. http://doi.wiley.com/10.1111/
j.1472-4642.2009.00633.x .

138.  Fifth national reports to the Convention on Biological 

Diversity (http://www.cbd.int/reports/nr5/ and national 
biodiversity strategies and actions plans (http://www.cbd.int/
nbsap/)

139.   Pagad, S., S. Schindler, F. Essl, W. Rabitsch, and P. Genovesi. 
(2014). Trends of invasive alien species, unpublished report. 

140.  Bellard, C., W. Thuiller, B. Leroy, P. Genovesi, M. Bakkenes, 

and F. Courchamp. (2013). Will climate change promote 
future invasions? Global Change Biology in press

141.  Pagad, S., S. Schindler, F. Essl, W. Rabitsch, and P. Genovesi. 
(2014). Trends of invasive alien species, unpublished report.

142.  CBD (2014) UNEP/CBD/SBSTTA/18/9/Add.1. Pathways 

of Introduction of Invasive Species, their Prioritization and 
Management. http://www.cbd.int/doc/meetings/sbstta/
sbstta-18/official/sbstta-18-09-add1-en.pdf 

143.  Bellard C, Thuiller W, Leroy B, Genovesi P, Bakkenes M, and 

Courchamp F. 2013. Will climate change promote future 
invasions? Global Change Biology in press. Available from 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23913552.

144.  Blackburn, T. M. et al. 2014. A unified classification of alien 

species based on the magnitude of their environmental 
impacts. - PLoS Biol. 12: e1001850.; Global Invasive 
Alien Species Information Partnership (2014). The 
GIASIPartnership Gateway. http://giasipartnership.
myspecies.info;

145.  Briski, E. et al. (2012). Invasion risk posed by 

macroinvertebrates transported in ships’ ballast tanks. - Biol. 
Invasions 14: 1843–1850; Katsanevakis, S. et al. (2013). 
Invading European Seas: Assessing pathways of introduction 
of marine aliens. - Ocean Coast. Manag. 76: 64–74.; Seebens, 
H. et al. 2013. The risk of marine bioinvasion caused by global 
shipping. - Ecol. Lett. 16: 782–90.

Notes146.  Pluess, T. et al. (2012). When are eradication campaigns 

successful? A test of common assumptions. - Biol. Invasions 
14: 1365–1378.; , Simberloff, D. et al. (2013). Impacts of 
biological invasions - what’s what and the way forward. - 
Trends Ecol. Evol. in press:

147.  R.B. Allen, R.P. Duncan and W.G. Lee (2006). Updated 

perspective on biological invasions in New Zealand.R.B.Allen 
and W.G.Lee (Eds.) Biological Invasions in New Zealand, 
Ecological Studies,Vol. 186, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg.

148.  Kriticos, D. J., Phillips, C. B., & Suckling, D. M. (2005). 

Improving border biosecurity: potential economic benefits to 
New Zealand. New Zealand Plant Protection, 58, 1-6.

149.  Trampusch, C. (in press). ‘Protectionism, obviously, is not 

dead’: A case study on New Zealand’s biosecurity policy and 
the causes-of-effects of economic interests. Australian Journal 
of Political Science, (ahead-of-print).

150.  Wotton, D. M., & Hewitt, C. L. (2004). Marine biosecurity 
post-border management: Developing incursion response 
systems for New Zealand. New Zealand Journal of Marine and 
Freshwater Research, 38(3), 553-559.

151.  McLean, I. G., & Armstrong, D. P. (1995). New Zealand 
translocations: theory and practice. Pacific Conservation 
Biology, 2(1), 39-54

152.  Towns, D. R., West, C. J., & Broome, K. G. (2013). Purposes, 

outcomes and challenges of eradicating invasive mammals 
from New Zealand islands: an historical perspective. Wildlife 
Research, 40(2), 94-107.

153.  Innes, J., Lee, W. G., Burns, B., Campbell-Hunt, C., Watts, 

C., Phipps, H., & Stephens, T. (2012). Role of predator-proof 
fences in restoring New Zealand’s biodiversity: a response to 
Scofield et al. (2011). New Zealand Journal of Ecology, 36(2), 
232-238.

154.  Glen, A. S., Pech, R. P., & Byrom, A. E. (2013). Connectivity 

and invasive species management: towards an integrated 
landscape approach. Biological invasions, 15(10), 2127-2138.

155.  M.Clout, P. Genovesi from Simberloff, D. et al. (2012). 

Impacts of biological invasions: what’s what and the way 
forward. Trends in Ecology & Evolution 28:58–66, updated by 
J. Russel. 

156.  Burke, L., K. Reytar, M. D. Spalding, and A. Perry. (2011). 

Reefs at risk revisited. World Resources Institute, Washington 
DC; Brodie, J.E., Kroon, F.J., Schaffelke, B., et al. (2012). 
Terrestrial pollutant runoff to the Great Barrier Reef: An 
update of issues, priorities and management responses. 
Marine Pollution Bulletin 65: 81-100.

157.  Russ, G. R., A. J. Cheal, A. M. Dolman, M. J. Emslie, R. D. 

Evans, I. Miller, H. Sweatman, and D. H. Williamson. (2008). 
Rapid increase in fish numbers follows creation of world’s 
largest marine reserve network. Curr Biol 18:R514-515; 
Mumby, P. J. and A. R. Harborne. 2010. Marine reserves 
enhance the recovery of corals on Caribbean reefs. Plos One 
5:e8657.

158.  Burke, L., K. Reytar, M. D. Spalding, and A. Perry. (2011). 

Reefs at risk revisited. World Resources Institute, Washington 
DC;

159.  Kennedy, E. V., C. T. Perry, P. R. Halloran, R. Iglesias-Prieto, C. 
H. Schonberg, M. Wisshak, A. U. Form, J. P. Carricart-Ganivet, 
M. Fine, C. M. Eakin, and P. J. Mumby. (2013). Avoiding 
coral reef functional collapse requires local and global action. 
Current Biology 23:912-918.

160.  Fifth national reports to the Convention on Biological 

Diversity (http://www.cbd.int/reports/nr5) and national 
biodiversity strategies and actions plans (http://www.cbd.int/
nbsap/)

161.  Teh L.C.L., Teh L.S.L., Chung F.C. (2008). A private 

management approach to coral reef conservation in Sabah, 
Malaysia. Biodiversity and Conservation 17: 3061-3077.; Reef 
Guardian - www.reef-guardian.org ; 

162.  Kennedy, E. V., C. T. Perry, P. R. Halloran, R. Iglesias-Prieto, C. 
H. Schonberg, M. Wisshak, A. U. Form, J. P. Carricart-Ganivet, 
M. Fine, C. M. Eakin, and P. J. Mumby. (2013). Avoiding 
coral reef functional collapse requires local and global action. 
Current Biology 23:912-918

163.  World Database on Protected Areas (WDPA) - http://www.

protectedplanet.net/ 

164.  CBD (2012), Review of Progress in Implementation of the 

Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011-2020, Including the 
Establishment of National Targets and the Updating of 
National Biodiversity Strategies and Action Plans, UNEP/
CBD/COP/11/12, paragraph 26 (https://www.cbd.int/doc/
meetings/cop/cop-11/official/cop-11-12-en.pdf

165.  Spalding, M., Melanie, I., Milam, A., Fitzgerald, C. & Hale, 
L.Z. (2013). Protecting Marine Spaces: Global Targets and 
Changing Approaches. In Chircop, A., Coffen-Smout, S. & 
McConnell, M. (eds.). Ocean Yearbook 27. Martinus Nijhoff 
Publishers, Leiden, pp. 213-248. 

166.  S. H. M. Butchart et al. (unpublished data)
167.  Hole, D.G., Huntley, B., Arinaitwe, J., Butchart, S.H.M., 

Collingham, Y.C., Fishpool, L.D.C., Pain, D.J., Willis, S.G., 
2011. Toward a management framework for networks of 
protected areas in the face of climate change. Conservation 
Biology 25, 305–15. 

168.  For sources, see endnote for Box 11.1
169.  Leverington, F., Costa, K.L., Pavese, H., Lisle, A., Hockings, 
M., 2010. A global analysis of protected area management 
effectiveness. Environmental Management 46, 685–98. 

170.  Leverington, F., Costa, K.L., Pavese, H., Lisle, A., Hockings, 
M., 2010. A global analysis of protected area management 
effectiveness. Environmental Management 46, 685–98.; 
Borrini-Feyerabend, G., N. Dudley, T. Jaeger, B. Lassen, 
N. Pathak Broome, A. Phillips and T. Sandwith (2013). 
Governance of Protected Areas: From understanding to 
action. Best Practice Protected Area Guidelines Series No. 20, 
Gland, Switzerland: IUCN. Xvi+124pp

171.  Fifth national reports to the Convention on Biological 

Diversity (http://www.cbd.int/reports/nr5/) and national 
biodiversity strategies and actions plans (http://www.cbd.int/
nbsap/)

172.  Fifth national reports to the Convention on Biological 

Diversity (http://www.cbd.int/reports/nr5/ 

173.  Januchowski-Hartley SR, Pearson RG, Puschendorf R, Rayner 

T (2011) Fresh Waters and Fish Diversity: Distribution, 
Protection and Disturbance in Tropical Australia. PLoS ONE 
6(10): e25846; Abell R, Allan JD, Lehner B (2007) Unlocking 
the potential of protected areas for freshwaters. Biological 
Conservation 134: 48–63; Hermoso, V., Kennard, M.J. & 
Linke, S. 2012. Integrating multidirectional connectivity 
requirements in systematic conservation planning for 
freshwater systems. Diversity and Distributions 18: 448-458; 
Larned, S.T., Datry, T., Arscott, D.B. & Tockner, K. (2010) 

151

NotesEmerging concepts in temporary-river ecology. Freshwater 
Biology, 55, 717–738; Vörösmarty, C.J. et al. 2010. Global 
threats to human water security and river biodiversity. Nature 
467: 555-561.

174.  Whakatane Mechanism - http://whakatane-mechanism.org/
thailand; Forest Peoples Programme (2012) Pilot Whakatane 
Assessment in Ob Luang National Park, Thailand, finds 
exemplary joint management by indigenous peoples, local 
communities, National Park authorities and NGOs - http://
www.forestpeoples.org/topics/whakatane-mechanism/
news/2012/02/pilot-whakatane-assessment-ob-luang-
national-park-thailand-f

175.  Butchart, S. H. M., Stattersfield, A. J. & Collar, N. J. (2006) 
How many bird extinctions have we prevented? Oryx 40, 27 
266-278; Hoffmann, Michael, Craig Hilton-Taylor, Ariadne 
Angulo, Monika Böhm, Thomas M. Brooks, Stuart HM 
Butchart, Kent E. Carpenter et al. “The impact of conservation 
on the status of the world’s vertebrates.” Science 330, no. 5 
6010 (2010): 1503-1509.

176.  Collen, Ben, Felix Whitton, Ellie E. Dyer, Jonathan EM Baillie, 

Neil Cumberlidge, William RT Darwall, Caroline Pollock, 
Nadia I. Richman, Anne-Marie Soulsby, and Monika Böhm. 
“Global patterns of freshwater species diversity, threat and 
endemism.” Global Ecology and Biogeography 23, no. 1 
(2014): 40-51. 

177.  Netherlands Environmental Assessment Agency (2010) 
Rethinking Global Biodiversity Strategies. Netherlands 
Environmental Assessment Agency, The Hague/Bilthoven, the 
Netherlands. 

178.  Fifth national reports to the Convention on Biological 

Diversity (http://www.cbd.int/reports/nr5) and national 
biodiversity strategies and actions plans (http://www.cbd.int/
nbsap/)

179.  IUCN 2013. www.iucnredlist.org Retrieved on 03/02/2014; 

Birdlife International 2014. The 2014 IUCN Red List for birds. 
Available at http://www.birdlife.org/datazone/species

180.  Butchart, Stuart HM, Joern PW Scharlemann, Mike I. Evans, 
Suhel Quader, Salvatore Arico, Julius Arinaitwe, Mark Balman 
et al. Protecting important sites for biodiversity contributes 
to meeting global conservation targets. PLoS One 7 (2012): 
e32529 – update in preparation (2013).

181.  Oaks, J. L., Gilbert, M., Virani, M. Z., Watson, R. T., Meteyer, 
C. U., Rideout, B. A., Shivaprasad, H. L., Ahmed, S., Chaudhry, 
M. J. I., Arshad, M., Mahmood, S., Ali, A. and Khan, A. A. 
(2004) Diclofenac residues as the cause of vulture population 
declines in Pakistan. Nature 427: 630–633; Green, R. E., 
Newton, I., Shultz, S., Cunningham, A. A., Gilbert, M., 
Pain, D. and Prakash, V. (2004) Diclofenac poisoning as 
a cause of vulture population declines across the Indian 
subcontinent. J. Appl. Ecol. 41: 793–800; Shultz, S., Baral, 
H.S., Charman, S., Cunningham, A.A., Das, D., Ghalsasi, G.R., 
Goudar, M.S., Green, R.E., Jones, A., Nighot, P., Pain, D.J. 
& Prakash, V. (2004) Diclofenac poisoning is widespread in 
declining vulture populationsacross the Indian subcontinent. 
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, B (Supplement), 
in press. DOI: 10.1098/rsbl.2004.0223.; India’s 5th national 
report to the Convention - http://www.cbd.int/doc/world/in/
in-nr-05-en.pdf 

182.  FAO (2010). The second report on the state of the world’s 

plant genetic resources for food and agriculture. Rome. 

185.  China’s 5th national report to the Convention - 

http://www.cbd.int/doc/world/cn/cn-nr-05-en.pdf

186.  Akhalkatsi, M., Ekhvaia, J., and Asanidze, Z. (2012). 

Diversity and Genetic Erosion of Ancient Crops and Wild 
Relatives of Agricultural Cultivars for Food: Implications 
for Nature Conservation in Georgia (Caucasus), 
Perspectives on Nature Conservation - Patterns, Pressures 
and Prospects, Prof. John Tiefenbacher (Ed.), ISBN: 
978-953-51-0033-1, InTech, Available from: http://
www.intechopen.com/books/perspectives-on-nature-
conservation-patterns-pressures-and-prospects/
diversity-and-genetic-erosion-of-ancient-crops-and-wild-
relatives-of-agricultural-cultivars-for-food

187.  FAO (2010). The second report on the state of the world’s 

plant genetic resources for food and agriculture. Rome. 

188.  FAO, (2014) personal communication
189.  FAO (2011). Second Global Plan of Action for Plant Genetic 

Resources for Food and Agriculture. FAO, Rome; FAO (2012). 
Synthesis progress report on the implementation of the 
Global Plan of Action for Animal Genetic Resources – 2012. FAO, 
Rome

190.  FAO (2012). Synthesis progress report on the implementation 
of the Global Plan of Action for Animal Genetic Resources – 2012. 
FAO, Rome

191.  Jarvis, D. I., Brown, A. H., Cuong, P. H., et al (2008). A global 

perspecticve of the richness and eveness of traditional 
crop-diversity maintained by farming communities. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 105(23), 
5326–5331.

192.  UK National Ecosystem Assessment (2011). The UK 

National Ecosystem Assessment: synthesis of the key findings. 
UNEP-WCMC, Cambridge, UK.

193.  Halpern, B.S., Catherine Longo, Darren Hardy, Karen L. 
McLeod, Jameal F. Samhouri, Steven K. Katona, Kristin 
Kleisner, Sarah E. Lester, Jennifer O’Leary, Marla Ranelletti, 
Andrew A. Rosenberg, Courtney Scarborough, Elizabeth 
R. Selig, Benjamin D. Best, Daniel R. Brumbaugh, F. Stuart 
Chapin, Larry B. Crowder, Kendra L. Daly, Scott C. Doney, 
Cristiane Elfes, Michael J. Fogarty, Steven D. Gaines, Kelsey 
I. Jacobsen, Leah Bunce Karrer,Heather M. Leslie, Elizabeth 
Neeley, Daniel Pauly, Stephen Polasky, Bud Ris, Kevin St 
Martin, Gregory S. Stone, U. Rashid Sumaila & Dirk Zeller 
2012. An index to assess the health and benefits of the global 
ocean. Nature 488: 615–620.

194.  Fifth national reports to the Convention on Biological 

Diversity (http://www.cbd.int/reports/nr5) and national 
biodiversity strategies and actions plans (http://www.cbd.int/
nbsap/)

195.  Halpern, B.S., Catherine Longo, Darren Hardy et al (2012). 

An index to assess the health and benefits of the global ocean. 
Nature 488: 615–620.

196.  Ocean Health Index - http://www.oceanhealthindex.org/, 

accessed 29 July 2014; 

197.  CAFF (2013). Arctic Biodiversity Assessment. Status and 

trends in Arctic biodiversity. Conservation of Arctic Flora and 
Fauna, AkureyriArctic Biodiversity Assessment ; Eamer, J., 
Donaldson, G.M., Gaston, A.J., Kosobokova, K.N., Lárusson, 
K.F., Melnikov, I.A., Reist, J.D., Richardson, E., Staples, L., von 
Quillfeldt, C.H. 2013. Life Linked to Ice: A guide to sea-ice-
associated biodiversity in this time of rapid change. CAFF 
Assessment Series No. 10. Conservation of Arctic Flora and 
Fauna, Iceland. ISBN: 978-9935-431-25-7.

198.  South Africa 5th national report to the CBD - www.cbd.int/

doc/world/za/za-nr-05-en.pdf 

152

Notes199.  Hobbs, R.J., and Cramer, V.A. (2008). Restoration ecology: 
interventionist approaches for restoring and maintaining 
ecosystem function in the face of rapid environmental change. 
Annu. Rev. Environ. Resour. 33, 39–61; Funk, J.L., Matzek, 
V., Bernhardt, M., and Johnson, D. (2014). Broadening the 
Case for Invasive Species Management to Include Impacts on 
Ecosystem Services. BioScience 64, 58–63.

200.  China’s 5th national report to the CBD - http://www.cbd.int/

doc/world/cn/cn-nr-05-en.pdf

201.  LeFevour, MK, L. Jackson, S. Alexander, G.D. Gann, C. 

Murcia, D. Lamb, and D.A. Falk. 2007. Global Restoration 
Network (www.GlobalRestorationNetwork.org). Society for 
Ecological Restoration International, Tucson, Arizona, USA.

202.  Convention on Biological Diversity (2014). UNEP/CBD/

SBSTTA/18/14 - Report on issues in progress: Ecosystem 
conservation and restoration - http://www.cbd.int/doc/
meetings/sbstta/sbstta-18/official/sbstta-18-14-en.pdf 
203.  Fifth national reports to the Convention on Biological 

Diversity (http://www.cbd.int/reports/nr5) and national 
biodiversity strategies and actions plans (http://www.cbd.int/
nbsap/)

204.  LeFevour, MK, L. Jackson, S. Alexander, G.D. Gann, C. 

Murcia, D. Lamb, and D.A. Falk. 2007. Global Restoration 
Network (www.GlobalRestorationNetwork.org). Society for 
Ecological Restoration International, Tucson, Arizona, USA.

205.  Liu, J., Li, S., Ouyang, Z., Tam, C., and Chen, X. 2008). 

Ecological and socioeconomic effects of China’s policies for 
ecosystem services. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 105, 9477–9482.

206.  Feng, Z., Yang, Y., Zhang, Y., Zhang, P., and Li, Y. (2005). 

Grain-for-green policy and its impacts on grain supply in West 
China. Land Use Policy 22, 301–312.

207.  Yan-qiong, Y., Guo-jie, C., and Hong, F. 2003). Impacts of the 
“Grain for Green” project on rural communities in the Upper 
Min River Basin, Sichuan, China. Mt. Res. Dev. 23, 345–352
208.  China’s 5th national report to the Convention - http://www.

cbd.int/doc/world/cn/cn-nr-05-en.pdf 

209.  Cao, S., Chen, L., and Liu, Z. (2009). An investigation of 

Chinese attitudes toward the environment: Case study using 
the Grain for Green Project. AMBIO J. Hum. Environ. 38, 
55–64.

210.  Gellrich, M., Baur, P., Koch, B., and Zimmermann, N.E. 

(2007). Agricultural land abandonment and natural forest 
re-growth in the Swiss mountains: A spatially explicit 
economic analysis. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 118, 93–108.; 
MacDonald, D., Crabtree, J.R., Wiesinger, G., Dax, T., Stamou, 
N., Fleury, P., Gutierrez Lazpita, J., and Gibon, A. (2000). 
Agricultural abandonment in mountain areas of Europe: 
environmental consequences and policy response. J. Environ. 
Manage. 59, 47–69; Stoate, C., Báldi, A., Beja, P., Boatman, 
N.D., Herzon, I., Van Doorn, A., De Snoo, G.R., Rakosy, L., 
and Ramwell, C. (2009). Ecological impacts of early 21st 
century agricultural change in Europe-A review. J. Environ. 
Manage. 91, 22–46; EEA (2012). Corine Land Cover 1990 - 
2000 changes (European Environment Agency); Keenleyside, 
C., and Tucker, G. (2010). Farmland Abandonment in the EU: 
an Assessment of Trends and Prospects (WWF Netherlands 
and IEEP); Verburg, P.H., and Overmars, K.P. (2009). 
Combining top-down and bottom-up dynamics in land use 
modeling: exploring the future of abandoned farmlands 
in Europe with the Dyna-CLUE model. Landsc. Ecol. 24, 
1167–1181; Balmford, A., Green, R., and others (2005). 
Sparing land for nature: exploring the potential impact of 

changes in agricultural yield on the area needed for crop 
production. Glob. Change Biol. 11, 1594–1605.; Navarro, L., 
and Pereira, H. (2012). Rewilding Abandoned Landscapes in 
Europe. Ecosystems 15, 900–912; Rey Benayas, J.M., Bullock, 
J.M., and Newton, A.C. (2008). Creating woodland islets to 
reconcile ecological restoration, conservation, and agricultural 
land use. Front. Ecol. Environ. 6, 329–336; Deinet, S., 
Ieronymidou, C., McRae, L., Burfield, I.J., Foppen, R.P., Collen, 
B., and Bohm, M. (2013). Wildlife comeback in Europe: the 
recovery of selected mammal and bird species. (London, 
UK.: Final report to Rewilding Europe by ZSL, BirdLife 
International and the European Bird Census Council.); 
Proença, V., and Pereira, H.M. (2010). Mediterranean Forest 
(Appendix 2). In Biodiversity Scenarios: Projections of 21st 
Century Change in Biodiversity and Associated Ecosystem 
Services., P. Leadley, H.M. Pereira, J.F. Fernandez-Manjarres, 
V. Proença, J.P.W. Scharlemann, and M.J. Walpole, eds. 
(Montreal: Secretariat of the Convention on Biological 
Diversity), pp. 60–67.

211.  Navarro, L., and Pereira, H. (2012). Rewilding Abandoned 

Landscapes in Europe. Ecosystems 15, 900–912;

212.  As of July 2014 the following Parties have now ratified or 
acceded to the landmark treaty: Albania, Belarus, Benin, 
Bhutan, Botswana, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Comoros, Côte 
D’Ivoire, Denmark, Egypt, Ethiopia, European Union, 
Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Guatemala, Guinea Bissau, Guyana, 
Honduras, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Jordan, Kenya, Lao 
People’s Democratic Republic, Madagascar, Mauritius, 
Mexico, the Federated States of Micronesia, Mongolia, 
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Niger, Norway, Panama, 
Peru, Rwanda, Samoa, the Seychelles, South Africa, Spain, 
Sudan, Switzerland, the Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, 
Uganda, Uruguay, Vanuatu, and Vietnam

213.  CIMTECH (2014) - http://www.cimtech.com.au/
214.  Robinson, D. (no date). Towards Access and Benefit-

Sharing Best Practice Pacific Case Studies. The ABS Capacity 
Development Initiative - http://www.abs-initiative.
info/fileadmin//media/Knowledge_Center/Pulications/
Palau_Samoa_Vanuatu/ABS_Best_Practice_Pacific_Case_
Studies_Final.pdf

215.  Access and Benefit Sharing Clearing House Mechanism - 

https://absch.cbd.int/

216.  Includes pre- and post-2010 NBSAPs
217.  6 of these NBSAPS do not contain sufficient information to 

determine if the NBAP do or do not contains indicators.

218.  All NBSAPs are available at http://www.cbd.int/nbsap
219.  Moseley, Christopher (ed.). 2010. Atlas of the World’s 

Languages in Danger, 3rd edn. Paris, UNESCO Publishing. 
Online version: http://www.unesco.org/culture/en/
endangeredlanguages/atlas; Anseeuw, W., Wily, L.A., Cotula, 
L., Taylor, M. 2012. Land Rights and the Rush for Land: 
Findings of the Global 7 Commercial Pressures on Land 
Research Project. (Bending T, Wilson D, editors.). Rome: 
International Land 8 Coalition.

220.  Kothari, A., Corrigan, C., Jonas, H., Neumann, A., & Shrumm, 

H. (eds.). (2012). Recognising and Supporting Territories 
and Areas Conserved by Indigenous Peoples and Local 
Communities: Global Overview and National Case Studies. 
Montreal: Secretariat of the Convention on Biological 
Diversity.

153

Notes221.  Fifth national reports to the Convention on Biological 

Diversity (http://www.cbd.int/reports/nr5) and national 
biodiversity strategies and actions plans (http://www.cbd.int/
nbsap/)

222.  Moseley, Christopher (ed.). 2010. Atlas of the World’s 

Languages in Danger, 3rd edn. Paris, UNESCO Publishing. 
Online version: http://www.unesco.org/culture/en/
endangeredlanguages/atlas

223.  CAFF (2013). Arctic Biodiversity Assessment. Status and 

trends in Arctic biodiversity. Conservation of Arctic Flora and 
Fauna, Akureyri

224.  TEBTEBBA (2013). Developing and Implementing 

CBMIS: The Global Workshop and the Philippine 
Workshop Reports http://www.tebtebba.org/index.php/
content/271-developing-and-implementing-cbmis-the-global-
workshop-and-the-philippine-workshop-reports pp. 17-19.
225.  Vernooy R, Haribabu E, Muller MR, Vogel JH, Hebert PDN, 
et al. 2010. Barcoding Life to Conserve Biological Diversity: 
Beyond the Taxonomic Imperative. PLoS Biol 8(7): e1000417. 
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.100041730

226.  Pereira, H. M., etal (2013). Essential biodiversity variables. 
Science, 339(6117), 277–8. doi:10.1126/science.122993128

227.  Global Biodiversity Information Facility - www.gbif.org
228.  Catalogue of Life - www.catalogueoflife.org
229.  Barcode of Life Data Systems - www.boldsystems.org 
230.  Global Biodiversity Information Facility (2012). Global 

Biodiversity Informatics Outlook: Delivering Biodiversity 
Knowledge in the Information Age - http://www.gbif.org/
resources/2251

231.  Observatoire des Forêts d’Afrique Centrale - http://

observatoire-comifac.net/index.php. 

232.  High-level Panel on Global Assessment of Resources for 

Implementing the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011-2020 
(2012). Resourcing the Aichi Biodiversity Targets: A First 
Assessment of the Resources Required for Implementing the 
Strategic Plan For Biodiversity 2011-2020;

233.  Second Report of the High Level Panel on Global Assessment 

of Resources for Implementing the Strategic Plan for 
Biodiversity 2011-2020. UNEP-WCMC, ICF GHK and the 
Secretariat of the CBD.

234.  Parker, C., Cranford, M., Oakes, N., Leggett, M. ed., (2012). 

The Little Biodiversity Finance Book, Global Canopy 
Programme; Oxford; Waldron, A. et al. (2013), “Targeting 
global conservation funding to limit immediate biodiversity 
declines”, PNAS, Vol. 110, No. 29, pp. 12144-12148.

235.  See http://www.cbd.int/financial/statistics.shtml 
236.   Global Environment Facilaty (2014). Record Funding 

for the Global Environment. http://www.thegef.org/gef/
Record-Funding-for-Global-Environment

237.  OECD Creditor Reporting System - Data extracted on July 2014 

from OECD.Stat

238.  Global Environment Facility Independent Evaluation Office 

(2014). OPS 5 – Fifth Overall Performance Study of the GEF - 
http://www.thegef.org/gef/sites/thegef.org/files/documents/
OPS5-Final-Report-EN.pdf 

239.  High-level Panel on Global Assessment of Resources for 

Implementing the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011-2020 
(2012). Resourcing the Aichi Biodiversity Targets: A First 
Assessment of the Resources Required for Implementing the 
Strategic Plan For Biodiversity 2011-2020. https://www.cbd.
int/doc/meetings/cop/cop-13 11/information/cop-11-inf-
20-en.pdf 

240.  Donal P. McCarthy et al.(2012). Financial Costs of Meeting 
Global Biodiversity Conservation Targets: Current Spending 
and Unmet Needs. Science 338, 946

241.  India’s 5th National Report to the CBD - http://www.cbd.int/
doc/world/in/in-nr-05-en.pdf. Inida’s submission on financial 
resources according to the preliminary reporting framework. 
https://www.cbd.int/financial/statistics.shtml 

242.  Rebecca L Goldman, Silvia Benitez, Alejandro Calvache, Sarah 

Davidson, Driss Ennaanay, Emily McKenzie, Heather Tallis 
(2010) Water Funds for conservation of ecosystem services 
in watersheds, Colombia, TEEB Case Study available at: 
TEEBweb.org.; High-Level Panel. 2014. Resourcing the Aichi 
Biodiversity Targets: An Assessment of Benefits, Investments 
and Resource needs for Implementing the Strategic Plan for 
Biodiversity 2011-2020. Second Report of the High Level 
Panel on Global Assessment of Resources for Implementing 
the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011-2020. UNEP-WCMC, 
ICF GHK and the Secretariat of the CBD. 

243.  Leadley et al (2014). Technical Series 78 - Progress towards 

the Aichi Biodiversity Targets: An assessment of biodiversity 
trends, policy scenarios and key actions. Secretariat of the 
Convention on Biological Diversity

244.  Leadley et al (2014). Technical Series 78 - Progress towards 

the Aichi Biodiversity Targets: An assessment of biodiversity 
trends, policy scenarios and key actions. Secretariat of the 
Convention on Biological Diversity

245.  This assessment draws on information in the reports of the 
following countries: Albania, Australia, Azerbaijan, Belgium, 
Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Burundi, Cameroon, Canada, 
China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Cote D’Ivoire, Croatia, 
Cuba, Denmark, Dominica, Democratic Republic of Congo, 
Ecuador, Estonia, Ethiopia, European Union, Finland, 
France, Germany, Hungary, India, Iraq, Italy, Japan, Liberia, 
Madagascar, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Moldova, Mongolia, 
Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, 
New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria, Niue, Pakistan, Palau, Poland, 
Rwanda, Senegal, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, 
Spain, Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, Tonga, Uganda, United 
Kingdom, and United Republic of Tanzania. All are available 
at http://www.cbd.int/nr5/default.shtml

246.  To determine the potential interactions among the twenty 

Aichi Targets, a group of experts (composed of GBO-4 
Technical Report authors and reviewers) qualitatively assessed 
how the achievement of any given Aichi Biodiversity Target 
could influence the achievement of the other targets. The 
following ordinal scores were used by each expert to qualify 
all the target interactions in a matrix: 1 -low 23 influence, 2 - 
intermediate influence, and 3-high influence. Then the scores 
from each expert were averaged and the relative agreement 
for each matrix

247.  Leadley et al (2014). Technical Series 78 - Progress towards 

the Aichi Biodiversity Targets: An assessment of biodiversity 
trends, policy scenarios and key actions. Secretariat of the 
Convention on Biological Diversity and PBL Netherlands 
Environmental Assessment Agency (2014). Technical Series 
79 - How sectors can contribute to sustainable use and 
conservation of biodiversity. Secretariat of the Convention on 
Biological Diversity.

248.  Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity (2010) 
Global Biodiversity Outlook 3. Montréal, 94 pages. http://www.
cbd.int/gbo3/; Leadley P, Proença V, Fernández-Manjarrés 
J, Pereira HM, Alkemade R, Biggs R, Bruley E, Cheung W, 
Cooper D, Figueiredo J, Gilman E, Guénette S, Hurtt G, 
Mbow C, Oberdorff T, Revenga C, Scharlemann JPW, Scholes 

154

NotesR, Stafford Smith M, Sumaila UR and Walpole M (2014). 
Interacting Regional-Scale Regime Shifts for Biodiversity 
and Ecosystem Services, BioScience (August 2014) 64 (8): 
665-679 doi:10.1093/biosci/biu093.

249.  PBL (2012). Roads from Rio+20: Pathways to achieve global 
sustainability goals by 2050. Netherlands 46 Environmental 
Assessment Agency

250.  IPCC (2014) Climate change 2014: impacts, adaptations, 

and vulnerability. In: IPCC 5th assessment report. (ed Ipcc); 
Hurtt GC, Chini LP, Frolking S et al. (2011) harmonization 
of land-use scenarios for the period 1500-2100: 600 years 
of global gridded annual land-use transitions, wood harvest, 
and resulting secondary lands. climate change, 109, 117-161. 
In contrast, see: Wise M, Calvin K, Thomson A et al. (2009) 
Implications of Limiting CO2 Concentrations for Land Use 
and Energy Science, 324, 1183-1186. See also Chapter 5 in 
Leadley et al (2014). Technical Series 78 - Progress towards 
the Aichi Biodiversity Targets: An assessment of biodiversity 
trends, policy scenarios and key actions. Secretariat of the 
Convention on Biological Diversity

251.  PBL Netherlands Environmental Assessment Agency 

(2014). Technical Series 79 - How sectors can contribute to 
sustainable use and conservation of biodiversity. Secretariat 
of the Convention on Biological Diversity.

252.  Millennium Ecosystem Assessment, 2005. Ecosystems and 

Human Well-being: Synthesis. Island Press, Washington, 
DC.; TEEB, 2011. The Economics of Ecosystems and 
Biodiversity in National and International Policy Making. 
Earthscan, London and Washington; Nelson, E., Cameron, 
D.R., Regetz, J., Polasky, S., Daily, G.C., 2011. Terrestrial 
Biodiversity, in: Kareiva, P., Tallis, H., Ricketts, T., Daily, 
G.C., Polasky, S. (Eds.), Natural Capital, Theory & Practice of 
Mapping Ecosystem Services. Oxford University Press, New 
York; Cardinale, B.J., Duffy, J.E., Gonzalez, A., Hooper, D.U., 
Perrings, C., Venail, P., Narwani, A., Mace, G.M., Tilman, 
D., Wardle, D.A., Kinzig, A.P., Daily, G.C., Loreau, M., Grace, 
J.B., Larigauderie, A., Srivastava, D.S., Naeem, S., 2012. 
Biodiversity loss and its impact on humanity. Nature 486 
(7401): 59-67; 

253.  Mace, G.M., Norris, K., Fitter, A.H., 2012. Biodiversity and 
ecosystem services: a multilayered relationship. Trends in 
Ecology and Evolution 27 (1): 19-26; Cardinale, B.J., Duffy, 
J.E., Gonzalez, A., Hooper, D.U., Perrings, C., Venail, P., 
Narwani, A., Mace, G.M., Tilman, D., Wardle, D.A., Kinzig, 
A.P., Daily, G.C., Loreau, M., Grace, J.B., Larigauderie, A., 
Srivastava, D.S., Naeem, S., 2012. Biodiversity loss and its 
impact on humanity. Nature 486 (7401): 59-67; 

254.  TEEB, 2011. The Economics of Ecosystems and Biodiversity in 
National and International Policy Making. Earthscan, London 
and Washington

255.  FAO, CINE, 2009. Indigenous Peoples’ food systems: the 

many dimensions of culture, diversity and environment for 
nutrition and health. Food and Agriculture Organization of 
the United Nations (FAO) and Centre for Indigenous Peoples’ 
Nutrition and Environment (CINE), Rome

256.  Roe, D., Thomas, D., Smith, J., Walpole, M. & Elliott, J. 
(2011) Biodiversity and Poverty: Ten Frequently Asked 
Questions – Ten Policy Implications. IIED Gatekeeper Series 
150, IIED, London, UK; Roe, D., Elliott, J., Sandbrook, C. 
& Walpole, M. (2013, eds) Biodiversity Conservation and 
Poverty Alleviation: Exploring the Evidence for a Link. Wiley-
Blackwell Publishing Ltd., Oxford, UK. XI +336 pages.

257.  Danielsen F., Sorensen M.K., Olwig M.F., Selvam V., Parish F., 
Burgess N.D., Hiraishi T., Karunagaran V.M., Rasmussen M.S., 
Hansen L.B., Quarto A. & Suryadiputra N. (2005). The Asian 
tsunami: A protective role for coastal vegetation. Science, 
310 (5748), 643-643. UNEP-WCMC (2006). In the front 
line: shoreline protection and other ecosystem services from 
mangroves and coral reefs. UNEP-WCMC, Cambridge, UK 33 
pp

258.  Ferrario, F., Beck, M. W., Storlazzi, C. D., Micheli, F., Shepard, 

C. C., & Airoldi, L. (2014). The effectiveness of coral reefs 
for coastal hazard risk reduction and adaptation. Nature 
communications, 5

259.  Millennium Ecosystem Assessment, 2005. Ecosystems and 

Human Well-being: Synthesis. Island Press, Washington, DC.;

260.  Millennium Ecosystem Assessment, 2005. Ecosystems and 

Human Well-being: Synthesis. Island Press, Washington, DC.; 
CBD, 2010b. Global Biodiversity Outlook 3. Secretariat of the 
Convention on Biological Diversity, Montréal.

261.  Koziell I. 2001 Diversity not adversity: Sustainable livelihoods 

with biodiversity. IIED and DFID, London.; Roe, D., Thomas, 
D., Smith, J., Walpole, M. & Elliott, J. (2011) Biodiversity 
and Poverty: Ten Frequently Asked Questions – Ten Policy 
Implications. IIED Gatekeeper Series 150, IIED, London, 
UK.; Sachs, J.D., Baillie, J.E.M., Sutherland, W.J., Armsworth, 
P.R., Ash, N., Beddington, J., Blackburn, T.M., Collen, B., 
Gardiner, B., Gaston, K.J., Godfray, H.C.J., Green, R.E., 
Harvey, P.H., House, B., Knapp, S., Kümpel, N.F., Macdonald, 
D.W., Mace, G.M., Mallet, J., Matthews, A., May, R.M., 
Petchey, O., Purvis, A., Roe, D., Safi, K., Turner, K., Walpole, 
M., Watson, R., Jones, K.E., 2009. Biodiversity Conservation 
and the Millennium Development Goals. Science 325 (5947): 
1502-1503.

262.  Tekelenburg, A., ten Brink, B.J.E, and Witmer, M.C.H. 2009. 
How do biodiversity and poverty relate? An explorative study. 
Netherlands Environmental Assessment Agency (PBL), 
Bilthoven, Netherlands.

263.  The outcome document of the OWG was adopted on July 19, 

2014. See: http://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/owg.html

155

Notes