 

Human Development  
Report 2013
 
The Rise of the South:
Human Progress in a Diverse World

S

E

N

Empowered lives. 
Resilient nations. 

W

The  2013  Human  Development  Report  is  the 
latest in the series of global Human Development 
Reports  published  by  UNDP  since  1990  as 
independent,  empirically  grounded  analyses  of 
major development issues, trends and policies.
 
Additional resources related to the 2013 Human 
Development  Report  can  be  found  online  at 
http://hdr.undp.org,  including  complete  editions 
or  summaries  of  the  Report  in  more  than  20 
languages,  a  collection  of  Human  Development 
Research  Papers  commissioned  for  the  2013 
Report,  interactive  maps  and  databases  of 
national  human  development  indicators,  full 
explanations  of  the  sources  and  methodologies 
employed  in  the  Report’s  human  development 
indices,  country  profiles  and  other  background 
materials as well as previous global, regional and 
national Human Development Reports.

Human Development Report 2013

The Rise of the South:
Human Progress in a Diverse World

Published for the
United Nations
Development
Programme
(UNDP)

Empowered lives. 
Resilient nations. 

1990  Concept and Measurement of Human Development
1991  Financing Human Development
1992  Global Dimensions of Human Development
1993  People’s Participation
1994  New Dimensions of Human Security
1995  Gender and Human Development
1996  Economic Growth and Human Development
1997  Human Development to Eradicate Poverty
1998  Consumption for Human Development
1999  Globalization with a Human Face
2000  Human Rights and Human Development
2001  Making New Technologies Work for Human Development
2002  Deepening Democracy in a Fragmented World
2003  Millennium Development Goals: A Compact among Nations to End Human Poverty
2004  Cultural Liberty in Today’s Diverse World
2005 
2006  Beyond Scarcity: Power, Poverty and the Global Water Crisis

Human Development Reports 1990–2013
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  2007/2008  Fighting Climate Change: Human Solidarity in a Divided World
 
 
 
 

International Cooperation at a Crossroads: Aid, Trade and Security in an Unequal World

2009  Overcoming Barriers: Human Mobility and Development
2010  The Real Wealth of Nations: Pathways to Human Development
2011 
2013  The Rise of the South: Human Progress in a Diverse World

Sustainability and Equity: A Better Future for All

Regional Human Development Reports: Over the past two decades, regionally focused HDRs have also been 
produced in all major areas of the developing world, with support from UNDP’s regional bureaus. With 
provocative analyses and clear policy recommendations, regional HDRs have examined such critical issues 
as political empowerment in the Arab states, food security in Africa, climate change in Asia, treatment of 
ethnic minorities in Central Europe and challenges of inequality and citizens’ security in Latin America and 
the Caribbean.

National Human Development Reports: Since the release of the first national HDR in 1992, national HDRs 
have been produced in 140 countries by local editorial teams with UNDP support. These reports—some 700 
to date—bring a human development perspective to national policy concerns through local consultations 
and research. National HDRs have covered many key development issues, from climate change to youth 
employment to inequalities driven by gender or ethnicity.

Copyright © 2013 
by the United Nations Development Programme 
1 UN Plaza, New York, NY 10017, USA

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted, in any form or by any 
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without prior permission.

ISBN 978-92-1-126340-4

A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library and the Library of Congress.

Printed in Canada by Gilmore Printing Services Inc. on Forest Stewardship Council  certified and elemental chlorine-free papers. 
Printed using vegetable-based inks and produced by means of environmentally compatible technology.

Editing and production: Communications Development Incorporated, Washington DC 
Design: Melanie Doherty Design, San Francisco, CA

For a list of any errors or omissions found subsequent to printing, please visit our website at http://hdr.undp.org

Human Development Report 2013 Team

Director and lead author
Khalid Malik

Research and statistics
Maurice Kugler (Head of Research), Milorad Kovacevic (Chief Statistician), Subhra Bhattacharjee, Astra Bonini, Cecilia 
Calderón, Alan Fuchs, Amie Gaye, Iana Konova, Arthur Minsat, Shivani Nayyar, José Pineda and Swarnim Waglé

Communications and publishing
William  Orme  (Chief  of  Communications),  Botagoz  Abdreyeva,  Carlotta  Aiello,  Eleonore  Fournier-Tombs,  Jean-Yves 
Hamel, Scott Lewis and Samantha Wauchope

National Human Development Reports
Eva Jespersen (Deputy Director), Christina Hackmann, Jonathan Hall, Mary Ann Mwangi and Paola Pagliani

Operations and administration
Sarantuya Mend (Operations Manager), Ekaterina Berman, Diane Bouopda, Mamaye Gebretsadik and Fe Juarez-Shanahan

     |    iii

Foreword

The 2013 Human Development Report, The 
Rise of the South: Human Progress in a Diverse 
World looks at the evolving geopolitics of our 
times,  examining  emerging  issues  and  trends 
and also the new actors which are shaping the 
development landscape.

The  Report  argues  that  the  striking  trans-
formation  of  a  large  number  of  developing 
countries into dynamic major economies with 
growing political influence is having a signifi-
cant impact on human development progress.

The Report notes that, over the last decade, 
all countries accelerated their achievements in 
the education, health, and income dimensions 
as measured in the Human Development Index 
(HDI)—to  the  extent  that  no  country  for 
which data was available had a lower HDI val-
ue in 2012 than in 2000. As faster progress was 
recorded in lower HDI countries during this 
period, there was notable convergence in HDI 
values globally, although progress was uneven 
within and between regions.

Looking specifically at countries which lifted 
their  HDI  value  substantially  between  1990 
and 2012 on both the income and non-income 
dimensions of human development, the Report 
examines the strategies which enabled them to 
perform well. In this respect, the 2013 Report 
makes  a  significant  contribution  to  develop-
ment thinking by describing specific drivers of 
development transformation and by suggesting 
future policy priorities that could help sustain 
such momentum.

By  2020,  according  to  projections  devel-
oped for this Report, the combined economic 
output of three leading developing countries 
alone—Brazil, China and India—will surpass 
the aggregate production of Canada, France, 
Germany, Italy, the United Kingdom and the 
United States. Much of this expansion is being 
driven by new trade and technology partner-
ships within the South itself, as this Report also 
shows.

A key message contained in this and previous 
Human Development Reports, however, is that 
economic growth alone does not automatically 
translate  into  human  development  progress. 
Pro-poor policies and significant investments 

iv    |    HUMAN DEvELOPMENT REPORT 2013

in people’s capabilities—through a focus on ed-
ucation, nutrition and health, and employment 
skills—can expand access to decent work and 
provide for sustained progress.

The  2013  Report  identifies  four  specific 
areas  of  focus  for  sustaining  development 
momentum:  enhancing  equity,  including  on 
the gender dimension; enabling greater voice 
and participation of citizens, including youth; 
confronting environmental pressures; and man-
aging demographic change.

The Report also suggests that as global de-
velopment challenges become more complex 
and  transboundary  in  nature,  coordinated 
action on the most pressing challenges of our 
era, whether they be poverty eradication, cli-
mate change, or peace and security, is essential. 
As countries are increasingly interconnected 
through  trade,  migration,  and  information 
and  communications  technologies,  it  is  no 
surprise  that  policy  decisions  in  one  place 
have substantial impacts elsewhere. The crises 
of  recent  years—food,  financial,  climate—
which have blighted the lives of so many point 
to this, and to the importance of working to 
reduce  people’s  vulnerability  to  shocks  and 
disasters.

To  harness  the  wealth  of  knowledge,  ex-
pertise,  and  development  thinking  in  the 
South,  the  Report  calls  for  new  institutions 
which can facilitate regional integration and 
South–South  cooperation.  Emerging  powers 
in the developing world are already sources of 
innovative  social  and  economic  policies  and 
are major trade, investment, and increasingly 
development  cooperation  partners  for  other 
developing countries.

Many other countries across the South have 
seen rapid development, and their experiences 
and South–South cooperation are equally an 
inspiration to development policy. UNDP is 
able to play a useful role as a knowledge broker, 
and as a convener of partners—governments, 
civil society and multinational companies—to 
share  experiences.  We  have  a  key  role  too  in 
facilitating learning and capacity building. This 
Report offers very useful insights for our future 
engagement in South–South cooperation.

Finally, the Report also calls for a critical look 
at global governance institutions to promote a 
fairer, more equal world. It points to outdated 
structures, which do not reflect the new eco-
nomic and geopolitical reality described, and 
considers options for a new era of partnership. 
It  also  calls  for  greater  transparency  and  ac-
countability, and highlights the role of global 
civil  society  in  advocating  for  this  and  for 
greater decision-making power for those most 
directly affected by global challenges, who are 
often the poorest and most vulnerable people 
in our world.

As discussion continues on the global devel-
opment agenda beyond 2015, I hope many will 

take the time to read this Report and reflect 
on  its  lessons  for  our  fast-changing  world. 
The  Report  refreshes  our  understanding  of 
the current state of global development, and 
demonstrates how much can be learned from 
the experiences of fast development progress in 
so many countries in the South.

Helen Clark
Administrator
United Nations Development Programme

Foreword    |    v

Acknowledgements

The  Human  Development  Report  is  the 
product  of  a  collective  effort  by  the  United 
Nations  Development  Programme  (UNDP) 
Human Development Report Office (HDRO) 
and  many  valued  external  advisors  and  con-
tributors. However, the findings, analysis and 
policy  recommendations  of  this  Report,  as 
with previous Reports, are those of the authors 
alone.

The  publication  of  this  Report  in  March 
2013 represents a return to the original sched-
ule of the Human Development Reports, with 
its global launch and distribution in the first 
part of the year. This timing allows the Report’s 
composite indices to incorporate the most cur-
rent statistical indicators and provides greater 
opportunity for discussions of the Report’s key 
findings and messages during the year.

Preparation  of  this  Report  was  guided 
by  a  careful  re-reading  of  the  first  Human 
Development  Reports  by  Mahbub  ul  Haq. 
In that spirit, the Report opens with a review 
of the current “state of human development”, 
looking  at  key  human  development  trends 
and issues in the world today. It also benefited 
greatly from the wise counsel of Amartya Sen 
and Frances Stewart, Mahbub’s close collabor-
ators,  who  generously  provided  both  critical 
advice and written contributions.

We  are  pleased  that  this  Report  features 
signed  contributions  from  New  York  City 
Mayor Michael Bloomberg, Japan International 
Cooperation Agency President Akihiko Tanaka 
and Turkey’s Minister of Development Cevdet 
Yılmaz, among others. We would like to express 
special  gratitude  to  the  authors  of  research 
papers commissioned by HDRO, who greatly 
enriched  our  understanding  of  the  issues  we 
set out to address: Fred Block, Nader Fergany, 
Ilene Grabel, Khalil Hamdani, Patrick Heller, 
Barry  Hughes,  Inge  Kaul,  Peter  Kragelund, 
Shiva Kumar, Wolfgang Lutz, Deepak Nayyar, 
Leonce Ndikumana and Ngaire Woods.

Throughout the preparation of the Report, 
we received invaluable insights and guidance 
from  our  distinguished  HDRO  Advisory 
Panel, especially Edward S. Ayensu, Cristovam 
Buarque, Michael Elliott, Jayati Ghosh, Patrick 

vi    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2013

Guillaumont,  Nanna  Hvidt,  Rima  Khalaf, 
Nora  Lustig,  Sir  James  Alexander  Mirrlees, 
Rajendra  K.  Pachauri,  Samir  Radwan,  Rizal 
Ramli, Gustav Ranis, Frances Stewart, Miguel 
Székely and Kandeh K. Yumkella.

We would also like to thank HDRO’s stat-
istical  panel,  which  provided  expert  advice 
on methodologies and data choices related to 
the calculation of the Report’s human devel-
opment  indices:  Anthony  Atkinson,  Rachid 
Benmokhtar Benabdellah, Enrico Giovannini, 
Peter Harper, Anthony K.M. Kilele, Ben Paul 
Mungyereza,  Hendrik  Van  der  Pol,  Marcia 
Quintsler and Eduardo Sojo Garza-Aldape.

The  Report’s  composite  indices  and  other 
statistical resources rely on the expertise of the 
leading  international  data  providers  in  their 
specialized fields, and we express our gratitude 
for their continued collegial collaboration with 
the Human Development Report. To ensure 
accuracy  and  clarity,  the  Report’s  statistical 
analysis also benefited from an external review 
of statistical findings by Akmal Abdurazakov, 
Sabina  Alkire,  Virginija  Cruijsen,  Kenneth 
Harttgen and Claudio Montenegro.

The  consultations  held  around  the  world 
during preparation of the Report relied on the 
generous support of many institutions and indi-
viduals who are too numerous to mention here. 
Consultations were held between September 
2011 and June 2012 in Addis Ababa, Bonn, 
Brasilia, Colombo, Geneva, New York, Rabat, 
Santiago and Tokyo. Support from partnering 
institutions,  including  UNDP  country  and 
regional offices, listed at http://hdr.undp.org/
en/reports/hdr2013/consultations, is acknow-
ledged with much gratitude.

Many of our UNDP colleagues around the 
world—as  members  of  the  HDRO  Readers 
Group  and  the  Executive  Group—provided 
invaluable  insights  into  the  preparation  and 
final  drafting  of  the  Report.  We  would  es-
pecially like to thank Adel Abdellatif, Pedro 
Conceição, Rebeca Grynspan, Olav Kjørven, 
Ajay Chhibber, George Ronald Gray Molina, 
Heraldo Muñoz, Selim Jehan, Natalia Linou, 
Kamal  Malhotra,  Abdoulaye  Mar  Dieye, 
Charles McNeill, Shantanu Mukherjee, Madi 

Musa, Thangaval Palanivel, Anuradha Rajivan, 
Turhan  Saleh,  Heather  Simpson,  Ben  Slay, 
Mounir Tabet, Antonio Vigilante and Kanni 
Wignaraja.

Several  hard  working,  talented  young  col-
leagues made important contributions to the 
thorough fact checking of the Report. These 
include Philip Bastian, Joshua Greenstein, Ni 
Gu,  Diana  Jimenez,  Wanshan  Li,  Veronica 
Postal and Alyssa Vladimir.

The  Report  has  been  blessed  with  many 
“friends of HDRO” who have gone out of their 
way to help strengthen it. Apart from a critical 
read  of  the  draft  Report  by  Frances  Stewart 
and  Jomo  Kwame  Sundaram  and  extensive 
review by Khalil Hamdani, Shiva Kumar, Terry 
McKinley, Pedro Conceição and Peter Stalker, 

we  are  grateful  for  the  painstaking  work  of 
our editors at Communications Development 
Incorporated, led by Bruce Ross-Larson, with 
Meta de Coquereaumont, Christopher Trott 
and  Elaine  Wilson,  and  of  designer  Melanie 
Doherty.

Most of all, I am profoundly grateful to the 
HDRO  team  for  their  dedication  and  com-
mitment in producing a report that meets the 
highest standards of scholarship.

Khalid Malik
Director
Human Development Report Office

Acknowledgments    |    vii

Contents

Foreword 
Acknowledgements 

Overview 
Introduction 

CHaPteR 1

The state of human development 
Progress of nations 
Social integration 
Human security 

CHaPteR 2

A more global South 
Rebalancing: a more global world, a more global South 
Impetus from human development 
Innovation and entrepreneurship in the South 
New forms of cooperation 
Sustaining progress in uncertain times 

CHaPteR 3

Drivers of development transformation 
Driver 1: a proactive developmental state 
Driver 2: tapping of global markets 
Driver 3: determined social policy innovation 

CHaPteR 4

Sustaining momentum 
Policy priorities for developing countries 
Modelling demography and education 
Impact of the rate of population ageing 
the need for ambitious policies 
Seizing the moment 

CHaPteR 5

Governance and partnerships for a new era 
a new global view of public goods 
Better representation for the South 
Global civil society 
towards coherent pluralism 
Responsible sovereignty 
New institutions, new mechanisms 
Conclusions: partners in a new era 

viii    |    HUMAN DEvELOPMENT REPORT 2013

iv
vi

1
11

21
23
34
38

43
43
49
54
56
60

63
66
74
77

87
87
97
100
101
102

105
106
109
110
112
116
117
119

Notes 
References 

StatIStICal aNNex

Human Development Index and its components 
Human Development Index trends, 1980–2012 
Inequality-adjusted Human Development Index 
Gender Inequality Index 

Readers guide 
Key to HDI countries and ranks, 2012 
Statistical tables
1 
2 
3 
4 
5  Multidimensional Poverty Index 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
Regions 
Statistical references 
technical appendix: explanatory note for projections exercise 

Command over resources 
Health 
Education 
Social integration 
International trade flows of goods and services 
International capital flows and migration 
Innovation and technology 
Environment 
Population trends 

125
131

140
143

144
148
152
156
160
162
166
170
174
178
182
186
190
194
198
199
200

Fairness, macroeconomics and human development 

BoxeS
22
1.1 
22
1.2  Short-term cuts have long-term consequences: rising fertility rates in Africa 
1.3  What is it like to be a human being? 
24
1.4  Subjective indicators of well-being: increased acceptance in thinking and policy  28
1.5 
31
1.6  Education quality: achievement on the Programme for International 

Inequality holds back human development 

Student Assessment 

1.7  Social competencies: human development beyond the individual 
1.8  Poverty’s structural dimensions 
2.1  The South’s integration with the world economy and human development 
2.2  Acquisitions by the South of brands in the North 
2.3  Ties that bind: the mutual dependence of North and South 
2.4  Mobile phones and the Palapa Ring: connecting Indonesia 
2.5  Decent work in a competitive world 
2.6 
2.7  Brazil, China and India at work in Zambia 
3.1  History and initial conditions matter, but they are not destiny 
3.2  What is a developmental state? Need it be authoritarian? 
3.3  Japan and triangular cooperation 
3.4 
3.5  Eastern Europe and Central Asia: where North meets South 

Final assembly is about more than low wages 

Investing in agriculture 

33
36
37
44
48
49
51
53
54
57
65
67
68
69
70

3.6 

India’s Supreme Court issues a progressive verdict mandating seats for 
disadvantaged children in private schools 

3.7  Bangladesh makes dramatic advances in child survival 
3.8  Strengthening social protection in Turkey 
3.9  Conditional cash transfer programmes and Mexico’s Oportunidades 
3.10  Why New York City looked South for antipoverty policy advice 
4.1  Why population prospects will likely differ in the Republic of Korea and India 
4.2  China and Ghana: who benefits from the demographic dividend? 
5.1  The shifting line between public and private in transportation 
5.2  A world parliament for global democracy? 
5.3  Regional finance in Asia: Chiang Mai Initiative Multilateralization and the 

Asian Development Bank 

5.4  CAF: a Latin American development bank 

FIGuReS
1 
2  More than 40 countries of the South had greater gains on the HDI between 

Acceleration of growth on the HDI 

3 

4 
5 

6 

1990 and 2012 than would have been predicted from their previous 
performance on the HDI 
Brazil, China and India combined are projected to account for 40% of global 
output by 2050, up from 10% in 1950 
The middle class in the South is projected to continue to grow 
The exponential rise in Internet use in the South has been most notable over 
the past decade 
At least 15 developing countries have substantial trading relationships with 
more than 100 trade partners as both exporters and importers 
Official foreign exchange reserves by country group 
Income per capita is rising to varying degrees in all four HDI groups 

7 
1.1 
1.2  Sub-Saharan Africa has sustained income growth over the last decade 
1.3  The lower the HDI value, the larger the gap between income poverty and 

multidimensional poverty 

1.4  There is notable variation among countries in the gap between income 

poverty and multidimensional poverty 
Losses due to inequality in HDI and its components 

1.5 
1.6  Most regions show declining inequality in health and education and rising 

1.7 

inequality in income 
Few countries show both the high HDI and low ecological footprint required 
for sustainable human development 

1.8  Development is not always accompanied by a rise in military spending 
2.1  As a share of world merchandise trade, South–South trade more than tripled 

2.2 

over 1980–2011, while North–North trade declined 
Foreign direct investment flows to and from the South have veered sharply 
upward since the 1990s 

2.3  Between 2000 and 2010, Internet use grew more than 30% a year in around 

60 developing countries 

2.4  Export earnings per capita and human development are highly correlated 
2.5  Current foreign direct investment is positively associated with achievements 

in health and education in previous years 

79
81
83
84
85
88
100
106
112

114
115

12

12

13
14

15

16
18
26
26

29

30
31

32

35
40

46

47

50
52

53

2.6  Emerging market economies have amassed large foreign exchange reserves 

since 1995 

58

3.1  Some countries have performed well on both the nonincome and the income 

dimensions of the HDI 

63
3.2  Current HDI values and previous public expenditures are positively correlated . . .  71
71
3.3 
4.1  Under the fast track scenario, education outcomes are enhanced 
92
4.2 

. . . as are current child survival and previous public expenditure on health 

In most countries, employment opportunities have not kept pace with 
educational attainment 

4.3  At each HDI level, some countries have greater carbon productivity than others 
4.4  Different environmental scenarios have different impacts on extreme poverty 
4.5  Education policies can alter dependency ratios 
4.6  Populations are ageing more rapidly in developing countries 
4.7  Human development prospects for 2050 are greater under the accelerated 

progress scenario, especially for low HDI countries 

4.8  Human development outcomes through 2050 improve more under the 

accelerated progress scenario 

4.9  Advances in GDP per capita through 2050 are especially strong under the 

accelerated progress scenario 

93
94
96
98
101

101

102

103

5.1  Under the accelerated progress scenario, the largest projected increases in 

the Human Development Index are in Sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia 

118

5.2  Allocating a small fraction of the international reserves of the nine G20 
countries of the South could provide substantial additional resources for 
public investment in infrastructure in Sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia 

118

MaPS
1.1  There is a small negative connotation between homicide rates and HDI values  39
2.1  Thailand’s export expansion, 1995–2011 
45

taBleS
1.1  HDI and components, by region and HDI group, 2012 
1.2  Top five countries that rank better on the HDI than on gross national income 

per capita in 2012 
Inequality and satisfaction with freedom of choice and community 
Least developed countries’ trade with China, 2000–2001 and 2010–2011 

1.3 
2.1 
2.2  Different models of development partnerships 
3.1  Selected developing countries that registered large reductions in HDI shortfall 

or high rates of growth in gross national income per capita, 1990–2012 
3.2  Share of world exports of goods and services of high achievers in human 

development, 1985–1990 and 2005–2010 

4.1  Under-five mortality rate and total fertility rate by mother’s education level 
4.2  Projected number of deaths of children under age 5, by education scenario, 

2010–2015, 2025–2030 and 2045–2050 

4.3  Population in extreme poverty under the environmental disaster scenario, 

by region, 2010–2050 

4.4  Trends in dependency ratios, selected countries, 1970–2050 
4.5  Number of people in extreme poverty by region and selected countries, base 

25

27
38
46
56

64

75
89

90

96
99

case and accelerated progress scenarios, 2010–2050 

103

Contents    |    ix

“It is when we all play safe 
that we create a world 
of utmost insecurity.”

Dag Hammarskjold

Overview

One of the most heartening developments in recent years has been the broad progress in human development of many 
developing countries and their emergence onto the global stage: the “rise of the South”. This growing diversity in voice and 
power is challenging the principles that have guided policymakers and driven the major post–Second World War institu-
tions. Stronger voices from the South are demanding more- representative frameworks of international governance that 
embody the principles of democracy and equity.

Just as important, many developing countries 
are reshaping ideas about how to attain human 
development. The rise of the South has resulted 
not from adhering to a fixed set of policy pre-
scriptions,  but  from  applying  pragmatic  pol-
icies that respond to local circumstances and 
opportunities—including a deepening of the 
developmental role of states, a dedication to 
improving human development (including by 
supporting education and social welfare) and 
an openness to trade and innovation. Even so, 
future  progress  will  require  policymakers  to 
play  close  attention  to  such  issues  as  equity, 
voice and accountability, environmental risks 
and changing demography.

Over  the  past  decades,  countries  across  the 
world  have  been  converging  towards  higher 
levels of human development, as shown by the 
Human Development Index (HDI), a composite 
measure of indicators along three dimensions: 
life  expectancy,  educational  attainment  and 
command over the resources needed for a decent 
living. All groups and regions have seen notable 
improvement in all HDI components, with fast-
er progress in low and medium HDI countries. 
On this basis, the world is becoming less unequal. 
Nevertheless,  national  averages  hide  large  var-
iations in human experience. Wide disparities 
remain within countries of both the North and 
the  South,  and  income  inequality  within  and 
between many countries has been rising.

Although  most  developing  countries  have 
done  well,  a  large  number  of  countries  have 
done particularly well—in what can be called 
the  “rise  of  the  South”.  Some  of  the  largest 
countries have made rapid advances, notably 
Brazil, China, India, Indonesia, South Africa 
and Turkey. But there has also been substan-
tial  progress  in  smaller  economies,  such  as 
Bangladesh, Chile, Ghana, Mauritius, Rwanda 
and Tunisia.

The  South  has  risen  at  an  unprecedented 
speed and scale. For example, the current eco-
nomic takeoffs in China and India began with 
about 1 billion people in each country and dou-
bled output per capita in less than 20 years—an 
economic force affecting a much larger popu-
lation than the Industrial Revolution did.1 By 
2050, Brazil, China and India combined are 
projected to account for 40% of world output 
in purchasing power parity terms.

During these uncertain times, countries of 
the South are collectively bolstering world eco-
nomic growth, lifting other developing econo-
mies, reducing poverty and increasing wealth 
on  a  grand  scale.  They  still  face  formidable 
challenges and are home to many of the world’s 
poor. But they have demonstrated how prag-
matic policies and a strong focus on human de-
velopment can release the opportunities latent 
in their economies, facilitated by globalization.

A changing world, 
a more global South

To the casual observer, the state of affairs in 
2013  may  appear  as  a  tale  of  two  worlds:  a 
resurgent South—most visibly countries such 
as China and India, where there is much hu-
man development progress, growth appears to 
remain robust and the prospects for poverty 
reduction  are  encouraging—and  a  North  in 
crisis—where austerity policies and the absence 
of  economic  growth  are  imposing  hardship 
on millions of unemployed people and people 
deprived of benefits as social compacts come 
under intense pressure. There are also deeper 
problems, shared by North and South: growing 
inequality in many countries, both developed 
and developing, which threatens global recov-
ery  and  the  sustainability  of  future  progress 

Overview    |    1

the South needs the 
North, and increasingly 
the North needs the South

and limits poverty reduction, as well as serious 
concerns about the environment.

While  focusing  on  the  rise  of  the  South 
and its implications for human development, 
this Report is also about this changing world, 
driven in large measure by the rise of the South. 
It examines the progress being made, the chal-
lenges  arising  (some  as  a  result  of  that  very 
success)  and  the  opportunities  emerging  for 
representative global and regional governance.
The headline story of a resurgent South is 
both uplifting and in some ways misleading. 
The South needs the North, and increasingly 
the North needs the South. The world is get-
ting  more  connected,  not  less.  Recent  years 
have seen a remarkable reorientation of global 
production, with much more destined for in-
ternational trade, which, by 2011, accounted 
for nearly 60% of global output. Developing 
countries have played a big part: between 1980 
and 2010, they increased their share of world 
merchandise  trade  from  25%  to  47%  and 
their share of world output from 33% to 45%. 
Developing regions have also been strengthen-
ing links with each other: between 1980 and 
2011, South–South trade increased from less 
than 8% of world merchandise trade to more 
than 26%.

Yet  the  United  States  remains  the  largest 
economy in the world in monetary terms and 
will remain so for the foreseeable future. If the 
US  recovery  hesitates  and  Europe  is  unable 
to pull itself out of its current economic and 
social doldrums, there will be a large knock-on 
effect on the developing world. Global chal-
lenges  such  as  climate  change  and  stressed 
ecosystems  require  countries  to  cooperate 
even more than before. While the rise of the 
South  is  reshaping  power  relations  in  many 
important respects, hard-won gains in human 
development will be more difficult to protect 
if cooperation fails and difficult decisions are 
postponed.

Indeed,  one  can  go  further  and  state  that 
there is a “south” in the North and a “north” in 
the South. Elites, whether from the North or 
the South, are increasingly global and connect-
ed, and they benefit the most from the enor-
mous wealth generation over the past decade, 
in part due to accelerating globalization. They 
are educated at the same universities and share 
similar lifestyles and perhaps values.

2    |    HUMAN DEvELOPMENT REPORT 2013

The  changing  global  economy  is  creating 
unprecedented  challenges  and  opportunities 
for continued progress in human development. 
Global economic and political structures are in 
flux at a time when the world faces recurrent 
financial crises, worsening climate change and 
growing social unrest. Global institutions ap-
pear unable to accommodate changing power 
relations, ensure adequate provision of global 
public goods to meet global and regional chal-
lenges  and  respond  to  the  growing  need  for 
greater equity and sustainability.

This phenomenon, coupled with the diverse 
development paths followed by these countries 
from the South, presents an opportunity: the 
principles that have driven post–Second World 
War institutions and guided policymakers need 
recalibration, if not a reset, to accommodate 
the growing diversity in voice and power and 
to sustain development progress over the long 
term. These principles require reconsideration, 
and global institutions need greater flexibility 
to reinforce directions that put people first and 
nudge institutions to aim forcefully at a fairer, 
more just world. Potentially, the growing diver-
sity in development patterns is creating space, 
even demands, for such a global dialogue and 
restructuring.  There  is  scope  then  for  inno-
vation, and the emergence of global, regional 
and  national  governance  frameworks  that 
embody principles of democracy, equity and 
sustainability.

The  developmental  paths  of  Brazil,  China 
and India, as well as less well recognized suc-
cess  stories  such  as  Bangladesh,  Mauritius 
and Turkey, are reshaping ideas about how to 
attain  human  development.  The  success  of 
these countries calls into question the notion 
of “right” policies, but that does not mean that 
valuable  lessons  cannot  be  drawn  from  the 
experiences of these successful countries. On 
the contrary, key drivers and principles of de-
velopment begin to emerge from the diversity 
of development paths that include deepening 
the developmental role of states, dedication to 
human  development  and  social  welfare,  and 
openness to trade and innovation. And while 
this Report acknowledges the positive aspects 
of the rise of the South, it also underlines the 
imperatives of ensuring that concerns of equity 
and sustainability are fully incorporated into 
future  policies  and  strategies.  As  the  2011 

Concerns for the future apply in the North 
as  well,  where  low  economic  growth,  high 
unemployment  rates  and  austerity  measures 
threaten the high levels of human development. 
In both the North and the South, ruling elites 
cannot afford to ignore these threats to social 
inclusion and social welfare, given the rising 
call for fairness and accountability—from cit-
izens, communities and civil organizations at 
home and abroad, facilitated by the explosion 
of social media.

To support policymaking and research that 
adequately  address  these  contemporary  and 
emerging global realities, measures and analyt-
ics are needed that broaden the human devel-
opment  concept.  The  Human  Development 
Report and the family of human development 
indices  must  meet  this  challenge  by  moving 
beyond a focus on measuring individual capa-
bilities to incorporate society-level capacities, 
concerns and perceptions. Individual achieve-
ments in health, education and income, while 
essential, do not guarantee progress in human 
development if social conditions constrain in-
dividual achievements and if perceptions about 
progress differ. The turmoil in several countries 
in the Arab States is a reminder that people, 
especially the young, who are better educated 
and healthier than previous generations put a 
high premium on meaningful employment, on 
exercising a voice in affairs that influence their 
lives and on being treated with respect. 

Human Development Report also stressed, con-
tinued human development progress is unlikely 
if inequality and environmental destruction are 
not moved to the forefront of policy discus-
sions. Under worst case scenarios, a business 
as usual approach to development combined 
with environmental crises could reverse human 
development gains in the South or make this 
progress unsustainable.

Furthermore, the promotion of social cohe-
sion and social integration, a stated objective 
of  development  strategies  of  countries  such 
as Brazil, is based on evidence of the positive 
development impact of a unified society. More-
equal societies tend to do better in most meas-
ures  of  human  development—from  teenage 
pregnancies to suicide rates—than do unequal 
societies. This finding is borne out by studies 
in both developed and developing countries. 
These  society-level  aspects  of  development 

have been underappreciated in past conceptu-
alizations of development but are proving to be 
essential elements of any viable and desirable 
long-term development path.

Helping other countries catch up

All developing countries are not yet participat-
ing fully in the rise of the South. The pace of 
change is slower, for instance, in the majority 
of the 49 least developed countries, especially 
those  that  are  landlocked  or  distant  from 
world  markets.  Nevertheless,  many  of  these 
countries  have  also  begun  to  benefit  from 
South–South  trade,  investment,  finance  and 
technology transfer. For example, there have 
been positive growth spillovers from China to 
other countries, particularly close trading part-
ners. To some extent, this has offset slackening 
demand  from  developed  countries.  Growth 
in low- income countries would have been an 
estimated 0.3–1.1 percentage points lower in 
2007–2010 had growth fallen at the same rate 
in China and India as in developed economies.2
Many  countries  have  also  benefited  from 
spillovers into important human development 
sectors,  especially  health.  Indian  firms,  for 
example, are supplying affordable medicines, 
medical equipment, and information and com-
munications technology products and services 
to  countries  in  Africa.  Brazilian  and  South 
African companies are having a similar impact.

Rising competitive pressures

Nevertheless, the arrival of exports from larger 
countries  can  also  have  disadvantages.  Large 
countries generate competitive pressures that 
might stifle economic diversification and in-
dustrialization in smaller countries. Yet there 
are  examples  of  industrial  revival  following 
such  competitive  jolts.  A  competitive  role 
today  may  easily  turn  into  a  complementary 
role in the future. Moving from competition to 
cooperation seems to depend on policies that 
enable local agents to make the most of the new 
situation.

Increasingly,  the  most  important  engine 
of growth for countries of the South is their 
domestic market. The middle class is growing 
in size and median income. By 2025, annual 
consumption in emerging markets is estimated 

Individual achievements 
in health, education and 
income, while essential, 
do not guarantee progress 
in human development if 
social conditions constrain 
individual achievements 
and if perceptions 
about progress differ

Overview    |    3

to rise to $30 trillion. By then, the South will ac-
count for three-fifths of the 1 billion households 
earning more than $20,000 a year. Nevertheless, 
such  expansion  will  be  hampered  as  well  as 
marred by significant pockets of deprivation. 
These disparities in the South’s expansion are 
not only un desirable in themselves; they also 
undermine the sustainability of progress, not 
least by creating social and political tensions.

These trends are leading to a more balanced 
world. Instead of having a centre of industrial-
ized countries and a periphery of less developed 
countries,  there  is  now  a  more  complex  and 
dynamic environment.

While there is much awareness at the global 
and regional levels that the world is in transi-
tion, leaders, institutions and academics seem-
ingly find it difficult to put forward principles, 
institutions and policy recommendations that 
can  secure  the  next  steps  in  creating  a  more 
just and sustainable world. This may be in part 
because the world is changing so rapidly and on 
so many fronts, making shared assessments dif-
ficult and collective action elusive. This Report 
contributes  to  this  conversation  by  critically 
assessing the contemporary global context and 
by  promoting  principles  and  concepts  that 
can help a diverse world move towards human 
development  strategies  that  meet  the  new 
challenges of the 21st century, reduce or even 
eliminate poverty and advance progress for all.

Policies, partnerships, principles

How have so many countries in the South been 
able  to  transform  their  human  development 
prospects?  Across  most  of  these  countries, 
there have been three notable drivers of devel-
opment: a proactive developmental state, tap-
ping of global markets, and determined social 
policy innovation. These drivers do not spring 
from abstract conceptions of how development 
should  work;  rather,  they  are  demonstrated 
by the transformational development experi-
ences of many countries in the South. Indeed, 
they challenge preconceived and prescriptive 
approaches:  on  the  one  hand,  they  set  aside 
a  number  of  collectivist,  centrally  managed 
precepts; on the other hand, they diverge from 
the unfettered liberalization espoused by the 
Washington Consensus.

Success is likely to be 
the result of gradual 
integration with 
the world economy 
and accompanied 
by investment in 
people, institutions 
and infrastructure

4    |    HUMAN DEvELOPMENT REPORT 2013

Driver 1: a proactive 
developmental state

A  strong,  proactive  and  responsible  state 
develops policies for both public and private 
sectors—based  on  a  long-term  vision  and 
leadership, shared norms and values, and rules 
and institutions that build trust and cohesion. 
Achieving  enduring  transformation  requires 
countries to chart a consistent and balanced 
approach to development. However, countries 
that have succeeded in igniting and sustaining 
growth in incomes and human development 
have  not  followed  one  simple  recipe.  Faced 
with  different  challenges,  they  have  adopted 
varying policies dealing with market regulation, 
export promotion, industrial development and 
technological  progress.  Priorities  need  to  be 
people-centred and to promote opportunities 
while  protecting  people  against  downside 
risks. Governments can nurture industries that 
would not otherwise emerge because of incom-
plete  markets.  Despite  posing  some  risks  of 
rent seeking and cronyism, this has enabled sev-
eral countries of the South to turn inefficient 
industries into early drivers of export success as 
their economies became more open.

In large and complex societies, the outcome 
of  any  particular  policy  is  inevitably  uncer-
tain.  Developmental  states  therefore  need 
to be pragmatic and test a range of different 
approaches. Some features stand out: for in-
stance,  people-friendly  developmental  states 
have expanded basic social services. Investing 
in people’s capabilities—through health, edu-
cation and other public services—is not an ap-
pendage of the growth process but an integral 
part of it. Rapid expansion of quality jobs is a 
critical feature of growth that promotes human 
development.

Driver 2: tapping of global markets

Global  markets  have  played  an  important 
role  in  advancing  progress.  All  newly  indus-
trializing countries have pursued a strategy of 
“importing what the rest of the world knows 
and exporting what it wants”. But even more 
important are the terms of engagement with 
these markets. Without investment in people, 
returns from global markets tend to be limited. 
Success is more likely to be the result not of a 

sudden opening but of gradual and sequenced 
integration with the world economy, according 
to national circumstances, and accompanied by 
investment  in  people,  institutions  and  infra-
structure. Smaller economies have successfully 
focused  on  niche  products,  whose  success  is 
often the fruit of years of state support built on 
existing competencies or the creation of new 
ones.

Driver 3: determined social 
policy innovation

Few  countries  have  sustained  rapid  growth 
without impressive levels of public investment 
—not just in infrastructure, but also in health 
and education. The aim should be to create vir-
tuous circles where growth and social policies 
reinforce each other. Growth is generally much 
more effective in reducing poverty in countries 
where income inequality is low than in coun-
tries with high inequality. Promoting equality, 
particularly among different religious, ethnic 
or  racial  groups,  also  helps  minimize  social 
conflict.

Education,  health  care,  social  protection, 
legal empowerment and social organization all 
enable poor people to participate in growth. 
Sectoral balance—especially paying attention 
to the rural sector—and the nature and pace of 
employment expansion are critical in determin-
ing how far growth spreads incomes. But even 
these basic policy instruments may not empow-
er disenfranchised groups. The poor fringes of 
society  struggle  to  voice  their  concerns,  and 
governments do not always ensure that services 
actually  reach  everyone.  Social  policy  has  to 
promote inclusion—ensuring nondiscrimina-
tion and equal treatment is critical for political 
and social stability—and provide basic social 
services that can underpin long-term econom-
ic  growth  by  supporting  the  emergence  of  a 
healthy,  educated  labour  force.  Not  all  such 
services need to be provided publicly. But the 
state should ensure that all citizens have secure 
access  to  the  basic  requirements  of  human 
development.

An agenda for development transformation 
is thus multifaceted. It expands poor people’s 
assets by increasing public expenditures on ba-
sic services. It improves the functioning of state 
and social institutions to promote both growth 

and equity. It reduces bureaucratic and social 
constraints on economic action and social mo-
bility. It involves communities in setting budget 
priorities and holding leadership accountable.

Sustaining the momentum

Many countries of the South have demonstrat-
ed much success. But even in the higher achiev-
ing countries, future success is not guaranteed. 
How can countries in the South continue their 
progress in human development, and how can 
the progress be extended to other countries? 
This Report suggests four important areas to 
facilitate this: enhancing equity, enabling voice 
and participation, confronting environmental 
challenges and managing demographic change. 
This Report points to the high cost of policy 
inaction and argues for greater policy ambition.

enhancing equity

Few countries have 
sustained rapid growth 
without impressive 
levels of public 
 investment—not just in 
infrastructure, but also 
in health and education

Greater  equity,  including  between  men  and 
women and among other groups, is not only 
essential in itself, but also important for pro-
moting human development. One of the most 
powerful instruments for this purpose is edu-
cation, which boosts people’s self- confidence 
and enables them to find better jobs, engage in 
public debate and make demands on govern-
ment for health care, social security and other 
entitlements.

Education also has striking impacts on health 
and mortality. Research for this Report shows 
that a mother’s education level is more impor-
tant to child survival than is household income. 
Projections also show that policy interventions 
have a greater impact in countries and regions 
where education outcomes are initially weak-
er.  This  has  profound  policy  implications, 
potentially shifting the emphasis from efforts 
to  boost  household  income  to  measures  to 
improve girls’ education.

This Report makes a strong case for policy 
ambition.  An  accelerated  progress  scenario 
suggests that low HDI countries can converge 
towards  the  levels  of  human  development 
achieved by high and very high HDI countries. 
By  2050,  aggregate  HDI  could  rise  52%  in 
Sub-Saharan Africa (from 0.402 to 0.612) and 
36% in South Asia (from 0.527 to 0.714). Such 

Overview    |    5

unless people can 
participate meaningfully 
in the events and 
processes that shape 
their lives, national 
human development 
paths will be neither 
desirable nor sustainable

policy interventions will also have a positive 
impact on the fight against poverty. By con-
trast, the costs of inaction will rise, especially in 
low HDI countries, which are more vulnerable. 
For instance, failing to implement ambitious 
universal  education  policies  will  adversely 
affect many essential pillars of human develop-
ment for future generations.

enabling voice and participation

Unless  people  can  participate  meaningfully 
in  the  events  and  processes  that  shape  their 
lives, national human development paths will 
be  neither  desirable  nor  sustainable.  People 
should be able to influence policymaking and 
results—and young people in particular should 
be able to look forward to greater economic 
opportunities and political participation and 
accountability.

Dissatisfaction is increasingly high in both 
the  North  and  the  South  as  people  call  for 
more opportunities to voice their concerns and 
influence policy in order to ensure basic social 
protection  and  social  progress.  Among  the 
most active protesters are young people. In part 
this is a response to limited employment op-
portunities for educated young people. History 
is  replete  with  popular  rebellions  against 
unresponsive governments. Such upheaval can 
derail human development—as unrest impedes 
investment and growth and autocratic govern-
ments divert resources to maintaining law and 
order.

It is hard to predict when societies will reach 
a  tipping  point.  Mass  protests,  especially  by 
educated people, tend to erupt when people 
feel excluded from political influence and when 
bleak economic prospects lower the opportu-
nity cost of engaging in such protests. These 
effort-intensive forms of political participation 
are  then  easily  coordinated  by  new  forms  of 
mass communication.

Confronting environmental challenges

Environmental threats such as climate change, 
deforestation,  air  and  water  pollution,  and 
natural disasters affect everyone. But they hurt 
poor  countries  and  poor  communities  most. 
Climate change is already exacerbating chronic 
environmental threats, and ecosystem losses are 

6    |    HUMAN DEvELOPMENT REPORT 2013

constraining livelihood opportunities, especial-
ly for poor people.

Although low HDI countries contribute the 
least to global climate change, they are likely 
to endure the greatest loss in annual rainfall 
and the sharpest increase in its variability, with 
dire implications for agricultural production 
and livelihoods. The magnitude of such losses 
highlights the urgency of adaptation measures.
The cost of inaction will likely be high. The 
longer the inaction, the higher the cost. To en-
sure sustainable economies and societies, new 
policies and structural changes are needed that 
align human development and climate change 
goals in low-emission, climate-resilient strat-
egies and innovative public-private financing 
mechanisms.

Managing demographic change

Between  1970  and  2011,  world  population 
increased  from  3.6  billion  to  7  billion.  As 
that  population  becomes  more  educated,  its 
growth rate will slow. Moreover, development 
prospects are influenced not just by the total 
number of people, but also by the population’s 
age structure. An increasingly critical concern 
is a country’s dependency ratio—that is, the 
number of younger and older people divided 
by the working-age population ages 15–64.

Some  poorer  regions  could  benefit  from  a 
“demographic  dividend”  as  the  share  of  the 
working-age population rises, but only if there 
is strong policy action.3 Girls’ education is a 
critical vehicle of a possible demographic div-
idend.  Educated  women  tend  to  have  fewer, 
healthier  and  better  educated  children;  in 
many  countries  educated  women  also  enjoy 
higher salaries than do uneducated workers.

By contrast, the richer regions of the South 
confront  a  very  different  problem:  as  their 
population ages, the share of the working-age 
population falls. The rate of population age-
ing matters because developing countries will 
struggle to meet the needs of an older popu-
lation if they are still poor. Many developing 
countries  now  have  only  a  short  window  of 
opportunity  to  reap  the  full  benefits  of  the 
demographic dividend.

Demographic trends are not destiny, how-
ever. They can be altered through education 
policies  in  particular.  This  Report  presents 

two  scenarios  for  2010–2050:  a  base  case 
scenario,  in  which  current  education  trends 
continue, and a fast track scenario, in which 
the  countries  with  the  lowest  initial  levels 
embrace ambitious education targets. For low 
HDI countries, the decline in the dependen-
cy ratio under the fast track scenario is more 
than twice that under the base case scenario. 
Ambitious education policies can enable medi-
um and high HDI countries to curb projected 
increases in their dependency ratio, thus easing 
the demographic transition towards an ageing 
population.

Addressing  these  demographic  challenges 
will  require  raising  educational  attainment 
levels while expanding productive employment 
opportunities—by  reducing  unemployment, 
promoting labour productivity and increasing 
labour force participation, particularly among 
women and older workers.

Governance and partnerships 
for a new era

The  rise  of  the  South  is  providing  both  op-
portunities and challenges for the formidable 
problems  of  an  increasingly  interconnected 
world.  Challenges  such  as  management  of 
climate change; use of global commons; and 
regulation of trade, finance and migration have 
cross-border  consequences.  Some  elements 
of global public goods can be provided at the 
regional level, but effective provision usually 
requires considerable multilateral coordination 
and cooperation. Neither the North nor the 
newly influential South can sit out the regional 
or global dialogues needed to forge agreement 
on  these  issues.  Countries  of  the  South  are 
in a position not just to contribute financial 
resources towards strengthening regional and 
multilateral  processes,  but  also  to  bring  the 
substantial experience gained through their hu-
man development achievements and pragmatic 
policies in many of these areas.

The South has promoted new arrangements 
and institutions such as bilateral and regional 
trade  agreements  and  financial  mechanisms. 
Consequently, today’s systems of international 
governance are a mosaic of old structures and 
new  arrangements.  And  they  may  become 
even more diverse: international cooperation is 

likely to involve an ever more complex web of 
bilateral, regional and global processes.

Many of the current institutions and princi-
ples for international governance were designed 
for  a  world  very  different  from  today’s.  One 
consequence  is  that  they  underrepresent  the 
South.  To  survive,  international  institutions 
need  to  be  more  representative,  transparent 
and accountable. Indeed, all intergovernmen-
tal processes would be invigorated by greater 
participation from the South, which can bring 
substantial financial, technological and human 
resources as well as valuable solutions to critical 
world problems.

In all of this, governments are understanda-
bly concerned with preserving national sover-
eignty. While appropriate in some cases, this 
focus can encourage zero-sum thinking. A bet-
ter strategy would be “responsible sovereignty”, 
whereby  countries  engage  in  fair,  rule-based 
and  accountable  international  cooperation, 
joining in collective endeavours that enhance 
global  welfare.  Responsible  sovereignty  also 
requires  that  states  ensure  the  human  rights 
security and safety of their citizenry. According 
to this view, sovereignty is not just a right, but 
also a responsibility.

The current context has profound implica-
tions for the provision of public goods. Among 
the areas meriting urgent attention are those re-
lated to trade, migration and climate change. In 
some cases, public goods can be delivered by re-
gional institutions, which can avoid the polari-
zation that sometimes slows progress in larger, 
multilateral  forums.  But  increasing  regional 
cooperation may have  disadvantages—adding 
to a complex, multilevel and fragmented tap-
estry of institutions. The challenge therefore is 
to ensure “coherent pluralism”—so that institu-
tions at all levels work in a broadly coordinated 
fashion.

International governance institutions can be 
held to account not just by member states, but 
also by global civil society. Civil society organ-
izations have already influenced global trans-
parency and rule setting on such issues as aid, 
debt, human rights, health and climate change. 
Networks of civil society now take advantage 
of  new  media  and  new  communications 
technologies.  Yet  civil  society  organizations 
also face questions about their legitimacy and 
accountability and may take undesirable forms. 

all intergovernmental 
processes would be 
invigorated by greater 
participation from the 
South, which can bring 
substantial financial, 
technological and human 
resources as well as 
valuable solutions to 
critical world problems

Overview    |    7

Nevertheless, the future legitimacy of interna-
tional governance will depend on institutions’ 
capabilities  to  engage  with  citizen  networks 
and communities.

Priorities for a new era

Through all this, the fundamental principles of 
human development remain critical. As ever, 
the aim is to expand choices and capabilities for 
all people, wherever they live. Many countries 
of the South have already demonstrated what 
can be done. But they have gone only part of 
the way. For the years ahead, this Report sug-
gests five broad conclusions.

Rising economic strength in the 
South must be matched by a full 
commitment to human development

Investments  in  human  development  are  jus-
tified  not  only  on  moral  grounds,  but  also 
because improved health, education and social 
welfare are key to success in a more competitive 
and  dynamic  world  economy.  In  particular, 
these  investments  should  target  the  poor—
connecting  them  to  markets  and  increasing 
their  livelihood  opportunities.  Poverty  is  an 
injustice that can and should be remedied by 
determined action.

Good policymaking also requires a focus on 
enhancing social capacities, not just individual 
capabilities. Individuals function within social 
institutions  that  can  limit  or  enhance  their 
development  potential.  Policies  to  change 
social norms that limit human potential, such 
as gender discrimination, early marriages and 
dowry requirements, open up opportunities for 
individuals to reach their full potential.

less developed countries can learn 
and benefit from the success of 
emerging economies of the South

The unprecedented accumulation of financial 
reserves  and  sovereign  wealth  funds  in  both 
the North and South provides an opportunity 
to  accelerate  broad-based  progress.  A  small 
portion of these funds should be dedicated to 
human development and poverty eradication. 
At  the  same  time,  South–South  trade  and 

investment flows can leverage foreign markets 
in new ways that enhance development oppor-
tunities,  such  as  by  participating  in  regional 
and global value chains.

Burgeoning South–South trade and invest-
ment in particular can lay the basis for shifting 
manufacturing capacity to other less developed 
regions  and  countries.  Recent  Chinese  and 
Indian joint ventures and startup manufactur-
ing investments in Africa could be a prelude to 
a much expanded force. International produc-
tion networks provide opportunities to speed 
development by allowing countries to leap-frog 
to more sophisticated production modes.

New institutions can facilitate 
regional integration and 
South–South relationships

New  institutions  and  partnerships  can  help 
countries  share  knowledge,  experiences  and 
technology. This can be accompanied by new 
and stronger institutions to promote trade and 
investment and accelerate experience sharing 
across the South. One step would be to estab-
lish a new South Commission to bring a fresh 
vision  of  how  the  South’s  diversity  can  be  a 
force for solidarity.

Greater representation for the South 
and civil society can accelerate 
progress on major global challenges

The  rise  of  the  South  is  leading  to  a  greater 
diversity of voice on the world stage. This pre-
sents an opportunity to build governance insti-
tutions that fully represent all constituencies 
and that would make productive use of this di-
versity in finding solutions to world problems.
New  guiding  principles  for  international 
organizations are needed that incorporate the 
experience of the South. The emergence of the 
Group of 20 is an important step in this direc-
tion, but the countries of the South also need 
more equitable representation in the Bretton 
Woods institutions, the United Nations and 
other international bodies.

Active  civil  society  and  social  movements, 
both national and transnational, are using the 
media to amplify their calls for just and fair 
governance.  The  spread  of  movements  and 
the  increase  in  platforms  for  vocalizing  key 

the unprecedented 
accumulation of financial 
reserves provides an 
opportunity to accelerate 
broad-based progress

8    |    HUMAN DEvELOPMENT REPORT 2013

messages and demands challenge governance 
institutions  to  adopt  more-democratic  and 
more-inclusive  principles.  More  generally, 
a  fair  and  less  unequal  world  requires  space 
for  a  multiplicity  of  voices  and  a  system  of 
public discourse.

the rise of the South presents 
new opportunities for generating 
a greater supply of public goods

A sustainable world requires a greater supply 
of  global  public  goods.  Global  issues  today 
are  increasing  in  number  and  urgency,  from 
mitigation of climate change and international 
economic and financial instability to the fight 
against  terrorism  and  nuclear  proliferation. 
They  require  a  global  response.  Yet  in  many 
areas, international cooperation remains slow 
and at times dangerously hesitant. The rise of 
the South presents new opportunities for more 
effectively providing global public goods and 
for unlocking today’s many stalemated global 
issues.

Publicness and privateness are in most cases 
not innate properties of a public good but so-
cial constructs and as such represent a policy 
choice. National governments can step in when 
there is underprovision at the national level. 
But when global challenges arise, international 
cooperation is necessary—and can happen only 
through the voluntary actions of many govern-
ments.  Given  the  many  pressing  challenges, 

progress  in  determining  what  is  public  and 
what is private will require strong, committed 
personal and institutional leadership.

* 

 

 

 

* 

 

 

 

*

This Report presents the contemporary global 
context  and  charts  a  path  for  policymakers 
and citizens to navigate the increasing inter-
connectedness  of  the  world  and  to  face  the 
growing  global  challenges.  It  describes  how 
the  dynamics  of  power,  voice  and  wealth  in 
the  world  are  changing—and  identifies  the 
new  policies  and  institutions  necessary  to 
address these 21st century realities and pro-
mote human development with greater equity, 
sustainability and social integration. Progress 
in  human  development  requires  action  and 
institutions  at  both  the  global  and  national 
levels. At the global level, institutional reforms 
and  innovation  are  required  to  protect  and 
provide global public goods. At the national 
level,  state  commitment  to  social  justice  is 
important, as is the understanding that one-
size-fits-all  technocratic  policies  are  neither 
realistic  nor  effective  given  the  diversity  of 
national  contexts,  cultures  and  institutional 
conditions. Nevertheless, overarching princi-
ples such as social cohesion, state commitment 
to education, health and social protection, and 
openness to trade integration emerge as means 
of navigating towards sustainable and equita-
ble human development.

the rise of the 
South presents new 
opportunities for more 
effectively providing 
global public goods and 
for unlocking today’s many 
stalemated global issues

Overview    |    9

“Across the globe, people 
are uniting in a common 
struggle: to participate freely 
in the events and processes 
that shape their lives.”

Mahbub ul Haq

Introduction

When developed economies stopped growing in the 2008–2009 financial crisis but developing economies kept on grow-
ing, the world took notice.1 The rise of the South, seen within the developing world as an overdue global rebalancing, has 
been much commented on since. This discussion has typically focused narrowly on gross domestic product (GDP) and trade 
growth in a few large countries. Yet there are broader dynamics at play, involving many more countries and deeper trends, 
with potentially far-reaching implications for people’s lives, for social equity and for democratic governance at the local and 
global levels. As this Report shows, the rise of the South is both the result of continual human development investments and 
achievements and an opportunity for still greater human progress for the world as a whole. Making that progress a reality 
will require informed and enlightened global and national policymaking, drawing on the policy lessons analysed in this Report.

The rise of the South is unprecedented in its 
speed  and  scale.  Never  in  history  have  the 
living  conditions  and  prospects  of  so  many 
people  changed  so  dramatically  and  so  fast. 
Great Britain, where the Industrial Revolution 
originated, took 150 years to double output 
per  capita;  the  United  States,  which  indus-
trialized later, took 50 years.2 Both countries 
had a population below 10 million when they 
began to industrialize. In contrast, the current 
economic takeoffs in China and India began 
with about 1 billion people in each country 
and  doubled  output  per  capita  in  less  than 
20 years—an economic force affecting a hun-
dred  times  as  many  people  as  the  Industrial 
Revolution did.3

The rise of the South must be understood as 
the story of a dramatic expansion of individual 
capabilities and sustained human development 
progress in the countries that are home to the 
vast  majority  of  the  world’s  people.  When 
dozens of countries and billions of people move 
up the development ladder, as they are doing 
today, it has a direct impact on wealth creation 
and  broader  human  progress  in  all  countries 
and regions of the world. There are new op-
portunities  for  catch-up  for  less  developed 
countries and for creative policy initiatives that 
could benefit the most advanced economies as 
well.

A  close  look  at  the  diverse  pathways  that 
successful developing countries have pursued 
enriches  the  menu  of  policy  options  for  all 
countries and regions while providing insights 
into values and world views that can inform 
future  development  cooperation  and  con-
structive responses to the most severe global 
challenges. The goal, as always, is to accelerate, 

wherever possible, broad-based progress that 
raises standards and expands people’s choices 
in  all  countries  and  communities  in  all  key 
dimensions  of  human  development,  from 
health and education and livelihoods to the 
personal  freedom  to  control  and  improve 
one’s own life.

Transforming  the  South  requires  changing 
the  rules  that  underpin  global  relationships. 
Most multilateral organizations were designed 
to reflect an international order newly emerg-
ing from the Second World War. That world 
view no longer resonates with the 21st century 
rebalancing  of  global  demographics,  wealth 
and geopolitical influence. The growing policy- 
shaping influence of the South is visible in the 
international  response  to  the  2008  financial 
crisis. In the past, financial decisions were made 
by the major industrial powers alone, as in the 
1985 Plaza Accord. This time, a more extensive 
group, the Group of 20 (G20), which includes 
the largest developing economies, played a key 
role. People in the South are also increasingly 
taking leadership positions in long-established 
international organizations.4

These are just preliminary signs of change in 
international institutions and of the possibili-
ty that the new actors in the South may help 
resume efforts to provide better global public 
goods. Indeed, the rise of the South adds to the 
urgency  with  which  governments  and  inter-
national  organizations  will  need  to  confront 
challenges that are likely to loom large in the 
future: equity in opportunities, civic engage-
ment in governance, environmental sustainabil-
ity and the demographic bulge, to name a few. 
The next sections elaborate on specific features 
of the rise of the South.

Introduction    |    11

FIGuRe 1

Acceleration of growth on the HDI

Number of countries

  120

  100

  80

  60

  40

  20

0

33 

33 

33 

33 

43 

36 

30 

30 

59 

HDI ≥ 0.731

33

15

HDI 
0.615 to <0.731

HDI 
0.439 to <0.615

15

HDI <0.439

1990

2000

2012

Note: Thresholds are the 25th, 50th and 75th percentiles of HDI values for 132 
countries in 1990.
Source: HDRO.

FIGuRe 2

More than 40 countries of the South had greater gains on the HDI between 1990 and 
2012 than would have been predicted from their previous performance on the HDI

Korea, Rep.

Chile

Mexico

Malaysia
Brazil

Mauritius

HDI, 2012

0.9

0.7

0.5

0.3

Turkey

Tunisia
Thailand
China

Indonesia

Viet Nam

India

Lao PDR
Bangladesh

Ghana

Uganda

Rwanda

HDI 1990 = HDI 2012

0.1

0.1

0.3

0.5

0.7

0.9

HDI, 1990

Broad-based progress

The 21st century transformation of the South 
has  been  accompanied  by  major  advances 
in  public  health,  education,  transportation, 
telecommunications and civic engagement in 
national governance. The human development 
consequences  have  been  profound:  the  pro-
portion of people living in extreme poverty fell 
from 43.1% in 1990 to 22.4% in 2008; more 
than 500 million people have been lifted out of 
poverty in China alone.5

Countries at low levels of human develop-
ment accelerated their achievements in health, 
education and income more in the past decade 
than  in  the  preceding  one.  The  number  of 
countries with a Human Development Index 
(HDI) value below the 25th percentile in 1990 
dropped  from  33  to  30  between  1990  and 
2000 and was halved from 30 to 15 between 
2000 and 2012 (figure 1). At the upper end of 
the distribution, the number of countries with 
an HDI value above the 75th percentile rose 
from  33  to  43  between  1990  and  2000  and 
from 43 to 59 between 2000 and 2012. The 
picture is more mixed in the middle quartiles of 
the HDI. Overall, no country had a lower HDI 
value in 2012 than in 2000, in contrast to the 
prior decade, when 18 countries had a lower 
HDI value in 2000 than in 1990.

Between 1990 and 2012, almost all countries 
improved  their  human  development  status. 
Of 132 countries with a complete data series, 
only 2 had a lower HDI value in 2012 than in 
1990 (Lesotho and Zimbabwe). Progress was 
particularly rapid in more than 40 countries of 
the South, whose increases in HDI value were 
significantly  larger  than  predicted  for  coun-
tries that were at a similar level of HDI value 
in 1990.6 This includes countries as diverse as 
Ghana, Rwanda and Uganda in Sub-Saharan 
Africa; Bangladesh and India in South Asia; 
Tunisia in the Arab States; China, Lao PDR 
and Viet Nam in East Asia and the Pacific; and 
Brazil, Chile and Mexico in Latin America and 
the Caribbean (figure 2).

Highlighted 18

Big improvers

Others

Note: Countries above the 45 degree line had a higher HDI value in 2012 than in 1990. Blue and grey markers indicate countries with 
significantly larger than predicted increases in HDI value between 1990 and 2012 given their HDI value in 1990. These countries were 
identified based on residuals obtained from a regression of the change in log of HDI between 2012 and 1990 on the log of HDI in 
1990. Countries that are labelled are a selected group of rapid HDI improvers that are discussed in greater detail in chapter 3.
Source: HDRO calculations.

Global rebalancing

For the first time in 150 years, the combined 
output  of  the  developing  world’s  three 

12    |    HUMAN DEvELOPMENT REPORT 2013

leading  economies—Brazil,  China  and 
India—is about equal to the combined GDP 
of the long- standing industrial powers of the 
North—Canada, France, Germany, Italy, the 
United Kingdom and the United States.7 This 
represents a dramatic rebalancing of global eco-
nomic power. In 1950, Brazil, China and India 
together accounted for only 10% of the world 
economy, while the six traditional economic 
leaders  of  the  North  accounted  for  roughly 
half. According to projections in this Report, 
by 2050 Brazil China and India will together 
account for 40% of global output (figure 3), far 
surpassing the projected combined production 
of today’s Group of Seven bloc.8

Today, the South as a whole produces about 
half of world economic output, up from about 
a third in 1990. The combined GDP of eight 
major developing countries alone—Argentina, 
Brazil, China, India, Indonesia, Mexico, South 
Africa and Turkey—now equals the GDP of 
the United States, still by far the world’s big-
gest national economy.9 As recently as 2005, 
the combined economic weight of those eight 

FIGuRe 3

countries  was  barely  half  that  of  the  United 
States.

This  major  increase  in  share  of  economic 
output  would  not  mean  much  in  human  de-
velopment terms, however, if it had not been 
accompanied  by  an  unprecedented  reduction 
in deprivation and expansion of human capabil-
ities. The first Millennium Development Goal 
of halving the proportion of people living on 
less than $1.25 a day relative to 1990 has been 
met three years before the target date. This is 
primarily because of the success of some of the 
most populous countries in eradicating extreme 
poverty: Brazil, China and India have all dra-
matically reduced the proportion of their people 
who are income poor—Brazil from 17.2% of 
the population in 1990 to 6.1% in 2009, China 
from 60.2% in 1990 to 13.1% in 2008 and India 
from 49.4% in 1990 to 32.7% in 2010.10

Broader  development  challenges,  however, 
have not diminished. An estimated 1.57 billion 
people, or more than 30% of the population of 
the 104 countries studied for this Report, live in 
multidimensional poverty,11 a measure of both 

today, the South as a 
whole produces about 
half of world economic 
output, up from about 
a third in 1990

Brazil, China and India combined are projected to account for 40% of global output by 2050, up from 10% in 
1950

Share of global output (%)

PROJECTION

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

1820

1860

1900

1940

1980

2010

2050

Brazil, China and India

Canada, France, Germany, Italy, the United Kingdom and the United States

Note: Output is measured in 1990 purchasing power parity dollars.
Source: HDRO interpolation of historical data from Maddison (2010) and projections based on Pardee Center for International Futures (2013).

Introduction    |    13

the  number  and  the  intensity  of  over lapping 
human deprivations in health, education and 
standard  of  living.  For  many  of  the  rapidly 
growing countries of the South, the population 
living  in  multidimensional  poverty  exceeds 
that living in income poverty. And income in-
equality is on the rise in many countries. Based 
on  calculations  for  the  Inequality-adjusted 
HDI for 132 countries in 2012, almost a quar-
ter  of  HDI  value,  23%,  is  lost  to  inequality. 
Between 1990 and 2005, Inequality- adjusted 
HDI trends for 66 countries show that overall 
inequality  declined  only  marginally,  because 
declining  inequality  in  health  and  education 
was offset by rising inequality in income.12 Latin 
America, in contrast to overall global trends, has 
seen income inequality fall since 2000 but still 
has the most unequal distribution of all regions. 
Sub-Saharan Africa has the most inequality in 
health, and South Asia in education.

Massive expansion of 
the middle class

The  middle  class  in  the  South  is  growing 
rapidly  in  size,  income  and  expectations. 

latin america, in 
contrast to overall global 
trends, has seen income 
inequality fall since 2000

FIGuRe 4

The middle class in the South is projected to continue to grow

Middle class population (billions)

2009
World:

1.845 billion

.032

.105

.181

.664

.338

.525

2020
World:

3.249 billion

.057

.165

.251

.703

.333

1.740

2030
World:

4.884 billion

.107

.234

.313

.680

.322

3.228

Europe

Asia–Paci(cid:31)c

North America

Central and South America

Middle East and North Africa

Sub-Saharan Africa

Note: The middle class includes people earning or spending $10–$100 a day (in 2005 purchasing power parity terms).
Source: Brookings Institution 2012.

14    |    HUMAN DEvELOPMENT REPORT 2013

Between 1990 and 2010, the South’s share of 
the global middle class population expanded 
from 26% to 58%. By 2030, more than 80% 
of the world’s middle class is projected to be 
residing in the South and to account for 70% 
of total consumption expenditure.13 The Asia–
Pacific  Region  will  host  about  two-thirds of 
the world’s middle class by 2030, Central and 
South America about 10% and Sub-Saharan 
Africa 2% (figure 4). Within Asia, China and 
India will account for more than 75% of the 
middle class as well as its share of total con-
sumption. Another estimate is that by 2025, 
annual consumption in emerging market econ-
omies will rise to $30 trillion, from $12 trillion 
in 2010, with the South home to three-fifths 
of the 1 billion households earning more than 
$20,000 a year.14 The continued expansion of 
the middle class is certain to have a profound 
impact on the world economy.

The sheer number of people in the South—
the  billions  of  consumers  and  citizens—
multiplies  the  global  human  development 
consequences  of  actions  by  governments, 
companies and international institutions in the 
South. The South is now emerging alongside 
the North as a breeding ground for technical 
innovation and creative entrepreneurship. In 
North−South trade the newly industrializing 
economies have built capabilities to efficiently 
manufacture complex products for developed 
country  markets.  But  South−South  interac-
tions have enabled companies in the South to 
adapt and innovate with products and process-
es that are better suited to local needs. This is 
creating  new  business  models,  as  companies 
develop  products  that  can  reach  customers 
with lower disposable incomes. The rise of the 
South is also diffusing technology through new 
models of extensive coverage with low margins, 
which  serve  lower  income  households  and 
reach a large number of consumers in markets 
that have weak support infrastructure.

The world is also becoming more educated. 
Assuming  a  robust  increase  in  school  enrol-
ment  rates,  the  share  of  the  world’s  people 
older  than  15  who  lack  formal  schooling  is 
projected to shrink from 12% in 2010 to 3% in 
2050, and the share with secondary or tertiary 
education will climb from 44% in 2010 to 64% 
in 2050. Furthermore, the digital divide is rap-
idly narrowing, giving people from everywhere 

the rapid expansion 
of educated people in 
much of the South adds 
to the urgency of job 
creation on a mass scale

comparable  access  to  information,  especially 
through increasingly affordable mobile broad-
band Internet.

The rapid expansion in the educated popula-
tion in much of the South adds to the urgency 
of job creation on a mass scale. Countries of 
the  South  that  experience  low  dependency 
rates in the future can create a “demographic 
dividend”  only  if  the  increase  in  the  labour 
force is matched by equally rapid expansion of 
employment opportunities. If enough decent 
jobs are not available to meet this demographic 
demand, the consequences are likely to include 
rising  civil  unrest,  as  demonstrated  by  the 
youth-led insurrections of the Arab Spring.

Unprecedented connectedness

Trade, travel and telecommunication exchang-
es are expanding worldwide at an unprecedent-
ed pace. People are moving between countries 
in  numbers  never  seen  before,  as  business 
professionals, as tourists and as migrants. In 
2010, first-generation immigrants accounted 
for  nearly  3%  of  the  world’s  population,  or 
more than 215 million people—a three-fold 
increase  since  1960.15  Nearly  half  of  remit-
tances sent home by emigrants from the South 
come from workers living in other developing 
countries.

FIGuRe 5

Countries of the South are also hosting more 
tourists than ever from other developing coun-
tries: by 2020, there will be nearly 1.6 billion 
tourist arrivals globally, with 75% of them ex-
pected to be intraregional. The share of South–
South trade in world commerce has more than 
tripled  over  the  past  three  decades  to  25%; 
South–South foreign investment now accounts 
for 30%–60% of all outside investment in the 
least developed countries.16

There  has  been  an  exponential  rise  in  the 
number of people in the South with access to 
the  world  wide  web  (Internet).  The  takeoff 
has been especially notable in the past decade 
(figure  5).  Between  2000  and  2010,  average 
annual growth in Internet use surpassed 30% in 
around 60 developing countries with a popula-
tion of 1 million or more. In September 2012, 
the online social networking website Facebook 
recorded 1 billion monthly active users, with 
140.3  billion  connections  among  “friends”; 
four  of  the  five  countries  with  the  greatest 
number  of  Facebook  users  are  in  the  South: 
Brazil, India, Indonesia and Mexico.17

Interdependence  in  commerce  is  allowing 
more people to participate in the global mar-
ketplace,  from  Ugandan  banana  exporters 
to shrimp farmers on the Mekong River. The 
global  trade  to  GDP  ratio,  a  conventional 
measure of trade integration, reached 22% in 
1913, a dramatic increase over the estimated 

The exponential rise in Internet use in the South has been most notable over the past decade

Internet users (millio ns)

1,500

1,200

900

600

300

0

1990

Source: World Bank 2012a.

South

North

1994

1998

2002

2006

2011

Introduction    |    15

2% in 1800.18 Today the ratio exceeds 56%.19 
At least 15 developing countries have substan-
tial trading relationships with more than 100 
trade partners as both exporters and importers, 
up from about 6 in 1996 (figure 6). The South 
now accounts for half of global trade flows, up 
from barely a quarter 30 years ago. These in-
creasing trade connections are deepening even 
faster “horizontally”, on a South–South  basis, 
than on the traditional North–South axis.

A  substantial  share  of  South−South  trade 
continues  to  be  driven  by  demand  in  the 
North, but the opposite is also true: develop-
ing  countries  are  major  importers  from  the 
North. Since 2007, for example, US exports 
to established partners in the Organisation for 
Economic  Co-operation  and  Development 
(OECD) have risen 20%, but US exports to 

Latin America and the Caribbean and China 
have risen more than 50%. The South needs the 
North, but, increasingly, the North also needs 
the South.

Countries  of  the  South  are  also  emerging 
as  natural  hubs  for  absorbing  technologies 
and  developing  new  products.  There  is  now 
greater  potential  for  human  development 
thanks to technology transfer from the South. 
Technology  transfer  from  the  North  often 
requires  costly  adaptation  due  to  differences 
in  absorptive  capacity.  Technological  trans-
fer from the South has been more amenable 
to  direct  adoption.20  And  technological 
adaptation by the South has also led to new 
kinds  of  innovation  with  immediate  human 
development benefits. Take the uses to which 
Africans  are  putting  affordable  Asian-built 

FIGuRe 6

At least 15 developing countries have substantial trading relationships with more than 100 trade partners as both exporters and importers

1995–1996

2010–2011

Thailand
Turkey

China

India

Malaysia

Indonesia

Viet Nam

Brazil

South Africa

Ukraine
Egypt
Pakistan

United Arab Emirates

Morocco

Mexico

Number of export markets
200

Number of export markets
200

175

150

125

100

75

50

25

0

China

Thailand

Malaysia

Brazil

India

Turkey

175

150

125

100

75

50

25

0

0

50

100

150

200

0

50

100

150

200

Number of import markets

Number of import markets

Developing countries with more than 100 trade partners as both importers and exporters

Others

Note: values are averages for 1995 and 1996 and for 2010 and 2011. Includes only countries with bilateral trade exceeding $1.5 million in 1995–1996 and $2 million in 2010–2011.
Source: UNSD 2012.

16    |    HUMAN DEvELOPMENT REPORT 2013

mobile phones: cellular banking is cheaper and 
easier than opening a traditional bank account, 
farmers can obtain weather reports and check 
grain  prices  and  entrepreneurs  can  provide 
business services through mobile phone kiosks. 
These and other transformations multiply the 
possibilities of what people can do with tech-
nology: participating in decisions that affect 
their lives; gaining quick and low-cost access to 
information; producing cheaper, often generic 
medicines, better seeds and new crop varieties; 
and generating new employment and export 
opportunities. These new technologies are con-
necting people in formerly isolated and mar-
ginalized rural communities and in poor urban 
neighbourhoods. They also give them access to 
valuable tools, resources and information and 
enable them to more actively participate in the 
wider national and even global society.

Pragmatic development policies

The  rise  of  the  South  spans  diverse  country 
experiences,  showing  that  there  are  multiple 
ways to achieve and sustain human develop-
ment. Countries were pragmatic in adopting 
policies suited to their unique circumstances: 
for example, between 1979 and 1989, no fewer 
than 40% of China’s national regulations were 
deemed  experimental.21  There  were  broadly 
shared  common  approaches  as  well.  Most 
fast-developing countries of the South opened 
up to foreign trade, investment and technolo-
gies. But that opening alone did not guarantee 
success. They also invested in their own human 
development capabilities, strengthened domes-
tic institutions and built new areas of compar-
ative  advantage.  The  critical  combination  of 
external openness with internal preparedness 
allowed countries to prosper in the global mar-
ketplace,  with  positive  human  development 
outcomes for the population at large.

Active  government  leadership  was  crucial 
in  accelerating  economic  progress  and  min-
imizing  social  conflict.  Growth  created  the 
needed  fiscal  space  for  investment  in  health 
and education and paved the way for a virtuous 
synergy between economic and social policy. 
Well known innovative programmes in Brazil, 
India and Mexico—conditional cash transfer 
programmes and rural employment guarantee 

programmes—exemplify  active  interest  in 
fostering a more equitable distribution of eco-
nomic and social opportunities. China has also 
stressed the importance of such an approach in 
its strategic pursuit of a “harmonious society”. 
Elements of these programmes have been emu-
lated by many other countries in the South.

A  common  emphasis  of  these  social  initi-
atives has been to promote equity and social 
integration, aspects that were underappreciated 
in past development models but are proving to 
be essential elements of any sustainable path for 
human progress. Ruling elites are increasingly 
recognizing that social and economic progress 
can profoundly influence their own legitimacy. 
Investments in social welfare and public goods 
have  become  building  blocks  for  long-term 
development.  These  exemplary   initiatives—
which  combine  health,  education  and  eco-
nomic policies in a broader agenda of equity, 
empowerment  and  participation—highlight 
the importance of supporting social justice not 
only on moral grounds, but also as a crucial 
means of advancing human development.

New partners for development

The South is now in a position to influence, 
even  reshape,  old  models  of  development 
cooperation  with  augmented  resources  and 
home-grown  lessons,  but  it  also  exerts  new 
competitive pressures on other aspects of bilat-
eral cooperation. The rise of the South is spur-
ring  innovation  in  bilateral  partnership  and 
regional  cooperation,  resulting  in  greater 
options  within  the  South  for  concessional 
finance, infrastructural investment and tech-
nology transfer. The growing assistance from 
the South is often without explicit conditions 
on economic policy or approaches to govern-
ance. The development emphasis on improved 
infrastructure, for example, has been rediscov-
ered because of the domestic experience and 
lessons of some emerging economies. Over the 
past decade, nearly half of financing for infra-
structure in Sub-Saharan Africa was provided 
by governments and regional funds from else-
where in the South.22

Furthermore, the extraordinary increase in 
capital  accumulation  in  the  fastest  growing 
economies  of  the  South—exemplified  most 

the South is now in a 
position to influence old 
models of development 
cooperation with 
augmented resources 
and home-grown lessons, 
but it also exerts new 
competitive pressures 
on other aspects of 
bilateral cooperation

Introduction    |    17

New development 
partnerships have opened 
opportunities for bilateral 
trade and investment 
exchanges, sustaining 
the rise of the South

notably  by  the  surge  in  foreign  exchange 
 reserves—represents a largely untapped store 
of development capital. Three-quarters of the 
increase in foreign exchange reserves between 
2000 and 2011 was accumulated by countries 
of the South, partly as self-insurance against fu-
ture financial downturns and crises (figure 7).

As  early  as  1995,  the  United  Nations 
Development  Programme  identified  23  de-
veloping countries as being pivotal to South–
South cooperation. Over the past decade, those 
countries  have  accelerated  their  engagement 
with  other  developing  countries.23  Outside 
the  OECD,  Brazil,  China  and  India  are  the 
three largest donors.24 Other countries such as 
Malaysia, Thailand and Turkey are also impor-
tant in regional development. New develop-
ment partnerships, fashioned on “win-win” for 
all parties, have supported development efforts 
and  opened  opportunities  for  bilateral  trade 
and investment exchanges, sustaining the rise of 
the South. In the process, international regimes 
are realigning, and international organizations 
are reorienting to the shifts in global economic 
power due to the rise of the South.

* 

 

 

 

* 

 

 

 

*

This Report examines in greater detail many 
aspects of the rise of the South and their im-
plications  for  human  development.  Chapter 
1 takes stock of the current status of human 
development globally and regionally, with an 
emphasis on trends, challenges and advances 
in  such  key  interrelated  areas  as  poverty,  in-
equality, social integration and human security. 
Chapter 2 shows how countries of the South 
are emerging as significant players in the world 
economy,  becoming  both  drivers  of  growth 
and  catalysts  for  change  in  other  developing 

FIGuRe 7

Official foreign exchange reserves by country group

Oﬃcial foreign exchange reserves ($ trillions)

12

10

8

6

4

  2

0

World total:
$10.18 trillion

EMERGING ECONOMIES

ADVANCED ECONOMIES

2000

2005

2008

2009

2010

2011a

a.  Preliminary third-quarter data.
Note: The classification of countries follows that used by the International 
Monetary Fund (IMF); it includes 34 advanced economies and 110 emerging and 
developing economies that report to the IMF’s Currency Composition of Official 
Foreign Reserves database.
Source: Grabel 2013.

countries, and identifies some of the emerging 
challenges. Chapter 3 looks at the policies and 
strategies  that  have  underpinned  progress  in 
some of the more successful countries of the 
South. Chapter 4 asks two basic questions: can 
this progress be sustained, and what are likely 
to be the future challenges to sustaining human 
development? Chapter 5 looks at prospects for 
policies and principles for a new framework of 
global and regional governance that fully rep-
resents and responds to the rise of the South in 
the long-term interests of the South and North 
alike.  As  the  Report  shows,  the  increasingly 
complex challenges of the 21st century require 
new partnerships and new approaches that re-
flect the realities of this rapidly changing world.

18    |    HUMAN DEvELOPMENT REPORT 2013

“The political problem of 
mankind is to combine 
three things: Economic 
Efficiency, Social Justice 
and Individual Liberty.”

John Maynard Keynes

1.
The state of human development

From Brazil to South Africa to India to China, the largest developing countries have become major drivers of the global 
economy. In 2012, however, even the most vigorous economies of the South began to be affected by the financial problems 
of the North. Struggling to emerge from a debt crisis and large budget deficits, many developed countries are imposing 
severe austerity programmes that are not only causing hardship for their own citizens, but are also undermining the human 
development prospects of millions of other people across the world.

The  first  Human  Development  Report  in 
1990 laid out a vision of economic and social 
progress  that  is  fundamentally  about  people 
enlarging their choices and capabilities. Since 
then, there has been substantial progress: many 
developing economies continue to grow rapid-
ly and raise standards of human development. 
The rise of the South is a feature of a rapidly 
changing world. The South now accounts for 
almost a third of world output1 and consump-
tion.2  Without  the  robust  growth  in  these 
economies, led by China and India, the global 
economic recession would have been deeper.3

Nevertheless,  there  are  signs  of  contagion, 
with  real  concern  that  in  an  interconnected 
world the crisis in the North may slow devel-
oping  countries’  progress.  In  industrialized 
countries,  with  some  notable  exceptions, 
governments  are  introducing  harsh  austerity 
measures  that  reduce  the  government’s  wel-
fare role and cut back on spending and public 
services,4 leading to hardship and exacerbating 
economic  contractions.  Living  standards  are 
declining  for  many  people  in  the  developed 
world. Several countries have seen major street 
demonstrations  and  general  disillusionment 
with politicians and economic management as 
a result.

The  world  has  known  similar  crises:  in 
Europe  and  the  United  States  in  the  1930s, 
in Latin America in the 1980s and in Asia in 
the 1990s. But this time around, well into the 
second decade of the 21st century, the crisis is 
again happening in the heart of Europe.

Governments  are  imposing  austerity  pro-
grammes because of a legitimate concern about 
the sustainability of sovereign debt. But there is 
a risk that short-term measures will cause long-
term damage, eroding the human development 
and  social  welfare  foundations  that  enable 
economies to grow, democracies to flourish and 

societies to be less unequal and less vulnerable 
to shocks.5

There is also evidence that deploying drastic 
austerity programmes too quickly can deepen 
and prolong recessions. Fiscal consolidation has 
already had contractionary effects on private 
domestic demand and gross domestic product 
(GDP)6 while weakening economic conditions 
and increasing un employment.7 Rollbacks of 
health, education and other public services are 
likely to impair the health of the population, 
the  quality  of  the  labour  force  and  the  state 
of scientific research and innovation for years 
to  come  (box  1.1).  This  could  put  progress 
in human development on a lower trajectory 
for some time (box 1.2). Moreover, economic 
stagnation reduces the tax revenues that gov-
ernments need to finance social services and 
public goods.

Much of this damage is avoidable. Historical 
evidence indicates that the best time to cut defi-
cits is after economic growth has taken off.8 As 
John Maynard Keynes put it succinctly nearly 
75 years ago, “The boom, not the slump, is the 
right time for austerity.”9

It is also vital to consider not just the quantity 
of public expenditure, but also its composition 
and how it can be changed. According to the 
International Labour Organization, a fiscally 
neutral  change  in  the  composition  of  gov-
ernment revenues and expenditures designed 
to  foster  employment  and  promote  human 
development could create 1.8–2.1 million jobs 
in 33 advanced economies over the next year or 
two.10

While  countries  have  different  degrees  of 
freedom to adjust their spending priorities, for 
many there is ample scope for reprioritization. 
For  instance,  military  spending  worldwide 
exceeded  $1.4  trillion  in  2010,  more  than 
the GDP of the world’s 50 poorest countries 

Chapter 1  The state of human development    |    21

Box 1.1

Fairness, macroeconomics and human development

The rising income inequality in the United States and some European coun-
tries highlights fairness in how incomes are distributed and who benefits 
from  growth.  These  concerns  are  entering  the  mainstream  political  dis-
course in developed countries, though with limited impact on policies so 
far. Unemployment in developed countries is at its highest level in years, 
and a large share of the workforce has had no significant increase in real 
wages  over  the  last  few  decades,  while  the  richest  deciles  have  seen  a 
substantial increase in income. Increasing inequality has been accompanied 
by demands by many of the better- off for smaller government and fiscal re-
straint: the well-off have not only benefited disproportionately from earlier 
growth, but also appear committed to protecting their gains. It is surprising 
that in democracies, despite considerable pressure from civil society, gov-
ernment agendas are dominated by austerity programmes rather than social 
protection programmes.

The call for austerity measures is not limited to countries in the euro 
area. The United Kingdom plans to reduce public investment by about 2% 
of GDP under the current austerity programme. This call for austerity comes 

when public investment is at a historic low. For instance, net public invest-
ment in the United Kingdom for fiscal year 2011/2012 is less than 2% of 
GDP. A continued push for reduced government and social expenditures may 
well worsen the prospects for recovery and growth.

Macroeconomic policies can have large consequences for human devel-
opment. Cutting social spending to reduce public debt can have long-term 
effects. If economies keep contracting, successive rounds of debt reduction 
will do little to further debt sustainability. Cutting spending reduces aggre-
gate demand, which, coupled with high income inequality, makes it chal-
lenging to revive the economy and put people back to work. In the quest for 
full  employment,  reduced  aggregate  demand  has  to  be  compensated  for. 
In the United States (and other industrialized countries) this was achieved 
through low interest rates, which, along with new financial instruments and 
lax regulation, caused a bubble that eventually led to the current financial 
crisis. Countries in the euro area, constrained in their use of policy instru-
ments, cannot use monetary policies to devalue (or inflate) their way out of 
a crisis.

Source: Atkinson 2011, 2012; Block 2013; HM Treasury 2010; Nayyar 2012; Sen 2012; Stiglitz 2012.

Box 1.2

Short-term cuts have long-term consequences: rising fertility rates in Africa

Why did fertility rates rise between 1970 and 1990 in many Sub-Saharan 
African  countries  despite  falling  in  every  other  region?  The  evolution  of 
fertility rates appears to be associated with social expenditure cuts, par-
ticularly in education, made as part of structural adjustment programmes 
in the 1980s.

Cuts in education not only limit human capabilities, but also affect the 
age structure of the population years later because of their impact on birth 
rates. Countries with lower levels of education, especially countries where 
girls lack secondary education, tend to have higher fertility rates. Almost 
universally, women with higher levels of education have fewer children. This 
effect is particularly strong in countries that are early in their demographic 

transition and still have high overall fertility rates. Education reduces fertility 
rates by enhancing information, changing the incentives for behaviour and 
empowering people to better pursue their own preferences.

In the 1980s, Sub-Saharan Africa saw a partial reversal in the progress 
towards demographic transition, with real expenditure per capita on educa-
tion falling nearly 50% on average. Between 1980 and 1986, enrolment in 
primary education dropped from 79% to 73% for the region as a whole (fall-
ing in 16 countries and rising in 17). The reduced education expenditures had 
a negative impact on female education, causing average female combined 
primary and secondary gross enrolment rates to increase more slowly than 
in the period before the structural adjustment programmes.

Source: Lutz and KC 2013; Rose 1995.

combined. Even where fiscal consolidation is 
necessary, it need not involve cuts in welfare 
services. Consolidation through enhanced effi-
ciency and reduced subsidies on fossil fuels, for 
instance, could leave social spending relatively 
unaffected.11

The countries of the South have shown great-
er resilience in the face of the current global 
economic  crisis.  After  transitory  setbacks 
following  the  2008  crisis,  African  and  Latin 
American  countries  have  resumed  their  up-
ward trajectories of human development and 

growth. This is partly because they have been 
more pragmatic, taking countercyclical meas-
ures and postponing debt reduction for more 
appropriate times. Continuing demand from 
the South has also helped sustain many devel-
oping country exports, offsetting the effects of 
sluggish economic activity in the North.12

At  the  same  time,  many  developing  coun-
tries  continue  to  invest  in  long-term  human 
development. They recognize a clear positive 
correlation between past public investment in 
social and physical infrastructure and progress 

22    |    HUMAN DEvELOPMENT REPORT 2013

on the Human Development Index (HDI).13 
Governments in the South have also appreci-
ated that sustainable progress must be based 
on  social  integration.  Brazil  and  India,  for 
example,  have  supported  aspects  of  human 
development underappreciated in past devel-
opment  models  by  introducing  cash  transfer 
programmes and right-to-work programmes.

Overall,  over  the  past  few  decades,  many 
countries  of  the  South  have  made  substantial 
strides in HDI performance, not only boosting 
economic  growth  and  reducing  poverty,  but 
also making large gains in health and education 
(discussed in greater detail later in the chapter). 
This broad-based achievement is notable because 
income  growth  does  not  necessarily  translate 
into gains in other aspects of human develop-
ment. Growth may generate resources to invest 
in health and education, but the link is not auto-
matic. Moreover, growth may have little impact 
on other important human development priori-
ties such as participation and empowerment.

Now more than ever, indicators are needed 
to  capture  these  dimensions  as  well  as  the 
environmental  sustainability  of  development 
pathways.

Progress of nations

Every Human Development Report  has  mon-
itored  human  progress,  notably  through  the 
HDI, a composite measure that includes indi-
cators along three dimensions: life expectancy, 
educational  attainment,  and  command  over 
the resources needed for a decent living. Other 
indices  have  delved  into  inequality,  poverty 
and gender deficits. HDI values for 2012 are 
presented in statistical table 1.

The  HDI  in  2012  reveals  much  progress. 
Over  the  past  decades,  countries  across  the 
world have been converging towards higher lev-
els of human development. The pace of progress 
on the HDI has been fastest in countries in the 
low and medium human development catego-
ries. This is good news. Yet progress requires 
more than average improvement in HDI value. 
It will be neither desirable nor sustainable if in-
creases in HDI value are accompanied by rising 
in equality in income, unsustainable patterns of 
consumption, high military spending and low 
social cohesion (box 1.3).

In 2012, the global average HDI value was 
0.694;  Sub-Saharan  Africa  had  the  lowest 
HDI  value  (0.475),  followed  by  South  Asia 
(0.558).  Among  developing  regions,  Europe 
and Central Asia had the highest HDI value 
(0.771),  followed  by  Latin  America  and  the 
Caribbean (0.741).

there is a clear positive 
correlation between past 
public investment in social 
and physical infrastructure 
and progress on the 
Human Development Index

There are large differences across HDI groups 
and regions in the components of the HDI—
life expectancy, mean years of schooling and 
income. Average gross national income (GNI) 
per capita in very high HDI countries is more 
than 20 times that in low HDI countries (table 
1.1). Life expectancy in very high HDI coun-
tries is a third higher than in low HDI coun-
tries, while average years of schooling among 
adults  over  25  are  nearly  three  times  greater 
in very high HDI countries than in low HDI 
countries. However, expected years of school-
ing,  which  better  reflect  changing  education 
opportunities in developing countries, present 
a  much  more  hopeful  picture:  the  average 
incoming elementary school student in a low 
HDI country is expected to complete 8.5 years 
of school, about equal to the current years of 
schooling among adults in high HDI countries 
(8.8 years). Overall, most low HDI countries 
have  achieved  or  are  advancing  towards  full 
enrolment in elementary school and more than 
50% enrolment in secondary school.

There  are  large  disparities  in  achievements 
within HDI groups and regions. One way of 
assessing disparities within country groups is to 
compare the ratio of the highest to the lowest 
HDI values among countries in the group. This 
ratio is highest in Sub-Saharan Africa, followed 
by  the  Arab  States,  South  Asia,  and  Latin 
America and the Caribbean. In Sub-Saharan 
Africa, most of the disparity arises from sub-
stantial differences in income per capita (with 
a ratio of 70.114) and mean years of schooling 
(with a ratio of 7.8). In South Asia, the dis-
parities  also  arise  primarily  from  differences 
in income per capita, with a ratio of 10.7, and 
mean years of schooling (with a ratio of 4.0). 
In the Arab States, and to a lesser extent Latin 
America and the Caribbean, the main driver is 
differences in income per capita.

Overall,  the  last  decade  has  seen  greater 
convergence  in  HDI  values,  involving  accel-
erated human development among countries 
with lower HDI values. All HDI groups and 

Chapter 1  The state of human development    |    23

Box 1.3 

What is it like to be a human being?

Amartya Sen, Nobel Laureate in Economics

Almost half a century ago, the philosopher Thomas Nagel published a fa-
mous paper called “What Is It Like to Be a Bat?” The question I want to ask 
is: what is it like to be a human being? As it happens, Tom Nagel’s insight-
ful paper in The Philosophical Review was also really about human beings, 
and only marginally about bats. Among other points, Nagel expressed deep 
scepticism about the temptation of observational scientists to identify the 
experience of being a bat—or similarly, a human being—with the associ-
ated physical phenomena in the brain and elsewhere in the body that are 
within easy reach of outside inspection. The sense of being a bat or a human 
can hardly be seen as just having certain twitches in the brain and of the 
body. The complexity of the former cannot be resolved by the easier tracta-
bility of the latter (tempting though it may be to do just that).

The cutting edge of the human development approach is also based on a 
distinction —but of a rather different kind from Nagel’s basic epistemologi-
cal contrast. The approach that Mahbub ul Haq pioneered through the series 
of Human Development Reports which began in 1990 is that between, on 
the one hand, the difficult problem of assessing the richness of human lives, 
including the freedoms that human beings have reason to value, and on the 
other, the much easier exercise of keeping track of incomes and other exter-
nal resources that persons—or nations—happen to have. Gross domestic 
product (GDP) is much easier to see and measure than the quality of human 
life that people have. But human well-being and freedom, and their connec-
tion with fairness and justice in the world, cannot be reduced simply to the 
measurement of GDP and its growth rate, as many people are tempted to do.
The intrinsic complexity of human development is important to acknowl-
edge, partly because we should not be side-tracked into changing the ques-
tion: that was the central point that moved Mahbub ul Haq’s bold initiative to 
supplement—and to some extent supplant—GDP. But along with that came 
a more difficult point, which is also an inescapable part of what has come 
to be called “the human development approach.” We may, for the sake of 
convenience,  use  many  simple  indicators  of  human  development,  such  as 
the HDI, based on only three variables with a very simple rule for weight-
ing them—but the quest cannot end there. We should not spurn workable 
and useful shortcuts—the HDI may tell us a lot more about human quality 
of life than does the GDP—but nor should we be entirely satisfied with the 
immediate gain captured in these shortcuts in a world of continuous practice. 
Assessing the quality of life is a much more complex exercise than what can 
be captured through only one number, no matter how judicious is the selec-
tion of variables to be included, and the choice of the procedure of weighting.

The recognition of complexity has other important implications as well. 
The crucial role of public reasoning, which the present Human Development 
Report particularly emphasizes, arises partly from the recognition of this 
complexity. Only the wearer may know where the shoe pinches, but pinch-
avoiding  arrangements  cannot  be  effectively  undertaken  without  giving 
voice  to  the  people  and  giving  them  extensive  opportunities  for  public 
discussion. The importance of various elements in evaluating well-being 
and freedom of people can be adequately appreciated and assessed only 
through persistent dialogue among the population, with an impact on the 
making of public policy. The political significance of such initiatives as the 
so-called  Arab  Spring,  and  mass  movements  elsewhere  in  the  world,  is 
matched by the epistemic importance of people expressing themselves, in 
dialogue with others, on what ails their lives and what injustices they want 
to remove. There is much to discuss—with each other and with the public 
servants that make policy.

The  dialogic  responsibilities,  when  properly  appreciated  across  the 
lines of governance, must also include representing the interest of the peo-
ple who are not here to express their concerns in their own voice. Human 
development cannot be indifferent to future generations just because they 
are not here—yet. But human beings do have the capacity to think about 
others, and their lives, and the art of responsible and accountable politics 
is to broaden dialogues from narrowly self-centred concerns to the broader 
social understanding of the importance of the needs and freedoms of people 
in the future as well as today. This is not a matter of simply including those 
concerns  within  one  single  indicator—for  example,  by  overcrowding  the 
already heavily loaded HDI (which stands, in any case, only for current well-
being and freedom)—but it certainly is a matter of making sure that the dis-
cussions of human development include those other concerns. The Human 
Development Reports can continue to contribute to this broadening through 
explication as well as presenting tables of relevant information.

The human development approach is a major advance in the difficult 
exercise of understanding the successes and deprivations of human lives, 
and in appreciating the importance of reflection and dialogue, and through 
that advancing fairness and justice in the world. We may be much like bats 
in not being readily accessible to the measuring rod of the impatient obser-
vational scientist, but we are also capable of thinking and talking about the 
many- sided nature of our lives and those of others—today and tomorrow—
in ways that may not be readily available to bats. Being a human being is 
both like being a bat and very unlike it.

regions saw notable improvement in all HDI 
components, with faster progress in low and 
medium  HDI  countries.  East  Asia  and  the 
Pacific and South Asia saw continuing progress 
from earlier decades, while Sub-Saharan Africa 
saw more rapid progress in the last decade. The 
convergence in HDI values has become more 
pronounced in the last decade.

One  of  the  principal  components  of  the 
HDI is life expectancy. In 2012, average life ex-
pectancy was 70.1 years, with wide differences 

across  HDI  groups:  59.1  years  in  low  HDI 
countries  and  80.1  years  in  very  high  HDI 
countries.  Differences  across  countries  are 
even wider, with a low of 48.1 years in Sierra 
Leone and a high of 83.6 years in Japan. In Sub-
Saharan  Africa,  life  expectancy  stagnated  at 
49.5 years between 1990 and 2000, a result of 
the HIV and AIDS pandemic. Between 2000 
and 2012, however, it increased 5.5 years.

Another  important  influence  on  the  HDI, 
and  one  of  the  most  sensitive  indicators  of 

24    |    HUMAN DEvELOPMENT REPORT 2013

taBle 1.1

HDI and components, by region and HDI group, 2012

Region and HDI group

Region

Arab States

East Asia and the Pacific

Europe and Central Asia

Latin America and the Caribbean

South Asia

Sub-Saharan Africa

HDI group

very high human development

High human development

Medium human development

Low human development

World

HDI

0.652

0.683

0.771

0.741

0.558

0.475

0.905

0.758

0.640

0.466

0.694

Life expectancy 
at birth (years)

Mean years 
of schooling 

(years)

Expected years 

of schooling 

(years)

71.0

72.7

71.5

74.7

66.2

54.9

80.1

73.4

69.9

59.1

70.1

6.0

7.2

10.4

7.8

4.7

4.7

11.5

8.8

6.3

4.2

7.5

10.6

11.8

13.7

13.7

10.2

9.3

16.3

13.9

11.4

8.5

11.6

Gross national 

income 
per capita 
(2005 PPP $)

8,317

6,874

12,243

10,300

3,343

2,010

33,391

11,501

5,428

1,633

10,184

Note: Data are weighted by population and calculated based on HDI values for 187 countries. PPP is purchasing power parity.
Source: HDRO calculations. See statistical table 1 for detailed data sources.

human well-being, is child survival. In 2010, the 
global under-five mortality rate was 55 deaths 
per 1,000 live births, though spread unevenly 
across HDI groups. Low HDI countries had the 
highest rate (110 deaths per 1,000 live births), 
followed by medium HDI countries (42), high 
HDI countries (18) and very high HDI coun-
tries  (6).  Poor  child  health  can  permanently 
damage  a  child’s  cognitive  development  and 
later affect labour productivity as an adult.

HDI comparisons are typically made between 
countries in the North and the South, and on 
this basis the world is becoming less unequal. 
Nevertheless, national averages hide large varia-
tions in human experience, and wide disparities 
remain within countries of both the North and 
the South. The United States, for example, had 
an HDI value of 0.94 in 2012, ranking it third 
globally. The HDI value for residents of Latin 
American  origin  was  close  to  0.75,  while  the 
HDI  value  for  African-Americans  was  close 
to 0.70 in 2010–2011.15 But the average HDI 
value for an African-American in Louisiana was 
0.47.16 Similar ethnic disparities in HDI achieve-
ment in very high HDI countries can be seen in 
the Roma populations of southern Europe.

The  range  in  human  development  is  also 
wide in some developing countries. In Brazil, 
for example, the highest HDI value in 2000, 
the most recent year for which subnational data 
are available, was in São Caetano do Sul in the 
state of São Paulo (0.92), while the lowest was 
in Manari in the state of Pernambuco (0.47). 
China  has  similar,  if  less  marked,  provincial 
variations, with Shanghai at the top (0.91), and 
Tibet at the bottom (0.63).17

Income and human development

Another  essential  component  of  human  de-
velopment  and  the  HDI  is  command  over 
resources, as measured by income per capita. 
Between  1990  and  2012,  income  per  capita 
rose in all four HDI groups, though in varying 
degrees (figure 1.1). The highest average annual 
growth in income per capita was recorded in 
China and Equatorial Guinea, both over 9%. 
Only 12 countries surpassed 4% growth, while 
19 saw income per capita fall.

One of the most striking achievements has 
been  in  Sub-Saharan  Africa.  From  2003  to 
2008—the  five  years  preceding  the  global 

HDI comparisons are 
typically made between 
countries in the North 
and the South, and on 
this basis the world is 
becoming less unequal

Chapter 1  The state of human development    |    25

FIGuRe 1.1

Income per capita is rising to varying degrees in all four HDI groups

Gross national income per capita (2005 PPP $)

35,000

30,000

25,000

20,000

15,000

10,000

5,000

0

Very high HDI

High HDI

Medium HDI

Low HDI

1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

2010

2012

Note: PPP is purchasing power parity.
Source: HDRO calculations based on a panel of the same 161 countries and territories.

FIGuRe 1.2

Sub-Saharan Africa has sustained income growth over the last decade

Gross national income per capita (2005 PPP $)

2,100

2,000

1,900

1,800

1,700

1,600

1,500

1,400

1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

2010

2012

Note: PPP is purchasing power parity.
Source: HDRO calculations.

26    |    HUMAN DEvELOPMENT REPORT 2013

financial crisis—income per capita in the re-
gion grew 5% a year, more than twice the rate 
of the 1990s (figure 1.2).18 This upward trend 
was led by resource-rich countries that benefit-
ed from price increases in Africa’s main com-
modity exports—notably, gas, oil, minerals and 
agricultural products—thanks mostly to strong 
demand from the South, led by China.

But  growth  was  also  widespread  in  other 
countries,  with  strong  performance  among 
more  diversified  economies  and  agriculture- 
based  economies.  Despite  commodity  price 
increases,  many  net  commodity-importing 
countries,  such  as  Ethiopia,  Rwanda  and 
Uganda, continued to grow fast. Sub-Saharan 
African  economies  were  also  partly  shielded 
from global shocks by greater regional integra-
tion, particularly in East Africa.

As  most Human Development Reports  have 
underscored, what matters is not only the level 
of income, but also how that income is used. A 
society can spend its income on education or 
on weapons of war. Individuals can spend their 
income on essential foods or on narcotics. For 
both societies and individuals, what is decisive 
is not the process of wealth maximization, but 
how they choose to convert income into human 
development. Table 1.2 shows country successes 
in this respect, as measured by the largest positive 
difference  between  GNI  per  capita  and  HDI 
ranks.19 New Zealand tops the list for very high 
human development countries, and Cuba tops 
the list for high human development countries.

Poverty

One of the world’s main priorities is to erad-
icate poverty and hunger. This is the first of 
the  eight  Millennium  Development  Goals, 
for which the target for 2015 was to halve the 
proportion of people living on less than $1.25 
a day relative to 1990. This goal was achieved 
three years before that target date, primarily 
because of the success of some of the most pop-
ulous countries: Brazil (where the percentage 
of the population living on less than 2005 PPP 
$1.25 a day went from 17.2% to 6.1%), China 
(from 60.2% to 13.1%) and India (from 49.4% 
to 32.7%).20 As a result, many fewer people are 
poor. For example, between 1990 and 2008, 
China alone lifted a remarkable 510 million 
people out of poverty.21

Poor people do not just suffer from a lack of 
income. Poverty has multiple dimensions, with 
deficits in health and education, for example. 
Moreover, an estimated 10% of the global pop-
ulation is afflicted by some form of disability, 
potentially limiting their standard of living re-
gardless of income.22

In  the  early  and  middle  20th  century, 
European countries reduced poverty not only 
by increasing incomes, but also by providing 
public  goods  such  as  health  care  and  educa-
tion.23  When  considering  relative  poverty 
levels, it is also important to consider the social 
and  political  arenas,  including  whether  the 
poor can “appear in public without shame”.24 
Translating  income  into  a  decent  standard 
of  living  depends  on  a  range  of  assets  and 
capabilities. These are all issues in which the 
state has an important role facilitating access 
to health, education, and public and personal 
safety  (box  1.4).  How  income  is  converted 
into well-being, particularly for the poor, also 
depends on environmental circumstances.25

Poverty can be measured more comprehen-
sively using the Multidimensional Poverty Index 
(MPI), which looks at overlapping deprivations 
in health, education and standard of living. The 
MPI  is  the  product  of  the  multidimensional 
poverty headcount (the share of people who are 
multidimensionally poor) and the average num-
ber of deprivations that each multidimensional-
ly poor household experiences (the intensity of 
their poverty). Focusing on the intensity of pov-
erty enables the MPI to provide a more com-
plete picture of poverty within a country or a 
community than is available from headcount 
measures alone. In the 104 countries covered by 
the MPI, about 1.56 billion people—or more 
than 30% of their population—are estimated to 
live in multidimensional poverty.26 This exceeds 
the estimated 1.14 billion people in those coun-
tries who live on less than $1.25 a day, although 
it is below the proportion who live on less than 
$2 a day.27 The pattern holds true for all four 
HDI groups, though the difference is larger in 
low  HDI  countries  than  in  medium  of  high 
HDI countries (figure 1.3). This also holds true 
for many of the rapidly growing countries of the 
South (figure 1.4).

The  countries  with  the  highest  headcount 
percentages based on the MPI are in Africa: 
Ethiopia (87%), Liberia (84%), Mozambique 

taBle 1.2

Top five countries that rank better on the HDI than on gross national income per 
capita in 2012

HDI group and country

HDI value

Very high human development

Gross national income (GNI) 

per capita (2005 PPP $)

GNI rank 
minus HDI 

rank

New Zealand

Ireland

Australia

Korea, Rep.

Israela

High human development

Cuba

Georgia

Montenegro

Albania

Grenada

Medium human development

Samoa

Tonga

Fiji

Kyrgyzstan

Ghana

Low human development

Madagascar

Togo

Kenya

Zimbabwe

Nepalb

0.919

0.916

0.938

0.909

0.900

0.780

0.745

0.791

0.749

0.770

0.703

0.710

0.702

0.622

0.558

0.483

0.459

0.519

0.397

0.463

24,358

28,671

34,340

28,231

26,244

5,539

5,005

10,471

7,822

9,257

3,928

4,153

4,087

2,009

1,684

828

928

1,541

424

1,137

26

19

15

15

13

44

37

24

21

21

28

26

24

24

22

28

16

15

14

11

a. The difference between GNI and HDI ranks is also 13 for Chile, Estonia and Greece, all very high HDI countries.
b. The difference between GNI and HDI ranks is also 11 for Liberia, a low HDI country.
Source: HDRO calculations. See statistical table 1 for detailed data sources.

(79%)  and  Sierra  Leone  (77%;  see  statisti-
cal  table  5).  The  countries  with  the  highest 
intensity  of  poverty  (deprivations  in  at  least 
33% of weighted indicators) are Ethiopia and 
Mozambique (about 65% each in 2007–2011), 
followed  by  Burkina  Faso  (64%),  Senegal 
(59%)  and  Liberia  (58%).  Despite  having  a 
smaller proportion of multidimensional poor 
(lower  headcount  ratio)  than  Liberia  does, 
Mozambique has a higher MPI value (0.512) 
because it has the highest intensity of depriva-
tion among countries with data.

Chapter 1  The state of human development    |    27

Box 1.4

Subjective indicators of well-being: increased acceptance in thinking and policy

Interest in using subjective data to measure well-being and human prog-
ress and to inform public policy has grown in recent years.1 In the United 
Kingdom, the government committed itself to explore the use of subjective 
indicators of well-being, as suggested by Stiglitz, Sen and Fitoussi (2009). 
Bhutan has integrated the subindicators that constitute the Gross National 
Happiness Index into its public policy measures. Subjective data can com-
plement but not substitute for objective data.

Kahneman  and  Krueger  (2006)  lay  the  analytical  basis  for  measuring 
subjective well-being on the fact that people often depart from the standards 
of the “rational economic agent”. Making inconsistent choices, not updating 
beliefs in the light of new information, desisting from gainful exchanges: 
all violate the assumption of rationality that underlies the translation of ob-
served behaviour into a theory of revealed preferences in economics. If the 
assumed link between observed data and actual preferences is tenuous, the 
case for relying exclusively on objective data is weakened, and there exists 
a greater case for using subjective data as well.

Stiglitz, Sen and Fitoussi (2009) adopt subjective well-being as one of 
their three conceptual approaches to measuring quality of life. They point 

out  that  the  approach  has  strong  links  to  the  utilitarian  tradition  but  also 
has broader appeal. Subjective measures of quality of life, however, do not 
have objective counterparts. For instance, there is no observed measure of 
happiness, whereas inflation can be measured as either actual or perceived 
inflation. They further note that subjective approaches allow for a distinction 
between quality of life dimensions and the objective factors that shape them.
Subjective measures are not without problems. They are ordinal in na-
ture and usually are not comparable across countries and cultures or reliable 
across time. Thus it can be misleading to use subjective indicators such as 
happiness as the only or main policy criterion. However, these indicators—
appropriately measured and carefully used—can be valuable supplements 
to objective data to inform policy, particularly at the national level.

An  important  subjective  indicator  of  well-being  that  can  be  gleaned 
from surveys is overall life satisfaction. Data for 149 countries place aver-
age life satisfaction globally at 5.3 on a scale of 0–10 (see table), with a 
low of 2.8 in Togo and a high of 7.8 in Denmark (see statistical table 9). Not 
surprisingly, life satisfaction tends to be higher in countries with higher hu-
man development.

overall life satisfaction and satisfaction with health care and education

HDI group and region
HDI group
very high human development
High human development
Medium human development
Low human development
Region
Arab States
East Asia and the Pacific
Europe and Central Asia
Latin America and the Caribbean
South Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa
World

Overall life satisfaction, 2007–2011a 

(0, least satisfied, 
10, most satisfied)

Satisfaction with 

health care, 2007–2009a
(% answering “yes”)

Satisfaction with education 

quality, 2011

(% answering “yes”)

6.7
5.9
4.9
4.5

4.8
5.1b
5.3
6.5
4.7
4.4
5.3

61.9
55.2b
68.7b
50.0

54.3b
79.5b
44.8
56.7
64.8
50.1b
61.0b

61.3
58.0
69.2
56.5

50.0
68.2b
51.8
61.4b
73.3
52.0
64.2

a. Data refer to the most recent year available during the period specified.
b. value is not displayed in the statistical tables because data are not available for at least half the countries covering at least two-thirds of the population of the group.
Source: HDRO calculations based on Gallup (2012).

Other important subjective indicators of human well-being are sat-
isfaction with the quality of health care and education. Survey results 
indicate that high-quality health care and education can be delivered 
at  a  wide  range  of  income  and  human  development  levels.  Average 
global  satisfaction  with  health  care  quality  was  61%,  with  a  low  of 
19% in Ethiopia and a high of 90% in Luxembourg (see statistical table 
7). Average global satisfaction with education quality was 64%, with 

a low of 35% in Mali and a high of 94% in Cambodia (see statistical 
table 8).

In South Asia, 65% of respondents indicated satisfaction with health 
care quality, with Pakistan at 41% and Sri Lanka at 83%, the latter showing 
that even at comparatively low levels of income it is possible to reinforce 
social perceptions about community and the state. By contrast, health care 
satisfaction is 45% in Europe and Central Asia.

1. Dolan, Layard and Metcalfe 2011. Krueger and Schkade (2008) note that over 2000–2006, 157 papers and numerous books were published in the economics literature using data on life satisfaction or subjective 
well-being.
Source: Kahneman and Krueger 2006; Stiglitz, Sen and Fitoussi 2009; Dolan, Layard and Metcalfe 2011; Stewart 2013.

28    |    HUMAN DEvELOPMENT REPORT 2013

In South Asia, the highest MPI value is in 
Bangladesh  (0.292  with  data  for  2007),  fol-
lowed by Pakistan (0.264 with data for 2007) 
and  Nepal  (0.217  with  data  for  2011).  The 
proportion of the population living in multi-
dimensional  poverty  is  58%  in  Bangladesh, 
49% in Pakistan and 44% in Nepal, and the 
intensity of deprivation is 50% in Bangladesh, 
53% in Pakistan and 49% in Nepal. Although 
a larger proportion of the population (head-
count)  lives  in  multidimensional  poverty  in 
Bangladesh than in Pakistan, the intensity of 
deprivation  is  higher  in  Pakistan.  Moreover, 
in Bangladesh and Nepal, the living standards 
dimension  contributes  more  than  the  health 
and education dimensions, but in Pakistan, the 
health  dimension  contributes  more  than  the 
other two dimensions.

equity and human development

An  essential  part  of  human  development  is 
equity.  Every  person  has  the  right  to  live  a 
fulfilling life according to his or her own values 
and aspirations. No one should be doomed to 
a short life or a miserable one because he or 
she happens to be from the “wrong” class or 
country, the “wrong” ethnic group or race or 
the “wrong” sex.

Inequality

Inequality reduces the pace of human devel-
opment and in some cases may even prevent it 
entirely. This is most marked for inequality in 
health and education and less so for inequality 
in  income,  where  the  effects  are  more  sub-
stantial in high and very high HDI countries. 
An analysis of 132 developed and developing 
countries for this Report finds an inverse rela-
tionship between inequality and human devel-
opment (box 1.5), reinforcing the conclusions 
of several studies of developed countries.28

The effects of inequality on human develop-
ment can be captured by the Inequality-adjusted 
Human Development Index (IHDI), which ex-
amines the average level of human development 
and its distribution along the dimensions of life 
expectancy, educational attainment and com-
mand over the resources needed for a decent 
living. Where there is no inequality, the IHDI 
equals the HDI. A difference between the two 

FIGuRe 1.3

The lower the HDI value, the larger the gap between income poverty and 
multidimensional poverty

High HDI

Medium HDI

Low HDI

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70
Percent

Extreme income poverty (less than $1.25 a day)

Multidimensional poverty

Note: Data refer to 2002–2011. The population-weighted averages are based on 22 countries for the high HDI group and 36 countries 
each for the medium and low HDI groups.
Source: HDRO calculations.

No one should be 
doomed to a short life or 
a miserable one because 
he or she happens to be 
from the “wrong” class 
or country, the “wrong” 
ethnic group or race 
or the “wrong” sex

denotes inequality; the greater the difference, 
the greater the inequality.29

Based on IHDI calculations for 132 coun-
tries in 2012, almost a quarter of HDI value, or 
23% is lost to inequality (see statistical table 3). 
Low HDI countries suffer most because they 
tend to have greater inequality in more dimen-
sions. Low HDI countries lose a third of HDI 
value  to  inequality,  whereas  very  high  HDI 
countries lose only 11%.

Globally, there have been much greater re-
ductions in inequality in health and education 
in the last two decades than in income.30 This 
is  partly  because  of  the  measures  used—life 
expectancy and mean years of schooling have 
upper bounds to which all countries eventually 
converge. But for income, there is no upper lim-
it. Virtually all studies agree that global income 
inequality is high, though there is no consensus 
on recent trends.31 One study that integrated 
the income distribution of 138 countries over 
1970–2000 found that although mean income 
per capita has risen, inequality has not.32 Other 
studies  conclude  the  opposite.33  Still  others 
find no change at all.34

IHDI trends for 66 countries over 1990–
2005  show  that  overall  inequality  declined 
marginally  due  to  declines  in  health  and 
education inequality being offset by increas-
es  in  income  inequality  (figure  1.5).  Most 

Chapter 1  The state of human development    |    29

FIGuRe 1.4

There is notable variation among countries in the gap between income poverty and multidimensional 
poverty

Population living on less than $1.25 a day (%)

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

Nigeria

Tanzania

Bangladesh

Ethiopia

Ghana

Nepal

India

Pakistan

Indonesia

Georgia

China

South Africa

Kyrgyzstan

Brazil

Thailand Argentina
0

Tunisia

Egypt

Peru

Morocco

0

Azerbaijan

10

20

30

40

50

60
90
Population in multidimensional poverty (%)

70

80

Note: Data refer to 2002–2011. Bubble size is proportional to the number of people in multidimensional poverty. Diagonal line indicates where population living on 
less than $1.25 a day equals population in multidimensional poverty.
Source: HDRO calculations.

regions show rising inequality in income and 
declining inequality in health and education 
(figure 1.6). Latin America has seen income 
inequality fall since 2000, but it still has the 
most  unequal  distribution  of  all  regions. 
Sub-Saharan Africa has the most inequality 
in health, while South Asia has the most in-
equality in education.

The  world  has  made  much  progress  in  re-
ducing  inequality  in  educational  attainment 
in  both  enrolment  ratios  and  expected  years 
of schooling over 1990–2010, particularly in 

Europe and Central Asia (loss due to inequality 
in education declined almost 68%), East Asia 
and the Pacific (34%) and Latin America and 
the Caribbean (32%). In both developed and 
developing countries, the average enrolment ra-
tio for primary education is nearly 100%. And 
more children are finishing school.

Declines  in  inequality  in  both  health  and 
education may reflect corresponding govern-
ment priorities and innovations in social policy. 
There is also a link between health and educa-
tion. Better education for women, for example, 

30    |    HUMAN DEvELOPMENT REPORT 2013

tends to result in better health outcomes for 
them  and  for  the  next  generation.  Thus  life 
expectancy  and  educational  attainment  may 
move in tandem. Most inequality in education 
today reflects disparities in quality (box 1.6): 
many developing countries have dual-track sys-
tems, with the well-off attending good schools 
and universities, mostly privately funded, and 
the poor attending inadequate, mostly publicly 
funded facilities.35

Rising inequality, especially between groups, 
can lead to social instability, undermining long-
term human development progress. Persistence 
of  inequality  often  results  in  a  lack  of  inter-
generational  social  mobility,  which  can  also 
lead to social unrest.

The rise in income inequality to some extent 
reflects a failure of national fiscal, and particu-
larly taxation, systems. This can be offset by so-
cial protection. In Latin America, for example, 
income inequality has declined as a result of 
cash transfer programmes.

Box 1.5

Inequality holds back human development

HDRO research using Human Development Index (HDI) data yields robust findings of an in-
verse relationship between inequality and subsequent improvement in human development, 
driven mostly by inequality in health and education rather than in income.

Using data on 132 countries for 2012, regression analysis showed the effects of multi-
dimensional inequality (measured as the loss in the Inequality-adjusted Human Development 
Index relative to the HDI) on the HDI and each of its components (health, education and in-
come) due to four explanatory variables: overall inequality in human development, inequality 
in life expectancy, inequality in educational attainment and inequality in income per capita. 
A different regression was used for each explanatory variable, and all regressions included 
dummy variables to control for the level of human development (low, medium, high and very 
high). Overall inequality in human development, inequality in life expectancy and inequality 
in educational attainment showed a highly statistically significant (at the 1% level) negative 
correlation, but inequality in income per capita showed no correlation. Results were robust to 
different specifications, including grouping countries with low and medium human develop-
ment on the one side and countries with high and very high human development on the other.

Source: HDRO.

FIGuRe 1.5

Gender and women’s status

Losses due to inequality in HDI and its components

Gender equality is both a core concern and 
an essential part of human development. All 
too often, women are discriminated against 
in health, education and the labour market, 
which restricts their freedoms. The extent of 
discrimination can be measured through the 
Gender Inequality Index (GII), which cap-
tures the loss of achievement due to gender 
inequality in three dimensions: reproductive 
health,  empowerment  and  labour  market 
participation. The higher the GII value, the 
greater  the  discrimination.  Based  on  2012 
data for 148 countries, the GII shows large 
variations  across  countries,  ranging  from 
0.045 (in Netherlands) to 0.747 (in Yemen), 
with  an  average  of  0.463  (see  statistical 
table 4).

High gender disparities persist in South Asia 
(0.568), Sub-Saharan Africa (0.577) and the 
Arab States (0.555). In South Asia, the three 
driving factors are low female representation 
in parliament (18.5%), gender imbalances in 
educational achievement (28% of women have 
completed at least secondary education, com-
pared with 50% of men) and low labour force 
participation (31% of women are in the labour 
force, compared with 81% of men).

Loss due to inequality  (%)

42.5

37.5

32.5

27.5

22.5

17.5

1990

1995

2000

Education

Health

Income

2005

Total

Note: Based on a population-weighted balanced panel of 66 countries.
Source: HDRO calculations using data from Milanovi´c (2010).

Between 2000 and 2012, progress in reduc-
ing the GII value has been virtually universal, 
but  uneven.36  Countries  in  the  very  high 
human development group outperform those 
in  other  human  development  groups  and 
demonstrate  greater  parity  between  women 
and men in educational attainment and labour 
market participation. Even in this group, how-
ever, several countries have huge gender gaps in 

Chapter 1  The state of human development    |    31

FIGuRe 1.6

Most regions show declining inequality in health and education and rising inequality in income

Health

Education

Income

Loss due to inequality (%)

Loss due to inequality (%)

Loss due to inequality (%)

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

1990

1995

2000

2005

Arab States

East Asia and 
the Paci(cid:31)c

Europe and 
Central Asia

Latin America and 
the Caribbean

South Asia

Sub-Saharan Africa

Developed
countries

Note: Based on a population-weighted balanced panel of 182 countries for loss due to health inequality, 144 countries for loss due to education inequality and 66 countries for loss due to income inequality. Data on 
income inequality from Milanovi´c (2010) are available through 2005.
Source: HDRO calculations using health data from United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs life tables, education data from Barro and Lee (2010) and income inequality data from Milanovi´c (2010).

parliamentary representation. Italy, for exam-
ple, managed to increase female representation 
more than 50%, but women still occupy only 
around a fifth of all seats (20.7%). In Ireland, 
female parliamentary representation is still be-
low 20% while in Rwanda, women outnumber 
men  in  parliamentary  representation  (52% 
compared with 48%).

Though  many  countries  in  Sub-Saharan 
Africa showed improvement in their GII value 
between  2000  and  2012,  they  still  perform 
worse than countries in other regions, mainly 
because  of  higher  maternal  mortality  ratios 
and adolescent fertility rates and huge gaps in 
educational attainment.

One  of  the  most  disturbing  trends  con-
cerns the sex ratio at birth, which is deteri-
orating in some fast-growing countries. The 

natural ratio for children ages 0–4 is 1.05 (or 
105 boys to 100 girls). But in the 175 coun-
tries for which 2012 data are available, the 
average  was  1.07,  and  13  countries  had  a 
ratio of 1.08–1.18.37

In  some  countries,  sex-selective  abortion 
and infanticide are artificially altering the de-
mographic landscape, leading to a shortage of 
girls and women. This is not just a concern for 
gender justice and equality; it also has major 
implications for democracy and could lead to 
social violence.

The high male sex ratio at birth reflects wom-
en’s  status  in  society,  entrenched  patriarchal 
mores and prejudices, which are an aspect of 
deep-rooted sociocultural beliefs, the changing 
aspirations of urban and rural societies, and the 
dowry  system  in  some  countries.38  In  recent 

32    |    HUMAN DEvELOPMENT REPORT 2013

Redressing  this  imbalance  will  involve 
changing many social norms, including those 
that  affect  the  economic  incentives  of  the 
household  to  have  boys  rather  than  girls. 
This would include effectively ending the ex-
ploitative dowry system,39 generating greater 
economic opportunities for women, creating 
conditions for women to have greater control 
over their lives and enhancing their political 
participation  and  decisionmaking  within 
households.

It  has  often  been  argued  that  improving 
education for women helps raise their levels 
of health and nutrition and reduces fertility 
rates.40 Thus, in addition to its intrinsic value 
in expanding women’s choices, education also 
has an instrumental value in enhancing health 
and  fertility  outcomes  of  women  and  chil-
dren. In this respect, low and medium HDI 
countries still have some way to go. There was 
also  a  gender  imbalance  among  the  unedu-
cated population in high and very high HDI 
countries in 1970–2010, although there was 
substantially more gender balance at all edu-
cation levels in these countries for girls and 
young women currently of school attendance 
age.

years, the problem has been exacerbated by the 
spread and misuse of ultrasound technologies 
that enable parents to exercise age-old prefer-
ences for boys. The key driver, however, is the 
combination of patriarchal mores and greater 
economic  value  of  boys  in  the  presence  of  a 
dowry  system.  In  absence  of  the  latter—for 
instance,  in  African  countries—patriarchal 
prejudices alone do not manifest in high male 
sex ratio at birth.

Important  as  education  and  job  creation 
for women are, they are not enough. Standard 
policies to enhance women’s income do not 
take  into  account  gender  differences  with-
in  households,  women’s  greater  burden  of 
unpaid work and gender division of work as 
per  cultural  norms.  Policies  based  on  eco-
nomic theory that does not take these factors 
into  account  may  have  adverse  impacts  on 
women,  even  though  they  create  economic 
prosperity.41 Key to improving gender equity 
are political and social reforms that enhance 
women’s  human  rights,  including  freedom, 
dignity, participation, autonomy and collec-
tive agency.42

Box 1.6

Education quality: achievement on the Programme for International Student 
Assessment

The education component of the Human Development Index has two measures: mean years 
of schooling and expected years of schooling. But even more than years of schooling, quality 
of education is a key factor in expanding human capabilities (see figure).

The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development’s Programme for Interna-
tional Student Assessment (PISA) collects internationally compatible data on the educational 
attainment of students and allows for cross-country comparison of average learning scores, 
share of low-performing schools and consistency of quality outcomes. For example, the ad-
vantages of a highly educated labour force, which countries such as the United States have 
traditionally had, appear to be eroding as young cohorts in other countries (such as Ireland, 
Japan and the Republic of Korea) reach and surpass the qualifications found in the United 
States.

In the most recent PISA, conducted in 63 countries and territories in 2009, many coun-
tries showed impressive strides in quality of learning outcomes. Students from Shanghai, 
China, outperformed students from 62 countries in reading, mathematics and science skills. 
They were followed by students from the Republic of Korea, Finland and Hong Kong, China 
(SAR) in reading; Singapore, Hong Kong, China (SAR) and the Republic of Korea in math-
ematics; and Finland, Hong Kong, China (SAR) and Singapore in science. The United States 
performed  below  average  in  mathematics,  sharing  29th  place  with  Ireland  and  Portugal; 
slightly above average in science, in 21st place; and above average in reading, sharing 15th 
place with Iceland and Poland. Brazil, Chile, Indonesia and Peru have seen impressive gains, 
catching up from very low levels of performance. Investments by some countries in education 
quality will likely bring future payoffs in a more knowledge-driven globalized world.

Programme for International Student assessment scores in reading positively 
correlate with HDI values

 

Reading score, 2009
600

500

400

300

200

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

HDI, 2012

Non-OECD

OECD

Source: HDI values, HDRO calculations; Programme for International Student Assessment scores, OECD (2010b).

Chapter 1  The state of human development    |    33

Progress in human 
development achieved 
sustainably is superior to 
gains made at the cost 
of future generations

Intergenerational equity 
and sustainability

When one crisis follows another, it is easy to 
lose  perspective  about  important  long-term 
consequences  of  current  actions.  It  is  thus 
important to bear in mind that today’s choices 
can have a large and decisive influence on the 
choices  available  for  decades  in  the  future. 
Sustainable  human  development  is  about 
understanding  the  links  between  temporal 
choices  of  different  generations  and  about 
assigning  rights  to  both  present  and  future 
generations.

Clearly  a  balance  is  needed.  Enhancing 
people’s  capabilities  now—especially  the  ca-
pabilities of those who are poor or live with 
multiple deprivations—is vital as a matter of 
basic rights and part of the universalism of life 
claims.43 Moreover, poverty and misery today 
have negative consequences for the future. The 
objective should thus be both intragenerational 
and intergenerational equity.

Investing in people today requires a prudent 
balance  between  debts  incurred  today  and 
the  obligations  they  impose  on  future  gen-
erations.  As  the  1994 Human  Development 
Report  underscores,  “All  postponed  debts 
mortgage  sustainability,  whether  economic 
debts, social debts or ecological debts.”44 The 
recent economic crisis has brought to the fore 
the  sustainability  of  economic  debt,  public 
and private, when economies are not growing, 
while  tending  to  draw  attention  away  from 
the  critical  issues  of  social  and  ecological 
debts.  On  the  environmental  front,  there  is 
already extensive evidence of severe damage 
to  ecosystems  from  the  choices  of  past  and 
current  generations.  Poor  countries  cannot 
and  should  not  imitate  the  production  and 
consumption patterns of rich countries. And 
rich  countries  must  reduce  their  ecological 
footprint  because  from  a  global  perspective 
their per capita consumption and production 
are not sustainable.

Of  particular  concern  now  are  the  glob-
al  challenges  of  climate  change  and  fragile 
ecosystems.  An  influential  study  concluded 
that  “Humanity  has  already  transgressed  at 
least  three  planetary  boundaries,”45  a  point 
repeated  in  the  2012  Report  of  the  UN 
Secretary  General’s  High  Level  Panel  on 

34    |    HUMAN DEvELOPMENT REPORT 2013

Global Sustainability.46 Few countries are fol-
lowing  an  ecologically  sustainable  path  now, 
underscoring the need for technological inno-
vations and shifts in consumption that can fa-
cilitate movement towards sustainable human 
development.47

Figure 1.7 plots the ecological footprint of 
consumption  of  151  countries  against  their 
HDI value in 2012.48 Very few countries have 
both  a  high  HDI  value  and  an  ecological 
footprint below the world average biocapacity 
(1.79 global hectares per capita in 2008). This 
does not bode well for the world. Over time, 
the  situation  is  becoming  more  dire.  While 
some high HDI countries have an ecological 
footprint below the world average, their foot-
prints have been increasing over time.

People care not only about the choices open 
to  them,  but  also  about  how  those  choices 
are secured, by whom and at whose expense. 
Progress in human development achieved sus-
tainably is superior to gains made at the cost of 
future generations. Indeed, a proper accounting 
system  for  sustainable  human  development 
would  include  both  future  human  develop-
ment and current achievements.

Better  ways  to  monitor  environmental 
sustainability are also needed. The 2012 UN 
Conference  on  Sustainable  Development 
called  for  measures  that  address  the  con-
nections  between  present  and  future  sets  of 
choices.  Such  measures  should  monitor  the 
accumulation of economic and environmental 
debt based on the premise that every citizen on 
the planet, whether alive or not yet born, has 
an equal right to live a comfortable, fulfilling 
life.  These  measures  should  also  highlight 
planetary  boundaries  or  “tipping  points”, 
recognizing that climate change, for example, 
already  imposes  substantial  costs,  with  the 
brunt  of  them  borne  by  poor  countries  and 
poor communities.

Social integration

Human  development  involves  expanding  in-
dividual  capabilities.  Yet  individuals  are  also 
bound up with others. Thus, how individuals 
relate to each other is important in building 
cohesive  and  enduring  societies.  Integrating 
different groups can be as critical for well- being 

FIGuRe 1.7

Few countries show both the high HDI and low ecological footprint required for sustainable human 
development

Ecological footprint, 2007 (global hectares per capita)

11

10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

LOW AND MEDIUM HDI       HIGH AND VERY HIGH HDI

WORLD AVERAGE BIOCAPACITY, 2008 (cid:31)1.79(cid:30) 

SUSTAINABLE

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT

0.25

0.35

0.45

0.55

0.65

0.75

0.85

0.95

 HDI, 2012

Low HDI

Medium HDI

High HDI

Very high HDI

Note: Ecological footprint is a measure of the biocapacity of the earth and the demand on biocapacity. It depends on the average productivity of biologically 
productive land and water in a given year.
Source: HDRO calculations and Global Footprint Network (2011).

and  social  stability  as  economic  success. 
Inequity and exclusion are social injustices that 
fundamentally weaken human freedoms.

An  integrated  society  relies  on  effective 
social institutions that enable people to act 
collectively,  enhancing  trust  and  solidarity 
between  groups.  These  institutions  include 
formal  nongovernmental  organizations, 
informal  associations  and  cooperatives,  as 
well  as  norms  and  rules  of  behaviour.  They 
influence  individual  human  development 
outcomes, social cohesion and social stability. 
To differentiate them from individual capa-
bilities, the functioning of these institutions 
and their impact on people can be described 
as “social competencies” (box 1.7). The extent 
to  which  social  competencies  foster  more- 
cohesive  societies  can  be  assessed  by  their 

success at achieving social inclusion and so-
cial stability.

Some  developing  countries  have  sought  to 
address  social  exclusion  by  distributing  the 
benefits of growth more evenly in a refinement 
of  the  growth  with  redistribution  strategy. 
But this commodity-centric view of inclusive 
growth does little to end the economic and so-
cial discrimination that often has long-standing 
historical and cultural roots. Such discrimina-
tion may be widespread even in countries with 
high income per capita. Clearly income growth 
alone  cannot  achieve  social  cohesion;  active 
policies are needed.

The  impact  of  inequity  can  persist  over 
generations.  For  instance,  a  study  of  eight 
developed countries found that more-unequal 
countries usually had lower social mobility.49 In 

Chapter 1  The state of human development    |    35

Box 1.7

Social competencies: human development beyond the individual

Individuals cannot flourish alone; indeed, they cannot function alone. The 
human development approach, however, has been essentially individualis-
tic, assuming that development is the expansion of individuals’ capabilities 
or freedoms. Yet there are aspects of societies that affect individuals but 
cannot be assessed at the individual level because they are based on rela-
tionships, such as how well families or communities function, summarized 
for society as a whole in the ideas of social cohesion and social inclusion. 
Individuals are bound up with others. Social institutions affect individuals’ 
identities and choices. Being a member of a healthy society is an essential 
part of a thriving existence.

So one task of the human development approach is to explore the nature 
of social institutions that are favourable for human flourishing. Development 
then has to be assessed not only for the short-run impact on individual capa-
bilities, but also for whether society evolves in a way that supports human 
flourishing. Social conditions affect not only the outcomes of individuals in a 
particular society today, but also those of future generations.

Social institutions are all institutions in which people act collectively 
(that is, they involve more than one person), other than profit-making mar-
ket  institutions  and  the  state.  They  include  formal  nongovernmental  or-
ganizations,  informal  associations,  cooperatives,  producer  associations, 
neighbourhood associations, sports clubs, savings associations and many 
more. They also consist of norms and rules of behaviour affecting human 
development  outcomes.  For  example,  attitudes  towards  employment  af-
fect material well-being, and norms of hierarchy and discrimination affect 
inequality,  discrimination,  empowerment,  political  freedom  and  so  on.  To 
describe what those institutions can be and do, and to understand how they 
affect individuals, we can use the term social competencies.

Central to the human development perspective is that societal norms 
affect  people’s  choices  and  behaviours  towards  others,  thus  influenc-
ing outcomes in the whole community. Community norms and behaviours 
can  constrain  choice  in  deleterious  ways  from  a  human  development 
 perspective—for  example,  ostracizing,  or  in  extreme  cases  killing,  those 
who  make  choices  that  contravene  social  rules.  Families  trapped  in  pov-
erty by informal norms that support early marriage and dowry requirements 
might reject changes to such entrenched social norms. Social institutions 
change over time, and those changes may be accompanied by social tension 
if they hamper the interests of some groups while favouring others.

Policy  change  is  the  outcome  of  a  political  struggle  in  which  differ-
ent groups (and individuals) support or oppose particular changes. In this 
struggle,  unorganized  individuals  are  generally  powerless,  but  by  joining 

together they can acquire power collectively. Social action favouring human 
development (such as policies to extend education, progressive taxation and 
minimum wages) happens not spontaneously, but because of groups that 
are effective in supporting change, such as producer groups, worker associa-
tions, social movements and political parties. These organizations are espe-
cially crucial for poorer people, as demonstrated by a group of sex workers 
in Kolkata, India, and women in a squatter community in Cape Town, South 
Africa, who improved their conditions and self-respect by joining together 
and exerting collective pressure.

Societies vary widely in the number, functions, effectiveness and con-
sequences of their social competencies. Institutions and norms can be clas-
sified as human development–promoting, human development–neutral and 
human development–undermining. It is fundamental to identify and encour-
age those that promote valuable capabilities and relationships among and 
between  individuals  and  institutions.  Some  social  institutions  (including 
norms) can support human development in some respects but not in others: 
for example, strong family bonds can provide individuals with support during 
upheavals, but may constrain individual choices and opportunities.

Broadly  speaking,  institutions  that  promote  social  cohesion  and  hu-
man development show low levels of disparity across groups (for example, 
ethnic, religious or gender groups) and high levels of interaction and trust 
among people and across groups, which results in solidarity and the absence 
of violent conflict. It is not a coincidence that 5 of the 10 most peaceful 
countries in the world in 2012, according to the Global Peace Index, are also 
among the most equal societies as measured by loss in Human Development 
Index value due to inequality. They are also characterized by the absence of 
discrimination  and  low  levels  of  marginalization.  In  some  instances  anti-
discriminatory measures can ease the burden of marginalization and partial-
ly mitigate the worst effects of exclusion. For instance, US law mandating 
that hospital emergency rooms offer treatment to all patients regardless of 
their ability to pay partly mitigates the impact of an expensive health care 
system with limited coverage, while affirmative action in a range of coun-
tries (including Brazil, Malaysia, South Africa and the United States) has 
improved the situation of deprived groups and contributed to social stability.
The study of social institutions and social competencies must form an 
essential part of the human development approach—including the forma-
tion of groups; interactions between groups and individuals; incentives and 
constraints to collective action; the relationship among groups, politics and 
policy outcomes; the role of norms in influencing behaviours; and how norms 
are formed and changed.

Source: Stewart 2013; Institute for Economics and Peace 2012.

the United Kingdom in particular, as inequali-
ty rose, intergenerational mobility declined.

The 2010 Latin America and the Caribbean 
Human  Development  Report  highlighted 
the link between the lack of social mobility 
and persistent inequality.50 In Brazil, at least 
a  quarter  of  inequality  in  earnings  is  asso-
ciated  with  household  circumstances,  such 

as  parents’  educational  attainment,  race  or 
ethnicity, or place of birth.51 Such persistence 
of  income  distribution  patterns  across  gen-
erations is also evident in Chile and Mexico, 
although Mexico has seen increased intergen-
erational mobility in recent years.52 Generally, 
Latin America suffers from low social mobili-
ty, stifling opportunities for individuals at the 

36    |    HUMAN DEvELOPMENT REPORT 2013

bottom of the income distribution for whom 
performance in society is determined largely 
by  background  characteristics  beyond  their 
control. The problem is particularly intracta-
ble in heterogeneous societies, as members of 
deprived groups find it particularly difficult to 
progress.

Inequity  and  exclusion  endure  when  the 
excluded and those at the lower ends of the 
distribution  lack  the  political  voice  to  seek 
redress.  More-equal  and  more-just  societies, 
essential  for  satisfactory  and  sustainable  hu-
man progress, thus require greater voice and 
political participation and more-accountable 
governments (box 1.8).

Even in the European Union, where a large 
part of the population has seen rising prosper-
ity,  some  groups  have  been  left  behind.  The 
Roma, for example, have been part of European 
civilization  for  more  than  a  thousand  years. 
With an estimated 7–9 million people, they are 
Europe’s biggest ethnic minority, present in all 
27 EU member states. Most are EU citizens but 
continue to suffer discrimination and social ex-
clusion. As two regional Human Development 
Reports  have  revealed,  the  Roma  are  often 
trapped in a vicious cycle of social exclusion 
that has persisted generation after generation.53
The presence of inequalities can adversely 
affect social interactions and restrict freedom 

the presence of 
inequalities can 
adversely affect social 
interactions and restrict 
freedom of choice

Box 1.8

Poverty’s structural dimensions

The traditional agendas for reducing poverty recognize but inadequately ad-
dress its structural sources. Contemporary interventions to promote inclu-
sive growth have tended to focus on the outcomes of development through 
expanding and strengthening social safety nets. While such public initiatives 
are to be encouraged, they address the symptoms of poverty, not its sources.
The results of such restrictive interventions are reduction of income pov-
erty to varying degrees and some improvement in human development. But 
across much of the South, income inequalities have increased, social dis-
parities have widened and injustice remains pervasive, while the structural 
sources of poverty remain intact. Any credible agenda to end poverty must 
correct the structural injustices that perpetuate it.

unequal access to assets
Inequitable  access  to  wealth  and  knowledge  disempowers  the  excluded 
from competing in the marketplace. Rural poverty, for example, originates 
in insufficient access to land and water for less privileged segments of rural 
society. Land ownership has been not only a source of economic privilege, 
but also a source of social and political authority. The prevailing structures of 
land ownership remain inimical to a functioning democratic order. Similarly, 
lack of access to capital and property perpetuates urban poverty.

unequal participation in the market
With the prevailing property structures of society, the resource-poor remain 
excluded from more-dynamic market sectors. The main agents of produc-
tion tend to be the urban elite, who own the corporate assets that power 
faster growing economic sectors. By contrast, the excluded partake only as 
primary producers and wage earners, at the lowest end of the production 
and marketing chains, leaving them with little opportunity to share in market 
economy opportunities for adding value to their labour.

Capital markets have failed to provide sufficient credit to the excluded, 
even  though  they  have  demonstrated  their  creditworthiness  through  low 
default  rates  in  the  microcredit  market.  And  formal  capital  markets  have 

not  provided  financial  instruments  to  attract  the  savings  of  the  excluded 
and transform them into investment assets in the faster growing corporate 
sector.

unjust governance
This  inequitable  and  unjust  social  and  economic  universe  can  be  com-
pounded by unjust governance. Often the excluded remain voiceless in the 
institutions of governance and thus underserved by public institutions. The 
institutions of democracy remain unresponsive to the needs of the excluded, 
both in the design of policy agendas and in the selection of electoral candi-
dates. Representative institutions thus tend to be monopolized by the afflu-
ent and socially powerful, who then use office to enhance their wealth and 
perpetuate their hold over power.

Promoting structural change
To  correct  these  structural  injustices,  policy  agendas  need  to  be  made 
more  inclusive  by  strengthening  the  capacity  of  the  excluded  to  partici-
pate on more equitable terms in the market economy and the democratic 
polity. Such agendas should reposition the excluded within the processes 
of production, distribution and governance. The production process needs 
to graduate the excluded from living out their lives exclusively as wage 
earners and tenant farmers by investing them with the capacity to become 
owners of productive assets. The distribution process must elevate the ex-
cluded beyond their inherited role as primary producers by enabling them 
to move upmarket through greater opportunities to share in adding value 
through collective action. Access to assets and markets must be backed by 
equitable access to quality health care and education, integral to empower-
ing the excluded.

The  governance  process  must  increase  the  active  participation  of 
the  excluded  in  representative  institutions,  which  is  crucial  to  enhancing 
their  voice  in  decisionmaking  and  providing  access  to  the  institutions  of 
governance.

Source: Sobhan, R. 2010. Challenging the Injustice of Poverty.

Chapter 1  The state of human development    |    37

taBle 1.3

Inequality and satisfaction with freedom of choice and community

HDI group and region

HDI group

very high human development

High human development

Medium human development

Low human development

Region

Arab States

East Asia and the Pacific

Europe and Central Asia

Latin America and the Caribbean

South Asia

Sub-Saharan Africa

World

Overall loss in 
HDI value due to 
inequality, 2012 (%)

Satisfaction 

with freedom of 
choice, 2007–2011a 

(% satisfied)

Satisfaction with 

community,b 
2007–2011a 

(% answering yes)

10.8

20.6

24.2

33.5

25.4

21.3

12.9

25.7

29.1

35.0

23.3

81.5

66.3

77.8

61.8

54.6

78.7c

58.5

77.9

72.9

69.1

73.9

85.9

76.4

79.9

72.2

67.6

80.1c

76.5

79.0

83.2

65.2

79.0

a. Data refer to the most recent year available during the period specified.
b. Based on the Gallup survey question on overall satisfaction with city.
c. value is not displayed in the statistical tables because data are not available for at least half the countries covering at least 
two-thirds of the population of the group.
Source: Overall loss in HDI value due to inequality, HDRO calculations based on the Inequality-Adjusted HDI; satisfaction with 
freedom of choice and community, HDRO calculations based on Gallup (2012).

of choice. Subjective data can provide an in-
sight into the state of social integration within 
a country or community. Evidence suggests a 
small negative correlation between losses due 
to  inequality  and  satisfaction  with  freedom 
of choice and with the community. Evidence 
also suggests that people in countries with a 
high HDI value are generally more satisfied 
with  their  freedom  of  choice  and  with  the 
community. Exploring these associations can 
offer  important  policy  lessons  for  countries 
(table 1.3).

Human security

The 1994 Human Development Report argued 
that the concept of security must shift from the 
idea of a militaristic safeguarding of state bor-
ders to the reduction of insecurity in people’s 
daily  lives  (or  human  insecurity).54  In  every 
society,  human  security  is  undermined  by  a 
variety  of  threats,  including  hunger,  disease, 
crime, unemployment, human rights violations 

38    |    HUMAN DEvELOPMENT REPORT 2013

and  environmental  challenges.  The  intensity 
of  these  threats  differs  across  the  world,  but 
human security remains a universal quest for 
freedom from want and fear.

Consider economic insecurity. In the coun-
tries of the North, millions of young people 
are  now  unable  to  find  work.  And  in  the 
South, millions of farmers have been unable 
to earn a decent livelihood and forced to mi-
grate, with many adverse effects, particularly 
for women. Closely related to insecurity in 
livelihoods  is  insecurity  in  food  and  nutri-
tion.  Many  developing  country  households 
faced  with  high  food  prices  cannot  afford 
two square meals a day, undermining progress 
in  child  nutrition.  Another  major  cause  of 
impoverishment in many countries, rich and 
poor, is unequal access to affordable health 
care. Ill health in the household (especially 
of the head of the household) is one of the 
most  common  sources  of  impoverishment, 
as earnings are lost and medical expenses are 
incurred.

Perspectives on security need to shift from a 
misplaced emphasis on military strength to a 
well rounded, people-centred view. Progress in 
this shift can be gleaned in part from statistics 
on crime, particularly homicides, and military 
spending.

Crime

Freedom from fear should be reflected in low 
crime  rates,  specifically  low  homicide  rates. 
A  few  studies  have  also  used  homicide  rates 
to  assess  civic  engagement  and  trust.55  The 
2012 Caribbean Human Development Report, 
for example, argues that violent crime erodes 
confidence  in  future  development  prospects, 
reduces the competitiveness of industries and 
services  by  imposing  burdensome  security 
costs  and  damages  the  investment  climate. 
Crime may also lead to a brain drain from the 
country or affected community. And diverting 
resources to control crime reduces the funds 
available to invest in health care and education, 
thus slowing social integration and dampening 
development.56

In  recent  years,  the  global  average  hom-
icide  rate  for  189  countries  with  data  was 
6.9  per  100,000  people,57  with  a  low  of  0 
in Monaco and a high of 91.6 in Honduras 

MaP 1.1

There is a small negative connotation between homicide rates and HDI values

Eastern Europe & Central Asia 
5.5

5.5

Arab States
4.5

South Asia
3.7

Côte d’lvoire 
56.9

Sub-Saharan Africa
20.4

World
6.9

East Asia & Paciﬁc
2.8

El Salvador 69.2

Honduras 91.6

Venezuela 45.1

Latin America
& the Caribbean
22.2

Homicide rate per 100,000 people

0 to <10

30 to <40

10 to <20

40+

20 to <30

No data

Source: HDRO calculations based on UNODC 2012.

(see statistical table 9). There is a small neg-
ative correlation between homicide rate and 
HDI value, with low HDI countries at 14.6 
per 100,000 people, high HDI countries at 
13.0  and  very  high  HDI  countries  at  2.1. 
Homicide rates are highest in Latin America 
and  the  Caribbean  (22.2  per  100,000  peo-
ple), followed by Sub-Saharan Africa (20.4), 
Europe  and  Central  Asia  (5.5),  the  Arab 
States (4.5), South Asia (3.7) and East Asia 
and the Pacific (2.8).

It  can  also  be  instructive  to  look  at  the 
homicide rates for cities. Contrary to popular 
perception,  crime  is  not  generally  higher  in 
poorer cities. Amartya Sen notes that Kolkata 
“is not only one of the poorest cities in India, 
and  indeed  in  the  world,  but  it  also  has  the 
lowest violent crime rate of all Indian cities.”58 
This is also true for homicide: Kolkata’s average 
incidence of murder, 0.3 per 100,000 people, 
is lower than in much more affluent London 
(2.4) and New York (5.0).59

Sen argues that Kolkata has benefited from its 
long history as a “mixed” city, without ethnic or 
income separation between neighbourhoods. 

For several decades, the city has also had a sys-
tem of basic public services, including govern-
ment hospitals, schools, colleges and a low-cost 
public transport system, which have dampened 
the impacts of economic and social exclusion. 
In local trains, poor vendors commonly travel 
side by side with wage labourers and white-col-
lar workers.

But when people do not have access to ser-
vices, they may be more prone to crime. A UK 
study  of  reoffending  criminals,  for  example, 
noted  that  many  prisoners  are  victims  of  a 
lifetime of social exclusion60 and are effectively 
excluded from access to basic services.61

Military spending

Since the end of the Cold War, there has been 
no  overall  intensification  of  militarization, 
measured by military expenditure as a propor-
tion of GDP, partly because of changes in the 
threats  to  national  security.  While  interstate 
conflicts appear to be on the decline since the 
early 1990s, the number of intrastate conflicts 
has increased since the mid-20th century.

Chapter 1  The state of human development    |    39

Today the majority of security threats come 
not  from  other  countries  but  from  insur-
gencies,  terrorism  and  other  civil  conflicts.62 
Conflicts  in  the  post–Cold  War  era  have 
claimed more than 5 million casualties, 95% of 
them civilians.63

In South Asia, for example, all nine countries 
have experienced internal conflict in the last 
two decades, and the resulting casualties have 
outnumbered those from interstate conflicts.64 
Moreover,  since  2001,  more  of  the  conflicts 
have been in the poorer regions of those coun-
tries than elsewhere.65

In 2010, military spending worldwide for 
the  104  countries  with  data  available  was 
more  than  $1.4  trillion,  or  2.6%  of  world 
GDP.  Most  of  the  spending  was  by  very 
high HDI countries. But as other countries’ 
economies have grown, particularly medium 
HDI  countries,  their  military  expenditures 
have  been  increasing.  Between  1990  and 
2010, military spending more than tripled in 
medium HDI countries, while rising close to 
50% in low HDI countries and 22% in very 
high HDI countries and falling almost 47% 
in high HDI countries. Nevertheless, in the 
three  HDI  groups  where  total  military  ex-
penditure grew, the increase was slower than 
GDP growth. These aggregates hide consid-
erable  diversity.  Europe  and  Central  Asia 
saw military spending decline 69% between 

Not all countries have 
the preconditions for 
complete demilitarization, 
but most have scope for 
substantial slowing in 
their military spending

FIGuRe 1.8

Development is not always accompanied by a rise in military spending

Military spending, 2010 (% of GDP)

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

Low HDI

Medium HDI

High HDI

Source: Military expenditure, Stockholm International Peace Research Institute; HDI, HDRO calculations.

1.0

HDI, 2012

Very high HDI

40    |    HUMAN DEvELOPMENT REPORT 2013

1990 and 2010, while South Asia, East Asia 
and the Pacific, and the Arab States saw it rise 
43%–388%.66

Although development is often accompanied 
by a rise in military spending, this is not always 
the case (figure 1.8). The highest shares of mil-
itary spending as a proportion of GDP are in 
very high and high HDI countries, but some 
very high HDI countries have a share below 1% 
of GDP, among them Austria, Iceland, Ireland 
and Luxembourg.

This is of particular significance for the rising 
countries of the South. Costa Rica, for exam-
ple, has not had an army since 1948.67 It spends 
nothing on the military and has thus been able 
to earmark more funds for social programmes 
and social investments.68 In 2009, it invested 
6.3% of GDP in education and 7% in health. 
Such choices contributed to its progress on the 
HDI from 0.621 in 1980 to 0.773 in 2012.

Today,  around  20  countries  have  small  or 
no  armed  forces.  They  tend  to  possess  small 
territories, and many of them rely on external 
powers for national security. Not all countries 
have the preconditions for complete demilita-
rization, but most have scope for substantial 
slowing in their military spending. Particularly 
with  respect  to  internal  conflicts,  India  has 
shown that while policing may be more effec-
tive in curbing violence in the short term, re-
distribution and overall development are better 
strategies to prevent and contain civil unrest in 
the medium term.69

* 

 

 

 

* 

 

 

 

*

This  analysis  of  the  state  of  human  develop-
ment is positive and hopeful. Yet much work 
remains. Almost every country has challenges 
to  overcome  and  opportunities  for  further 
progress.  Of  particular  concern  is  that  some 
developed countries, in response to the debt 
crisis, are pursuing austerity policies that could 
foreclose or reduce future choices and options 
for people in the South.

The only viable path to higher human devel-
opment is through active investment in enhanc-
ing capabilities and enlarging opportunities. As 
the 1991 Human Development Report noted, 
“People  who  are  healthier,  confident,  and 
skilled will be in a much better position to cope 
with a fast-changing environment and meet the 

technological and competitive demands of the 
international marketplace.”70

The  next  chapter  documents  the  extent  to 
which many countries of the South have been 
able to follow this route, as well as the global 

impact they are having. Later chapters will con-
sider how they have done this and examine the 
implication of the rise of the South for inter-
national governance and for reshaping global 
power relations.

Chapter 1  The state of human development    |    41

“When the music changes, 
so does the dance.”
African proverb

“I do not want my house to be 
walled in on all sides and my 
windows to be stuffed. I want 
the cultures of all the lands to 
be blown about my house as 
freely as possible. But I refuse 
to be blown off my feet by any.”
Mahatma Gandhi

2.
A more global South

A striking feature of the world scene in recent years is the transformation of many developing countries into dynamic 
economies that are doing well in economic growth and trade and progressing rapidly on human development. During these 
uncertain times, they are collectively bolstering world economic growth, lifting other developing economies, reducing pov-
erty and increasing wealth on a grand scale. They still face formidable challenges and are home to many of the world’s 
poor.1 But they have demonstrated how pragmatic policies and a strong focus on human development can release the 
opportunities latent in their economies, facilitated by globalization.

The  rise  of  the  South  is  noteworthy  for  its 
diversity. This wave of developing countries en-
compasses countries with very different endow-
ments, social structures, geography and history: 
for example, Algeria and Argentina, Brazil and 
Bangladesh,  China  and  Chile,  Ghana  and 
Guyana, India and Indonesia, and Malaysia and 
Mozambique.  These  countries  demonstrate 
that  rapid  people-centred  development  can 
take root in a wide range of contexts. And their 
experiences  and  knowhow  are  an  expanding 
source of best practice that should enable other 
developing countries to catch up.

The rapidly expanding connections between 
these  countries  are  also  leading  to  a  more 
balanced  form  of  globalization.  New  trade 
routes  are  flourishing:  countries  as  diverse 
as  Morocco,  South  Africa,  Thailand,  Turkey 
and  Viet  Nam  each  have  substantial  export 
and import relationships with more than 100 
economies.2 New and improved technologies, 
adapted to local conditions, are boosting peo-
ple’s productivity and enabling production to 
be shared across borders.

And  all  this  is  happening  as  people  and 
continents are connected on a previously unim-
aginable scale. More than 2 billion people use 
the Internet, and every year more than 1 billion 
people travel internationally.3

This transformation is affecting the dynamics 
of regional and global relationships. The leading 
countries of the South played a crucial role in 
responding to the 2008 financial crisis. Dialogue 
is intensifying on the appropriate provisioning 
of global public goods, such as curbing climate 
change, developing rules for stable financial mar-
kets, advancing multilateral trade negotiations 
and  agreeing  on  mechanisms  to  finance  and 
produce green technologies. It may seem that in-
creasing the number of participants will make it 

more difficult to arrive at a global consensus. But 
the rise of the South could help break stalemates 
on some of today’s global issues and lead to more 
development- friendly global agreements.

Rebalancing: a more global 
world, a more global South

Global production is rebalancing in ways not 
seen for 150 years. Growth in the cross-border 
movement of goods, services, people and ideas 
has been remarkable. In 1800, trade account-
ed  for  2%  of  world  output.4  The  proportion 
remained small right after the Second World 
War, and by 1960 it was still less than 25%. By 
2011, however, trade accounted for nearly 60% 
of global output.5 The expansion it represents is 
widely distributed, with at least 89 developing 
countries increasing their trade to output ratio 
over the past two decades (box 2.1).6

Today, as a result of reduced trade barriers 
and lower transport costs, the production of 
manufactures  is  fragmented  across  borders, 
with  many  countries  trading  intermediate 
goods.7 And changes in information technol-
ogy have made services increasingly tradable. 
The result has been a remarkable rise in intra-
industry and intrafirm trade.

Developing  countries,  particularly  in  Asia, 
have  ridden  these  shifts  to  great  advantage. 
Between 1980 and 2010, they increased their 
share of world merchandise trade from about 
25% to 47%8 and their share of world output 
from 33% to 45%. Today, developing countries 
account  for  a  third  of  value  added  in  world 
production of manufactured goods.9 Between 
1990  and  2010,  the  merchandise  exports  of 
eight developing country members of the Group 
of  20  (G20)  increased  15-fold,  from  about 

Chapter 2  A more global South    |    43

Box 2.1

The South’s integration with the world economy and human development

In a sample of 107 developing countries over 1990–2010, about 87% can 
be considered globally integrated: they increased their trade to output ratio, 
have many substantial trading partnerships1 and maintain a high trade to 
output ratio relative to countries at comparable income levels.2 All these 
developing countries are also much more connected to the world and with 
each other: Internet use has expanded dramatically, with the median annual 
growth in the number of users exceeding 30% between 2000 and 2010.

While not all globally integrated developing countries have made rapid 
gains in Human Development Index (HDI) value, the converse is true. Almost 
all developing countries that made the most improvement in HDI value rela-
tive to their peers between 1990 and 2012 (at least 45 in the sample here) 
have integrated more with the world economy over the past two decades; 
their average increase in trade to output ratio is about 13 percentage points 
greater than that of the group of developing countries with more modest 
improvement in HDI value. This is consistent with earlier findings that coun-
tries tend to open more as they develop.3

The increasingly integrated countries with major improvement in HDI 
value include not only the large ones that dominate the headlines, but also 
dozens  of  smaller  and  least  developed  countries.  Thus  they  constitute  a 

Human progress and trade expansion in the South

Relative improvement in HDI value, 1990–2012
0.3

larger and more varied group than the emerging market economies often 
designated by acronyms, such as BRICS (Brazil, Russian Federation, India, 
China  and  South  Africa),  IBSA  (India,  Brazil  and  South  Africa),  CIvETS 
(Colombia, Indonesia, viet Nam, Egypt, Turkey and South Africa) and MIST 
(Mexico, Indonesia, South Korea [Republic of Korea] and Turkey).

The  figure  below  plots  improvement  in  HDI  value4  against  the  change 
in trade to output ratio, an indicator of the depth of participation in global 
markets. More than four-fifths of these developing countries increased their 
trade to output ratio between 1990 and 2012. Among the exceptions in the 
subgroup that also made substantial improvement in HDI value are Indonesia, 
Pakistan and venezuela, three large countries that are considered global play-
ers in world markets, exporting or importing from at least 80 economies. Two 
smaller countries whose trade to output ratio declined (Mauritius and Panama) 
continue to trade at levels much higher than would be expected for countries 
at comparable income levels. All countries that had substantial improvement 
in HDI value and increased their trade to output ratio between 1990 and 2012 
are highlighted in the upper right quadrant of the figure. Countries in the lower 
right quadrant (including Kenya, the Philippines and South Africa) increased 
their trade to output ratio but made modest improvement in HDI value.

0.2

0.1

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

China

Mexico

Turkey
Brazil

Ghana

Bangladesh

India

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

1.2

Change in trade to output ratio, 1990–2010

High HDI improvers, globally integrated 

Modest HDI improvers, globally integrated 

Others

1. Bilateral trade exceeding $2 million in 2010–2011.
2. Based on results from a cross-country regression of trade to GDP ratio on income per capita that controls for population and landlockedness.
3. See Rodrik (2001).
4. Relative HDI improvement is measured by residuals from a regression of the change in the log of HDI value between 1990 and 2012 on the log of initial HDI value in 1990. Five countries with black dots in the upper 
left quadrant made substantial improvement in HDI value but reduced their trade to output ratio between 1990 and 2010, though they either maintained a large number of substantial trading ties globally or traded 
more than predicted for countries at comparable levels of income per capita. Countries with open circles in the upper right and lower right quadrants had modest relative improvement in HDI value between 1990 and 
2012 but increased their trade to output ratio or maintained a large number of substantial trading ties.
Source: HDRO calculations; trade to output ratios from World Bank (2012a).

$200 billion to $3 trillion.10 But trade has also 
increased for many other countries. In 2010, mer-
chandise exports per capita from Sub-Saharan 
Africa were more than twice those from India.11 

In 1995–1996 Thailand had around 10 trading 
partners to which it exported more than $1 bil-
lion in goods each; just 15 years later it had three 
times as many, spread across the globe (map 2.1).12

44    |    HUMAN DEvELOPMENT REPORT 2013

MaP 2.1

Thailand’s export expansion, 1995–2011

1995–1996

2010–2011 

Thailand’s exports
($ millions)

0 to <15

15 to <100

100 to <1,000

1,000 to <25,000

No data

Note: Data are averages for 1995 and 1996 and for 2010 and 2011.
Source: UNSD 2012.

Global  rebalancing  has  been  accompanied 
by an unprecedented linking of developing re-
gions. Between 1980 and 2011, South–South 
trade as a share of world merchandise trade rose 
from 8.1% to 26.7%, with growth particularly 
remarkable in the 2000s (figure 2.1). Over the 
same period, the share of North–North trade 
declined  from  about  46%  to  less  than  30%. 
These  trends  hold  even  when  exports  and 
imports  of  natural  resources  are  excluded.13 
South–South  trade  has  been  an  important 
growth stimulus during the recent economic 

downturn. Countries of the South are export-
ing more merchandise (and manufactures) to 
each other than to countries of the North, and 
those exports are more intensive in skills and 
technology.14

Sub-Saharan  Africa  has  become  a  major 
new source and destination for South–South 
trade.  Between  1992  and  2011,  China’s 
trade  with  Sub-Saharan  Africa  rose  from 
$1 billion to more than $140 billion. Indian 
companies are investing in African industries 
ranging from infrastructure to hospitality and 

Chapter 2  A more global South    |    45

FIGuRe 2.1

As a share of world merchandise trade, South–South trade more than tripled over 
1980–2011, while North–North trade declined

Share of world merchandise trade (%)

telecommunications, while Brazilian firms are 
some of the largest employers in Angola.15

trade in capital goods and services

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

North–North
South–South

South–North

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2011

Note: North in 1980 refers to Australia, Canada, Japan, New Zealand, the United States and Western Europe.
Source: HDRO calculations based on UNSD (2012).

taBle 2.1

Least developed countries’ trade with China, 2000–2001 and 2010–2011 ($ millions at 
current exchange rates)

Sector

2000–2001

2010–2011

2000–2001

2010–2011

Imports from China

Exports to China

Agricultural raw materials

Food and beverages

Fuel, ores and metals

Chemicals

Textiles and leather

Iron and steel

Other material-based manufactures

Industrial machinery

Electronics

Road vehicles and equipment

Apparel and footwear

Professional equipment and fixtures

16

164

42

232

1,323

61

236

400

382

266

266

147

105

1,089

323

2,178

8,974

1,642

3,132

4,415

3,806

6,691

2,577

2,291

243

378

3,126

1,965

841

44,244

1

14

0

44

1

3

0

4

1

93

138

1

540

1

7

1

129

34

Note: Export values are averaged for 2000 and 2001 and for 2010 and 2011 and rounded to the nearest whole number, as reported 
by China; import values include cost, insurance and freight.
Source: HDRO calculations based on UNSD (2012).

46    |    HUMAN DEvELOPMENT REPORT 2013

South–South trade offers developing countries 
access to affordable capital goods that are often 
more appropriate to their needs than are cap-
ital goods from richer countries and that are 
therefore more likely to be acquired, adopted 
and  imitated.16  Even  India  has  benefited.  In 
2010, capital goods such as electrical machin-
ery,  nuclear  reactors  and  boilers  dominated 
India’s  imports  from  China  (60%)  and  cost 
an estimated 30% less than if they had been 
sourced from richer countries.17 This still does 
not reflect the full dynamism of such exchang-
es. For example, China’s fourth-largest turbine 
producer, Mingyang, recently acquired 55% of 
India’s Global Wind Power, with the aim of in-
stalling 2.5 gigawatts of wind and solar capacity 
in India.18

One  of  the  largest  internationally  traded 
services  is  tourism,  which  accounts  for  as 
much as 30% of world exports of commercial 

In  2010–2011,  crucial  inputs  for  aug-
menting productive capacity and infrastruc-
ture—road vehicles and equipment, industrial 
machinery,  professional  equipment  and  fix-
tures,  chemicals,  and  iron  and  steel—made 
up  nearly  half  of  least  developed  countries’ 
imports from China (table 2.1). The largest 
import category was textiles and leather, in-
cluding yarn and fabric that are used as inputs 
for least developed countries’ exports of ap-
parel to markets in the North. Consumer elec-
tronics and apparel and footwear accounted 
for less than 20% of least developed countries’ 
imports from China.

Developing countries have also seized oppor-
tunities for trade in services. Advances in in-
formation technology have facilitated services 
trade at different skill levels: lower skill work, 
as in call centres and data entry; medium-skill 
work, as in back office accounting, program-
ming,  ticketing  and  billing;  and  high-skill 
work, as in architectural design, digital anima-
tion, medical tests and software development. 
This trend is expected to intensify as developing 
countries take advantage of the benefits of scale 
from servicing their own expanding consumer 
markets.

services.19 Tourists spent roughly $1 trillion in 
2010; China was among the most popular des-
tinations (more than 57 million arrivals), along 
with  Egypt,  Malaysia,  Mexico,  Thailand  and 
Turkey. The UN World Tourism Organization 
projects that by 2020, three-fourths of more 
than 1.5 billion tourist arrivals will occur with-
in the same geographic region.

Foreign direct investment

The  increase  in  output  and  trade  in  many 
developing  countries  has  been  assisted  by 
large  inflows  of  foreign  direct  investment 
(FDI): between 1980 and 2010, the countries 
of the South increased their share of global 
FDI  from  20%  to  50%.20  FDI  flows  into 
developing countries have been a forerunner 
of outward FDI from developing countries. 
The growth rate of the South’s FDI inflows 
and  outflows  rose  rapidly  in  the  1990s  and 
early  to  mid-2000s  (figure  2.2).  FDI  from 
the South destined for other countries in the 
South  grew  20%  a  year  over  1996–2009.21 

FIGuRe 2.2

Foreign direct investment flows to and from the 
South have veered sharply upward since the 1990s

Foreign direct investment ($ billions)

800

600

400

200

In(cid:31)ows

Out(cid:31)ows

0

1980

1990

2000

2010

Note: Data are for developing and transitional economies as defined by the 
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development. Data are converted to 
US dollars at current exchange rates.
Source: HDRO calculations based on UNCTAD (2011a).

In  many  least  developed  countries,  a  size-
able share of inward FDI now originates in 
other  developing  countries,  especially  from 
the fast-growing multinational corporations 
based in the South.

These  investments  generally  involve  links 
with  local  firms  and  transfers  of  technology 
that make intensive use of labour and local con-
tent. There is some evidence of a strong region-
al dimension to South–South FDI, with most 
investments in countries in the same region, of-
ten to neighbours and to countries with shared 
languages.22 The biggest outward investor from 
the South is China, with an investment stock of 
$1.2 trillion.23

In 1990, companies in the South made up 
only  4%  of  the  Fortune  Global  500  ranking 
of the world’s biggest corporations; in 2011, 
their share was 22%. Today, one in four trans-
national  corporations  is  based  in  the  South. 
Though  the  enterprises  may  be  smaller,  they 
are numerous: there are now more Korean than 
Japanese multinational companies, and more 
Chinese ones than US ones. Enterprises from 
the South are going global earlier than firms 
from developed countries did at a similar stage 
of development.24 They are augmenting their 
competitiveness  by  acquiring  strategic  assets 
such  as  brands,  technology  and  distribution 
networks (box 2.2).

Production networks

The  increase  in  trade  and  investment  by 
multi national  corporations  and  others  has 
been linked to the expansion of internation-
al  production  networks,  especially  in  Asia. 
Likened  to  a  third  industrial  revolution,25 
these  networks  split  production  processes 
into  multiple  steps  that  cross  national  bor-
ders. As a result, developing countries have 
been able to diversify their industrial struc-
tures and participate in complex production 
processes. Developing countries engage ini-
tially in the labour- intensive segments, typi-
cally in product assembly, and then graduate 
to  component  fabrication  and  equipment 
manufacture.  Meanwhile,  the  less  complex 
production relocates to less advanced neigh-
bouring economies. At the same time, these 
manufacturing  plants  create  demand  for 
domestic firms to supply inputs and producer 

the increase in trade 
and investment by 
multinational corporations 
and others can be 
likened to a third 
industrial revolution

Chapter 2  A more global South    |    47

Box 2.2

Acquisitions by the South of brands in the North

In 2011, 61 of the world’s biggest corporations on the Fortune 500 list were 
Chinese, 8 were Indian and 7 Brazilian. Just five years earlier, China had 16 
on the list, India 5 and Brazil 3. The South is going global through outward 
investment  using  mergers  and  acquisitions.  The  acquisition  of  venerated 
brands  from  the  North  by  companies  in  lower  and  upper  middle-income 
countries is a portent of the rise of the South. In 2005, the Chinese com-
pany  Lenovo  bought  IBM’s  laptop  division  for  $1.25  billion  and  took  over 
$500  million  of  its  debt.  In  2010,  Zhejiang  Geely  purchased  the  Swedish 
car company volvo. In 2011 alone, Chinese firms spent $42.9 billion on an 
eclectic mix of more than 200 acquisitions: Sany Heavy Industry Co. acquired 
Putzmeister,  Germany’s  largest  concrete  pump  maker;  Liugong  Machinery 
Co.  Ltd.  purchased  the  Polish  construction  equipment  manufacturer  Huta 
Stalowa Wola; and Shandong Heavy Industry Group bought a 75% stake in 
Italy’s Ferretti Group, a luxury yacht maker.

India’s  Tata  Group  acquired  the  Anglo-Dutch  steel  firm  Corus  for 
$13.3 billion in 2007 and Jaguar Land Rover for $2.6 billion in 2008. The 
Aditya Birla Group bought US aluminium firm Novelis in 2007 and Columbian 
Chemicals in 2011. Mahindra and Mahindra acquired Sangyong, a bankrupt 
Korean carmaker. Brazil’s food companies have also been active: in 2007, 

JBS Friboi bought Swift, a US rival, to ease its entry into the United States. 
In 2011, Turkish companies made 25 deals worth nearly $3 billion. One of 
Turkey’s famous acquisitions is Godiva, a Belgian chocolate manufacturer, 
bought for $850 million by Yildiz Holding. There are scores of lesser known 
purchases of smaller brands from the North by companies in Southeast Asia 
and the Arab States. (Many big purchases are also South–South. In 2010, 
India’s Bharti Airtel acquired the African operations of Zain for $10.7 billion, 
and China spent $9.8 billion in 27 deals across Brazil, India, the Russian 
Federation and South Africa.)

South–North  acquisitions  are  often  interpreted  in  patriotic  terms. 
Whether the deals help short-run profitability and value creation is unclear. 
In the long run, however, the strategic motives (outside the resource sector) 
appear to be about acquiring proprietary knowledge, skills and competen-
cies  that  will  help  companies  expand  abroad  and  at  home.  Acquiring  an 
established, albeit struggling, brand from the North gives companies from 
the South a foothold in mature markets. The acquiring companies lower their 
cost base by diversifying and globalizing supply chains and gain the technol-
ogy and tacit knowhow (such as risk management or credit rating in the case 
of financial institutions) to enhance operating capabilities.

Source: HDRO; China Daily 2012; The Economist 2011a,b, 2012a; Deloitte 2012a,b; Luedi 2008.

services. In this way, opportunities to partic-
ipate in international production have wid-
ened for new entrants—as for Malaysia in the 
1970s, Thailand in the 1980s, China in the 
1990s and Viet Nam today.

The  North  has  played  an  important  role 
in this rise of the South, just as the South is 
contributing to the North’s recovery from the 
economic slowdown (box 2.3). International 
production networks have been driven mainly 
by final demand in the North. The surge in inte-
grated production networks within Asia alone 
resulted in a high-technology export boom of 
nearly $320 billion between 1995 and 2005.26

Personal networks

Many transnational opportunities in both trade 
and investment arise through personal connec-
tions,  often  between  international  migrants 
and their countries of origin. In 2010, an esti-
mated 3% of the world’s people (215 million) 
were first-generation immigrants,27 and close 
to half of them lived in developing countries.28 
Almost 80% of South–South migration takes 
place between bordering countries.29

Migrant  diasporas  are  a  huge  source  of 
foreign  exchange.  In  2005,  South–South 

48    |    HUMAN DEvELOPMENT REPORT 2013

remittances  were  estimated  at  30%–45%  of 
worldwide remittances.30 Diasporas are also a 
source of information about market opportuni-
ties. Diasporas can be associated with increased 
bilateral  trade  and  FDI.31  For  example,  US 
multinational firms with a high proportion of 
employees from particular countries have less 
need to rely on joint-venture partners in coun-
tries with which their employees have cultural 
ties.32

Links can also be strengthened when mi-
grants  return  to  their  home  country.  Many 
information  technology  professionals  in 
California’s Silicon Valley, for example, have 
taken their ideas, capital and networks back 
with them when they return to their home 
countries. Other returnees are building new 
infrastructure,  universities,  hospitals  and 
businesses.  Returning  entrepreneurs  stay  in 
touch  with  former  colleagues,  facilitating 
the diffusion of business information. Cross-
border  scientific  collaboration  also  dispro-
portionately involves scientists with diaspora 
ties.33

Other flows of information are made possible 
by  the  widening  penetration  of  the  Internet 
and  new  social  media.  Between  2000  and 
2010,  average  annual  growth  in  Internet  use 

Box 2.3

Ties that bind: the mutual dependence of North and South

A substantial share of South–South trade, especially in manufactured parts 
and components, is driven by demand in the North. This makes the countries 
of the South sensitive to shocks in the North. After the 2008 global finan-
cial crisis, for instance, exports from Southeast Asia to Japan, the European 
Union and the United States fell about 20% between 2008 and 2009. The 
percentage drop in China’s exports to these economies was also in double 
digits.

The North is also increasingly relying on the South to power its own re-
bound. Since 2007, US exports to China and Latin America and the Caribbean 
have grown two and a half times faster than US exports to traditional mar-
kets in the North. Helped by a weak dollar and increasing purchasing power 
in the South, expansion of US exports involved not only traditional sectors 
such as aircraft, machinery, software and Hollywood movies, but also new, 
high-value services such as architecture, engineering and finance. Behind 
Shanghai’s  booming  architectural  wonders  (including  Shanghai  Towers, 
which will be the country’s tallest building in 2015) are US designers and 

structural engineers, who are drawing an ever-increasing share of fees and 
royalties from services exported to Brazil, China and India.

Furthermore, a growing “app economy” supported by such companies 
as Apple, Facebook and Google employs more than 300,000 people whose 
creations are easily exported across borders. Zynga, a large company that 
makes  online  games  and  mobile  applications,  recorded  $1.1  billion  in 
revenue in 2011, a third of it from players outside the United States. The 
impact of a growing consumer class in the South is felt not only in ser-
vices, but also in manufacturing and commodities. A third of US exports 
are now accounted for by firms employing fewer than 500 people; through 
new techniques, such as three-dimensional printing, many are recapturing 
markets once lost to imports. Emerging markets have also revived the US 
role as a commodity producer (of grains, for example). These shifting trade 
patterns suggest that a slowdown in the South would halt growth in the 
newly dynamic exports from the North, just as the recession in the North 
hit the South.

Source: HDRO; The Economist 2012b.

was exceptionally high in around 60 develop-
ing countries (figure 2.3).34 Of the 10 countries 
with the most users of popular social network-
ing sites such as Facebook, 6 are in the South.35 
While these rates reflect in part the low base in 
2000, the spread and adoption of new media 
have revolutionized many sectors across diverse 
countries (box 2.4).

Impetus from human development

Successful  performance  in  trade,  investment 
and international production also depends on 
rising levels of human development, as illus-
trated by the association between high export 
earnings per capita and achievement in edu-
cation and health (figure 2.4). The more suc-
cessful countries in the upper right quadrant 
of the figure also tend to have better economic 
opportunities  for  women.  Increased  trade 
draws  new  workers,  often  women,  into  the 
labour market, expanding their choices. These 
new workers do not always benefit from good 
working conditions; efforts to keep costs low 
can put pressure on wages and work environ-
ments. Some governments may be reluctant to 
expand worker rights, if they believe it would 
raise production costs and reduce competitive-
ness (box 2.5).36

The capacity of people and institutions also 
affects the benefits from FDI. Host countries 
need to invest in the capacity of their people 
to identify, assimilate and develop the useful 
knowledge  embedded  in  foreign  capital  and 
ideas.37  Indeed,  an  educated  and  healthy 
workforce is often a key factor in influencing 
the decision of foreign investors on where to 
locate. This positive association between FDI 
inflows and achievements in health and edu-
cation is evident for a sample of 137 countries 
(figure 2.5).38

This relationship between a skilled popu-
lace and inward foreign investment tends to 
be  mutually  reinforcing.  But  there  are  out-
liers. FDI could still flow to countries with 
modest achievements in human development 
if  they  are  exceptionally  well  endowed  in 
natural resources. Between 2003 and 2009, 
for  instance,  many  resource-rich  African 
countries  where  FDI  contributed  substan-
tially  to  economic  growth  saw  some  of  the 
lowest  nonincome  Human  Development 
Index (HDI) values.39 However, the impact 
on development is limited when such invest-
ments are confined to enclaves and delinked 
from  the  rest  of  the  economy.  Spillover 
benefits  from  FDI  are  unlikely  to  be  wide-
spread if there is no sustained investment in 
people’s capabilities. In this regard, relatively 

Host countries need to 
invest in the capacity of 
their people to identify 
and use the knowledge 
embedded in foreign 
capital and ideas

Chapter 2  A more global South    |    49

FIGuRe 2.3

Between 2000 and 2010, Internet use grew more than 30% a year in around 60 developing countries

Internet users, 2000 (per 100 people)

4.0

3.5

3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0

Dominican Republic

Peru

Tunisia

Brazil

Colombia

Saudi Arabia

Belarus

Russian 
Federation

China

Ecuador

Pakistan

Ukraine

Sri Lanka

Uzbekistan

India

Egypt

Kazakhstan

Bosnia and
Herzegovina

Morocco

Tanzania
Yemen

Syrian 
Arab
Republic

Viet Nam

Azerbaijan

Malawi 

Libya 

Angola

0

10

20

30

40

60
Internet users, 2010 (per 100 people)

50

Note: Bubble size is proportional to total Internet subscriptions in 2010 (320,000 in Angola and 6.7 million in viet Nam, for reference). Only developing countries 
exceeding the 75th percentile of compound annual growth in Internet users are shown.
Source: ITU 2012; World Bank 2012a.

resource-poor  Ethiopia  and  Tanzania  are 
noteworthy for their large increase in nonin-
come HDI value between 2000 and 2010 and 
for  their  above-average  FDI  over  the  same 
period.

Human  development  is  also  vital  for  par-
ticipating  in  global  supply  chains.  Contrary 
to popular perception, an abundance of low-
wage and low-skill labour is not enough. Even 
assembling components made elsewhere can be 
complex, requiring individual skills and social 
competencies to coordinate and organize on 
a large scale. People can learn such skills with 
appropriate  education,  training  and  policy 
support. Basic human capabilities are also cru-
cial.40  China,  Malaysia,  the  Philippines  and 
Thailand in East Asia; Brazil, Costa Rica and 
Mexico in Latin America and the Caribbean; 
and Morocco and Tunisia in the Arab States 
have some of the highest trade shares in parts 

and components. Widespread benefits accrue 
only  when  activities  are  scaled  up  (box  2.6). 
However, it should also be noted that in trade 
of  parts  and  components,  the  share  of  value 
added by any one country is generally low. In 
countries where production takes place almost 
entirely in enclaves connected to overseas sup-
ply chains, with limited ties to the domestic 
economy, the benefits to the rest of the econo-
my are limited.41

Helping other countries catch up

All developing countries are not yet participat-
ing fully in the rise of the South. The pace of 
change is slower, for instance, in the majority 
of the 49 least developed countries, especially 
those  that  are  landlocked  or  far  from  world 
markets. Nevertheless, many of these countries 
have also begun to benefit from South–South 

Human development is 
vital for participating in 
global supply chains; 
an abundance of 
low-wage and low-skill 
labour is not enough

50    |    HUMAN DEvELOPMENT REPORT 2013

Box 2.4

Mobile phones and the Palapa Ring: connecting Indonesia

Indonesia used telecommunications technology to connect its large cluster 
of far-flung islands and to open the country to the outside world in ways 
unimaginable a generation ago. This transformation was not spontaneous: 
it  required  extensive  private  and  public  investment  and  prescient  policy 
guidance  from  the  state-run  information  and  communications  technology 
council, Dewan Teknologi Informasi dan Komunikasi Nasional (DETIKNAS). 
With a diverse population stretched across a vast archipelago of nearly a 
thousand  inhabited  islands,  Indonesia  faced  formidable  obstacles  in  its 
transition to the digital age. Communications between islands was limited. 
Landline telephones were few, available to most ordinary Indonesians only 
in major cities and at high cost.

By 2010, however, 220 million mobile phones were registered in a coun-
try of 240 million people. An estimated 85% of adults owned phones, as 
state encouragement and market competition slashed the prices of hand-
sets and phone service alike. The number of Indonesian Internet users has 
also grown exponentially. As recently as 2008, just an estimated 13 million 
had regular Internet access. By late 2011, more than 55 million people did, 
according to industry surveys. The majority of young Indonesians in urban 
areas now enjoy Internet access, mostly through mobile phones, but also 
through the country’s 260,000 Internet cafes (warnets).

Through DETIKNAS the government has made Internet access a national 
priority, building what it calls a Palapa Ring of fibre-optic cables throughout 
the archipelago. It is closing in on its goal of wiring schools in a thousand 

remote rural villages with Internet service and has introduced e-budgeting 
and e-procurement systems for its own business operations. Perhaps most 
striking is the explosion of social media. In July 2012, there were 7.4 million 
registered Facebook users in greater Jakarta alone—the second most of 
any city in the world, after Bangkok’s 8.7 million. In all of Indonesia, there 
were 44 million Facebook accounts—almost as many as India’s 49 million. 
Indonesia has become a country where cabinet ministers send daily tweets 
to constituents. It has the third most Twitter subscribers in the world, and 
environmentalists use online databases and Google Earth mapping tools to 
publicize deforestation.

The human development benefits of this digital revolution are apparent, 
Indonesian analysts say, with mobile phones giving rural communities ac-
cess to public health information, banking services and agricultural market 
information. Civic engagement has benefited, with online public information 
services expanding since the 2010 passage of a far-ranging access to infor-
mation law. The economy is profiting too. A December 2011 study by Deloitte 
Access Economics calculated that the Internet economy already accounts for 
1.6% of Indonesia’s GDP, greater than the value of natural gas exports and 
comparable to the share in Brazil (1.5%) and the Russian Federation (1.6%), 
though still less than in China (2.6%) and India (3.2%). Deloitte projects an 
increase to at least 2.5% of GDP in five years, a substantial contributor to 
Indonesia’s International Monetary Fund–predicted annual GDP growth rate 
of 6%–7% through 2016.

Source: Karimuddin 2011; Deloitte 2011.

trade,  investment,  finance  and  technology 
transfer.

A  recent  study  of  trends  over  1988–2007 
finds  positive  growth  spillovers  from  China 
to  other  developing  countries,  particularly 
close  trading  partners.42  These  benefits  have 
to some extent offset slackening demand from 
developed  countries.  Growth  in  low-income 
countries  would  have  been  an  estimated 
0.3–1.1 percentage points lower in 2007–2010 
had growth fallen at the same rate in China and 
India as in developed economies.43 FDI from a 
single source country, China, was credited with 
contributing  substantially  to  growth  rates  in 
several African countries, including in 2008–
2009 when other growth impulses were dissi-
pating. Between 2003 and 2009, the estimated 
contribution  to  growth  from  Chinese  FDI 
ranged from 0.04 percentage point in South 
Africa to 1.9 percentage points in Zambia. The 
contribution was also high in the Democratic 
Republic of the Congo (1.0 percentage point), 
Nigeria  (0.9),  Madagascar  (0.5),  Niger  (0.5) 
and Sudan (0.3).44

Commodity  producers  in  Sub-Saharan 
Africa  and  elsewhere  have  benefited  from  a 
prolonged  commodity  boom  arising  in  East 
and South Asia. Cheap imports also increase 
the purchasing power of low-income consum-
ers and the competitiveness of export- oriented 
producers.  Some  African  countries  may, 
however,  be  hampered  by  the  enclave  char-
acter  of  extractive  industries,  which  reduces 
the potential gains from South–South trade 
and exposes economies to the risk of Dutch 
disease. Nevertheless, the primary sector can 
generate sizeable backward and forward links, 
as  Brazil,  Chile,  Indonesia,  Malaysia,  and 
Trinidad and Tobago have shown. Possibilities 
include agroindustry and logistics infrastruc-
ture, as well as demand for services (in food 
processing  and  distribution,  construction, 
repair and maintenance), all of which create 
jobs, income and learning and can enable en-
trepreneurs to begin new cycles of innovation 
and investment.

Several  encouraging  signs  are  evident. 
The  more  recent  investments  from  East  and 

Chapter 2  A more global South    |    51

FIGuRe 2.4

Export earnings per capita and human development are highly correlated

Log of exports per capita, 2008–2010

12

11

10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

75TH PERCENTILE

Malta

Hungary

Malaysia

Italy

0.2

0.4

0.6

MEDIAN

0.8

1.0

Nonincome HDI, 2005

Countries with relatively low labour force participation 
rates for women (less than 45% in 2009–2010)

Others

Note: Bubble size is proportional to the share of the nonprimary sector in output.
Source: HDRO calculations and World Bank (2012a).

South Asia in the African commodity sector 
show fewer enclave characteristics. And many 
governments  in  the  South  are  being  more 
pragmatic.  While  adopting  sound  macroe-
conomic  policies,  strengthening  institutions 
and  becoming  more  open,  they  are  actively 
engaging  in  industrial  policy  and  promoting 
entrepreneurship,  education,  skill  formation 
and technology upgrading. While supporting 
industrial  clusters  and  economic  zones  and 
expanding regional trade and investment, they 
are  also  creating  finance  and  credit  facilities 
for small and medium-size enterprises. Sound 
macroeconomic policy helps manage the risks 
of large foreign exchange inflows, while smart 
industrial  policy  strenghtens  domestic  links 
and enhances market multipliers.

Many  countries  have  also  benefited  from 
technology transfer and FDI into sectors that 
contribute  to  human  development.  Indian 

52    |    HUMAN DEvELOPMENT REPORT 2013

firms,  for  example,  are  supplying  affordable 
medicines, medical equipment, and informa-
tion and communications technology products 
and services to countries in Africa. Brazilian 
and  South  African  companies  are  doing  the 
same in their regional markets. Asian FDI in 
Africa has also expanded utility and telecom-
munications infrastructure.

Rising competitive pressures

Nevertheless, exports from larger countries can 
also have disadvantages. Large countries gener-
ate competitive pressures in smaller countries 
that  can  stifle  economic  diversification  and 
industrialization. Examples span the electrical 
industry  in  Zambia,  clothing  in  Kenya  and 
Senegal and textiles in South Africa.45 Clothing 
exports from Africa would struggle to retain 
their trade share in major markets without the 
trade  preferences  and  liberal  rules  of  origin 
available through the US African Growth and 
Opportunity Act and the EU Everything But 
Arms initiative.46

Even larger countries are not immune from 
competitive pressures. Chinese exports affect 
Brazilian manufacturing through imports of 
cheaper manufactures and indirectly through 
competition in third markets.47 As an indirect 
response, in September 2011, Brazil formally 
submitted  a  proposal  to  the  World  Trade 
Organization to examine trade remedies for 
redressing currency fluctuations that lead to 
import  surges.48  India  has  long  sought  re-
ciprocal market access for its automobiles in 
China.

To  check  the  adverse  consequence  of  ris-
ing exports on some of its partners, China is 
providing  preferential  loans  and  setting  up 
training  programmes  to  modernize  the  gar-
ment and textile sectors in African countries.49 
China  has  encouraged  its  mature  industries 
such as leather to move closer to the supply 
chain in Africa and its modern firms in tele-
communications, pharmaceuticals, electronics 
and construction to enter joint ventures with 
African businesses.50

Moreover,  there  are  instances  where  com-
petitive jolts have been followed by industrial 
revival.  Ethiopia’s  footwear  industry,  for 
example, was initially displaced by cheap East 
Asian imports, resulting in large-scale layoffs 

Box 2.5

Decent work in a competitive world

The  availability  of  decent,  well  paying  jobs  is  economically  empowering, 
especially for women. Yet today’s competitive global environment pressures 
workers to do more in less time for a lower wage. From both a human de-
velopment and a business perspective, competitiveness is best achieved by 
raising  labour  productivity.  Competitiveness  squeezed  out  through  lower 
wages and longer working hours is not sustainable. Labour flexibility should 
not  mean  adhering  to  practices  that  compromise  decent  working  condi-
tions. At least 150 countries have signed on to core International Labour 
Organization conventions on such matters as freedom of association and 
discrimination in the workplace. Labour laws on minimum wage, employ-
ment protection, working hours, social security and forms of contracts all 
aim  to  reduce  inequality,  insecurity  and  social  conflict;  they  also  provide 
incentives for businesses to pursue high-road management strategies. The 
view that more regulation is always bad for business has been discredited. 
One of the World Bank Group’s core Doing Business indicators on employ-
ing workers, which ranked countries on the leniency of measures related to 
hiring and firing workers, was discontinued because it falsely implied that 
fewer regulations were always preferable.

International  retailers  and  sourcing  agents  have  a  responsibility 
to  ensure  that  working  conditions  in  the  firms  they  source  inputs  from 
comply with international standards. Consider the recent case of one of 
the world’s most valuable companies, Apple, and its contractor, Foxconn. 
After a series of media exposés that documented terrible labour condi-
tions in Foxconn factories, Apple asked a monitoring group, the Fair Labor 
Association, to investigate. When the association published its findings 
of low pay, long hours and hazardous working conditions, Foxconn agreed 
to  substantial  reforms,  eventually  reducing  the  average  workweek  to 
49  hours  as  required  by  Chinese  law.  As  China’s  largest  private  sector 
employer, Foxconn had the power to directly improve and indirectly influ-
ence the working conditions of millions of people. Notable in this episode 
was that public opinion in a country of the North (US media and advocacy 
groups) pressured a corporation headquartered in that country to nudge 
a partner in a country of the South to uphold that country’s own labour 
standards. This outcome was possible only in an era when trade, busi-
ness practices and ethics and the universality of basic human rights are 
coalescing into a global norm.

Source: HDRO; Berg and Cazes 2007; Duhigg and Greenhouse 2012; Heller 2013.

and business closures, especially in the lower 
end of the market traditionally catered to by 
Ethiopian microenterprises. But the industry 
soon rebounded, even finding its way into the 
international market.51 One survey found that 
78 of the 96 Ethiopian firms that reported in 
2006 being hit hard by import competition had 
adjusted and become competitive within a few 
years. Nigeria’s plastics industry experienced a 
similar revival.52

Another concern is that the current patterns 
of demand from other countries in the South 
could accentuate the chronic specialization by 
many African economies in primary commod-
ities.  The  experience  of  the  least  developed 
countries, 33 of which are in Africa, seems to 
bear out this concern (see table 2.1). In 2011, 
agricultural  raw  materials  and  fuel,  metals 
and  ores  made  up  more  than  96%  of  least 
developed countries’ exports to China. Total 
exports  of  manufactures  by  least  developed 
countries to China were less than $1 billion; 
manufactured imports from China exceeded 
$38 billion.

Over the longer term, however, South–South 
cooperation  could  undo  this  pattern  by  fos-
tering sequential investments outside natural 
resource  industries  in  agriculture  and  manu-
facturing, as well as in services such as finance 

FIGuRe 2.5

Current foreign direct investment is positively associated with achievements in 
health and education in previous years

Log of foreign direct investment inﬂows, 2001–2010

27

25

23

21

19

17

15

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0
Nonincome HDI, 2000

Note: Inward FDI (in millions of US dollars) is averaged for 2001–2010. Nigeria’s nonincome HDI is for 2005.
Source: HDRO calculations and UNCTAD (2011a).

and telecommunications. In Africa, after years 
of neglect by governments and traditional do-
nors, infrastructure has again become a prior-
ity, drawing on the experiences and support of 
the region’s new development partners. Some 

Chapter 2  A more global South    |    53

Box 2.6

Final assembly is about more than low wages

The iPhone and iPad, two popular technology products, are assembled in a 
firm in Shenzen, China, and sold worldwide at retail prices in the hundreds 
of dollars. The value of labour performed in China, at under $10, accounts 
for less than 2% of the cost of an iPad, while just 3.6% of the wholesale 
cost of an iPhone went to Chinese workers. The rest of the value is earned 
by  suppliers  of  parts  and  components  headquartered  in  Germany,  Japan, 
the Republic of Korea and the United States. Korean firms LG and Samsung 
make the display and memory chips; Apple retains the product design, soft-
ware development and marketing functions in the United States; and the 
assembly firm is owned by a company from Taiwan Province of China.

The low share of value captured by workers in China could give the 
impression  that  assembly  does  not  require  much  sophistication.  This  is 
misleading.  While  Asia  is  attractive  because  of  cheaper  wages,  espe-
cially for semiskilled workers, a more important challenge for technology 

companies is managing global supply chains that involve procuring parts 
and components from hundreds of companies. This requires a rare com-
bination of industrial skills, flexibility, speed and diligence at both the in-
dividual and collective levels. For instance, an Apple executive told The 
New York Times that “the US has stopped producing people with the skills 
we need.”

Consider this incident from mid-2007, when Apple hastily redesigned 
the glass for the iPhone’s screen. The first delivery of a new load of strength-
ened, scratch-free glass arrived at a Foxconn plant in the middle of the night, 
and work started immediately. Within three months, Apple had sold a mil-
lion iPhones. It took 15 days to hire 8,700 industrial engineers to oversee 
the  200,000  assembly-line  workers  eventually  involved  in  manufacturing 
iPhones.  Apple’s  internal  estimate  was  that  a  similar  feat  in  the  United 
States would have taken nine months.

Source: HDRO; Kraemer, Linden and Dedrick 2011; Xing and Detert 2010; Duhigg and Bradsher 2012.

countries have even resorted to unique credit 
arrangements to fund infrastructure, backed by 
supplies of commodities.53

Neither the complementary nor the com-
petitive  perspective  is  sufficient  to  explain 
South–South  interactions.  Because  a  com-
petitive  role  today  may  easily  turn  into  a 
complementary  role  tomorrow,  these  labels 
should not be applied rigidly. Moving from 
competition to cooperation seems to depend 
on  policies  for  dealing  with  new  challeng-
es.  More  pessimistic  pronouncements  that 
there  is  no  hope  for  industrialization  in 
Sub-Saharan  Africa  have  been  overtaken  by 
realities on the ground, which demonstrate an 
ability to advance despite or maybe because of 
competition.  In  this  regard,  African  writers 
such as Dambisa Moyo are positive about the 
mutually beneficial role of new actors in the 
continent.54

The shift from traditional to emerging mar-
kets is also affecting countries in ways that are 
difficult to predict. Take the timber industry in 
Africa, which has reoriented itself from serving 
a  predominantly  European  market  towards 
China.55  In  sheer  volume  China  is  the  most 
important market, which is good for focusing 
business on it. The set of technical standards 
that China requires of exporters, however, is 
less onerous than those the European Union 
requires. Standards range from product spec-
ifications  to  accreditation  from  third-party 

certification schemes for forest sustainability 
and  health  regulations  governing  formalde-
hyde  emissions.  There  is  no  evidence  so  far 
that  the  shift  towards  emerging  markets  is 
being accompanied by a ratcheting up of the 
technical standards they require, which would 
have  required  upgrading  workers’  skills  and 
capabilities.56

Innovation and entrepreneurship 
in the South

In  North–South  trade,  the  newly  industri-
alizing  economies  developed  capabilities  for 
efficiently  manufacturing  complex  products 
for  developed  country  markets.  But  South–
South  interactions  have  enabled  companies 
in  the  South  to  adapt  and  innovate  in  ways 
that are more suited to developing countries. 
This  includes  new  business  models  whereby 
companies develop products for a large num-
ber of low-income customers, often with low 
margins.

Countries  of  the  South  are  also  natural 
locations  for  experimentation  in  new  tech-
nologies  and  products,  such  as  those  based 
on the global system for mobile (GSM) com-
munications standard. Under the 2005 GSM 
Emerging  Markets  Initiative,  manufacturers 
slashed the price of mobile handsets by more 
than half and expanded the GSM subscriber 

54    |    HUMAN DEvELOPMENT REPORT 2013

base by 100 million connections a year. This 
in turn stimulated investment: in 2007, mo-
bile operators, including South Africa’s MTN 
and  Kuwait’s  Zain,  announced  a  five-year 
plan  to  invest  an  additional  $50  billion  in 
Sub-Saharan Africa to improve mobile cover-
age and expand it to 90% of the population. 
Indeed,  the  spectacular  increase  in  phone 
connectivity in Africa has been driven almost 
entirely by companies based in India, South 
Africa and the United Arab Emirates.57

Mobile  phone  manufacturers  have  also 
re-engineered products for the needs of lower 
income consumers. For example, in 2004, TI 
India,  a  research  and  development  centre  of 
Texas  Instruments  in  Bengaluru,  designed  a 
single-chip prototype for use in high-quality, 
low-cost mobile phones. In 2005, Nokia, in co-
operation with TI, began to market the Indian-
made one-chip handsets in India and Africa, 
selling more than 20 million units. Single-chip 
designs  have  also  emerged  for  other  devices, 
including affordable digital display monitors 
and  medical  ultrasound  machines.  Intel  has 
developed a handheld device for rural banking, 
and Wipro has marketed a low-power desktop 
computer for basic Internet connectivity. And 
in  2008,  Tata  announced  the  ultra-low-cost 
Nano  car,  exportable  in  kits  for  assembly  by 
local technicians.

Technology  diffusion  through  South–
South investment is also unleashing entrepre-
neurial  spirit,  particularly  in  Africa.  People 
are often self-organizing, creating buyer–seller 
relationships and becoming entrepreneurs to 
fill unmet needs in spontaneously sprouting 
markets. This is evident in the uses to which 
Africans  are  putting  affordable  Asian-built 
mobile phones: cellular banking, for example, 
is  cheaper  and  easier  than  opening  a  bank 
account; farmers can obtain weather reports 
and check produce prices; and entrepreneurs 
can provide business services through mobile 
phone  kiosks.  The  use  of  mobile  phones  in 
Niger has improved the performance of the 
grain market, and Ugandan farmers are using 
mobile  phones  to  obtain  higher  prices  for 
their bananas.

These  and  other  transformations  multiply 
the  possibilities  of  what  people  can  do  with 
technology:  participating  in  decisions  that 
affect their lives; gaining quick and low-cost 

access to knowledge; producing cheaper, often 
generic medicines, better seeds and new crop 
varieties; and generating new employment and 
export  opportunities.  These  possibilities  cut 
across  income  classes,  reaching  down  to  the 
grassroots.

To respond to the changing needs of middle 
class consumers, companies doing well in the 
South  tend  to  be  long-term  risk-takers  and 
agile in adapting and innovating products for 
local buyers. Consumers in the South tend to 
be  younger,  are  often  first-time  shoppers  for 
modern appliances with distinct in-store habits 
and  are  usually  more  receptive  to  branding. 
Companies  in  emerging  market  economies 
have  the  advantage  of  different  management 
approaches from those dominant in the North: 
majority shareholders have greater power and 
redeploy resources more speedily than those in 
companies in the North.58

Some  of  these  developments  are  based  on 
interactions  among  research  and  develop-
ment institutions, businesses and community 
stakeholders. In such ways, innovation and its 
benefits spread, spawning faster change. There 
is greater appreciation of a broader role for the 
state in stimulating research and development 
and  in  nurturing  synergies  stemming  from 
cooperation  among  private,  university  and 
public research institutions. For example, many 
African countries have emulated the early suc-
cess of Mauritius in attracting East Asian FDI 
by creating export processing zones. Malaysia’s 
investment promotion policies have also been 
widely copied.

Increasingly, the most important engine of 
growth for countries of the South is likely to 
be their domestic market. The middle class is 
growing in size and income. By 2030, 80% of 
the world’s middle class is projected to live in 
the South. Countries in South Asia and East 
Asia and the Pacific will alone account for 60% 
of the middle class population and 45% of total 
consumption expenditure.59 Another estimate 
is  that  by  2025,  a  majority  of  the  1  billion 
households earning more than $20,000 a year 
will live in the South.60

Since  2008,  Chinese,  Indian  and  Turkish 
apparel  firms  have  shifted  production  from 
shrinking  global  markets  to  expanding  do-
mestic markets. Greater reliance on domestic 
markets  will  boost  internal  dynamism  and 

Companies doing well in 
the South tend to be long-
term risk-takers and agile 
in adapting and innovating 
products for local buyers

Chapter 2  A more global South    |    55

Instead of having a centre 
of industrialized countries 
and periphery of less 
developed countries, there 
is now a more complex 
and dynamic environment

contribute  to  more- inclusive  growth.  Given 
current trends, African consumers will continue 
to benefit from increased imports of affordable 
products. Flourishing local markets are likely 
to breed local entrepreneurs and attract more 
investment in extractive industries as well as in 
infrastructure,  telecommunications,  finance, 
tourism and manufacturing—particularly light 
manufacturing  industries  in  which  African 
countries have latent comparative advantage. In 
this scenario, which has already begun to play 
out  in  the  past  decade  and  in  other  regions, 
host economies undergo structural change, and 
indigenous industry responds to competitive 
pressure from imports and investment inflows 
by  upgrading  production.  But  the  process  is 
proving difficult in countries where technolog-
ical capabilities and infrastructure are less well 
developed.

Such expansion of domestic markets will be 
hampered by substantial pockets of deprivation 
and  lagging  regions  within  large  developing 
countries. Although South Asia, for example, 
reduced the proportion of the population liv-
ing on less than $1.25 a day (in 2005 purchas-
ing power parity terms) from 61% in 1981 to 
36% in 2008, more than half a billion people 
there remained extremely poor.61

These disparities undermine the sustainabil-
ity of progress because they create social and 
political tensions. In India, the Maoist rebels 
are  active  in  a  large  swathe  of  the  country’s 
hinterlands;  in  neighbouring  Nepal,  Maoists 
evolved from an ill-equipped militia to become 
the country’s largest political party within 12 
years.

taBle 2.2

Different models of development partnerships

Paris Declaration principle

Traditional donors

New development partners

Ownership

Harmonization

Managing for results

Mutual accountability

Source: Adapted from Park (2011).

National development strategies 
outline priorities for donors

National leadership articulates 
need for specific projects

Shared arrangements to minimize 
burden on recipients

Fewer bureaucratic procedures to 
minimize burden on recipients

Recipient-led performance 
assessment practices

Focus on delivering aid quickly 
and at low cost

Greater accountability through 
targets and indicators

Mutual respect of sovereignty; 
policy conditionality eschewed

56    |    HUMAN DEvELOPMENT REPORT 2013

New forms of cooperation

Many  developing  countries  are  emerging  as 
growth poles and drivers of connectivity and 
new  relationships,  opening  up  opportunities 
for  less  developed  countries  of  the  South  to 
catch up and leading to a more balanced world. 
Instead  of  having  a  centre  of  industrialized 
countries  and  periphery  of  less  developed 
countries,  there  is  now  a  more  complex  and 
dynamic environment. Countries of the South 
are  reshaping  global  rules  and  practices  in 
trade, finance and intellectual property and es-
tablishing new arrangements, institutions and 
partnerships.

Development assistance

The rise of the South is influencing develop-
ment  cooperation  bilaterally,  regionally  and 
globally. Bilaterally, countries are innovating 
through partnerships that bundle investment, 
trade,  technology,  concessional  finance  and 
technical  assistance.  Regionally,  trade  and 
monetary  arrangements  are  proliferating  in 
all developing regions, and there are pioneer-
ing  efforts  to  deliver  regional  public  goods. 
Globally, developing countries are participat-
ing actively in multilateral forums—the G20, 
the Bretton Woods institutions and others—
and giving impetus to reforms in global rules 
and practices.

A  rising  number  of  developing  countries 
provide  aid  bilaterally  and  through  regional 
development  funds.  Often,  this  involves  en-
twining conventional development assistance 
with  trade,  loans,  technology  sharing  and 
direct  investments  that  promote  economic 
growth  with  some  degree  of  self-reliance. 
Countries of the South provide grant aid on 
a smaller scale than traditional donors do but 
also give other forms of assistance, often with-
out explicit conditions on economic policy or 
approaches to governance.62 In project-based 
lending, they may not always have been very 
transparent, but they do give greater priority 
to the needs identified by receiving countries, 
ensuring a high degree of national ownership 
(table 2.2).

Brazil,  China  and  India  are  important 
providers  of  development  assistance,  which 
is  substantial  for  countries  in  Sub-Saharan 

Africa.63 Brazil has transplanted its successful 
school  grant  programme  and  its  programme 
for  fighting  illiteracy  to  its  African  partners. 
In 2011, it had 53 bilateral health agreements 
with 22 African countries.64 China has comple-
mented its investment flows and trade arrange-
ments  with  finance  and  technical  assistance 
for building hard infrastructure. In July 2012, 
China  pledged  to  double  concessional  loans 
to $20 billion over the next three years.65 The 
Export-Import  Bank  of  India  has  extended 
$2.9 billion in lines of credit to Sub-Saharan 
African countries and has pledged to provide 
an  additional  $5  billion  over  the  next  five 
years.66 Between 2001 and 2008, countries and 
institutions from the South met 47% of offi-
cial infrastructure financing for Sub-Saharan 
Africa.67

The  new  development  partners  from  the 
South follow their own model of bilateral co-
operation (box 2.7). The scale of their financial 
assistance,  combined  with  their  approach  to 
conditionality, can enhance policy autonomy 
in less developed countries.68 Less developed 
countries can now look to more emerging part-
ners for development support.69 This expands 
their  choices,  as  foreign  powers  compete  for 
influence, access to local consumers and favour-
able investment terms.

The  regional  development  assistance 
architecture  is  also  evolving  through  the 
regional  development  banks:  the  African 
Development Bank, the Asian Development 
Bank and the Inter-American Development 
Bank. In 2009, playing a countercyclical role, 
the  regional  development  banks  together 
provided 18.4% ($3.4 billion) of the aid pro-
vided by all multilateral institutions, a 42% 
increase over 2005. Development assistance 
from the Arab States has also made impor-
tant  contributions,  reaching  $6  billion  in 
2008.70 Some of the largest financiers of in-
frastructure in Sub-Saharan Africa between 
2001  and  2008  were  regional  banks  and 
funds based in Arab States.71 Development 
assistance from regional development banks 
may  become  more  important  to  low-in-
come countries in the coming years (as may 
South–South  development  assistance)  if 
policymakers in wealthy countries curtail aid 
commitments because of domestic economic 
and political challenges.72

Box 2.7

Brazil, China and India at work in Zambia

The model of bilateral cooperation being practiced by new development partners from the 
South  has  been  changing  rapidly.  Until  recently,  the  contribution  of  the  new  partners  to 
Zambia’s overall development finance was small. Of the total $3 billion in grants and loans 
that  Zambia  received  between  2006  and  2009,  disbursements  by  Brazil,  China  and  India 
made up less than 3%.

In November 2009, China and Zambia announced that China would extend a $1 billion 
concessional loan, in tranches, to Zambia for the development of small and medium-size 
enterprises. This is the equivalent of 40% of Zambia’s total public external debt stock. In 
2010, the Export-Import Bank of China extended a $57.8 million loan to Zambia to procure 
nine mobile hospitals. Also in 2010, India announced a line of credit of $75 million, fol-
lowed by another line of credit of $50 million, to finance a hydroelectric power project. 
Brazil has invested heavily in mining equipment at the Konkola Copper Mines in the North-
western province of Zambia (managed by an Indian company). The large Brazilian mining 
company, vale, is in a joint venture with the South African company Rainbow in copper 
prospecting and mining in Zambia, with an initial investment of about $400 million. Brazil 
and  Zambia  have  also  signed  technical  cooperation  agreements  covering  livestock  and 
health.

Source: HDRO; Kragelund 2013.

Development partners in the South have not 
sought to engage with or overturn the rules of 
multilateral development assistance. But they 
have  indirectly  introduced  competitive  pres-
sures  for  traditional  donors  and  encouraged 
them to pay greater attention to the needs and 
concerns of developing countries. In contrast 
to many traditional donors’ focus on social sec-
tors, new partners have in recent years invested 
heavily in new infrastructure across low-income 
countries—resulting in, for instance, a 35% im-
provement in electricity supply, a 10% increase 
in rail capacity and reduced price of telecom-
munications services.73

trade and financial agreements

Africa, Asia and Latin America have seen an 
expansion  of  trade  agreements—bilateral, 
subregional and regional. In South Asia, these 
regional  agreements  have  trumped  political 
differences.  In  East  Africa,  greater  regional 
integration has helped shield economies from 
global shocks.74 There is scope to strengthen 
regional  integration  through  practical  meas-
ures such as streamlining transit, transport and 
customs procedures and harmonizing national 
regulatory schemes. There is also scope to lower 
tariffs on South–South trade in final products, 

there is much scope 
to strengthen regional 
integration through 
practical measures such 
as streamlining transit and 
transport procedures

Chapter 2  A more global South    |    57

FIGuRe 2.6

Emerging market economies have amassed large foreign exchange reserves 
since 1995

China

Japan

United States

Russian
Federation

Saudi Arabia

India

Korea, Rep.

Brazil

Switzerland

Hong Kong,
China (SAR)

Singapore

Germany

Thailand

Algeria

France

Italy

Mexico

Malaysia

Libya

Indonesia

0

500

1,000

1,500

2,000

2,500

3,000

Foreign exchange reserves ($ billions)

1995

2010

Note: Includes holdings of gold.
Source: World Bank 2012a.

58    |    HUMAN DEvELOPMENT REPORT 2013

which are higher than those on North–South 
trade.75

In the aftermath of the 1997 Asian financial 
crisis,  several  countries  of  the  South  devel-
oped new monetary arrangements, which are 
transforming  the  financial  architecture  and 
creating  space  for  countries  to  craft  home-
grown policies. The new lending arrangements 
emphasize  pragmatism  over  ideology  and 
conditionality.

In addition, the global financial architecture 
is being shaped by the rising South’s vast finan-
cial reserves. A number of countries, not just 
Brazil, China and India, but also Indonesia, 
the  Republic  of  Korea,  Malaysia,  Mexico, 
Thailand  and  others  have  amassed  pools  of 
foreign  exchange  reserves  as  self-insurance 
against future financial downturns and crises 
(figure 2.6). Between 2000 and the third quar-
ter of 2011, global foreign exchange reserves 
rose from $1.9 trillion to $10.1 trillion, with 
a dominant share of the increase accumulated 
by emerging and developing countries, whose 
reserves totalled $6.8 trillion.76 Some of these 
countries  used  their  reserves  to  stimulate 
growth  in  the  aftermath  of  the  2008  global 
financial  crisis.  In  a  reversal  of  roles,  these 
funds have been sought by the International 
Monetary Fund for assistance with the finan-
cial crisis in Europe.

Developing  countries  with  large  reserve 
holdings  generally  transfer  part  of  these  to 
sovereign wealth funds. According to data by 
the  Sovereign  Wealth  Fund  Institute,  these 
funds had an estimated $4.3 trillion in assets 
at  the  end  of  2010,  with  $3.5  trillion  held 
by  developing  and  emerging  economies  and 
$800 billion in East Asia alone.77 As of March 
2011,  developing  and  emerging  economies 
held 41 sovereign wealth funds, 10 with assets 
of $100–$627 billion.

Large foreign exchange reserves and sover-
eign  wealth  funds  are  not  the  most  efficient 
insurance  against  financial  shocks.  This  un-
precedented accumulation of foreign exchange 
has opportunity costs both for the countries 
holding the reserves and for other developing 
countries.78 The resources could be deployed 
in more productive ways to support the pro-
vision  of  public  goods,  to  provide  capital  to 
projects  that  enhance  productive  capacities 
and  economic  and  human  development  and 

to promote regional and subregional financial 
stability  by  increasing  the  resource  pools  of 
regional institutions.

Overall,  the  rise  of  the  South  is  infusing 
new  patterns  of  resource  accumulation  into 
the  global  financial  system  and  building  a 
denser, multilayered and more heterogeneous 
financial  architecture  for  the  South.  These 
arrangements  sometimes  substitute  for  the 
Bretton Woods institutions, but in most cases, 
the  emerging  institutions  and  arrangements 
complement the global financial architecture. 
The changing financial landscape in the South 
has the potential to promote financial stabil-
ity  and  resilience,  support  the  development 
of  long-run  productive  capacities,  advance 
aims  consistent  with  human  development 
and expand national policy space. Moreover, 
emerging economies are having a transform-
ative  effect  by  pressing  the  Bretton  Woods 
institutions  to  respond  to  concerns  about 
representation, governance principles and the 
use of conditionalities.

The G20 has expanded its participation in 
such  key  global  financial  governance  institu-
tions as the Financial Stability Board, tasked 
with ensuring greater accountability in institu-
tions that set international financial standards. 
Likewise, all G20 countries, among others, are 
now represented in the Basel Committee on 
Banking  Supervision  and  the  International 
Organization  of  Securities  Commissions. 
The  South  is  also  gaining  influence  in  the 
International Monetary Fund, where China has 
filled a newly created deputy managing director 
post  and  stands  to  become  the  third  largest 
shareholder.79 At the World Bank, the voting 
power of developing and transition economies 
rose 3.13 percentage points in 2010, reaching 
47.19%.80

Migration policy

Regional organizations such as the Association 
of Southeast Asian Nations, the African Union 
and the Common Market of the South have 
added  migration  to  their  agendas.  Some  of 
this activity is through regional consultations, 
which are informal, nonbinding processes ded-
icated to finding common ground among coun-
tries. Many of these processes are interregional 
and straddle origin and destination regions in 

ways  intended  to  enable  capacity  building, 
technical standardization and agreements on 
issues such as readmissions. They have lowered 
barriers to communication and provided a ven-
ue for countries to come together, understand 
each other’s perspectives and identify common 
solutions.

These dialogues can be credited with pav-
ing the way for subsequent successful efforts 
on  migration,  most  ambitiously  the  Berne 
Initiative  2001–2005,  the  2006  High  Level 
Dialogue  on  Migration  and  Development 
hosted by the UN General Assembly and the 
subsequent creation of the Global Forum on 
Migration  and  Development.81  As  the  2009 
Human  Development  Report  recommended, 
such  efforts  could  improve  outcomes  for 
migrants and destination communities by lib-
eralizing and simplifying channels that allow 
people  to  seek  work  abroad,  ensuring  basic 
rights for migrants, reducing transaction costs 
associated  with  migration,  enabling  benefits 
from internal mobility and making mobility 
an  integral  part  of  national  development 
strategies.82

environmental protection

The  UN  Conference  on  Sustainable 
Development in Rio de Janeiro demonstrated 
the promise of regional arrangements, as gov-
ernments  from  the  South  showed  how  they 
are coming together to manage the resources 
they share. One initiative, negotiated by gov-
ernments  from  the  Asia–Pacific  region,  will 
protect the Coral Triangle, the world’s richest 
coral  reef  that  stretches  from  Malaysia  and 
Indonesia to the Solomon Islands and provides 
food and livelihoods to more than 100 million 
people. In the Congo River Basin, countries 
are working together against the illegal timber 
trade  to  conserve  the  world’s  second  largest 
rainforest.83  At  Rio+20,  a  group  of  regional 
development banks announced a $175 billion 
initiative  to  promote  public  transportation 
and bicycle lanes in some of the world’s largest 
cities.84

The  rise  of  the  South  is  also  reflected  in 
an  array  of  bilateral  arrangements  to  tackle 
climate change. With climate-related natural 
disasters  and  rising  sea  levels  threatening  to 
undermine  human  development  progress, 

With climate-related 
natural disasters 
and rising sea levels 
threatening to undermine 
human development 
progress, countries 
recognize that they 
have little choice but 
to formulate policies 
on adapting to climate 
change now and 
mitigating climate 
change for the future

Chapter 2  A more global South    |    59

countries recognize that they have little choice 
but to formulate policies on adapting to climate 
change now and mitigating climate change for 
the future. Countries are, for example, agreeing 
to cooperate on technology development and 
to establish region-specific carbon markets. A 
partnership  between  China  and  the  United 
Kingdom will test advanced coal combustion 
technologies, while India and the United States 
have forged a partnership to develop nuclear 
energy in India.85

Countries in the South are also developing 
and sharing new climate-friendly technologies. 
China,  the  fourth  largest  producer  of  wind 
energy in 2008, is the world’s largest producer 
of solar panels and wind turbines.86 In 2011, 
India’s National Solar Mission helped spur a 
62% increase in investment in solar energy to 
$12 billion, the fastest investment expansion 
of any large renewables market. Brazil made an 
8% increase in investment in renewable energy 
technology to $7 billion.87

Regional,  bilateral  and  national  initiatives 
in the South to mitigate climate change and 
protect  environmental  resources  are  positive 
steps. But climate change and the environment 
are inherently global issues that require global 
resolution  through  multilateral  agreements. 
The  cooperation  and  participation  of  rising 
economies of the South in such agreements are 
vital  to  their  success.  Regional  collaboration 
and agreement may be a step in this direction, 
indicating genuine interest in tackling the cli-
mate challenge.

Sustaining progress in 
uncertain times

The rise of the South was facilitated by a his-
toric global expansion of trade and investment. 
More than 100 developing countries recorded 
growth in income per capita of more than 3% 
in  2007.  Recently,  the  economic  slowdown 
in developed countries has nudged the South 
to look towards regional demand.88 Already, 
developing countries trade more among them-
selves than with the North, and this trend can 
go  much  further.  South–South  trade  blocs 
remain  riddled  with  nontariff  barriers  that 
constrict the scale of trade possibilities. Large 
foreign  exchange  reserves  remain  idle  when 

Developing countries 
trade more among 
themselves than with 
the North, and this trend 
can go much further

60    |    HUMAN DEvELOPMENT REPORT 2013

there  are  higher  returns  and  more- secure 
opportunities  for  South–South  investment. 
There  is  potential  to  expand  development 
partnerships  and  regional  and  interregional 
cooperation.

The rise of the South has underpinned rapid 
economic growth in Sub-Saharan Africa and 
enhanced opportunities there for human de-
velopment progress. Many of the fastest grow-
ing  economies  in  this  century  rank  low  on 
human development. While some have made 
progress on nonincome indicators, others have 
not.

Governments should seize the growth mo-
mentum  and  embrace  policies  that  convert 
rising  incomes  into  human  development. 
Policies that build human capabilities and do-
mestic productive capacity will enable coun-
tries  to  avoid  “the  commodities  trap”  and 
diversify economic activity. South–South co-
operation can help bring out the learning and 
diffusion potential in trading, investing and 
partnering in all industries, even commodi-
ties. South–South partnerships can facilitate 
industrial  diversification  through  FDI  and 
joint  ventures,  technology  sharing  through 
peer  learning,  and  provision  of  affordable 
products and innovative uses that meet the 
needs of the emerging entrepreneurial class. 
This  cooperation  is  already  happening  and 
can  be  scaled  up  substantially  in  the  years 
ahead.

All  said,  the  rise  of  the  South  has  been 
dramatic  but  is  still  in  its  early  stages.  The 
breadth  of  social,  economic,  technological 
and  entrepreneurial  connectedness  among 
developing countries today is unprecedented. 
The  daily  headlines  may  carry  dismal  mes-
sages  about  world  events.  But  interspersed 
among these discouraging notes are frequent 
snippets  reporting  on  entrepreneurial  ven-
tures and common-sense applications of new 
technologies by enterprising people in unex-
pected places.

Multiply each story by the number of people 
in  developing  countries  and  the  cumulative 
potential for a rising South across all regions is 
astounding. Chapter 3 explores this potential 
by  identifying  some  of  the  core  drivers  that 
have  enabled  leading  countries  of  the  South 
to make rapid progress, offering inspiration to 
other countries that might follow.

Global  prospects  are  uncertain,  and  the 
economic  downturn  in  the  North  is  ad-
versely  affecting  the  South.  With  the  right 
reforms,  however,  including  a  shift  in  policy 

orientation,89 the promise of sustained human 
progress is stronger as a result of the shift with-
in the world economy brought about by the rise 
of the South.

Chapter 2  A more global South    |    61

“We cannot expect that 
all nations will adopt like 
systems, for conformity is 
the jailer of freedom and 
the enemy of growth.”

John F. Kennedy

“Wisdom lies neither in fixity 
nor in change, but in the 
dialectic between the two.”

Octavio Paz

3.
Drivers of development transformation

How have so many countries in the South transformed their human development prospects? Given their social and political 
diversity and their contrasting natural resource endowments, their trajectories have often diverged. Yet some underlying 
themes have been consistent. This chapter looks at the experience of some of the more successful countries and at three 
of their common drivers: their proactive developmental states, their capacity to tap into global markets and their focus on 
social policy innovation.

Many  countries  have  made  substantial  pro-
gress  over  the  past  two  decades:  the  rise 
of  the  South  has  been  fairly  broad-based. 
Nevertheless, several high achievers have not 
only  boosted  national  income,  but  also  had 
better  than  average  performance  on  social 
indicators in areas such as health and educa-
tion. One way to identify high achievers is to 
look at countries with positive income growth 
and good performance on measures of health 
and  education  relative  to  other  countries  at 
comparable  levels  of  development.  These 
high  achievers  include  some  of  the  largest 
 countries—Brazil, China and India—as well 
as  smaller  countries,  such  as  Bangladesh, 
Chile,  Ghana,  Indonesia,  the  Republic  of 
Korea, Malaysia, Mauritius, Mexico, Thailand, 
Tunisia,  Turkey,  Uganda  and  Viet  Nam 
(figure 3.1).

This  chapter  analyses  the  performance  of 
a set of countries that, since 1990, have sub-
stantially improved both income growth and 
the nonincome dimensions of human devel-
opment, namely health and education. Some 
countries were more successful in one aspect 
than the other: Brazil and Turkey did better 
on the nonincome dimensions of the Human 
Development Index (HDI), whereas China’s 
performance over 1990–2010 was dominated 
by growth in income (in part because when 
reforms  began  in  the  late  1970s,  China’s 
achievements  in  health  and  education  were 
already  high).1  Furthermore,  as  mentioned 
in  chapter  1,  the  group  of  countries  whose 
improvements on the HDI stood out relative 
to the performance of peers between 1990 and 
2012 includes least developed countries, such 
as Lao PDR, Mali, Mozambique, Rwanda and 
Uganda.

Another  way  of  identifying  high  achiev-
ers  in  human  development  is  to  look  for 

countries  that  have  been  more  successful 
in  closing  the  “human  development  gap,” 
as measured by the reduction in their HDI 
shortfall  (the  distance  from  the  maximum 
HDI score).2 Table 3.1 lists 26 countries that 
were  among  either  the  top  15  developing 
countries that registered the largest reduction 
in HDI shortfall over 1990–20123 or the top 
15 that registered the highest rates of annual 
growth in income per capita during the same 
period.

The  first  set  of  countries  successfully  sup-
plemented fast economic growth with social 
policies that benefit society more broadly, es-
pecially the poor. China, for instance, reduced 
its HDI shortfall more than all other countries 

FIGuRe 3.1

Some countries have performed well on both the nonincome and the income 
dimensions of the HDI

Deviation from expected performance of nonincome dimensions of the HDI, 1990–2012
0.3

Tunisia

Brazil Turkey
Mexico

Ghana

Uganda
Indonesia

Bangladesh
Korea, Rep.
Malaysia

India

Thailand

Mauritius

Chile

Viet Nam

China

0.2

0.1

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.04

0.02

0

0.02

0.04

0.06

0.08

0.10

Growth in GNI per capita, 1990–2012 (%)

High achievers in human development

Others

Note: Based on a balanced panel of 96 countries.
Source: HDRO calculations.

Chapter 3  Drivers of development transformation    |    63

taBle 3.1

Selected developing countries that registered large reductions in HDI shortfall or 
high rates of growth in gross national income per capita, 1990–2012

Reduction in 
HDI shortfalla

Average annual growth 

in gross national 
income per capita

(%)

Rank

(%)

Rank

1990–2012

1990–2012

63.6

43.9

40.5

39.4

37.3

36.9

36.6

35.6

35.5

35.3

35.0

34.4

34.3

34.1

33.4

31.8

29.8

28.3

27.8

27.3

26.7

26.5

24.5

24.1

23.9

15.6

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

21

25

28

30

31

36

39

45

47

49

72

4.2

2.5

9.4

3.8

0.4

3.5

3.6

2.9

2.5

3.2

1.3

1.0

3.9

1.7

–0.4

5.9

3.6

3.9

7.9

4.4

5.3

4.4

4.7

3.9

3.6

4.1

8

32

1

13

77

18

17

29

33

22

58

69

11

50

87

3

14

12

2

7

4

6

5

10

15

9

HDI 
(value)

Country

Korea, Rep.

Iran, Islamic Rep.

China

Chile

Saudi Arabia

Argentina

Malaysia

Tunisia

Turkey

Qatar

Mexico

Algeria

Panama

Brazil

Brunei Darussalam

viet Nam

Mauritius

Dominican Republic

Myanmar

Sri Lanka

Guyana

Lao PDR

India

Bangladesh

Trinidad and Tobago

Mozambique

1990

0.749

0.540

0.495

0.702

0.653

0.701

0.635

0.553

0.569

0.743

0.654

0.562

0.666

0.590

0.782

0.439

0.626

0.584

0.305

0.608

0.502

0.379

0.410

0.361

0.685

0.202

2012

0.909

0.742

0.699

0.819

0.782

0.811

0.769

0.712

0.722

0.834

0.775

0.713

0.780

0.730

0.855

0.617

0.737

0.702

0.498

0.715

0.636

0.543

0.554

0.515

0.760

0.327

a. Reduction in the distance from the maximum HDI score.
Note: Based on a balanced panel of 96 developing countries.
Source: HDRO calculations.

except  Iran  and  the  Republic  of  Korea.  The 
Republic  of  Korea,  despite  lower  economic 
growth than China, had the biggest gains in 
HDI value. Viet Nam also fared well, ranking 
third  in  income  growth  and  among  the  top 
20 in HDI improvement. Sri Lanka, too, has 
had high income growth as well as a notable 

64    |    HUMAN DEvELOPMENT REPORT 2013

reduction  in  HDI  shortfall  despite  years  of 
internal conflict.4

India’s economic performance has also been 
impressive, averaging nearly 5% income growth 
a year over 1990–2012. Nevertheless, India’s 
per capita income is still low, around $3,400 in 
2012; to improve living standards, it will need 
further growth, since it is difficult to achieve 
much  poverty  reduction  through  redistribu-
tion alone at low income. India’s performance 
in accelerating human development, however, 
is less impressive than its growth performance. 
Indeed,  Bangladesh,  with  much  slower  eco-
nomic  growth  and  half  India’s  per  capita  in-
come, does nearly as well—and better on some 
indicators.

Among  the  top  15  countries  in  reducing 
HDI shortfall are Algeria, Brazil and Mexico, 
even though their growth in income per cap-
ita averaged only 1%–2% a year over 1990–
2012. Their experience points to the second 
broad strategy that has paid human develop-
ment dividends: giving primacy to state in-
vestment in people’s capabilities—especially 
their  health,  education  and  nutrition—and 
making their societies more resilient to eco-
nomic, environmental and other threats and 
shocks.

There  is  a  lesson  here:  countries  cannot 
rely on growth alone. As the 1993 and 1996 
Human Development Reports argued, the link 
between growth and human development is 
not automatic.5 It needs to be forged through 
pro-poor policies by concurrently investing in 
health and education, expanding decent jobs, 
preventing  the  depletion  and  overexploita-
tion  of  natural  resources,  ensuring  gender 
balance  and  equitable  income  distribution 
and  avoiding  unnecessary  displacement  of 
communities.

This is not to say that economic growth does 
not  matter.  Poor  countries  with  many  poor 
people need higher incomes. At the national 
level, faster growth can enable countries to re-
duce debts and deficits and generate additional 
public revenues to step up investment in basic 
goods  and  services,  especially  in  health  and 
education. And at the household level, income 
growth helps meet basic needs, improve living 
standards and enhance quality of life.

Nevertheless, higher income does not neces-
sarily produce a corresponding improvement in 

this chapter identifies 
three drivers of 
transformation: a 
proactive developmental 
state, tapping of global 
markets and determined 
social policy innovation

human well-being. Populations in large cities, 
for example, typically report high income per 
capita, but they also have high levels of crime, 
pollution and traffic congestion. In rural areas, 
farming households may see income grow while 
lacking a village school or health centre. Initial 
conditions have considerable influence on the 
pace of countries’ current and future develop-
ment. Nonetheless, they are not the only things 
that matter (box 3.1).

In fact, the links between economic growth 
and human development have snapped several 
times. The 1996 Human Development Report 
identified six unwelcome types of growth: job-
less growth, which does not increase employ-
ment  opportunities;  ruthless  growth,  which 
is accompanied by rising inequality; voiceless 
growth, which denies the participation of the 
most vulnerable communities; rootless growth, 
which uses inappropriate models transplanted 
from elsewhere; and futureless growth, which 
is based on unbridled exploitation of environ-
mental resources.6

What accounts for the superior generation 
of growth and its conversion into human de-
velopment? What are the policy lessons from 

the diverse human development experiences 
of these countries? Indeed, what are the driv-
ers of transformation? This chapter identifies 
three:
•  A proactive developmental state.
•  Tapping of global markets.
•  Determined social policy innovation.

These drivers are not derived from abstract 
conceptions of how development should work; 
rather, they are demonstrated by the transfor-
mational  development  experiences  of  many 
countries in the South. Indeed, they challenge 
preconceived and prescriptive approaches: on 
the one hand, they set aside a number of col-
lectivist, centrally managed precepts; on the 
other hand, they diverge from the unfettered 
liberalization  espoused  by  the  Washington 
Consensus.

These drivers suggest an evolution towards a 
new approach, in which the state is a necessary 
catalyst that pragmatically adjusts its policies 
and actions in line with new realities and the 
challenges  of  global  markets.  This  new  per-
spective recognizes that development does not 
happen automatically and that transformation 
cannot  be  left  to  markets  alone.  Instead,  the 

Box 3.1

History and initial conditions matter, but they are not destiny

“Initial  conditions”  have  profound  impacts,  as  certain  characteristics  are 
not only difficult to change, but also often perpetuated by institutions and 
policies. In societies that began with high inequality, elites can establish a 
legal framework that locks in their influence, which in turn enables them to 
maintain high inequality to their benefit. Take, for example, the Americas, 
where three distinct types of colonies took shape in the 1700s, depending 
on the initial conditions of soil, climate and native inhabitancy.

In the Caribbean, soil and climate made colonies suited for the pro-
duction of large-scale lucrative commodities. The distribution of wealth 
and  human  capital  was  extremely  unequal,  advantaging  the  elite  who 
could  assemble  large  companies  of  slaves.  In  Spanish  America,  abun-
dant  in  minerals  and  natives,  authorities  distributed  land  resources  to 
the  Spanish  colonists.  Elites  served  the  Spanish  crown  and  maintained 
their  status  after  independence.  Income  inequality  persisted  across  ra-
cial lines, with ownership of large tracts of land being a requirement for 
citizenship. In Peru today, as in many other countries, severe horizontal in-
equalities persist between indigenous populations and those of European 
descent. In the northern parts of the Americas the native population was 
not abundant, and soil and climate did not lend themselves to economies 
of scale. Thus, there was reliance on labourers of European descent with 

high  human  capital  and  more  equal  distribution  of  wealth.  Because  of 
abundant land and low capital requirements, most adult men operated as 
independent proprietors.

Haiti today is the poorest country in the Western Hemisphere. On the 
eve  of  its  revolution  in  1790,  it  was  probably  the  richest  country  in  the 
New World. Similarly, after the Seven Years War between the British and 
the  French  (1756–1763),  the  British  debated  whether  to  take  Canada  or 
Guadeloupe as reparation. Several centuries later the former proved to be 
more successful than other economies in the hemisphere.

Yet history and initial conditions are not insurmountable barriers. About 
half the progress in development, measured by the HDI, over the past 30 
years is unexplained by the initial HDI value in 1980. Countries that start at 
a similar level—such as India and Pakistan, Chile and venezuela, Malaysia 
and  the  Philippines,  or  Liberia  and  Senegal—have  ended  up  with  differ-
ent outcomes. As the 2010 Human Development Report argued, if countries 
with similar starting points go on divergent development paths, but average 
global achievements have not changed, we can infer that it is national forc-
es policies, institutions, social context and idiosyncratic shocks that drive 
national development outcomes. No country remains a prisoner of history 
for long if it wants to break out.

Source: Engerman and Sokoloff 2002; Hoff 2003; Thorp and Paredes 2011; UNDP 2010a.

Chapter 3  Drivers of development transformation    |    65

a common feature 
of countries that 
have brought about 
transformational 
development is a strong, 
proactive state 
—also referred to as a 
“developmental state”

state needs to mobilize society through policies 
and  institutions  that  advance  economic  and 
social development.

However, this is not a universal prescription. 
The  way  these  three  elements  are  translated 
into policies is context-specific, depending on 
country characteristics, government capacities 
and relationships with the rest of the world.

Driver 1: a proactive 
developmental state

Development is about changing a society to en-
hance people’s well-being across generations—
enlarging  their  choices  in  health,  education 
and income and expanding their freedoms and 
opportunities for meaningful participation in 
society.

A  common  feature  of  countries  that  have 
brought  about  such  transformations  is  a 
strong,  proactive  state—also  referred  to  as 
a “developmental state”. The term refers to a 
state with an activist government and often an 
apolitical elite that sees rapid economic devel-
opment as their primary aim. Some countries 
go  further  and  add  an  additional  feature:  a 
bureaucracy with the power and authority to 
plan  and  implement  policies.  High  growth 
rates  and  improved  living  standards  in  turn 
provide  the  state  apparatus  and  the  ruling 
elites their legitimacy.7

In some notable cases, development progress 
is guided by a long-term vision, shared norms 
and values, and rules and institutions that build 
trust and cohesion. Further, viewing develop-
ment as transformation demands consideration 
of these intangible factors as well as an under-
standing of how they affect the organization 
of society and interact with individual policies 
and reforms.

Country  ownership  of  development 
strategy,  strong  bureaucratic  capacities  and 
appropriate  policies  are  essential  elements 
that together shape the transformation pro-
cess.8  Policies  must  be  aimed  at  facilitating 
transformation by identifying barriers to and 
potential catalysts of changes. In this process, 
institutions,  societies  and  individuals  need 
to  set  their  own  objectives  and  identify  the 
strategies and policies that can achieve them. 
Although  not  pursued  everywhere,  broad 

participation of people, in the sense that they 
are being listened to, that their views are taken 
into account in decisionmaking and that they 
are actively involved in setting the agenda, is 
conducive to sustainable long-term develop-
ment—as  is  consistent  political  leadership 
backed by strong technocratic teams that can 
ensure institutional memory and continuity 
of policy (box 3.2).9

There is no simple recipe for connecting 
human development and economic growth 
or for accelerating growth.10 One study using 
cross-country  data  for  1950–2005  found 
that the vast majority of takeoffs in growth 
are  not  generated  by  substantial  economic 
reforms and that most substantial economic 
reforms  do  not  yield  takeoffs  in  growth.11 
Successful  countries  have  grown  fast  by 
gradually  removing  binding  constraints  to 
progress, not by implementing a long list of 
policies and reforms. The state has a critical 
role in that. Countries that have succeeded 
in  igniting  sustained  growth,  have  faced 
different sets of challenges and adopted var-
ying  policies  on  market  regulation,  export 
promotion, industrial development and tech-
nological adaptation and progress.12 When a 
country is already growing fast, the challenge 
is to remove or anticipate future constraints 
as they become actually or potentially bind-
ing. Positive terms of trade shocks, like the 
recent  commodity  boom  as  a  result  of  the 
rise  of  the  South,  can  help  begin  growth 
acceleration  but  not  sustain  it.  However, 
focused economic and institutional reforms 
appear to have statistically and quantitatively 
significant impacts on how sustained growth 
accelerations are.13

In  many  high-performing  developing 
countries,  the  state  operates  differently  from 
the conventional welfare state, which aims to 
correct market failures and build social safety 
nets  while  promoting  market-led  growth. 
Instead, developmental states have been pro-
active: initiating and monitoring transforma-
tions  in  people’s  lives.14  Rather  than  merely 
being market-friendly, these states have been 
development-friendly.  Those  with  strong, 
innovative  social  programmes  are  often  also 
people-friendly —a  necessary  progression  in 
the move from a focus on growth to human 
development.

66    |    HUMAN DEvELOPMENT REPORT 2013

Box 3.2

What is a developmental state? Need it be authoritarian?

The recent literature on developmental states has grown out of the expe-
riences of the East Asian “miracle” economies: Japan before the Second 
World War and Hong Kong, China (SAR), the Republic of Korea, Singapore 
and  Taiwan  Province  of  China  in  the  second  half  of  the  20th  century. 
Recently, China and viet Nam (as well as Cambodia and Lao PDR) can be 
seen as developmental states. Common traits include promoting economic 
development by explicitly favouring certain sectors; commanding competent 
bureaucracies; placing robust, competent public institutions at the centre of 
development strategies; clearly articulating social and economic goals; and 
deriving political legitimacy from their record in development.

That some East Asian developmental states were not democracies has 
prompted many to think that the developmental state model is also auto-
cratic. But evidence of the relationship between authoritarianism and de-
velopment  is  mixed.  Democratic  countries  such  as  Japan  and  the  United 
States have functioned as developmental states. After the Second World 
War France initiated planning by the Planning Commission, with sectoral 
industrial policy led by elite bureaucrats and the aggressive use of state-
owned enterprises. Since the 1950s, the Scandinavian countries have also 
acted as a type of developmental state, where political legitimacy is derived 
from the welfare state and full employment rather than from rapid growth. 
The Swedish state developed strategic sectors through public- private part-
nerships (iron and steel, railways, telegraphs and telephone, and hydroelec-
tric power). It also provided targeted protection to support the emergence 
of heavy industries, promoting research and development. Its welfare policy 

was closely integrated with strategies to promote structural change towards 
high-productivity sectors.

The United States has a long history of being a developmental state, going 
back to the early days of the republic. Alexander Hamilton, the first US treasury 
secretary, is widely considered the father and inventor of the infant industry 
argument. Between 1830 and 1945, the United States had some of the highest 
trade barriers in the world. In the same period it invested heavily in infra-
structure (Pacific railways, Midwestern canals and agricultural infrastructure), 
higher education, and research and development. Even after the Second World 
War, when the United States had attained industrial supremacy, and despite 
the rise of market fundamentalism, the developmental state survived.

Block (2008) argues that the state has focused on translating cutting- edge 
technological research into commercial use through cooperation among a net-
work of people with high levels of technological expertise situated in state 
agencies, industries, universities and research institutions. Developmentalism 
has lived in the shadows of US policy because acknowledging the state’s cen-
tral role in promoting technological change is inconsistent with the claim that 
the private sector should be left alone to respond to market signals autono-
mously. Yet, although limited in scope due to a lack of legitimacy, unstable 
funding and other limitations caused by its “hidden” nature, the US develop-
mental state has been quite successful. In many sectors, the United States has 
developed international competitiveness through public funding for research 
and development and through public procurement for defence (computers, air-
craft, Internet) and health (drugs, genetic engineering).

Source: Evans 2010; Chang 2010; Edigheji 2010; Block 2008.

Another  characteristic  of  developmental 
states is their pursuit of industrial policies to 
redress coordination problems and externali-
ties  by  “managing”  comparative  advantage.15 
For  example,  the  state  may  foster  industries 
believed to have a latent comparative advantage 
or seek to elevate those that are stuck in static 
comparative  advantage.  As  a  result,  several 
industries that benefited from tariff protection 
subsequently  succeeded  in  world  markets.16 
Nonetheless,  it  can  be  difficult  to  attribute 
the success or failure of a particular industry 
to specific trade policies because government 
interventions are guided by multiple motives, 
from revenue generation to protection of spe-
cial interests.

Evidence  across  industries  from  studies 
of  the  benefits  of  industry  protection  is 
ambiguous.  However,  there  is  a  distinction 
between  the  general  desirability  of  “soft” 
industrial  policies,  such  as  improving  infra-
structure  and  technological  adoption,  and 
“hard” industrial policies, such as direct taxes 

and  subsidy  interventions  favouring  specific 
industries, whose efficacy depends on country 
circumstances. There is no global prescription, 
though:  what  worked  in  East  Asia  may  not 
work in Latin America.
•  Japan.  Japan  has  long  acted  as  a  develop-
mental state. By the 1870s, it had a group of 
“well-educated,  patriotic  businessmen  and 
merchants and government that were focused 
on economic modernization”.17 Many subse-
quent reforms created the infrastructure of a 
modern country, including a unified curren-
cy, railroads, public education and banking 
laws.  The  government  built  and  operated 
state-owned plants in industries ranging from 
cotton  to  shipbuilding.  It  also  encouraged 
domestic production by raising import tariffs 
on many industrial products. Since the end 
of the Second World War, Japan has under-
gone a fundamental transformation from aid 
recipient to donor (box 3.3).

•  Republic of Korea. Between 1960 and 1980, 
the  Republic  of  Korea  had  significant 

one characteristic of 
developmental states is 
their pursuit of industrial 
policies to redress 
coordination problems 
and externalities by 
“managing” comparative 
advantage

Chapter 3  Drivers of development transformation    |    67

More important than 
getting prices right, a 
developmental state 
must get policy priorities 
right. they should 
be people-centred, 
promoting opportunities 
while protecting against 
downside risks

Box 3.3 

Japan and triangular cooperation

success.  After  1961,  the  government 
achieved a position of dominance over its 
business  class  through  a  series  of  reforms, 
including measures that increased the insti-
tutional coherence of the state, such as the 
creation of the Economic Planning Board, 
but centred on control over finance. It also 
avoided  the  capture  of  state  policies  on 
subsidies. Subsequently, it was able to guide 
a shift from import substitution to export 
promotion.18
Other  rising  countries  of  the  South  have 
pursued  similar  policies.  Governments  have 
partnered  with  the  private  sector  to  develop 
comparative advantage in the most promising 
sectors while ensuring effective macroeconomic 
management and promoting innovation. They 
have also paid special attention to expanding 
social  opportunities  by  setting  policy  prior-
ities,  nurturing  selected  industries,  fostering 
state-market complementarities, committing to 
long-term reforms, having strong political lead-
ership, learning by doing and boosting public 
investment.

Setting policy priorities

More  important  than  getting  prices  right,  a 
developmental state must get policy priorities 
right.  They  should  be  people-centred,  pro-
moting opportunities while protecting against 

downside  risks.  Getting  policies  and  policy 
priorities  right  raises  the  equally  important 
issue of getting policymaking right. Governing 
institutions and policies are profoundly and in-
extricably linked; one cannot succeed without 
the other. It is thus important to have policy 
processes  managed  by  committed  people  in 
effective and responsive government structures. 
Policies also change at different stages of de-
velopment: at early stages, for example, many 
countries prioritize job creation and poverty 
reduction.
•  Indonesia.  From  the  mid-1970s,  sup-
ported  by  revenues  from  newfound  oil 
wealth, Indonesia complemented import- 
substituting industrialization with a major 
thrust in agriculture and rural development 
(see box 3.4 for the transformative poten-
tial of strategic investments in agriculture). 
This strategy of balanced growth increased 
the demand for labour, thus reducing un-
employment  and  increasing  real  wages.19 
Then  in  the  mid-1980s,  as  oil  income 
began  to  decline,  Indonesia  shifted  from 
import  substitution  to  outward-oriented 
industrialization, drawing in surplus labour 
from agriculture to work in manufacturing, 
which  offered  higher  wages.  By  the  early 
1990s, when the supply of surplus labour 
had been exhausted, poverty reduction con-
tinued  primarily  through  wage  increases. 

Akihiko Tanaka, President, Japan International Cooperation Agency

Bolstered by the remarkable economic performance of emerging countries, 
South–South cooperation and triangular cooperation have grown rapidly in 
recent years. They have outgrown their traditional role as complements to 
North–South cooperation and are now an indispensable source of knowl-
edge sharing and innovation for many developing countries.

There are four virtues and merits of South–South and triangular coop-
eration: the benefits accrued from sharing knowledge and experience among 
peers to find more effective solutions; sharing appropriate technology and 
experience  that  can  promote  convergence  with  North–South  cooperation 
goals; respecting real ownership, with the South in the driver’s seat; and 
developing countries’ rapidly emerging as new donors.

As  early  as  1975,  Japan  recognized  the  value  of  South–South  and 
triangular  cooperation  and  began  a  large-scale  triangular  training  pro-
gramme. Japan had experienced a development trajectory similar to that 
of some emerging countries today, having first been a net foreign aid re-
cipient then playing a dual role as aid recipient and emerging donor for a 

number of years before finally becoming only a donor as the first Asian 
member of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 
in 1964.

This development pathway led Japan to believe that sharing develop-
ment experience, knowledge and appropriate technology among developing 
countries can play a very useful role in development cooperation and thus 
warranted donor support.

A  prime  example  is  the  cooperation  among  Brazil,  Japan  and 
Mozambique. Japan helped Brazil develop its own tropical savannah region, 
known as the Cerrado, making it a leading producer of soybeans and other 
agricultural products. The two countries now extend collaborative support to 
Mozambique to develop that country’s vast savannah.

An emerging challenge now is to scale up South–South and triangular 
cooperation as a central approach in development cooperation, while avoid-
ing excessive aid fragmentation among an increasing number of develop-
ment actors.

68    |    HUMAN DEvELOPMENT REPORT 2013

Box 3.4

Investing in agriculture

Strategic  investments  in  the  agricultural  sector  can  have  transformative 
effects. Higher crop yields not only lead to improved livelihoods for farm-
ers, they also increase demand for goods and services in rural areas, giving 
rise to new opportunities for economic development. They may also lead to 
lower food prices, reducing the share of food in household expenditures and 
creating markets for other sectors of the economy.

Agricultural  research  is  a  public  good  and  tends  to  be  underpro-
vided by the private sector. Consequently, governments can make use-
ful contributions in this area. Recent studies on several African, Asian 
and Latin American countries show that increased public spending on 
agriculture  is  particularly  good  for  promoting  growth.  Disaggregating 
agricultural expenditure into research and nonresearch spending shows 
that research spending is especially effective. Provision of other public 
goods, such as agricultural extension services and irrigation systems, is 
also beneficial.

China  has  the  world’s  largest  agricultural  research  and  development 
system  in  the  world.  Its  research  is  based  at  the  Chinese  Academy  of 

Agricultural  Sciences,  universities  and  the  Chinese  Academy  of  Science, 
which together comprise of more than 1,100 research institutions. China is 
becoming a leader in South–South cooperation with African countries, many 
of which are now benefiting from its research.

Agricultural  technology  has  also  been  a  strength  of  Brazil,  where  an 
estimated 41% of 2006 agricultural research spending in Latin America oc-
curred. The System for Agricultural Research and Innovation has contributed 
greatly to the nearly fourfold growth in agricultural efficiency per worker. 
The Brazil Agricultural Research Corporation, a state-owned enterprise, has 
been instrumental in increasing the land area used for cultivation. Similarly, 
many of Brazil’s agricultural programmes were developed with sustainability 
in mind. For example, to qualify for price support and credit programmes, 
farmers  must  respect  zoning  laws.  Another  programme,  Moderagro,  pro-
vides  farmers  with  credit  to  improve  agricultural  practices  and  preserve 
natural resources, Produsa provides credit for planting on agricultural land 
that has degraded soil and Propflora uses credit to encourage the planting of 
forests (particularly palm oil).

Source: OECD 2006, 2011a; Fan and Saurkar 2006; Fan, Nestorova and Olofinbiyi 2010; Stads and Beintema 2009; World Bank 2012a.

Each phase thus involved a people- centred 
approach  in  which  the  growth  strategy 
was  modified  in  response  to  changing 
conditions.

enhancing public investment

Traditional  economic  and  social  policy 
thinking, as emphasized by the “Washington 
Consensus”, focused on getting economic fun-
damentals right as a precondition for economic 
growth, arguing that other human development 
improvements would follow. A human devel-
opment approach, on the other hand, demands 
that  improvement  in  poor  people’s  lives  not 
be postponed. Thus, people-friendly develop-
mental states are those that expand a number 
of basic social services (box 3.5).20 In this view, 
investing  in  people’s  capabilities—through 
health, education and other public services—is 
not an appendage of the growth process but an 
integral part of it.

In addition to the levels of public expendi-
tures, their composition and the efficiency with 
which they are delivered, all taken together, in-
fluence the effective delivery of public services 
and expansion of capabilities. The effectiveness 
of public expenditure differs across countries. 
A global cross-country analysis shows a positive 

correlation between previous public expend-
iture per capita on health and education and 
current human development achievement (fig-
ure 3.2). Also, higher previous public spending 
per capita on health is associated with better 
child survival and lower under-five child mor-
tality rates (figure 3.3). Such outcomes natural-
ly depend on a country’s stage of development 
and on how well the money is spent. Countries 
should  put  in  place  checks  and  balances  to 
prevent reckless borrowing sprees and wasteful 
spending.

There has been much debate about whether 
public  investment  crowds  in  or  crowds  out 
private investment. Both outcomes are pos-
sible  because  of  the  many  different  uses  of 
public capital in developing countries. From 
the  lower  levels  of  health,  education  and 
infrastructure  development  in  South  Asia 
and  Sub-Saharan  Africa  than  in  the  high- 
performing countries of East and Southeast 
Asia, it is reasonable to infer that public in-
vestment, as well as its composition, performs 
a critical role.
•  Bangladesh.  Bangladesh  has  sustained 
growth in part by increasing the rate of pub-
lic investment over time while avoiding the 
fiscal deficits that have plagued the rest of the 
region.

Investing in people’s 
capabilities—through 
health, education and 
other public services—is 
not an appendage of 
the growth process but 
an integral part of it

Chapter 3  Drivers of development transformation    |    69

Box 3.5

Eastern Europe and Central Asia: where North meets South

Connecting the North and the rising South is the transforming East. Eastern 
Europe and Central Asia accounts for 5% of world population and output. Its 
experience in managing a rapid transition from centrally planned to market 
economies holds useful policy lessons for developing countries elsewhere. 
The first phase of the transformation began with a sharp drop in living stan-
dards and human development. While each country managed a subsequent 
recovery under varying political and economic conditions, the overall experi-
ence underscores the importance of social inclusion and a responsible role 
of the state.

The  2011  Regional  Human  Development  Report  for  Europe  and  the 
Commonwealth of Independent States showed a negative correlation be-
tween Human Development Index values and measures of social exclusion 
in Eastern Europe and Central Asia. It noted that economic variables ac-
counted for less than a third of the risks contributing to individual exclu-
sion.  Labour  informality,  corruption  and  lengthy  procedures  for  business 
startups were associated with high social exclusion. By contrast, because 
employment facilitates inclusion, functional and accessible labour market 
institutions were found to be important. A major lesson from two decades 
of transition is that the state has a critical role in creating an environment 

for inclusive growth and societies. Abruptly abandoning areas of respon-
sibility by the state or insisting on rapid privatization of all state-owned 
companies may prove very costly for societies in the long run. Yet at the 
same  time,  retaining  these  responsibilities  does  not  mean  keeping  the 
earlier  structures  intact.  On  the  contrary,  reforms  to  strengthen  national 
institutions’ transparency and accountability and to limit the scope of cor-
ruption are necessary to improve the quality of governance and efficiency 
of governments.

Many countries of the region are now active members of the European 
Union. They, together with Croatia, Kazakhstan, the Russian Federation 
and Turkey, have also become emerging donors, with aid disbursements 
exceeding $4 billion in 2011. The emerging donors are also active in bi-
lateral or trilateral exchange of knowledge with countries with common 
heritage or beyond. In recent years Romania has shared its experience 
conducting  elections  with  Egypt  and  Tunisia,  Poland  has  helped  Iraq 
with small and medium- size enterprise development, the Czech Republic 
has  cooperated  with  Azerbaijan  on  environmental  impact  assessments 
and  Slovakia  has  assisted  Moldova  and  Montenegro  in  public  finance 
management.

Source: HDRO; UNDP 2011b.

•  India.  India  increased  central  government 
spending on social services and rural devel-
opment from 13.4% in 2006–2007 to 18.5% 
in 2011–2012.21 And social services as a pro-
portion of total expenditure rose from 21.6% 
in 2006–2007 to 24.1% in 2009–2010 and 
to 25% in 2011–2012.

Nurturing selected industries

Governments  can  encourage  a  market- 
disciplined  private  sector  by  adopting  a 
dynamic  view  of  comparative  advantage, 
nurturing  sectors  that  would  not  other-
wise  emerge  due  to  incomplete  markets.22 
Although  this  poses  some  political  risks  of 
rent seeking and cronyism, it has enabled sev-
eral countries of the South to turn industries 
previously  derided  as  inefficient  and  unable 
to withstand foreign competition into early 
drivers of export success once their economies 
became more open.
•  India. For decades after independence in 
1947,  India  followed  a  strategy  of  state-
led, import-substituting industrialization. 
It  inhibited  the  private  sector  while  be-
stowing wide powers on technocrats who 

controlled trade and investment, creating 
a  system  that  became  increasingly  laden 
with bureaucratic intricacies (the “licence 
Raj”).23 During these years, however, there 
was a deliberate policy to build human ca-
pabilities and invest in world-class tertiary 
education, though perhaps neglecting pri-
mary education. Following the reforms of 
the 1990s, these investments paid off when 
India was unexpectedly able to capitalize 
on its stock of skilled workers in emergent 
information  technology–enabled  indus-
tries, which by 2011–2012 were generating 
$70  billion  in  export  earnings.  Another 
industry  built  during  the  inward-looking 
years  is  pharmaceuticals.  India  granted 
patents only to processes, not to products, 
which  encouraged  firms  to  reverse  engi-
neer and become world leaders in generic 
drugs.24 Similar tales of capacity building 
can be told for India’s automobile, chemi-
cal and service industries, now vigorously 
tapping into world markets.

•  Brazil.  For  long  stretches,  Brazil  also 
experimented  with  inward-oriented  eco-
nomic  strategies.  During  these  periods, 
individual  firms  that  benefited  from  large 

a dynamic view of 
comparative advantage 
has enabled several 
countries to turn 
inefficient industries 
unable to withstand 
foreign competition into 
drivers of export success 
once their economies 
became more open

70    |    HUMAN DEvELOPMENT REPORT 2013

domestic  markets  were  not  encouraged  to 
export and compete globally. But when they 
did so, they were able to rely on capacities 
built up over decades. Embraer, for example, 
is now the world’s leading producer of region-
al jet commercial aircraft of up to 120 seats.25 
The country’s steel and shoe industries also 
grew under public ownership, with research 
and development augmenting capabilities for 
domestic innovation.

Prioritizing job creation

Pragmatic  policies  aimed  at  creating  secure 
and remunerative jobs are likely to strength-
en  the  link  between  economic  growth  and 
human  development.  Evidence  from  Asia 
suggests  that  countries  with  simultaneously 
high rates of growth and poverty reduction 
also rapidly expanded employment. This was 
true for Malaysia and Thailand in the 1970s, 
China and Indonesia in the 1980s and India 
and Viet Nam in the 1990s.26 The first genera-
tion of fast-growing Asian economies—Hong 
Kong,  China  (SAR),  Republic  of  Korea, 
Singapore and Taiwan Province of China—
expanded employment 2%–6% a year before 
the  1990s,  while  raising  productivity  and 
wages.  Such  patterns  of  growth  were  often 
led  by  small-scale  agriculture  as  in  Taiwan 
Province of China and by labour-intensive ex-
port-oriented manufacturing in Hong Kong, 
China  (SAR),  the  Republic  of  Korea  and 
Singapore.27

The  success  of  some  Asian  countries—
such  as  the  Republic  of  Korea  and  later 
Thailand—holds  lessons  for  less  developed 
economies, especially in Sub-Saharan Africa, 
because they created jobs two to three times 
faster when they were at a comparable level 
of  development.  For  example,  over  the  past 
10  years,  Africa’s  labour  force  expanded  by 
91 million people but added only 37 million 
jobs in wage-paying sectors.28 With proactive 
government policies in labour- intensive sub-
sectors of manufacturing and agriculture, as 
well  as  retail,  hospitality  and  construction, 
Africa is projected to create up to 72 million 
jobs by 2020, an additional 18 million jobs 
over  present  growth  levels.29  Such  policies, 
however, require not only investing in young 
people’s  education  and  training,  but  also 

FIGuRe 3.2

Current HDI values and previous public expenditures are positively correlated . . .

HDI, 2012

1.0

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

6

7

8
14
Log of public expenditure on health and education per capita, 2000

12

13

9

10

11

Source: HDRO calculations and World Bank (2012a).

FIGuRe 3.3

. . . as are current child survival and previous public expenditure on health

Log of under-ﬁve mortality rate, 2010–2011

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

Log of public expenditure on health per capita, 2000 

Source: HDRO calculations based on World Bank (2012a).

improving infrastructure aimed at economic 
diversification and removing obstacles to pri-
vate entrepreneurship, such as lack of finance 
and onerous regulations.30
•  Mauritius.  The  possibilities  of  labour- 
intensive growth are higher when countries 
are  at  a  lower  level  of  industrialization. 
Analysing  the  performance  of  Mauritius 

Chapter 3  Drivers of development transformation    |    71

over  two  decades,  one  study  finds  that 
during the first decade (1982–1990), 80% 
of annual economic growth was accounted 
for by new employment and capital accu-
mulation.31 Unemployment dropped from 
20% to below 3%, with the number of jobs 
growing 5.2% a year. Economic growth in 
the  next  decade  (1991–1999),  however, 
was driven less by accumulation of capital 
and  more  by  the  productivity  growth  of 
workers, a result of investment in human 
capabilities.32

•  Bangladesh. The more rapid decline in pov-
erty in the 1990s compared with the 1980s33 
was  attributed  to  both  the  expansion  of 
labour- intensive exports (such as garments 
and  fisheries)  and  the  increase  in  employ-
ment in the rural nonfarm sector (compris-
ing small and cottage industries, construction 
and other nontradable services). The stim-
ulus, however, came less from productivity 
improvements within this sector than from 
rising demand facilitated by an increase in 
crop  production,  an  inflow  of  remittances 
and growing exports.34

•  Rwanda. Expansion in jobs does not always 
have to come from export-oriented manufac-
turing. In Rwanda, jobs in tourism services 
have  increased  over  the  past  decade.  The 
sector now sees export earnings that exceed 
those from coffee and tea and employs nearly 
75,000 people.35

•  Uganda.  Like  Rwanda’s,  Uganda’s  high 
growth during the 1990s was poverty alle-
viating because of income growth in agricul-
ture through large scale absorption of labour, 
especially in the cash crops sector that was 
buoyed by world prices and improvement in 
agriculture’s terms of trade.36

•  Thailand. Developing  countries  endowed 
with  arable  land  can  continue  to  create 
stable jobs in agriculture, even though its 
share in total output typically declines over 
time.  This  is  the  case  in  Thailand,  whose 
employment pattern of the 1960s is compa-
rable to that of many Sub-Saharan African 
countries today. While Thailand has since 
become  a  manufacturing  powerhouse, 
millions of stable jobs continue to be cre-
ated in nonmanufacturing sectors such as 
retail, hospitality and construction, as well 
as in commercial farming: the number of 

stable  jobs  in  agriculture  increased  from 
519,000  in  1960  to  nearly  3  million  in 
2008. Overall, in the 1990s alone, Thailand 
increased its share of stable jobs by 11 per-
centage points (as Brazil did between 1970 
and 1988).37

•  Indonesia. Indonesia before the 1997 Asian 
financial crisis stood out for pursuing growth 
that had a high labour intensity. Real wages 
increased at an average annual rate of 5% for 
two  decades  preceding  the  crisis.  Between 
1990 and 1996 alone, formal nonagricultural 
employment  increased  from  28.1%  of  the 
workforce to 37.9% and the share of work-
force  in  agriculture  declined  from  55.1% 
to  43.5%.38  Post-crisis,  when  some  of  the 
development  gains  were  reversed,  the  pro-
portionate increase in poverty was lowest for 
agricultural workers.39
As these examples suggest, patterns of growth 
are  rarely  consistently pro-poor over consec-
utive decades. This is because developmental 
transformation is synonymous with the change 
in the structure of production and sectors differ 
in their capacities to create jobs. Skilled and un-
skilled jobs, for example, require a different mix 
of complementary inputs, such as formal edu-
cation and industry-specific training. The larger 
point  is  that  human  development–oriented 
policies require both growth and an equitable 
expansion  of  opportunities.  Developmental 
states, therefore, have to be conscious that the 
nature of growth (and the intensity of labour 
use in sectors that drive growth) evolves as the 
economy  transforms,  and  they  need  then  to 
respond with matching investments in people’s 
skills.

Fostering state–market 
complementarities

Both markets and governments can fail, but 
there are synergies when they work togeth-
er.  Development  progress  cannot  be  left  to 
markets  alone.  Some  markets  not  only  fail 
to function, but may not exist at all at early 
stages  of  development.  Most  successful  de-
velopmental states have introduced industrial 
and related policies that enhance the private 
sector’s potential to contribute to human de-
velopment, especially by creating jobs in new 
sectors.

States have to be 
conscious that the 
nature of growth (and the 
intensity of labour use in 
sectors that drive growth) 
evolves as the economy 
transforms, and to respond 
with matching investments 
in people’s skills

72    |    HUMAN DEvELOPMENT REPORT 2013

•  Turkey. The state created favourable econom-
ic conditions that encouraged construction 
and  the  manufacture  of  furniture,  textiles, 
food  and  automobiles—all  industries  with 
a  high  capacity  to  absorb  labour.  Turkey’s 
export basket has since moved towards prod-
ucts  that  involve  more  processing,  higher 
technology  content  and  the  use  of  skilled 
labour.40

•  Tunisia. Since the early 1970s, Tunisia has 
relied  on  financial  and  fiscal  incentives 
to  attract  foreign  and  domestic  capital  to 
export-oriented  industries,  particularly  for 
garment  production.41  Various  forms  of 
business– government  relations  have  en-
hanced industrial upgrading and promoted 
industry clusters. Today, Tunisia is among the 
top five exporters of apparel to the European 
Union.42 It also has the potential to export 
health services by providing treatment to vis-
itors from neighbouring countries, to a value 
equivalent to a quarter of Tunisia’s private 
health sector output.43

•  Chile. After returning to democracy in the 
1990s,  Chile  encouraged  investment  and 
technological  upgrading  in  sectors  where 
the  country  had  an  intrinsic  comparative 
advantage. It subsidized the formation and 
operation  of  innovation-based  consortia 
between private firms and universities and 
engaged  in  other  innovation-promoting 
activities.44

Committing to long-term 
development and reform

Achieving enduring transformation is a long-
term process that requires countries to chart a 
consistent and balanced approach to develop-
ment. Some technical or managerial solutions 
may appear to be attractive quick fixes, but they 
are generally inadequate.
•  China. Since market-oriented reforms in the 
late 1970s, China has experienced a “com-
plex and interlocking set of changes: from a 
command to a market economy; from rural 
to urban; from agriculture to manufactur-
ing and services; from informal to formal 
economic activities; from a fragmented set 
of fairly self-sufficient provincial economies 
to  a  more  integrated  economy;  and  from 
an  economy  that  was  fairly  shut  off  from 

People-friendly 
developmental states 
need strong political 
leadership committed to 
equity and sustainability

the world to a powerhouse of international 
trade”.45 The scale of these changes required 
a committed state pursuing a long-term vi-
sion to build the necessary institutions and 
capacities.  The  leadership  deliberately  re-
placed the old guard, who might have been 
expected to resist change, with a younger, 
more open and better educated government 
bureaucracy. By 1988, a remarkable 90% of 
officials  above  the  county  level  had  been 
appointed since 1982.46 Capacity upgrading 
is still a priority, and the education levels 
of  officials  have  risen  continuously.  The 
Chinese  bureaucracy  has  been  designed 
with  a  strong  results  orientation,  linking 
career development to the achievement of 
central  objectives  of  modernization  and 
economic progress.47
People-friendly  developmental  states  need 
strong  political  leadership  committed  to  eq-
uity  and  sustainability.  Effective  leadership 
aligns the long-term goals of policymakers and 
enables constituencies to appreciate the state’s 
work  in  fostering  individual  capabilities  and 
social integration for human development. This 
requires a balanced approach to development 
and an ability to convert crises into opportu-
nities for introducing broad-based economic 
reforms.
•  Brazil. By the time the Brazilian transfor-
mation  to  a  developmental  state  began 
(around 1994), the government had imple-
mented macroeconomic reforms to control 
hyperinflation  through  the  Real  Plan  and 
concluded the trade liberalization that had 
begun  in  1988  with  tariff  reductions  and 
the  removal  of  other  restrictions.48  Trade 
openness and prudent monetary and fiscal 
policy followed, as did innovative social pro-
grammes that reduced poverty and income 
inequality.
In large and complex societies, the outcome 
of any particular policy is inevitably uncertain. 
Developmental states need to be pragmatic and 
test a range of different approaches.
•  China. China’s reform and opening resulted 
from an explicit choice in the late 1970s to 
relax constraints on people’s participation 
in economic decisions. But the institution-
al  innovations  that  went  on  to  underpin 
China’s  transformation  resembled  Deng 
Xiaoping’s approach to “crossing the river 

Chapter 3  Drivers of development transformation    |    73

as countries develop, 
they tend to dismantle 
trade barriers and 
become more open

by feeling the stones”.49 Between 1979 and 
1989, no fewer than 40% of China’s nation-
al  regulations  were  deemed  experimental. 
The first set of agrarian reforms permitted 
farmers  to  lease  land,  submit  a  share  of 
produce at fixed prices to the state and sell 
the  surplus.  Next  came  the  expansion  of 
the township and village enterprises.50 The 
gradual approach reflected the pragmatism 
of Chinese leaders. Another reason for this 
pragmatism  was  the  perception  that  the 
transition  was  impossible  to  plan,  com-
pounded by disillusionment with the whole 
planning system.

Driver 2: tapping of global markets

A  common  element  of  the  fast-developing 
countries of the South has been to strengthen 
the capabilities of people and the competencies 
of firms while embracing global markets. This 
has enabled them to source intermediate inputs 
and capital goods at competitive world prices, 
adopt foreign knowhow and technology and 
use them to sell to global markets.51 All newly 
industrializing countries have pursued a strat-
egy of “importing what the rest of the world 
knows and exporting what it wants”.52 Indeed, 
few countries have developed successfully by 
shunning  international  trade  or  long-term 
capital flows; very few have sustained growth 
without increasing their trade to output ratio, 
and there is no evidence that in the post-war 
period inward-looking economies have system-
atically developed faster than those that have 
been more open.53

This  experience  does  not  mean,  however, 
that  countries  can  ignite  growth  simply  by 
dismantling  trade  and  investment  barriers. 
Some influential cross-national studies in the 
1990s purported to show that rapidly opening 
up would automatically lead to high economic 
growth. But these were subsequently found to 
have significant methodological limitations.54 
In  particular,  growth  cannot  be  sufficiently 
explained  by  average  tariff  and  nontariff 
barriers.55

Actual development experiences from the 
South  have  demonstrated  a  more  nuanced 
consensus.56 In this view, successful and sus-
tained progress is more likely to be the result 

74    |    HUMAN DEvELOPMENT REPORT 2013

of  gradual  and  sequenced  integration  with 
the world economy, according to national cir-
cumstances, and accompanied by investment 
in  people,  institutions  and  infrastructure.57 
Country studies confirm that what is needed 
is a package that involves the interaction of 
reforms  in  trade,  exchange  rates,  and  fiscal, 
monetary  and  institutional  policies.58  A  re-
cent  study  finds  that  more  decisive  benefits 
come from trade liberalization embedded in 
broader  reforms:  in  the  post-liberalization 
period between 1950 and 1998, the countries 
that  were  considered  to  have  implemented 
such  policies  posted  growth  rates  that  were 
1.5 percentage points higher, investment rates 
that were 1.5–2 percentage points higher and 
trade to output ratios that were 5 percentage 
points higher.59

As countries develop, they tend to disman-
tle  trade  barriers  and  become  more  open.60 
HDRO  analysis  of  the  association  between 
the change in trade openness and relative im-
provement  in  HDI  value  between  1990  and 
2010 supports this conclusion (see box 2.1 in 
chapter  2).  Not  all  countries  that  increased 
trade  openness  made  big  improvements  in 
HDI  value  relative  to  their  peers.  But  those 
that did make big improvements in HDI value 
typically increased their trade to output ratio 
or established a global network of trade links of 
substantial bilateral value. In a sample of 95 de-
veloping countries and transitional economies, 
the average increase in trade to output ratio of 
countries considered to be rapid improvers on 
the HDI between 1990 and 2012 was about 
13 percentage points higher than that of more 
modest improvers.

As discussed in box 2.1 in chapter 2, almost 
all countries with substantial improvement in 
HDI value over the past two decades have also 
become more integrated with the world econ-
omy. Table 3.2 reconfirms this for a selected 
group of high human development–achieving 
countries discussed in this chapter, which have 
vigorously tapped opportunities presented by 
globalization by expanding their share of ex-
ports in world markets between 1990 and 2010. 
The only exception in this group is Mauritius, 
one of the first countries in the South to pur-
sue an export-oriented development strategy, 
whose share in world exports peaked in 2001.61 
As the more populous countries deepen their 

integration with the world economy, they have 
accelerated  their  structural  diversification  in 
manufacturing  and  services  and  boosted  ag-
ricultural  productivity,  helping  lift  hundreds 
of millions of people out of poverty in a few 
decades.

Gradual and sequenced integration

Rather than opening suddenly to world mar-
kets, some of the more successful countries have 
opened gradually, as the situation demanded.
•  China. A rapid opening up in China would 
have  shut  down  state  enterprises  without 
creating  new  industrial  activities,  so  the 
state reformed gradually. To attract foreign 
direct  investment  (FDI),  create  jobs  and 
promote exports, the state established spe-
cial economic zones, often in less built-up 
areas.62 At the same time, China increased 
the competencies of its workers and firms 
by  requiring  foreign  firms  to  enter  joint 
ventures, transfer technology or meet high 
requirements for domestic content. By the 
early 1990s, China was ready to expand its 
external  interactions,  building  on  invest-
ments in health and education during the 
1960s and 1970s and on the newly acquired 
competencies of farmers and firms. Between 
1993 and 1996, China was already the des-
tination  of  more  than  10%  of  worldwide 
FDI inflows.63 Its trade to GDP ratio nearly 
doubled,  from  21.7%  in  1980  to  about 
42%  in  1993–1994.  By  2011,  China  had 
completed 10 years of membership in the 
World  Trade  Organization  and  overtaken 
Germany as the second-largest exporter of 
goods and services.64

•  India.  Domestic  reforms  began  in  India 
in  the  mid-1980s  and  expanded  after  the 
1990–1991 external payments crisis. Before 
the  reforms,  India  had  import  quotas  and 
high  tariffs  on  manufactured  goods  and 
banned  imports  of  manufactured  con-
sumer  products.65  Early  reforms  focused 
on dismantling the systems of licences for 
industrial  activity  and  ending  restrictions 
on  investment.66  Quantitative  restrictions 
on manufactured capital goods were ended 
in  1993.  Tariffs  on  manufactured  goods 
were reduced quickly from 76.3% in 1990 to 
42.9% in 1992, but further cuts were spread 

taBle 3.2

Share of world exports of goods and services of high achievers in human 
development, 1985–1990 and 2005–2010 (%)

Country

Bangladesh

Brazil

Chile

China

Ghana

India

Indonesia

Malaysia

Mauritius

Thailand

Tunisia

Turkey

1985–1990

2000–2010

0.042

0.946

0.232

1.267

0.029

0.519

0.624

0.685

0.038

0.565

0.116

0.449

0.089

1.123

0.420

8.132

0.041

1.609

0.803

1.197

0.027

1.095

0.118

0.852

Note: values are averages for 1985–1990 and for 2005–2010.
Source: World Bank 2012a.

over  the  next  two  decades  to  reach  about 
8% in 2009. Restrictions on manufactured 
consumer  products  were  gradually  lifted 
and phased out by 2001, 10 years after the 
reforms  began.67  In  2010,  India’s  trade  to 
output ratio was 46.3%, up from only 15.7% 
in 1990. FDI also reached a peak of 3.6% 
of  GDP  in  2008,  up  from  less  than  0.1% 
in 1990.68

Building up industrial competencies 
for global markets

Several countries have built up industrial com-
petencies under periods of import substitution 
that  they  have  subsequently  used  to  supply 
overseas markets.
•  Turkey. Trade performance after the 1980s 
rested on production capacities built in the 
pre-1980 era of import-substituting indus-
trialization in Turkey.69 Between 1990 and 
2010, its trade to GDP ratio rose from 32% 
to  48%,  a  substantial  jump  for  a  middle- 
income country with a large domestic mar-
ket. In 2011, the top exports—automobiles, 
iron and steel, and household appliances and 
consumer electronics—were all from indus-
tries that had grown under trade protection.

Several countries 
have built up industrial 
competencies under 
periods of import 
substitution that they have 
subsequently used to 
supply overseas markets

Chapter 3  Drivers of development transformation    |    75

•  Republic  of  Korea.  When  the  Republic  of 
Korea  and  some  of  the  other  East  Asian 
economies  went  through  a  phase  of  mod-
erate  import  substitution  for  consumer 
goods, they did not protect domestic pro-
ducers  of  capital  goods.70  Even  when  they 
were  ambivalent  about  FDI  in  the  1980s, 
they  chose  to  import  technology  under 
licensing  agreements  and  to  develop  links 
with  multinational  firms.  The  goal  was  to 
build  indigenous  capabilities  for  the  long 
haul by borrowing and assimilating foreign 
technologies.

•  Thailand. Thailand’s manufacturing prowess 
continues to strengthen through the coun-
try’s participation in international produc-
tion  networks.  In  2009–2010,  its  exports 
of  parts  and   components—notably  in  the 
automotive and electronics industries—were 
valued at $48 billion, a quarter of its mer-
chandise exports. The government is keen to 
establish Thailand as the “Detroit of Asia”, 
not  only  a  cluster  for  logistics,  but  also  a 
high-tech hub that forges research collabora-
tion among firms, universities and the public 
sector.71

•  Malaysia.  Malaysia’s  pre-eminence  in  the 
electronics industry began in the early days 
of the international division of labour, with 
its courting of multinational companies from 
countries  in  the  North.  Free  trade  zones, 
established primarily for manufacturing elec-
tronic goods,72 helped the country develop 
rapidly  between  the  1970s  and  the  1990s. 
Today, however, Malaysia’s economy is seen 
to be in a “middle-income trap”, no longer 
able  to  compete  with  low-cost  production 
in  neighbouring  countries  and  lacking  the 
skills for high-end tasks in global production 
networks.73 The government’s own advisory 
council is concerned that a slowdown in FDI 
inflows could affect the prospects for gradu-
ating to high-income status.74 Malaysia’s good 
record in secondary education does not seem 
to have produced a strong enough base for 
an  innovation-driven  economy:  Malaysia’s 
future progress is hampered by inadequate 
research and development capacity and a lack 
of design and process engineers and technical 
and production workers.75

Having weathered the 
asian financial crisis 
in 1997, Indonesia 
today stands out for 
effectively managing 
its commodity exports

•  Indonesia. In the 1990s, to avoid the high 
costs associated with aspects of protection, 

76    |    HUMAN DEvELOPMENT REPORT 2013

Indonesia and some other East Asian coun-
tries  established  export  processing  zones, 
bonded  warehouses  and  duty  drawback 
systems—all requiring a competent bureau-
cracy. When countries felt they lacked that 
capacity, they resorted to unconventional 
approaches.  For  a  period  Indonesia  even 
privatized  its  customs  administration.76 
Having  weathered  the  Asian  financial 
crisis in 1997, Indonesia today stands out 
for  effectively  managing  its  commodity 
exports.77

Piggybacking on niche products

One option for smaller economies is to tap into 
world markets for niche products. The choice 
of successful products is not accidental; it is 
often the result of years of state support and 
facilitation that build on existing competencies 
or the creation of new ones.
•  Chile. With active support from the state, 
Chilean  firms  have  had  major  success  in 
expanding  exports  of  processed  agricul-
tural food and beverages and forestry and 
fish products. For example, in the 1960s, 
there was substantial public research and 
development  in  the  cultivation  of  grapes 
for wine production. There has also been 
a long history of subsidized plantations in 
forestry, and the state has made major ef-
forts to turn the wood, pulp and paper, and 
furniture  cluster  into  a  major  export  in-
dustry.78 Similar support from a nonprofit 
corporation, Fundación Chile, has helped 
make  the  country’s  commercial  salmon 
cultivation one of the most prolific in the 
world.79

•  Bangladesh.  Bangladesh  took  advantage  of 
market distortions in world apparel trade.80 
But  without  the  initiative  of  its  entrepre-
neurs,  it  could  easily  have  squandered  the 
opportunity.  In  1978,  the  Desh  Company 
signed  a  five-year  collaboration  agreement 
with Daewoo, a Korean company, that con-
nected Bangladesh to international standards 
and  a  network  of  apparel  buyers.  Daewoo 
trained Desh employees in production and 
marketing in the Republic of Korea. Within 
a year, 115 of the 130 trainees had left Desh 
to start their own garment export firms.81 By 
2010,  Bangladesh’s  share  of  world  apparel 

Development strategies 
cannot succeed without 
a commitment to equality 
of opportunity, giving 
everyone a fair chance to 
enjoy the fruits of growth

exports had increased to about 4.8%, from 
about 0.8% in 1990.82

•  Mauritius.  With  limited  arable  land,  an 
expanding population and overreliance on 
one commodity (sugar), Mauritius had to 
seek  a  larger,  overseas  market.  Asian  gar-
ment exporters, constrained by quotas, were 
attracted to the country. Until the 1990s, 
Mauritius  was  one  of  the  most  protected 
economies, but it provided duty-free access 
to imported inputs, tax incentives and flex-
ible  labour  market  conditions,  including 
supporting  the  entry  of  women  into  la-
bour-intensive jobs in the export processing 
zones.83

•  Ghana.  Cocoa  has  been  at  the  heart  of 
Ghana’s economy for decades. In the 1970s 
and early 1980s, however, the sector faced 
near-collapse.  Ghana  restored  its  interna-
tional competitiveness with reforms begun 
in  1983,  especially  by  devaluing  the  cur-
rency, increasing the capacity of the private 
sector in procurement and marketing, and 
giving farmers a much higher share of pric-
es  received.  Between  1983  and  2006,  the 
country  doubled  its  production  of  cocoa 
per hectare, and today the sector supports 
the livelihoods of 700,000 people.84 Over 
the  past  10  years,  Ghana  has  also  diversi-
fied into services, with the telecom sector 
growing fast and augmenting the capacity 
of farmers to connect to sources of market 
information.  A  recent  survey  found  that 
around 61% of cocoa farmers owned mobile 
phones.85
A  common  thread  that  runs  through  the 
economies that have had meaningful engage-
ment  with  the  world  is  their  investment  in 
people. Tariff reform, at home or in partner 
countries, may provide an unexpected opening 
into export markets; some countries may en-
joy resource windfalls or ride a wave of short-
term success by mimicking others. However, 
the lesson is that development cannot be sus-
tained without adequate investment in peo-
ple’s skills to constantly upgrade the quality 
of products and production techniques. The 
countries discussed here began from diverse 
initial conditions and have become adept at 
tailoring nurtured domestic strengths to reap 
external  opportunities  presented  by  world 
markets.

Driver 3: determined social 
policy innovation

Evidence  shows  that  substantial  public 
 investment—effectively  deployed  not  just 
in  infrastructure,  but  also  in  health  and 
 education—is key to achieving and sustaining 
human development. Development strategies 
cannot  succeed  without  a  commitment  to 
equality of opportunity, giving everyone a fair 
chance to enjoy the fruits of growth. Indeed, 
there is strong multicountry evidence that pro-
moting higher human development levels helps 
accelerate economic growth.86

A good test of a government’s commitment 
to equality of opportunity is its determination 
to  provide  education,  particularly  to  girls. 
Countries that have sustained high long-term 
growth have generally put considerable effort 
into  educating  their  citizens  and  deepening 
human  capital.87  Investing  in  education  is 
important  for  improving  cognitive  skills,  as 
measured by the performance of students on 
mathematics and science tests.88 However, the 
benefits derive from investment not so much 
in the production of specialist skills but in “ed-
ucation for all”.89 Similarly, improvements in 
public health help growth by boosting labour 
productivity.90

Growth accompanied by high or rising in-
equality generally involves slower advances in 
human development, poor social cohesion and 
slow reduction in poverty. Moreover, it is usu-
ally considered unsustainable.91 Thus the aim 
should  be  to  create  virtuous  cycles  in  which 
growth and social policies reinforce each other. 
Growth has frequently been much more effec-
tive at reducing poverty in countries with low 
income inequality than in countries with high 
income inequality. Growth is also less effective 
in reducing poverty when the distribution of 
income worsens over time.92

The exceptions seem to be China and Brazil. 
Over the last 30 years, as a result of very high 
rates  of  growth,  China  has  reduced  poverty 
despite increasing income inequality. Similarly, 
in  the  early  2000s,  Brazil  used  targeted  pol-
icies  to  reduce  poverty  despite  high  income 
 inequality—though  income  distribution  be-
came more equal over this period.

Promoting  equality—especially  equal-
ity  across  groups,  known  as  horizontal 

Chapter 3  Drivers of development transformation    |    77

equality—also  helps  reduce  social  conflict. 
The  sharpest  contractions  in  growth  after 
1975 occurred in countries with divided soci-
eties (as measured by indicators of inequality 
and ethnic fragmentation). They also suffered 
from weak institutions for conflict manage-
ment, with poor quality government institu-
tions that had less capacity to ensure the rule 
of  law,  democratic  rights  and  social  safety 
nets.93

Education,  health  care,  social  protections, 
legal empowerment and social organization all 
enable poor people to participate in growth. 
But even these basic policy instruments may 
not  empower  disenfranchised  groups.  Poor 
people  on  the  fringes  of  society  struggle  to 
voice their concerns, and governments do not 
always evaluate whether services intended to 
reach everyone actually do.94 Often, problems 
are exacerbated by external shocks, but in many 
cases  policies  are  implemented  where  local 
institutional capacity and community involve-
ment are low.
•  Uganda.  In  post-conflict  Uganda,  a  se-
ries  of  macroeconomic  reforms,  from  the 
loosening  of  price  control  and  exchange 
rates to changes in state-owned enterprises 
and  the  civil  service,  paved  the  way  for  a 
wide-ranging  poverty  reduction  plan  in 
1997.  Uganda  went  on  to  become  one  of 
the  few  Sub-Saharan  African  countries  to 
have  halved  extreme  poverty  before  the 
Millennium Development Goal deadline of 
2015, from 56.4% in 1992–1993 to 24.5% 
in 2009–2010. However, increasing income 
inequality has slowed the pace of poverty re-
duction.95 On balance, the economic success 
of  these  efforts  show  that  programmes  are 
more effective when the national leadership 
is  committed  to  reducing  poverty,  notably 
by  enhancing  the  consistency  of  goals  and 
approaches across government agencies.96 In 
turn, such progress can have a profound in-
fluence on the legitimacy of leaders and their 
governments.

Promoting inclusion

All  countries  have,  to  a  greater  or  lesser  ex-
tent, multireligious, multicultural, pluralistic 
societies, and different groups generally have 
different levels of human development. Even in 

advanced countries, there is persistent discrim-
ination against certain ethnic groups in labour 
markets.97 Nonmarket discrimination can be 
equally  severe  and  destabilizing.  Moreover, 
historical discrimination has long-lasting ef-
fects. Ensuring nondiscrimination and equal 
treatment,  including  providing  special  pro-
grammes for disadvantaged groups, is becom-
ing increasingly critical for political and social 
stability.

In  the  South,  too,  different  levels  of 
achievement often have historical or colonial 
origins—for  instance,  in  India,  between  up-
per and lower castes, and in Malaysia, among 
Bumiputras  (Malays),  Chinese  and  Indians. 
Economic prosperity alone cannot end group 
discrimination that leads to horizontal inequal-
ity. To bridge inequalities and correct historical 
disadvantages,  both  India  and  Malaysia  have 
adopted deliberate policy interventions, such 
as affirmative action.

Providing basic social services

States  can  underpin  long-term  economic 
growth  by  providing  public  services  that 
contribute  to  a  healthy,  educated  labour 
force. Such measures also help build national 
stability, reducing the likelihood of political 
unrest  and  strengthening  the  legitimacy  of 
governments.

Developing  countries  sometimes  receive 
policy advice urging them to view public ex-
penditures on basic services as luxuries they 
cannot afford. Over the long term, however, 
these  investments  pay  off.  Although  not  all 
services  need  be  publicly  provided,  a  mini-
mum universal level of basic health, education 
and  social  security  needs  to  be  established 
to ensure that all citizens have secure access 
to  the  basic  requirements  of  human  devel-
opment,  whether  from  public  or  private 
providers.  Compulsory  public  primary  and 
secondary  education  has  contributed  deci-
sively to human development in Europe and 
in some developing countries, such as Costa 
Rica.

access to high-quality education

Growth in HDI value is associated with growth 
in public spending on education. On average, 

Providing public 
services that contribute 
to a healthy, educated 
labour force helps 
build national stability, 
reducing the likelihood 
of political unrest and 
strengthening the 
legitimacy of governments

78    |    HUMAN DEvELOPMENT REPORT 2013

countries with higher government expenditures 
on health and education have experienced high 
growth in human development, although local 
variations may remain.
•	 Indonesia.  During  Indonesia’s  economic 
boom years (from 1973 onwards), the gov-
ernment funded the construction of schools 
for  basic  education  through  development 
programmes,  and  in  the  following  decade 
public expenditure on education more than 
doubled.

•	 India. Following the constitutional amend-
ment to make education a fundamental right 
for every child, India has taken progressive 
steps  towards  ending  discrimination  in  its 
school system (box 3.6).

•	 Ghana. One of the earliest initiatives in in-
dependent Ghana was the 1951 Accelerated 
Development  Plan  for  Education,  which 
aimed  at  a  massive  expansion  of  primary 
and  middle  school  education.  The  1961 
Education Act removed fees for elementary 
education so that households had to pay only 
a modest amount for textbooks. Enrolment 
in public elementary schools doubled over 
the next six years. Between 1966 and 1970, 
the  public  discourse  on  education  moved 
from  access  to  quality.  In  the  early  1970s, 

the focus came back to access, this time for 
secondary education. The next major round 
of  reforms  took  place  in  1987.  The  most 
significant aspect of the curriculum reform 
was to provide children with literacy in three 
languages—two  Ghanaian  languages  and 
English—as well as modern farming skills, 
vocational skills and practical mathematics 
skills.

•	 Mauritius.  The  government  of  Mauritius 
developed a national consensus on providing 
high-quality primary, secondary and tertiary 
schooling free of charge.

•	 Bangladesh.  The  Ministry  of  Primary  and 
Mass  Education  was  established  in  1992 
with the goal of universalizing primary edu-
cation and eliminating gender and poverty 
gaps  in  primary  education  in  Bangladesh. 
Demand-side  interventions,  such  as  the 
Female  Secondary  School  Assistance 
Program and the Food for Education pro-
gramme,  broadened  coverage,  particularly 
for girls.

•	 China.  In  1986,  China’s  National  People’s 
Congress  passed  a  law  proclaiming  the 
compulsory  provision  of  nine-year  basic 
education regardless of gender, ethnicity or 
race. From 1990 to 2000, the average years 

BOX 3.6

India’s Supreme Court issues a progressive verdict mandating seats for disadvantaged children in private schools

Most schools in developing countries are government run, but demand for 
private schools is expanding in response to the failures of public schools: 
bad infrastructure, overcrowded classrooms, poor access, teacher shortages 
and absenteeism. Parents with enough money send their children to private 
schools, creating a society in many countries divided between public and 
private school students.

India has made education free and compulsory for children ages 6–14. 
The vast majority of children are enrolled in government schools, especially 
in rural areas. But most children from elite households—the rich, the politi-
cal class, government employees and the growing middle class—are sent 
to private schools. In many instances, boys are sent to private schools, and 
girls to free government schools.

To  reduce  these  trends  towards  segregation,  India  passed  the  Right 
of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act in 2009. It requires pri-
vate schools to admit at least 25% of students from socially disadvantaged 
and  low-income  households.  In  turn,  private  schools  are  reimbursed  for 
either  their  tuition  charge  or  the  expenditure  per  student  in  government 
schools, whichever is lower. The act was based on the following rationales: 

schools must be sites for social integration, private schools do not exist 
independently of the state that provides them land and other amenities, 
the social obligation of private schools cannot be waived by contending 
that only children whose parents pay their fees have a right to be in these 
schools and the requirement to admit at least 25% of students from disad-
vantaged groups is fair given that these groups constitute around 25% of 
the population.

In a landmark judgement on 12 April 2012, the Supreme Court of India 
upheld the constitutional validity of the act, making two points in support 
of its decision. First, since the act obligates the state to provide free and 
compulsory  education  to  all  children  ages  6–14,  the  state  has  the  free-
dom to decide whether it shall fulfil its obligation through its own schools, 
aided schools or unaided schools. The 2009 act is “child-centric” and not 
“institution- centric”. Second, the right to education “envisages a reciprocal 
agreement between the state and the parents, and it places an affirmative 
burden on all stakeholders in our civil society.” Private, unaided schools sup-
plement the primary obligation of the state to provide free and compulsory 
education to the specified category of students.

Source: Government of India 2009; Supreme Court of India 2012.

Chapter 3  Drivers of development transformation    |    79

of schooling for people ages 15 and older in 
rural areas rose from 4.7 years to 6.8.

•  Uganda. School fees for primary education 
were abolished in Uganda in 1997 with the 
aim  of  universalizing  primary  education. 
Initially  this  strained  the  education  infra-
structure.98 To improve quality, the Ministry 
of Education emphasized five areas: curric-
ulum development, basic learning materials, 
teacher training, language of instruction and 
quality standards. The early drops in quality 
and  completion  rates  have  since  been  re-
versed, and the gains have been solidified and 
extended.

•  Brazil.  State-led  investments  in  education 
have  dramatically  improved  development 
outcomes in Brazil. The transformation of 
education started with the equalization of 
funding  across  regions,  states  and  munici-
palities.  The  national  Development  Fund 
for  Primary  Education,  created  in  1996, 
guaranteed national minimum spending per 
student  in  primary  education,  increasing 
the  resources  for  primary  students  in  the 
Northeast, North and Centre West states, 
particularly  in  municipally  run  schools. 
Funding “followed the student”, providing 
a  significant  incentive  for  school  systems 
to expand enrolment. Similarly, states were 
required  to  share  resources  across  munic-
ipalities  so  that  all  state  and  municipal 
schools could reach the per student spend-
ing threshold. As a result of this investment, 
Brazil’s  math  scores  on  the  Programme 
for  International  Student  Assessment  rose 
52  points  between  2000  and  2009,  the 
third-largest leap on record.

advancing health requires 
more than high-quality 
health services. 
Many countries are 
discovering that they need 
simultaneous interventions 
on multiple fronts

access to high-quality health care

Advancing  health  requires  more  than 
high-quality health services. Previous Human 
Development Reports have shown that human 
poverty is multidimensional. Many countries 
are  discovering  that  they  need  simultaneous 
interventions  on  multiple  fronts.  Algeria, 
Morocco and Tunisia, for example, have seen 
striking gains in life expectancy in the last 40 
years. Possible explanations include improve-
ments  in  health  and  drug  technology,  wide-
spread  vaccinations,  information  technology 
advances, better access to improved water and 

80    |    HUMAN DEvELOPMENT REPORT 2013

sanitation,  increased  energy  provision,  and 
public and private investments in health.
•  Bangladesh.  To  improve  child  survival 
rates, Bangladesh has taken a multisectoral 
approach: expanding education and employ-
ment opportunities for women; improving 
women’s  social  status;  increasing  political 
participation, social mobilization and com-
munity participation; disseminating public 
health knowledge; and providing effective, 
community-based  essential  health  services 
(box 3.7).
Health service provision has been heavily 
skewed  towards  the  better-off,  who  have 
been more likely to have good access to the 
public  services  and  pay  for  private  ones. 
Those  with  greatest  access  to  health  care 
have been workers in the formal sector, who 
have partly financed their needs with annual 
contributions. Workers in the informal sector 
are more difficult to provide for. In India, for 
example, there are no clearly identified regu-
lar employers who can contribute on behalf 
of the estimated 93% of the workforce in the 
informal sector.99

Everyone  should  be  entitled  to  the  same 
quality  of  health  care,  and  several  countries 
have attempted to provide and finance univer-
sal health coverage. Some have done so through 
public  health  services  targeted  to  the  poor. 
This is neither desirable nor efficient, generally 
resulting in a health care system in which poor 
people receive inferior quality services, often in 
public facilities, while the nonpoor get better 
health  care  services  from  the  private  sector. 
Health services targeted to the poor generally 
remain underfunded partly because the more 
powerful  people  who  are  not  poor  have  no 
stake in making the system better. Also, spe-
cial insurance schemes for the poor miss the 
advantages  of  pooling  risks  across  the  whole 
population and are thus likely to become finan-
cially unviable, often diverting resources from 
preventive and primary care to more-expensive 
tertiary care.

Governments also attempt to finance health 
care through user fees. However, there is near 
unanimous consensus now that such fees have 
adverse consequences, especially for the poor. 
They  discourage  the  poor  from  using  servic-
es  and  generally  mobilize  little  in  terms  of 
resources.100

Box 3.7

Bangladesh makes dramatic advances in child survival

In 1990, the infant mortality rate in Bangladesh, 97 deaths per 1,000 live 
births, was 16% higher than India’s 81. By 2004, the situation was reversed, 
with  Bangladesh’s  infant  mortality  rate  (38)  21%  lower  than  India’s  (48). 
Three main factors seem to explain the dramatic improvements.

First,  economic  empowerment  of  women  through  employment  in 
the garment industry and access to microcredit transformed their situ-
ation. The vast majority of women in the garment industry are migrants 
from rural areas. This unprecedented employment opportunity for young 
women  has  narrowed  gender  gaps  in  employment  and  income.  The 
spread of microcredit has also aided women’s empowerment. Grameen 
Bank alone has disbursed $8.74 billion to 8 million borrowers, 95% of 
them  women.  According  to  recent  estimates,  these  small  loans  have 
enabled more than half of borrowers’ households to cross the poverty 
line,  and  new  economic  opportunities  have  opened  up  as  a  result  of 
easier access to microcredit. Postponed marriage and motherhood are 
direct consequences of women’s empowerment, as are the effects on 
child survival.

Second,  social  and  political  empowerment  of  women  has  occurred 
through regular meetings of women’s groups organized by nongovernmental 
organizations. For example, the Grameen system has familiarized borrow-
ers with election processes, since members participate in annual elections 
for chairperson and secretaries, centre-chiefs and deputy centre-chiefs, as 
well as board member elections every three years. This experience has pre-
pared many women to run for public office. Women have also been socially 
empowered through participation in the banks. A recent analysis suggests 

much better knowledge about health among participants in credit forums 
than among nonparticipants.

Third, the higher participation of girls in formal education has been en-
hanced by nongovernmental organizations. Informal schools run by the non-
governmental  organization  BRAC  offer  four  years  of  accelerated  primary 
schooling to adolescents who have never attended school, and the schools 
have retention rates over 94%. After graduation, students can join the for-
mal schooling system, which most do. Monthly reproductive health sessions 
are integrated into the regular school curriculum and include such topics as 
adolescence, reproduction and menstruation, marriage and pregnancy, fam-
ily planning and contraception, smoking and substance abuse, and gender 
issues. Today, girls’ enrolment in schools exceeds that of boys (15 years ago, 
only 40% of school attendees were girls).

Women’s  empowerment  has  gone  hand-in-hand  with  substantial  im-
provements  in  health  services  and  promotion.  With  injectable  contracep-
tives, contraceptive use has surged. Nearly 53% of women ages 15–40 now 
use contraceptives, often through services provided by community outreach 
workers.  BRAC  also  provided  community-based  instruction  to  more  than 
13 million women about rehydration for children suffering from diarrhoea. 
Today Bangladesh has the world’s highest rate of oral rehydration use, and 
diarrhoea no longer figures as a major killer of children. Almost 95% of chil-
dren in Bangladesh are fully immunized against tuberculosis, compared with 
only 73% in India. Even adult tuberculosis cases fare better in Bangladesh, 
with  BRAC-sponsored  community  volunteers  treating  more  than  90%  of 
cases, while India struggles to reach 70% through the formal health system.

Source: BRAC n.d.; Grameen Bank n.d.; World Bank 2012a.

The lesson from global experience is that the 
main source of financing for universal health 
care  should  be  taxation.  Most  countries  in 
Southeast Asia, for example, have embraced the 
idea. Governments have sought to reduce pri-
vate out-of-pocket spending, increase pooled 
health  finance  and  improve  the  reach  and 
quality  of  health  services,  although  coverage 
varies.101 Identifying and reaching poor people 
remain challenges, and resource-poor develop-
ing countries such as Lao PDR and Viet Nam 
have relied heavily on donor-supported health 
equity funds.
•  Thailand. Thailand’s 2002 National Health 
Security  Act  stipulated  that  every  citizen 
should  have  comprehensive  medical  care. 
By  2009,  76%  of  the  population,  about 
48  million  people,  were  registered  in  the 
Universal Health Coverage Scheme, which 
provides  free  inpatient  and  outpatient 
treatment,  maternity  care,  dental  care  and 
emergency care. The scheme is fully financed 

by the government, with a budget in 2011 of 
$34 million—$70 for each insured person—
which  accounts  for  5.9%  of  the  national 
budget.102

•  Mexico.  In  2003,  the  Mexican  state  ap-
proved Seguro Popular, a public insurance 
scheme  that  provides  access  to  compre-
hensive  health  care  for  poor  households 
formerly  excluded  from  traditional  social 
security.  Public  resources  for  health  have 
increased  and  are  being  distributed  more 
fairly. Access to and use of health care ser-
vices have expanded. Financial protection 
indicators  have  improved.  By  the  end  of 
2007, 20 million poor people were benefit-
ing from the scheme.103 Mexico is a leader 
in moving rapidly towards universal health 
coverage by adopting an innovative financ-
ing mechanism.

•  Rwanda.  Access  to  health  services  has 
been  expanded  in  Rwanda  by  introducing 
community- based health insurance. Health 

Chapter 3  Drivers of development transformation    |    81

universal public health 
and education policies 
can be designed and 
implemented without 
sacrificing quality for the 
sake of greater coverage

care providers were given incentives by link-
ing  resources  to  performance.  As  a  result, 
health care became more affordable in rural 
areas. And there were visible improvements 
in health outcomes. Under-five mortality fell 
from 196 deaths per 1,000 live births in 2000 
to 103 in 2007, and the maternal mortality 
ratio  declined  more  than  12%  a  year  over 
2000–2008. Rwanda is on track to reach the 
Millennium Development Goal for maternal 
health.
One concern in a number of countries is the 
emergence of dual-track services. Even if public 
provision is universal in principle, quality and 
access  may  be  poor,  driving  people  towards 
expensive private providers.
•  China. Much of China’s health care success 
took place between 1950 and 1980, when 
the government established a three-level sys-
tem of village clinics, township health cen-
tres and county hospitals in rural areas and 
health centres and district hospitals in urban 
areas. Since the 1980s, however, the health 
sector has been driven by a fee-for-service 
model.  As  a  result,  while  China’s  overall 
health status has continued to improve, dis-
parities have grown between the eastern and 
western  provinces  and  between  rural  and 
urban areas. In many parts of the country 
quality health care has become unaffordable 
for the poor.

•  Chile.  Before  1980,  Chile’s  health  system 
was publicly financed through social secu-
rity and public funds. After health reform 
in  1981,  however,  risk  insurance  was  in-
troduced,  and  market  mechanisms  began 
to regulate levels of protection. By 2006, a 
dual system of coverage was in place. The 
National  Health  Care  Fund,  funded  by 
federal government tax revenues and by pre-
miums from beneficiaries, covered 69% of 
the population, but its resource constraints 
have prevented it from ensuring timely and 
quality  services.  Private  health  insurance 
companies covered 17% of the population. 
The  National  Health  Care  Fund  offers  a 
universal health plan. This dual system has 
been criticized because it leaves low-income 
and  high-risk  populations  to  be  treated 
mainly in the public system, which is poorly 
resourced and thus tends to provide lower 
quality service. In 2004, aware of the risks, 

the  state  introduced  El  Plan  de  Acceso 
Universal  de  Garantías  Explícitas,  which 
guarantees a medical benefits package con-
sisting of a prioritized list of diagnoses and 
treatment for 56 health conditions, as well 
as universal coverage for all citizens.
Providing universal health care and at least 
nine  years  of  compulsory  education  requires 
strong  state  commitment,  involvement  and 
consistency over time. The challenge for coun-
tries in the South is to ensure equity in access to 
health and education services and basic quality 
standards to prevent a dual-track service indus-
try  that  provides  low-quality  public  services 
(or none at all) to the poor and higher quality 
private services to the rich.

Universal public health and education pol-
icies can be designed and implemented with-
out sacrificing quality for the sake of greater 
coverage. Poor people have no alternatives to a 
public system, while wealthier people can pay 
for private services. Such dynamics entrench 
inequalities,  reduce  social  integration  and 
undermine sustainable human development. 
New  programmes,  such  as  those  in  China, 
Mexico and Thailand, illustrate the possibili-
ties of ensuring that basic services are univer-
sal and of reasonable quality. When financial 
resources  are  adequately  provided,  publicly 
provided services need not be inferior to pri-
vate services.

Increasing social cohesion by 
broadening development

Transforming  development  requires  that  all 
citizens  feel  vested  in  the  broader  goals  of 
society, showing respect and compassion for 
others and a commitment to building social 
cohesion. This requires that states and citizens 
understand that human development is about 
more than just enhancing individual capabili-
ties. Individual capabilities are embedded in 
a broader social system whose health requires 
enhanced social competencies (see box 1.7 in 
chapter 1).

More effective social protection systems are 
also needed to help individuals and communi-
ties manage risks to their welfare. Globalization 
has  contributed  to  the  dismantling  of  some 
aspects of social protection and social insur-
ance, especially for systems relying on universal 

82    |    HUMAN DEvELOPMENT REPORT 2013

coverage and large government expenditures. 
At the same time, it has increased the need for 
social protection, as fluctuations in economic 
activity  become  more  frequent.  Thus,  social 
policies become as important as economic pol-
icies in advancing human development. In fact, 
social and economic policies can hardly be dis-
entangled because their goals and instruments 
are analogous.104

In  many  parts  of  the  South,  states  have 
introduced  and  provided  social  protection 
programmes to integrate poor people into the 
new economy. Cash transfer programmes have 
been particularly important in reducing pover-
ty and improving income inequality through 
redistribution. But transfers cannot substitute 
for  public  provision  of  essential  goods  and 
services  (box  3.8).  At  best,  they  can  supple-
ment resources of the poor. Offering cash so 
that households can buy health care of their 
choice is unlikely to work where high- quality 

health care is in short supply. Similarly, giving 
cash  to  households  so  that  they  can  choose 
their school is unlikely to help the poor if few 
schools offer high- quality education. Nor can 
cash  transfers  substitute  for  incomes  earned 
through decent work.
•  India. India’s National Rural Employment 
Guarantee Scheme provides up to 100 days 
of unskilled manual labour to eligible rural 
poor at the statutory minimum agricultural 
labour wage. This initiative is promising be-
cause it provides access to income and some 
insurance for the poor against the vagaries 
of seasonal work and affords individuals the 
self-respect  and  empowerment  associated 
with  work.105  In  addition,  it  aims  to  help 
build economies in rural areas by develop-
ing  infrastructure.  The  scheme  has  inno-
vative design features such as social audits 
and advanced monitoring and information 
systems.

Cash transfer 
programmes—important 
in reducing poverty 
and improving income 
inequality—cannot 
substitute for public 
provision of essential 
goods and services

Box 3.8 

Strengthening social protection in Turkey

Cevdet Yılmaz, Minister of Development, Turkey

As recently as 2002, an estimated 30% of Turkey’s people lived below the 
government’s poverty threshold of $4.30 a day. Government spending on so-
cial protection accounted for just 12% of GDP, less than half the EU average 
of 25%. And expenditures on social assistance for the poor accounted for 
only 0.5% of GDP, prompting criticism that Turkey’s social support systems 
were both fragmented and insufficient.

Over the past decade, however, Turkey’s strong economic performance, 
pro-poor approach to social policies and targeted assistance with greater 
resources  have  helped  accelerate  poverty  reduction.  Key  policy  changes 
include systematic strengthening of social assistance programmes, condi-
tional cash transfers, social security reforms and an ambitious transforma-
tion of the national public health system. Under the conditional cash transfer 
programme alone, launched in 2003, more than 1 million children have re-
ceived health care support, and about 2.2 million have benefited from educa-
tion aid. School children have received more than 1.3 billion textbooks since 
2003 under a new free schoolbook programme, and nearly 1 million now get 
free transportation to school.

As a result of these and other initiatives, the share of the population 
living on less than $4.30 a day fell sharply, to 3.7% in 2010, and the share of 
GDP devoted to poverty assistance and related social services nearly tripled, 
to 1.2%.

The share of social expenditures in Turkey’s GDP is still less than the EU 
average, and social assistance schemes have not yet had the desired impact 
on poverty rates. To increase their effectiveness, the government is working 
on new methods of poverty measurement and social protection, new ap-
proaches to in-kind and cash assistance, stronger links to job opportunities 
and continuing consultations with targeted communities and households.

Similarly,  the  expansion  and  modernization  of  health  services  have 
had  a  direct,  measurable  impact  on  public  health.  Health  insurance  is 
now available to the entire population. Under the Health Transformation 
Programme launched in 2003, family practitioners were assigned to fami-
lies to strengthen basic health services, with primary and emergency health 
care provided free of charge. The results have been swift and encouraging. 
For the first time, almost all children are getting free regular vaccinations. 
Seven million schoolchildren get free milk every day. Iron and vitamin D 
supplements are provided without charge to mothers and children. Infant 
mortality rates have fallen sharply, to 10 per 1,000 live births in 2010, down 
from  29  in  2003,  according  to  government  figures.  This  two-thirds  drop 
greatly exceeds the reduction targeted under the Millennium Development 
Goals.

Pro-child policies go beyond health care and education, to broader as-
sistance for their home communities. The government started a new Social 
Support Program in 2008 to develop social cohesion and ensure social inte-
gration, particularly in the less-developed eastern regions of the country. Its 
projects aim to increase participation in national economic and social life 
by disadvantaged people marginalized by poverty and social exclusion. The 
goals of the programme’s several thousand projects to date go beyond job 
creation in these lower income regions to include support for young people 
and  women  to  express  themselves  through  cultural,  artistic  and  athletic 
accomplishments.

More important, though, is what these improvements already mean to 
the lives of ordinary Turkish families. Throughout the country, parents and 
children alike can now look forward to healthier, more secure, more fulfilling 
lives—the underlying goal and core principle of human development.

Chapter 3  Drivers of development transformation    |    83

•  China. The Minimum Livelihood Guarantee 
Scheme  is  the  Chinese  government’s  main 
response  to  the  new  challenges  of  social 
protection brought about by increasing pri-
vatization and engagement with the global 
market. It guarantees a minimum income in 
urban areas by filling the gap between actual 
income and a locally set poverty line. So, de-
spite increasing income inequality in China, 
there is potential for redistributive policies to 
reduce poverty and enhance food security. In 
addition, extending equal rights to migrants 
in cities can have a decisive impact on their 
ability to access comparable social services.

•  Brazil. Despite slower economic growth than 
in China and India, Brazil has reduced in-
equality by introducing a poverty reduction 
programme, extending education and raising 
the  minimum  wage.  Its  conditional  cash 
transfer programme Bolsa Escola, launched 
in 2001, followed the conceptual foundation 
of others in Latin America, such as Mexico’s 
Progresa  (now  called  Oportunidades; 
box 3.9). In 2003 Bolsa Escola was expand-
ed to Bolsa Familia by folding several other 
cash and in-kind transfer programmes into a 

unified targeting system under streamlined 
administration.  By  2009,  Bolsa  Familia 
covered  more  than  12  million  households 
across  the  country,  or  97.3%  of  the  target 
population.  These  programmes  have  also 
broken ground in terms of programme ad-
ministration  and  female  empowerment  by 
developing innovative distribution channels, 
such as ATM cards for low-income mothers 
without bank accounts. The result has been 
substantial declines in poverty and extreme 
poverty and reduced inequality.106

•  Chile. In response to findings that state sub-
sidies  were  not  reaching  the  extreme  poor, 
Chile  Solidario  was  launched  in  2002  to 
reach the extreme poor with a combination 
of  aid  and  skill  development.  Focusing  on 
household assistance, it takes the view that ex-
treme poverty is multidimensional, extending 
beyond low income to include other depriva-
tions in basic capabilities such as health and 
education. Furthermore, poverty reduction 
requires  the  mitigation  of  vulnerability  to 
common events, such as sickness, accidents 
and  unemployment.  Together  with  other 
social policies, the programme has increased 

Box 3.9

Conditional cash transfer programmes and Mexico’s Oportunidades

Conditional cash transfer programmes are designed to increase beneficiaries’ 
incomes and their access to health and education by making transfers condi-
tional on requirements such as visits to health clinics and school attendance. 
They  target  certain  beneficiaries  (typically  individuals  from  low-income  or 
disadvantaged households) and provide support in cash instead of as in-kind 
benefits,  with  the  transfers  conditional  on  activities  related  to  health  and 
education. Moreover, the programmes can be designed to allow rigorous im-
pact evaluation. For instance, the Tekopora programme in Paraguay has been 
shown to have positive impacts on nutrition, health, education and poverty 
reduction without having negative impacts on labour supply.

Mexico’s Oportunidades is a conditional cash transfer programme tar-
geted to poor households conditional on children’s school attendance and 
medical checkups and parents’ attendance at community meetings where 
information is provided on personal health and hygiene. The programme is 
designed to break the intergenerational transmission of poverty. Originally 
called Progresa, it aims to alleviate current and future poverty by giving par-
ents financial incentives (cash) to invest in the health and education of their 
children. The programme, which started in 1997, is one of the largest condi-
tional cash transfer programmes in the world, distributing about $3 billion to 
some 5 million beneficiary households in 2012.

Oportunidades transfers, given bimonthly to female heads of house-
hold, have two parts. The first, received by all beneficiary households, 
is a fixed food stipend, conditional on family members obtaining preven-
tive medical care, and is intended to help families spend on more and 
better nutrition. The second comes in the form of education scholarships 
and is conditional on children attending school a minimum of 85% of the 
time and not repeating a grade more than twice. The education stipend 
provided  for  each  child  under  age  18  enrolled  in  school  between  the 
third  grade  of  primary  school  and  the  third  (last)  grade  of  junior  high 
varies by grade and gender. It rises substantially after graduation from 
primary school and is higher for girls than for boys during secondary and 
tertiary school. Beneficiary children also receive money for school sup-
plies once a year.

Conditional  cash  transfer  programmes  cost  less  than  traditional  in-
kind  social  assistance  interventions.  Brazil’s  Bolsa  Familia  and  Mexico’s 
Oportunidades, the two largest programmes in Latin America, cost less than 
1%  of  GDP.  In  some  cases  they  have  been  perceived  as  tools  to  provide 
access to universal basic rights such as health and education, but in others 
they have led to the exclusion of some localities due to the inadequate sup-
ply of services.

Source: Hailu and veras Soares 2008; Ribas, veras Soares and Hirata 2008.

84    |    HUMAN DEvELOPMENT REPORT 2013

the take-up of health and education services 
during boom times, while playing a counter-
cyclical role in economic downturns by pro-
viding a much needed safety net to the poor.
The rising South is thus developing a broader 
social and poverty reduction agenda in which 
policies  to  address  inequalities,  institutional 
failures, social barriers and personal vulnera-
bilities are as central as promoting economic 
growth. This follows from an increased under-
standing that social challenges extend beyond 
income poverty; they also include lack of access 
to education, poor health, social inequality and 
limited social integration (box 3.10).

* 

 

 

 

* 

 

 

 

*

An  agenda  for  development  transformation 
that  promotes  human  development  is  multi-
faceted. It expands people’s assets by universal-
izing access to basic social services; extending 
credit to the population, especially the poor; 

protecting common resources; and introducing 
land  reform  where  relevant.  It  improves  the 
functioning of state and social institutions to 
promote equitable growth where the benefits 
are widespread. It prioritizes rapid growth in 
employment and works to ensure that jobs are 
of high quality. It reduces bureaucratic and so-
cial constraints on economic action and social 
mobility. It holds leadership accountable. It in-
volves communities in setting budget priorities 
and disseminating information. And it focuses 
on social priorities.

Many countries of the South have demon-
strated what can be achieved through a devel-
opmental state. But even in higher achieving 
countries, continuing success is not guaranteed. 
Countries across the world are facing a series of 
challenges, from rising inequality to spreading 
environmental degradation. The next chapter 
addresses these threats and considers what is 
needed  to  sustain  future  progress  in  human 
development.

a broader social and 
poverty reduction 
agenda is needed 
in which policies to 
address inequalities, 
institutional failures, social 
barriers and personal 
vulnerabilities are as 
central as promoting 
economic growth

Box 3.10 

Michael Bloomberg, Mayor, New York City

Why New York City looked South for antipoverty policy advice

In New York City, we are working to better the lives of our residents in many 
ways. We continue to improve the quality of education in our schools. We 
have improved New Yorkers’ health by reducing smoking and obesity. And 
we have enhanced the city’s landscape by adding bike lanes and planting 
hundreds of thousands of trees.

We have also sought to reduce poverty by finding new and better ways 
to build self-sufficiency and prepare our young people for bright futures. To 
lead  this  effort,  we  established  the  Center  for  Economic  Opportunity.  Its 
mission is to identify strategies to help break the cycle of poverty through 
innovative education, health and employment initiatives.

Over  the  last  six  years,  the  centre  has  launched  more  than  50  pilot 
programmes in partnership with city agencies and hundreds of community- 
based organizations. It has developed a customized evaluation strategy for 
each of these pilots, monitoring their performance, comparing outcomes and 
determining which strategies are most successful at reducing poverty and 
expanding opportunity. Successful programmes are sustained with new pub-
lic and private funds. Unsuccessful programmes are discontinued, and re-
sources reinvested in new strategies. The centre’s findings are then shared 
across government agencies, with policymakers, with nonprofit partners and 
private donors and with colleagues across the country and around the world 
who are also seeking new ways to break the cycle of poverty.

New York is fortunate to have some of the world’s brightest minds work-
ing in our businesses and universities, but we recognize there is much to 
learn from programmes developed elsewhere. That is why the centre began 
its work by conducting a national and international survey of promising an-
tipoverty strategies.

In 2007, the centre launched Opportunity NYC: Family Rewards, the first 
conditional cash transfer programme in the United States. Based on similar 
programmes operating in more than 20 other countries, Family Rewards re-
duces poverty by providing households with incentives for preventive health 
care, education and job training. In designing Family Rewards, we drew on 
lessons from Brazil, Mexico and dozens of other countries. By the end of 
our three-year pilot, we had learned which programme elements worked in 
New York City and which did not; information that is now helpful to a new 
generation of programmes worldwide.

Before  we  launched  Opportunity  NYC:  Family  Rewards,  I  visited 
Toluca, Mexico, for a firsthand look at Mexico’s successful federal con-
ditional cash transfer programme, Oportunidades. We also participated 
in  a  North–South  learning  exchange  hosted  by  the  United  Nations. 
We  worked  with  the  Rockefeller  Foundation,  the  World  Bank,  the 
Organization of American States and other institutions and international 
policymakers to exchange experiences on conditional cash transfer pro-
grammes  in  Latin  America,  as  well  as  in  Indonesia,  South  Africa  and 
Turkey.

Our  international  learning  exchanges  are  not  limited  to  these  cash 
transfer initiatives; they also include innovative approaches to urban trans-
portation, new education initiatives and other programmes.

No one has a monopoly on good ideas, which is why New York will 
continue to learn from the best practices of other cities and countries. And 
as we adapt and evaluate new programmes in our own city, we remain com-
mitted to returning the favour and making a lasting difference in communi-
ties around the world.

Chapter 3  Drivers of development transformation    |    85

“Each generation will reap what 
the former generation has sown.”
Chinese proverb

“We have to free half of the 
human race, the women, 
so that they can help to 
free the other half.”

Emmeline Pankhurst

4.
Sustaining momentum

Much of the news about developing countries in recent decades has been positive, especially their accelerated progress in 
human development. But what of the future? Can these countries continue to advance human development at the same rapid 
pace, and can other countries in the South share in the benefits? Yes, with the right policies. These include enhancing equity, 
enabling voice and participation, confronting environmental pressures and managing demographic change. Policymakers 
will need to strive for greater policy ambition and to understand the high cost of policy inaction.

Over the next few years, policymakers in de-
veloping countries will need to follow an am-
bitious agenda that responds to difficult global 
conditions, notably the economic slowdown, 
which has decreased demand from the North. 
At  the  same  time,  they  will  need  to  address 
their own urgent policy priorities.

Policy priorities for 
developing countries

Four policy priorities stand out for developing 
countries over the next few years if they are to 
continue the gains of recent decades and if the 
benefits are to extend to countries still lagging 
behind:
•  Enhancing equity. Equity and social justice, 
valuable in their own right, are important 
for expanding capabilities.1 Progress in hu-
man development is difficult to sustain in 
the face of growing or persistent inequity.2 
Inequity in specific capabilities—for exam-
ple, proxied and measured as disparities in 
health and education outcomes, as well as 
in  income—also  impedes  progress  in  hu-
man development, though the effects may 
be  less  pronounced.  At  the  core  of  these 
negative relationships is gender inequality: 
women’s health and education are crucial to 
addressing demographic and other human 
development  challenges.  Although  some 
countries in Latin America and elsewhere 
have greatly reduced income inequality, not 
all countries recognize the importance of 
addressing inequality in health, education 
and income.3

•  Enabling voice and participation. As educa-
tion levels rise and access to information and 
communication technologies spreads, people 
are demanding more participation in political 

processes,  challenging  decisionmakers  to 
be more accountable and expand opportu-
nities for open public discourse. Restricted 
opportunities for political participation, at 
a time when unemployment is rising and the 
economic environment is deteriorating, can 
fuel civil unrest. Expanded opportunities for 
political  participation,  along  with  greater 
government accountability in ensuring that 
basic human needs are met, can foster human 
freedoms and sustain human development. 
Strong political participation by the relative-
ly deprived provides an important source of 
support for pro–human development policy 
change.

•  Confronting  environmental  pressures. 
Climate change and local stresses on natu-
ral resources and ecosystems are increasing 
pressure on the environment in almost all 
countries,  regardless  of  their  stage  of  de-
velopment. Unless action is taken urgently, 
future progress in human development will 
be threatened. Building on scenarios devel-
oped for Human Development Report 2011, 
this  Report  argues  for  aggressive  action 
nationally and internationally to tackle these 
challenges.

•  Managing demographic change. In some de-
veloping  countries,  mostly  in  Sub-Saharan 
Africa,  large  cohorts  of  young  people  are 
entering the workforce. In other countries, 
notably in East Asia, the share of working- 
age  people  in  the  population  is  falling  as 
the share of elderly rises. New policy inter-
ventions  are  needed  to  generate  sufficient 
productive employment while meeting the 
growing demand for social protection.
There  will  be  other  challenges  to  human 
development,  including  volatile  commodity 
prices, especially for food and fuel. In an in-
creasingly  globalized  world,  these  and  other 

Chapter 4  Sustaining momentum    |    87

concerns will make for a complex environment 
with attendant risks, including progress rever-
sals,  rising  insecurity  and  greater  inequality. 
Forecasting  is  difficult  in  such  a  complex 
environment because modelling may miss key 
variables, such as technological progress, that 
can dramatically change both production and 
personal possibilities. Nevertheless, modelling 
scenarios  are  helpful  for  illustrating  policy 
choices and their implications.

enhancing equity

Greater  equity,  including  between  men  and 
women and across groups (religious, racial and 

others), is not only valuable in itself, but also 
essential for promoting human development. 
One  of  the  most  powerful  instruments  for 
advancing equity and human development is 
education, which builds people’s capacities and 
expands  their  freedom  of  choice.  Education 
boosts  people’s  self-confidence  and  makes  it 
easier for them to find better jobs, engage in 
public debate and make demands on govern-
ment for health care, social security and other 
entitlements.

Education  also  has  striking  benefits  for 
health and mortality (see box 4.1 on differences 
in education futures in the Republic of Korea 
and India). Evidence worldwide establishes that 

Box 4.1

Why population prospects will likely differ in the Republic of Korea and India

Educational  attainment  has  risen  rapidly  in  the  Republic  of  Korea.  In  the 
1950s a large proportion of school-age children received no formal educa-
tion. Today, young Korean women are among the best educated women in 
the world: more than half have completed college. As a consequence, elder-
ly Koreans of the future will be much better educated than elderly Koreans 
of today (see figure), and because of the positive correlation between educa-
tion and health, they are also likely to be healthier.

Assuming that enrolment rates (which are high) remain constant, the 
proportion of the population younger than age 14 will drop from 16% in 2010 
to 13% in 2050. There will also be a marked shift in the population’s educa-
tion composition, with the proportion having a tertiary education projected 
to rise from 26% to 47%.

For India, the picture looks very different. Before 2000, more than half the 
adult population had no formal education. Despite the recent expansion in ba-
sic schooling and impressive growth in the number of better educated Indians 
(undoubtedly a key factor in India’s recent economic growth), the proportion 
of the adult population with no education will decline only slowly. Partly be-
cause  of  this  lower  level  of  education,  particularly  among  women,  India’s 
population is projected to grow rapidly, with India surpassing China as the 
most populous country. Even under an optimistic fast track scenario, which 
assumes education expansion similar to Korea’s, India’s education distribu-
tion in 2050 will still be highly unequal, with a sizeable group of uneducated 
(mostly elderly) adults. The rapid expansion in tertiary education under this 
scenario, however, will build a very well educated young adult labour force.

Comparative population and education futures in the Republic of Korea and India

Republic of Korea, constant enrolment ratios

India, fast track scenario

Population (millions)

Population (millions)

TERTIARY

TERTIARY

SECONDARY

SECONDARY

PRIMARY

NO EDUCATION

 

PRIMARY

50

40

30

20

10

0

2,000

1,500

1,000

500

0

TERTIARY

SECONDARY

PRIMARY

NO EDUCATION

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

2020

2030

2040

2050

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

2020

2030

2040

2050

Source: Lutz and KC 2013.

88    |    HUMAN DEvELOPMENT REPORT 2013

better education of parents, especially of moth-
ers, improves child survival. Moreover, working 
women and more-educated women (who tend 
to  complete  their  schooling  before  bearing 
children)  are  likely  to  have  fewer  children.4 
Educated women also have healthier children 
who are more likely to survive (table 4.1), thus 
reducing the incentive to have a larger family.5 
Educated women also have better access to con-
traception and use it more effectively.6

Drawing  on  Demographic  and  Health 
Surveys and micro-level surveys, research for 
this Report reinforces these arguments, finding 
mother’s education to be more important to 
child survival than household income or wealth 
is. This has profound policy implications, po-
tentially shifting emphasis from efforts to boost 
household income to measures to improve girls’ 
education.

This relationship can be illustrated by data 
on  child  mortality  (see  table  4.1).  Many 
African  countries,  most  notably  Mali  and 
Niger, have a high under-five mortality rate. 
But  in  every  country,  the  mortality  rate  is 

lower  among  better  educated  mothers.  In 
some countries, such as Nigeria, much lower 
child  mortality  is  associated  with  primary 
education;  in  others,  such  as  Liberia  and 
Uganda, the decisive difference is associated 
with secondary education.

A  modelling  exercise  conducted  for  this 
Report  projects  the  impact  of  differences  in 
education levels on child mortality over 2010–
2050  under  two  scenarios.  The  “base  case” 
scenario assumes that current trends in educa-
tional attainment at the national level continue 
without substantial new funding commitments 
or  policy  initiatives.  Under  this  assumption, 
the  proportion  of  each  group  of  children— 
categorized by age and gender—advancing to 
the next education level remains constant (see 
Technical appendix).

The  “fast  track”  scenario  assumes  much 
more  ambitious  education  policy  targets, 
similar  to  those  achieved  in  recent  decades 
by the Republic of Korea, for example, with 
the  proportion  of  schoolchildren  advancing 
to the next education level steadily increasing 

a mother’s education 
is more important to 
her child’s survival 
than is household 
income or wealth

taBle 4.1

Under-five mortality rate and total fertility rate by mother’s education level
In selected countries, most recent year available since 2005

Country

Survey year

No education

Primary

Secondary 
or higher

Overall

No education

Primary

Secondary 
or higher

Overall

Under-five mortality rate 

(per 1,000 live births)

Total fertility rate 
(births per woman)

Bangladesh

Egypt

Ethiopia

Ghana

India

Indonesia

Liberia

Mali

Niger

Nigeria

Rwanda

Uganda

Zambia

2007

2008

2005

2008

2005/2006

2007

2009

2006

2006

2008

2007/2008

2006

2007

93

44

139

103

106

94

164

223

222

210

174

164

144

Note: Data refer to the period 10 years before the survey year.
Source: Lutz and KC 2013.

73

38

111

88

78

60

162

176

209

159

127

145

146

52

26

54

67

49

38

131

102

92

107

43

91

105

74

33

132

85

85

51

158

215

218

171

135

144

137

3.0

3.4

6.1

6.0

3.6

2.4

7.1

7.0

7.2

7.3

6.1

7.7

8.2

2.9

3.2

5.1

4.9

2.6

2.8

6.2

6.3

7.0

6.5

5.7

7.2

7.1

2.5

3.0

2.0

3.0

2.1

2.6

3.9

3.8

4.8

4.2

3.8

4.4

3.9

2.7

3.0

5.4

4.0

2.7

2.6

5.9

6.6

7.0

5.7

5.5

6.7

6.2

Chapter 4  Sustaining momentum    |    89

a greater emphasis 
on education can 
substantially reduce 
child deaths in all 
countries and regions

over the years. The results from the fast track 
scenario show substantially fewer child deaths 
as mother’s level of schooling rises. The model 
also shows that a greater emphasis on progress 
in education would substantially and contin-
ually reduce child deaths in all countries and 
regions, as a direct result of improvements in 
girls’ education (table 4.2).

India  has  the  most  projected  child  deaths 
over 2010–2015, almost 7.9 million, account-
ing for about half the deaths among children 
under  age  5  in  Asia.7  In  the  final  projection 
period, 2045–2050, nearly 6.1 million children 
are projected to die under the base case scenario 
but just half that many (3.1 million) under the 
fast track scenario.

China has more people than India but is pro-
jected to have less than a quarter (1.7 million) 
the number of child deaths over 2010–2015. 
And  due  to  China’s  advances  in  education, 
projections look optimistic under both scenar-
ios. If China follows the fast track scenario, as 

seems likely, child deaths will decline to about 
half a million by 2045–2050, less than a third 
of the current level.

Projections  are  less  optimistic  for  some 
other countries. Under the base case scenario, 
child  deaths  in  Kenya,  for  example,  would 
rise  from  about  582,000  in  2010–2015  to 
about 1.6 million in 2045–2050. Under the 
fast  track  scenario,  the  number  of  deaths 
over  2045–2050  would  drop  to  371,000, 
much  better,  but  not  far  below  the  level  in 
2010–2015.

The projected declines in child deaths re-
flect the combined effects of better educated 
women  having  fewer  children  and  of  fewer 
of those children dying. The projections also 
show that policy interventions have a greater 
impact where education outcomes are initially 
weaker.

These  results  underscore  the  importance 
of  reducing  gender  inequality,  especially  in 
education  and  in  low  Human  Development 

taBle 4.2

Projected number of deaths of children under age 5, by education scenario, 2010–2015, 2025–2030 and 
2045–2050 (thousands)

Country or region

Base case

Base case

Fast track

Base case

Fast track

2010–2015

2025–2030

2045–2050

Country

Brazil

China

India

Kenya

Korea, Rep.

Mali

Pakistan

South Africa

Region

Africa

Asia

Europe

Latin America and the Caribbean

North America

Oceania

328

1,716

7,872

582

9

488

1,927

288

16,552

15,029

276

1,192

162

11

224

897

6,707

920

8

519

1,641

198

18,964

11,715

209

963

160

11

177

871

4,806

482

9

318

1,225

165

12,095

8,924

204

704

155

11

161

625

6,096

1,552

7

541

1,676

134

24,185

10,561

196

950

165

12

102

526

3,064

371

7

150

773

93

7,495

5,681

187

413

152

10

Note: See Technical appendix at the end of this Report for a discussion of the base case and fast track scenarios.
Source: Lutz and KC 2013.

90    |    HUMAN DEvELOPMENT REPORT 2013

Index (HDI) countries. Gender inequality is 
especially tragic not only because it excludes 
women  from  basic  social  opportunities,  but 
also because it gravely imperils the life pros-
pects of future generations.

enabling voice and participation

In  the  1995  Human  Development  Report, 
Mahbub ul Haq highlighted that unless people 
can participate meaningfully in the events and 
processes that shape their lives, national human 
development paths will be neither desirable nor 
sustainable.

Equitable  and  sustainable  human  devel-
opment requires systems of public discourse 
that  encourage  citizens  to  participate  in  the 
political  process  by  expressing  their  views 
and voicing their concerns. People should be 
able  to  influence  policymaking  and  results, 
and young people should be able to look for-
ward to greater economic opportunities and 
political  accountability.  Exclusion  from  this 
process limits people’s ability to communicate 
their concerns and needs and can perpetuate 
injustices.

Autocratic  regimes  impose  restrictions 
that directly counter human development by 
restraining  essential  freedoms.  But  even  in 
democracies,  poor  people  and  poor  groups 
often have limited access to information, voice 
or  public  participation.  Poor  people  need 
to  work  together  to  effectively  exercise  their 
political voice. Yet in many countries, organiza-
tions representing the poor are not supported 
but discouraged. Democracies can also extend 
accountability  from  what  is  often  a  narrow 
constituency of elites to all citizens, particu-
larly those who have been underrepresented in 
public discourse, such as women, youth and the 
poor.

Governments  that  do  not  respond  to  citi-
zens’ needs or widen opportunities for politi-
cal  participation  risk  losing  their  legitimacy. 
Dissatisfaction is on the rise in the North and 
the  South  as  people  call  for  more  opportu-
nities  to  voice  their  concerns  and  influence 
policy,  especially  on  basic  social  protection. 
According  to  a  recent  International  Labour 
Organization report, government dissatisfac-
tion, measured by the Social Unrest Index, rose 
in 57 of 106 countries from 2010 to 2011. The 

largest increases were in countries of the North, 
followed by those in the Arab States and Sub-
Saharan Africa.9

People  in  the  North  have  been  protesting 
against  austerity  measures  and  reductions  in 
public spending and jobs, as in France, Greece, 
Italy, Spain and the United Kingdom. Citizens 
have  challenged  governments  to  address  the 
social consequences of their policies, pointing 
out that the burden of austerity is being borne 
disproportionately  by  the  poor  and  socially 
disadvantaged.10 Other focuses of unrest have 
included  food  prices,  unemployment  and 
pollution:
•  Rising food prices. Riots in response to high 
food prices in 2008 challenged stability in 
more  than  30  countries  in  Africa  and  the 
Arab States.11

•  Unemployment and low wages. Workers are 
demanding  that  governments  respond  to 
their  needs.  The  unemployed  are  voicing 
their dissatisfaction in many countries.12 In 
Viet Nam strikes doubled in 2011 as workers 
struggled to gain higher wages in the face of 
inflation.13

•  Environmental  pollution.  Mass  protests 
against  environmental  pollution  are  also 
widespread. Protesters in Shanghai, China, 
for example, fought a proposed wastewater 
pipeline,14  and  in  Malaysia  local  residents 
have  been  opposing  the  construction 
of  a  rare  earth  metal  refinery  in  their 
neighbourhood.15
Among the most active protesters are youth, 
in part a response to job shortages and limit-
ed  employment  opportunities  for  educated 
young  people.  In  a  sample  of  48  countries, 
youth  unemployment  was  more  than  20% 
in  2011,  well  above  the  9.6%  overall  rate.16 
Youth  discontent  in  response  to  rising  un-
employment is even more likely in areas with 
an  educated  population.17  Education  alters 
people’s  expectations  of  government  and 
instils the political skills and resources need-
ed  to  challenge  government  decisions.  This 
is  not  to  say  that  the  educated  have  greater 
rights.  But  unless  governments  give  greater 
priority to job creation, they are likely to face 
increasing youth dissatisfaction as education 
coverage expands (figure 4.1).18

At the same time, mobile broadband Internet 
and  other  modern  technologies  are  opening 

Dissatisfaction is on the 
rise as people call for 
more opportunities to 
voice their concerns and 
influence policy, especially 
on basic social protection

Chapter 4  Sustaining momentum    |    91

FIGuRe 4.1

Under the fast track scenario, education outcomes are enhanced

Base case scenario

Fast track scenario

Population (billions)
8

TERTIARY 

SECONDARY 

PRIMARY 

NO EDUCATION

AGES 014

6

4

2

0

Population (billions)
8

TERTIARY

SECONDARY 

PRIMARY 

NO EDUCATION

AGES 014

6

4

2

0

2010

2020

2030

2040

2050

2010

2020

2030

2040

2050

Note: See Technical appendix for a discussion of the base case and fast track scenarios.
Source: HDRO calculations based on Lutz and KC (2013).

Participation and 
inclusivity, valuable in their 
own right, also improve 
the quality of policies and 
their implementation and 
reduce the probability 
of future upheaval

new channels through which citizens, particu-
larly young people, can demand accountability. 
They are also enabling people in different coun-
tries to share values and experiences, bringing 
them closer together.

The Internet and social media, as “low-cost 
aggregators”  of  public  opinion,  are  amplify-
ing  people’s  voices.  In  China,  for  example, 
the post-1990 generation is highly educated, 
politically  aware  and  outspoken  on  social 
media.19 Less than a week after the July 2011 
high-speed train accident in Wenzhou, China’s 
two major microblogs (weibos) had distributed 
some  26  million  messages  commenting  on 
the  accident  and  expressing  concerns  about 
safety.20

Social movements and media draw attention 
to specific issues, but this does not always re-
sult in political transformations that benefit 
the broader society. In India, for example, the 
Anna  Hazare  movement  against  corruption 
created pressure for change. Critics, however, 
point out that such movements can favour pol-
icies that may not be supported by the wider 
electorate. Thus, it is important to institution-
alize  participatory  processes  that  can  adjust 
the political balance by providing a platform 
for  excluded  citizens  to  demand  accounta-
bility and redress of inequities, ranging from 

systemic discrimination to unfair and unjust 
exclusion.21

Participation  and  inclusivity,  valuable  in 
their  own  right,  also  improve  the  quality  of 
policies and their implementation and reduce 
the probability of future upheaval. Failure to 
build  an  accountable  and  responsive  polity 
may foment discontent and civil strife. This can 
derail human development. History is replete 
with popular rebellions against unresponsive 
governments, as unrest deters investment and 
impedes  growth  and  governments  divert  re-
sources to maintaining law and order.

In recent years, countries in both the North 
and the South have faced escalating crises of le-
gitimacy that have pitted citizens against their 
institutions.  Millions  of  people  in  the  Arab 
States  have  risen  to  demand  opportunities, 
respect and dignity as well as fuller citizenship 
and  a  new  social  contract  with  those  who 
govern in their name. As a result, Egypt, Libya 
and Tunisia have seen autocratic governments 
deposed, Yemen has embarked on an interna-
tionally  brokered  political  transition,  Jordan 
and  Morocco  have  undertaken  political  re-
forms and Syrian Arab Republic is in the throes 
of civil war.

One  way  to  foster  peaceful  change  is  to 
allow  civil  society  to  mature  through  open 

92    |    HUMAN DEvELOPMENT REPORT 2013

practice. Even under autocratic governments, 
Egypt  and  Tunisia,  for  example,  had  fairly 
well  developed  associational  structures  and 
self- disciplined  political  opposition  move-
ments. By contrast, Libya lacked such expe-
rience, which contributed to an all-out civil 
war. Building political cohesion after conflict 
is difficult in countries that lack a tradition 
of  civic  participation.  Diverse  experiences 
show that changes in political regimes do not 
automatically enhance voice, participation, in-
clusion or accountability or make states work 
more effectively.

Accountability  and  inclusion  are  vital  not 
only  in  the  political  sphere,  but  also  in  eco-
nomic  and  social  areas,  through  promoting 
job creation and social inclusion, especially in 
societies  with  a  large  and  growing  educated 
population. This requires effective mediating 
institutions;  otherwise,  modernization  can 
be destabilizing.22 This is not to suggest that 

FIGuRe 4.2

people  should  be  educated  only  if  there  are 
jobs  for  them—in  the  human  development 
paradigm, access to knowledge and education 
is an end in itself—but recent social upheavals 
show that a mismatch between education and 
economic opportunity can lead to alienation 
and despair, especially among young people.

Of the 20 countries with the largest increases 
in mean years of schooling over 1980–2010, 
8 were in the Arab States (figure 4.2). In most 
of these countries, employment opportunities 
failed  to  keep  pace  with  educational  attain-
ment.  Most  countries  that  were  part  of  the 
recent unrest in the Arab States are in the lower 
right quadrant of figure 4.2, because they had 
major  gains  in  educational  attainment  but 
below-median  employment  to  population 
ratios.23

It  is  hard  to  predict  when  societies  will 
reach a tipping point. Many factors precip-
itate  demands  for  change.  When  educated 

accountability and 
inclusion are vital not only 
in the political sphere, 
but also in economic and 
social areas, through 
promoting job creation 
and social inclusion

In most countries, employment opportunities have not kept pace with educational attainment

Employment to population ratio (%)

85

80

75

70

65

60

55

50

45

40

35

30

25

20

Qatar

United Arab Emirates

Bahrain

MEDIAN

Sudan

Syrian Arab
Republic

Libya

Saudi Arabia
Egypt

Tunisia

Jordan

Algeria

Morocco

Yemen

Iraq

1

0

1

2

MEDIAN

3

4

5

6

7

Change in mean years of schooling, 1980–2010 (years)

Select Arab States

Others

Note: Analysis covers 141 countries. Employment to population ratios are for the most recent year available during 2006–2010.
Source: Adapted from Campante and Chor (2012) using updated data.

Chapter 4  Sustaining momentum    |    93

young  people  cannot  find  work,  they  tend 
to feel aggrieved. Average years of schooling 
have risen over the past 30 years in all coun-
tries  with  data  available.24  Yet  grievances 
alone  do  not  trigger  upheavals.  The  public 
can be angry, but if people believe that the 
cost  in  time  and  effort  to  engage  in  politi-
cal  action  outweighs  the  likelihood  of  real 
change,  they  may  not  act.25  Mass  protests, 
especially by educated people, tend to erupt 
when bleak prospects for economic opportu-
nities lower the opportunity cost of engaging 
in  political  activity.  These  “effort- intensive 
forms  of  political  participation”26  are  then 
easily coordinated through new forms of mass 
communication.

Around  the  world  people  are  calling  on 
governments to become more accountable to 
citizens and to expand public opportunities to 
influence policymaking. Such transformations 
have taken place in the past. For example, Karl 
Polanyi documented the Great Transformation 
of  1944,  where  governments  in  the  North 

around the world 
people are calling on 
governments to become 
more accountable to 
citizens and to expand 
public opportunities to 
influence policymaking

FIGuRe 4.3

At each HDI level, some countries have greater carbon productivity than others

Carbon productivity, 2008 (PPP $ per kilogram)

40

30

20

10

0

0.275

0.375

0.475

0.575

0.675

0.775

0.875

0.975

HDI

Low HDI

Medium HDI

High HDI

Very high HDI

Note: Carbon productivity is GDP per unit of carbon dioxide. PPP is purchasing power parity.
Source: HDRO calculations based on World Bank (2012a).

94    |    HUMAN DEvELOPMENT REPORT 2013

responded to demands from civil society and 
labour unions to regulate the market and ex-
tend social protection so that the market served 
society rather than society being subservient to 
the  market.27  Many  governments  introduced 
regulations to constrain the activities of firms 
and  improve  working  conditions  and  ex-
tended  social  services  and  social  protection. 
Governments also assumed power over macro-
economic policy and introduced some restric-
tions on international trade. The time may be 
right again for a transformation, appropriate 
for 21st century concerns and conditions.28

Confronting environmental pressures

A major challenge for the world is to reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions. While it might seem 
that carbon productivity (GDP per unit of car-
bon dioxide) would rise with human develop-
ment, the correlation is quite weak (figure 4.3). 
At each HDI level, some countries have greater 
carbon productivity than others.

Consider  medium  HDI  Guatemala  and 
Morocco,  countries  with  nearly  identical 
HDI values. Guatemala’s carbon productivity 
($5.00 per kilogram in purchasing power parity 
terms) is nearly twice that of Morocco ($2.60). 
Differences can be just as great among prov-
inces or states within countries, as in China.29 
These  findings  reinforce  the  arguments  that 
progress in human development need not wors-
en carbon use and that improved environmen-
tal policy can accompany human development.
To sustain progress in human development, 
far  more  attention  needs  to  be  paid  to  the 
impact human beings are having on the envi-
ronment. The goal is high human development 
and a low ecological footprint per capita (the 
lower right quadrant of figure 1.7 in chapter 1). 
Only  a  few  countries  come  close  to  creating 
such  a  globally  reproducible  high  level  of 
human development without exerting unsus-
tainable  pressure  on  the  planet’s  ecological 
resources. Meeting this challenge on a global 
scale requires that all countries adjust their de-
velopment pathway: developed countries will 
need to reduce their ecological footprint, while 
developing  countries  will  need  to  raise  their 
HDI value without increasing their ecological 
footprint.  Innovative  clean  technologies  will 
pay an important part in this.

While environmental threats such as climate 
change, deforestation, air and water pollution, 
and natural disasters affect everyone, they hurt 
poor  countries  and  poor  communities  most. 
Climate change is already exacerbating chronic 
environmental  threats,  and  ecosystem  losses 
are  constraining  livelihood  opportunities, 
especially  for  poor  people.  A  clean  and  safe 
environment  should  be  seen  as  a  right,  not 
a  privilege.  The  2011  Human  Development 
Report highlighted that equity and sustainabil-
ity are inextricably linked. Sustainable societies 
need policies and structural changes that align 
human development and climate change goals 
through low-emission, climate-resilient strat-
egies and innovative public-private financing 
mechanisms.30

Most disadvantaged people contribute little 
to  global  environmental  deterioration,  but 
they often bear the brunt of its impacts.31 For 
example, although low HDI countries contrib-
ute the least to global climate change, they are 
likely to experience the greatest loss in annual 
rainfall and the sharpest increases in its varia-
bility,  with  dire  implications  for  agricultural 
production and livelihoods. The magnitude of 
such losses highlights the urgency of adopting 
coping measures to increase people’s resilience 
to global climate change.32

Natural  disasters,  which  are  increasing  in 
frequency and intensity, cause enormous eco-
nomic damage and loss of human capabilities. 
In 2011 alone, natural disasters accompanying 
earthquakes (tsunamis, landslides and ground 
settlements)  resulted  in  more  than  20,000 
deaths  and  damages  totalling  $365  billion, 
including  loss  of  homes  for  about  a  million 
people.33 The impact has been severe for small 
island developing states, some of which have 
incurred losses of 1% of GDP—and some as 
much as 8% or even multiples of their GDP. 
St. Lucia, for example, lost almost four times 
its  GDP  in  1988  from  Hurricane  Gilbert, 
and Granada lost twice its GDP in 2004 from 
Hurricane Ivan.34

The  2011 Human  Development  Report  ex-
amined  several  environmental  scenarios.  The 
“environmental  challenge”  scenario  factored 
in  the  anticipated  adverse  effects  of  global 
warming on agricultural production, access to 
clean water and improved sanitation, and pol-
lution. Under this scenario, the average global 

HDI value would be 8% lower by 2050 than 
under the “base case” scenario, which assumes 
a continuation but not a worsening of current 
environmental trends. Most dramatically, the 
average regional HDI value in both South Asia 
and Sub-Saharan Africa would be 12% lower 
under  the  environmental  challenge  scenario 
than  under  the  base  case  scenario.  Under  a 
more severe “environmental disaster” scenario, 
the global HDI value in 2050 would fall 15% 
below that under the baseline scenario—22% 
below in South Asia and 24% below in Sub-
Saharan  Africa,  effectively  halting  or  even 
reversing decades of human development pro-
gress in both regions.

This  Report  looks  more  specifically  at  the 
impact  of  these  environmental  scenarios  on 
the number of people living in extreme income 
poverty  (figure  4.4).  Some  3.1  billion  more 
people would live in extreme income poverty in 
2050 under the environmental disaster  scenario 
than  under  the  accelerated  progress  scenario 
(table  4.3).  Under  the  base  case  scenario,  by 
contrast,  the  number  of  people  in  extreme 
income  poverty  worldwide  would  decline 
by 2050.

Some 2.7 billion more people would live in 
extreme  income  poverty  under  the  environ-
mental disaster scenario than under the base 
case scenario, a consequence of two interrelated 
factors. First, the model shows an increase of 
1.9 billion people in extreme income poverty 
due  to  environmental  degradation.  Second, 
environmental  calamities  would  keep  some 
800 million poor people from rising out of ex-
treme income poverty, as they would otherwise 
have  done  under  the  base  case  scenario  (see 
Technical appendix).

These  outcomes  underscore  a  central  mes-
sage of this Report: environmental threats are 
among the most grave impediments to lifting 
human development, and their consequences 
for  poverty  are  likely  to  be  high.  The  longer 
action is delayed, the higher the cost will be.

Some 3.1 billion more 
people would live 
in extreme income 
poverty in 2050 under 
an environmental 
disaster scenario than 
under the accelerated 
progress scenario

Managing demographic change

Between  1970  and  2011,  the  world  popu-
lation  swelled  from  3.6  billion  to  7  billion. 
Development prospects are influenced by the 
age structure of the population, as well as its 
size.35  Declining  fertility  rates  and  shifts  in 

Chapter 4  Sustaining momentum    |    95

FIGuRe 4.4

Different environmental scenarios have different impacts on extreme poverty

Sub-Saharan Africa

Population in extreme poverty (millions)
1,200

South Asia

Population in extreme poverty (millions)
1,200

1,000

800

600

400

200

0

Environmental 
disaster 
scenario

Base case 
scenario

1,000

800

600

400

200

0

Environmental 
disaster 
scenario

Base case 
scenario

2010

2020

2030

2040

2050

2010

2020

2030

2040

2050

Note: Extreme poverty is defined as $1.25 a day in purchasing power parity terms. See Technical appendix for a discussion of the base case and fast track scenarios.
Source: HDRO calculations based on Pardee Center for International Futures (2013).

taBle 4.3

Population in extreme poverty under the environmental disaster scenario, by region, 2010–2050 (millions)

Difference

Region

Arab States

East Asia and the Pacific

Europe and Central Asia

Latin America and the Caribbean

South Asia

Sub-Saharan Africa

World

2010

2020

2030

2040

2050

Increase, 
2010–2050

25

211

14

34

557

371

25

142

6

50

530

377

39

211

17

90

738

496

73

363

32

138

978

709

1,212

1,129

1,592

2,293

145

530

45

167

1,207

1,055

3,150

120

319

30

134

650

685

1,938

From 

base case 

scenario, 2050

From 

accelerated 

progress 

scenario, 2050

128

501

41

135

1,126

788

2,720

144

522

44

155

1,194

995

3,054

Note: Extreme poverty is defined as $1.25 a day in purchasing power parity terms. See Technical appendix for a discussion of the base case and fast track scenarios.
Source: HDRO calculations based on Pardee Center for International Futures (2013).

age structure can have considerable effects on 
economic growth.36 Over 1970–2010, the de-
pendency ratio (the ratio of younger and older 
people to the working-age population ages 15–
64)  declined  sharply  in  most   regions—most 
dramatically in East Asia and the Pacific, where 
it dropped 39.5%, followed by Latin America 
and the Caribbean and the Arab States, where 
it fell 34%.

Over 2010–2050, however, dependency ra-
tios are likely to rise in medium, high and very 
high HDI countries, particularly in developed 
countries and in East Asia and the Pacific. In 
poorer regions, such as South Asia and Sub-
Saharan Africa, dependency ratios will contin-
ue to fall, but more slowly.

Changing demography will profoundly affect 
most countries in the South in coming decades, 

96    |    HUMAN DEvELOPMENT REPORT 2013

but in very different ways. Some poorer coun-
tries will benefit from a demographic dividend 
as the share of the population in the workforce 
rises.37 Richer regions of the South, however, 
will confront the challenge of rising depend-
ency ratios, with ageing populations and full 
school enrolment mirrored by a decline in the 
number of people earning incomes.

In  the  long  term,  both  demographic  chal-
lenges can be mitigated by raising educational 
achievement.  First,  education  accelerates 
reductions  in  fertility  rates  where  they  are 
still high. Second, education can boost labour 
productivity in richer countries with smaller 
workforces.  At  the  same  time,  governments 
will need to foster job creation more actively to 
expand opportunities for productive employ-
ment for younger and older workers alike.

The  failure  of  economic  opportunity  and 
productivity  to  keep  pace  with  these  demo-
graphic changes can not only keep countries 
from  benefiting  from  the  demographic  divi-
dend, it can also threaten social stability, as seen 
in many countries in recent years.

Modelling demography 
and education

Demographic  trends  are  not  deterministic, 
however. They can be influenced, at least indi-
rectly, by education policies and sometimes by 
migration  policies.38  Effective  policy  options 
can  be  identified  by  modelling  demographic 
and  education  trends.39  Two  scenarios  for 
2010–2050 illustrate the impact of different 
policy  responses:  the  base  case  scenario,  in 
which enrolment ratios remain constant at each 
level of education, and a fast track scenario, in 
which  countries  with  the  lowest  initial  edu-
cation  levels  embrace  ambitious  education 
targets.40

The  dependency  ratio  is  an  increasingly 
critical concern. A high dependency ratio can 
impoverish a country and lead to reversals in 
human  development.  The  base  case  scenario 
projects a 9.7 percentage point decline in the 
dependency  ratio  over  2010–2050  for  low 
HDI countries, a 9 percentage point increase 
for medium HDI countries, a 15.2 percentage 
point increase for high HDI countries and a 
28.7  percentage  point  increase  for  very  high 

HDI  countries  (figure  4.5).  Under  the  fast 
track  scenario,  the  dependency  ratio  for  low 
HDI countries drops 21.1 percentage points 
over 2010–2050, more than twice the decrease 
under the base case scenario. The dependency 
ratio rises more slowly under the fast track sce-
nario than under the base case scenario for me-
dium HDI countries (6.1 percentage points) 
and  high  HDI  countries  (4.9  percentage 
points); however, this rise is less pronounced 
for very high HDI countries.

Under  the  base  case  scenario,  the  share  of 
the elderly in the population rises for all HDI 
groups:  3.9  percentage  points  for  low  HDI 
countries, 17.7 percentage points for medium 
HDI countries, 20.2 percentage points for high 
HDI countries and 22.3 percentage points for 
very high HDI countries.41 Over 2010–2050, 
the share of the young population is project-
ed  to  fall  in  all  HDI  groups.  For  low  HDI 
countries, the dependency ratio will decrease 
because the decline in the share of the young 
population is greater than the rise in the share 
of the elderly population.

In  the  Arab  States,  South  Asia  and  Sub-
Saharan Africa, the dependency ratio is pro-
jected to decline under the base case scenario 
and even faster under the fast track scenario. In 
Sub-Saharan Africa, for example, the depend-
ency ratio falls 11.8 percentage points under 
the  base  case  scenario  and  25.7  percentage 
points under the fast track scenario.

In  East  Asia  and  the  Pacific,  Europe  and 
Central  Asia,  and  Latin  America  and  the 
Caribbean, the dependency ratio is projected 
to increase. East Asia and the Pacific will see a 
striking increase in the share of the elderly—up 
25.8 percentage points, which is an even greater 
rise than in very high HDI countries.

Brazil and Chile demonstrate the potential 
for  ambitious  education  policies  to  alter  de-
pendency ratios. In Brazil, the dependency ra-
tio rises 15.6 percentage points under the base 
case scenario but only 10.8 percentage points 
under the fast track scenario (table 4.4). Chile 
would see a similar increase, 20.2 percentage 
points and 17.3 percentage points.

The challenges differ considerably by country 
under the two scenarios. Under the base case 
scenario, China would experience a more rapid 
increase  (27.3  percentage  points)  than,  say, 
Thailand (23.9 percentage points) or Indonesia 

Demographic trends 
are not deterministic. 
they can be influenced 
by education policies 
and sometimes by 
migration policies

Chapter 4  Sustaining momentum    |    97

FIGuRe 4.5

Education policies can alter dependency ratios

Low HDI

Medium HDI

Dependency ratio

Dependency ratio

0.95

0.85

0.75

0.65

0.55

0.45

0.95

0.85

0.75

0.65

0.55

0.45

Base case

Fast
track

1970

1990

2010

2030

2050

1970

1990

2010

2030

2050

High HDI

Very high HDI

Dependency ratio

Dependency ratio

0.95

0.85

0.75

0.65

0.55

0.45

0.95

0.85

0.75

0.65

0.55

0.45

Base case
Fast
track

1970

1990

2010

2030

2050

1970

1990

2010

2030

2050

Note: See Technical appendix for a discussion of the base case and fast track scenarios.
Source: HDRO calculations based on Lutz and KC (2013).

Base case
Fast
track

Base case
Fast
track

(8.7 percentage points), countries where even a 
more ambitious education policy would have 
only  a  limited  impact  on  dependency  ratios 
because education levels are already high.

Countries can respond to a declining labour 
force  in  various  ways.  They  can  reduce  un-
employment,  promote  labour  productivity 
and foster greater labour force participation, 
particularly among women and older workers. 
They can also outsource work to offshore pro-
duction and attract international migrants.42

Without  proper  policy  measures,  demo-
graphic  dynamics  can  increase  inequality  in 

the  short  run,  given  that  differences  in  the 
speed  of  the  demographic  transition  across 
households  give  richer  households  an  initial 
advantage. Declining fertility rates and shifts 
in age structures can affect economic growth.43 
Reinforcing  the  cross-country  analysis  con-
ducted for this Report, a recent study finds that 
youth dependency ratios tend to be higher for 
poor households and lower for wealthier ones, 
especially in Latin America and Sub-Saharan 
Africa, and that differences in youth depend-
ency  ratios  between  rich  and  poor  dissipate 
over time.44 During demographic transitions, 

98    |    HUMAN DEvELOPMENT REPORT 2013

taBle 4.4

Trends in dependency ratios, selected countries, 1970–2050

Country

1970

Bangladesh

0.929

1980

0.946

1990

0.859

2000

0.704

2010

Scenario

0.560

Brazil

Chile

China

0.846

0.724

0.656

0.540

0.480

0.811

0.629

0.564

0.540

0.457

0.773

0.685

0.514

0.481

0.382

Ghana

0.934

0.946

0.887

0.799

0.736

India

0.796

0.759

0.717

0.638

0.551

Indonesia

0.868

0.807

0.673

0.547

0.483

Thailand

0.904

0.756

0.532

0.447

0.417

Turkey

0.850

0.787

0.671

0.560

0.478

Base case

Fast track

Base case

Fast track

Base case

Fast track

Base case

Fast track

Base case

Fast track

Base case

Fast track

Base case

Fast track

Base case

Fast track

Base case

Fast track

2020

0.462

0.457

0.443

0.437

0.471

0.467

0.408

0.404

0.704

0.686

0.518

0.510

0.452

0.451

0.426

0.425

0.458

0.450

2030

0.434

0.422

0.484

0.460

0.549

0.531

0.450

0.434

0.656

0.595

0.496

0.474

0.457

0.454

0.488

0.484

0.467

0.443

2040

0.433

0.418

0.540

0.499

0.609

0.582

0.587

0.562

0.643

0.548

0.491

0.463

0.504

0.501

0.576

0.570

0.504

0.473

2050

0.481

0.465

0.637

0.589

0.659

0.630

0.655

0.628

0.645

0.532

0.511

0.480

0.571

0.567

0.656

0.650

0.585

0.547

Source: HDRO calculations based on Lutz and KC (2013). See Technical appendix for a discussion of the base case and fast track scenarios.

the wealthiest people tend to lead the decline 
in fertility, producing a short-term increase in 
income inequality as they capture the benefits 
of demographic change first. Then the middle 
class catches up as its members educate daugh-
ters and plan families, followed by the poor. 
Eventually fertility is lower across all income 
groups, and the economic benefits of the demo-
graphic dividend are spread more evenly.45 This 
is  consistent  with  previous  studies  for  Latin 
America and Africa.46

This  short-term  rise  in  inequality  is  not 
inevitable, however, and can be influenced by 
public  policies,  especially  in  education  and 
reproductive  health,  that  enable  the  benefits 
of  the  demographic  transition  to  reach  all 
income  groups  at  the  same  time.  Consider 
the three countries with the largest declines in 
child dependency ratios: Côte d’Ivoire (with a 
GDP per capita in 2011 of $1,800), Namibia 
($6,800) and Peru ($10,300). In Côte d’Ivoire, 
the dependency ratio fell most among the rich 

and least among the poor; in Namibia, it fell 
most in the middle of the income range; and 
in Peru, it fell across the board in roughly equal 
amounts.47 See box 4.2 for a discussion of the 
distribution of the benefits of the demographic 
dividend in China and Ghana.

In 13 of 18 countries with a declining de-
pendency  ratio  and  rising  female  education 
over  1970–2010,  rising  labour  productivity 
over  1980–2008  and  falling  unemployment 
over 2005–2010, the female labour participa-
tion rate grew faster than the overall labour par-
ticipation rate over 2000–2004 to 2005–2010, 
indicating greater gender balance in the labour 
market.  Employment,  however,  did  not  nec-
essarily become easier as education levels rose. 
Indeed, in some countries, the labour market 
situation  became  tighter  for  better  educated 
female workers. Additional policy measures are 
needed to promote labour market conditions 
that offer productive opportunities for a more 
qualified and expanded labour force.

Chapter 4  Sustaining momentum    |    99

Box 4.2

China and Ghana: who benefits from the demographic dividend?

The global trend towards slower population growth and population ageing 
is driven partly by China, the world’s most populous country, which is going 
through a demographic transition. For Sub-Saharan Africa, a fast track edu-
cation policy with incremental enrolment gains could accelerate the demo-
graphic transition and generate a demographic dividend for the region. The 
cases of China and Ghana illustrate what can happen.

China
In 1970, youth constituted the largest share of China’s population, resulting in 
a high dependency ratio of 0.770, with 1.08 boys for each girl among infants 
ages 0–4 (figure 1). By 2010, China’s population pyramid looked completely dif-
ferent. As fertility rates fell, the share of the working-age population rose faster 
than the share of the youth population, lowering the dependency ratio to 0.382. 
The gender imbalance became more pronounced among infants, with 1.18 boys 
for each girl. The productive-age population (ages 35–50), currently the largest 
population share, will reach retirement in 15–25 years. By 2030, China will thus 
face the challenge of an ageing population, putting more pressure on the social 
sector and raising the dependency ratio. At retirement, this cohort will have a 
higher educational attainment than its predecessors 40 years ago.

Under the fast track scenario, with strong education policies, the age struc-
ture of China’s population in 2050 will be transformed, with the population ages 
60–64 becoming the largest cohort. The education level of the working-age 
group will rise considerably, contributing to a more productive workforce. A 
more skilled and productive workforce could offset some of the negative effects 
of a high dependency ratio and a large share of older people. In this scenario, 
the ratio of boys to girls will fall to 1.06, close to the global average.

Ghana
In  1970,  Ghana  had  a  population  of  8.7  million.  The  largest  share  of  the 
population was young people, resulting in a high dependency ratio (0.934). 
The share of the population without formal education was also high, es-
pecially among women. By 2010, Ghana’s population had nearly tripled, to 
24.4 million. Its age structure had changed little, although improvements in 
life expectancy rounded out the middle of the pyramid. The youth popula-
tion, though smaller than in 1970, remained large, and the dependency ratio 
was still high, at 0.736. Education levels, however, had improved consider-
ably, and the share of people with primary and secondary education had 
increased.

Ghana’s  prospects  for  2050  differ  markedly  under  the  two  education 
policy scenarios. In the base case, which assumes constant enrolment ratios 
over 2010–2050, Ghana’s population pyramid would remain triangular, with 
a large share of young people and a high dependency ratio (0.645; figure 2). 
The population is projected to reach 65.6 million in the base case scenario, 
but just 48.2 million in the fast track scenario.

Under the fast track scenario, the demographic outlook would change 
considerably as falling fertility rates lower the dependency ratio to 0.532, 
mainly because of the decrease of the youth as a share of Ghana’s total 
population. The share of working-age people with no education would also 
fall, implying a rise in productivity and improved capacity for benefiting from 
the demographic dividend, provided that job creation matches the labour 
supply of these new cohorts.

Figure 1  Demographic prospects for China

Figure 2  Demographic prospects for Ghana

Age
100+

90

75

60

45

30

15

0

2010

2050

70 60 50 40 30 20 10
Men (millions)

0

10 20 30 40 50 60 70
Women (millions)

70 60 50 40 30 20 10
Men (millions)

0

10 20 30 40 50 60 70
Women (millions)
Tertiary education

Ages 0–14

No education

Primary education

Secondary education

Age
100+

90

75

60

45

30

15

0

2050, base case scenario

2050, fast track scenario

35 30 25 20 15 10
Men (millions)

5

5

10 15 20 25 30 35
Women (millions)

35 30 25 20 15 10
Men (millions)

5

0

5

10 15 20 25 30 35
Women (millions)

Ages 0–14

No education

Primary education

Secondary education

Tertiary education

Source: Lutz and KC 2013. See Technical appendix for a discussion of the base case and fast track 
scenarios.

Source: Lutz and KC 2013. See Technical appendix for a discussion of the base case and fast track 
scenarios.

Impact of the rate of 
population ageing

Populations are ageing faster than in the past, 
as  fertility  rates  decline  and  life  expectancy 
rises.48 For example, for the share of the elderly 
population  to  double  from  7%  to  14%  took 

more than a century (from 1865 to 1980) in 
France, 85 years in Sweden, 83 in Australia and 
69 in the United States. Ageing is progressing 
faster still in developing countries. In eight of a 
sample of nine developing countries, the share 
of the elderly population is projected to reach 
14% in 30 years or less (figure 4.6). The only 

100    |    HUMAN DEvELOPMENT REPORT 2013

exception is Ghana, where it is expected to take 
50 years or more.

The  rate  of  population  ageing  matters  be-
cause if developing countries are still poor after 
the demographic transition, they will struggle 
to meet the needs of an older population. Many 
developing countries have only a brief window 
of opportunity to reap the full benefits of the 
demographic dividend of a larger working-age 
population.49

The need for ambitious policies

To accelerate and sustain development progress, 
countries  need  to  adopt  ambitious  policies 
that expand women’s education and that have 
cross-cutting benefits for human development. 
Timing is critical. Countries that act promptly 
to take advantage of the demographic dividend 
and avoid further environmental damage can 
reap substantial gains. Countries that do not 
could face high costs that would be compound-
ed over time.

The importance of bold, prompt policy ac-
tion can be demonstrated through two more 
scenarios that show the impact of different pol-
icy measures on projected HDI and its compo-
nents in 2050. The base case scenario assumes 
continuity with historical trends and policies 
in  recent  decades.  The  accelerated  progress 
scenario sets some of the choices and targets 
along 12 policy dimensions for aggressive but 
reasonable  interventions  to  reduce  poverty, 
expand infrastructure and improve governance. 
Examples of ambitious targets are a doubling of 
lending by international financial institutions 
over 10 years, a 50% increase in migration over 
20 years,50 a 20% increase in health spending 
over 10 years, a 20% expansion in infrastruc-
ture over 30 years and a 20% improvement in 
governance over 10 years.

The projections of the base case scenario are 
fairly optimistic in that they carry forward the 
momentum of advances over recent decades, 
including  dramatic  improvements  in  human 
development. Countries do much better under 
the accelerated progress scenario, with progress 
most rapid in low HDI countries (figure 4.7). 
Aggregate  HDI  rises  52%  in  Sub-Saharan 
Africa  (from  0.402  to  0.612)  and  36%  in 
South Asia (from 0.527 to 0.714). Low HDI 

FIGuRe 4.6

Populations are ageing more rapidly in developing 
countries

Bangladesh

2030–2050

Brazil

Chile

China

Ghana

India

2010–2035

2000–2025

2000–2030

2025–2055

Indonesia

2025–2040

Thailand

Turkey

2005–2025

2020–2040

2050–2100+

0

10

20

30

40

50

Years until share of population
ages 65 and older reaches 14%

Source: HDRO calculations based on Lutz and KC (2013). See Technical 
appendix for a discussion of the base case and fast track scenarios.

FIGuRe 4.7

Human development prospects for 2050 are 
greater under the accelerated progress scenario, 
especially for low HDI countries

Very high HDI

High HDI

Medium HDI

Low HDI

World 

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1.0

Projected HDI in 2050

Base case

Accelerated progress

Note: See Technical appendix for a definition of the base case and accelerated 
progress scenarios.
Source: HDRO calculations based on Pardee Center for International Futures 
(2013).

Chapter 4  Sustaining momentum    |    101

countries thus converge towards the levels of 
human development achieved by high and very 
high HDI countries.

Ambitious,  fully  integrated  policies  can 
thus  provide  strong  leverage  for  advancing 
human development (figure 4.8). The effects 
are strongest for Sub-Saharan Africa and South 
Asia,  followed  by  the  Arab  States  and  Latin 
America and the Caribbean. The impacts are 
weaker in Europe and Central Asia and in East 
Asia and the Pacific.

Across all regions, the greatest impacts result 
from policy interventions in health and educa-
tion. In Sub-Saharan Africa, for example, am-
bitious policies raise HDI value in 2050 from 
0.612 under the base case scenario to 0.651. 
In  most  regions,  improving  governance  has 
the next greatest impact through progress on 
reducing corruption, strengthening democratic 
institutions and empowering women. In South 
Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa, however, infra-
structure investment is even more important.

FIGuRe 4.8

Human development outcomes through 2050 improve more under the accelerated 
progress scenario

Accelerated
progress scenario:
very high HDI 
countries

Base case scenario:
very high HDI 
countries

Accelerated
progress scenario:
low, medium and 
high HDI countries

Base case scenario:
low, medium and 
high HDI countries

HDI

1.00

0.95

0.90

0.85

0.80

0.75

0.70

0.65

0.60

0.55

The two scenarios show notable differences 
in the individual dimensions of the HDI. In 
Sub-Saharan Africa, life expectancy rises from 
53.7 years in 2010 to 69.4 in 2050 under the 
base  case  scenario,  partly  in  response  to  sus-
tained progress against HIV/AIDS and other 
communicable diseases, but to 72.9 under the 
accelerated progress scenario. Over the same 
period, the average years of formal education in 
Sub-Saharan Africa are projected to rise from 
4.3 to 6.7 under the base case scenario, but to 
8.1 under the accelerated progress scenario.

The  gains  under  the  accelerated  progress 
scenario are even larger for GDP per capita (fig-
ure 4.9). This is true for all HDI groups, where 
differences across scenarios are considerable in 
both  cases.  Globally,  GDP  per  capita  would 
rise from $8,770 in 2010 to $17,873 in 2050 
under the base case scenario and to $27,995 
under  the  accelerated  progress  scenario.  The 
largest  differential  gains  would  be  in  Sub-
Saharan Africa and South Asia. In Sub-Saharan 
Africa, GDP per capita would rise from $1,769 
in 2010 to $5,730 in 2050 under the base case 
scenario and to an impressive $13,210 under 
the accelerated progress scenario—more than 
double the level under the base case scenario. 
Under the accelerated progress scenario, South 
Asia would see a stunning rise from $2,871 to 
$23,661.

The differential rise in income directly influ-
ences poverty reduction. Under the base case 
scenario, income poverty almost disappears in 
China but decreases only marginally in Sub-
Saharan Africa, as the population continues to 
grow, and remains high in India, which would 
still have more than 130 million poor people in 
2030. Under the accelerated progress scenario, 
the  number  of  poor  people  falls  much  more 
rapidly, nearly disappearing in some countries 
and regions (table 4.5).

Substantially reducing poverty by 2050 de-
pends on ambitious policy measures. Failing to 
act boldly to avert the environmental disaster 
scenario, for instance, would severely inhibit 
poverty reduction.

2010

2015

2020

2025

2030

2035

2040

2045

2050

Seizing the moment

Note: See Technical appendix for a definition of the base case and accelerated progress scenarios.
Source: HDRO calculations based on Pardee Center for International Futures (2013).

102    |    HUMAN DEvELOPMENT REPORT 2013

Greater  progress  in  human  development  is 
both possible and imperative. But accelerating 

progress  will  require  coordinated  policy 
measures  across  development  fronts.  One  of 
the most important of these is equity, because 
more- equitable  societies  fare  better  in  most 
aspects of well-being and are more sustainable. 
Another  is  reducing  child  mortality:  rapid 
progress  is  possible  in  all  countries  through 
education, particularly of women.

Policies  also  need  to  consider  other  forces 
that will influence development, especially peo-
ple’s meaningful participation in the processes 
that shape their lives. Demand for participation 
grows  as  people  become  more  educated  and 
more connected. Other major issues are envi-
ronmental and demographic change; countries 
need  to  act  during  brief  windows  of  oppor-
tunity to avoid high costs in forgone human 
development.

Most of the opportunities for sustaining and 
even  accelerating  the  momentum  in  human 
development lie in the hands of national gov-
ernments. In an increasingly globalized world, 
however, governments do not act alone. The 
final chapter considers the complex web of in-
ternational arrangements with which national 
governments need to engage and how regional 
and global institutions can work more effec-
tively for sustainable human development.

FIGuRe 4.9

Advances in GDP per capita through 2050 are especially strong under the accelerated 
progress scenario

GDP per capita (2000 PPP $ thousands)

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

Accelerated
progress scenario:
very high HDI countries

Base case scenario:
very high HDI countries

Accelerated
progress scenario:
low, medium and 
high HDI countries

Base case scenario:
low, medium and 
high HDI countries

2010

2015

2020

2025

2030

2035

2040

2045

2050

Note: See Technical appendix for a definition of the base case and accelerated progress scenarios.
Source: HDRO calculations based on Pardee Center for International Futures (2013).

taBle 4.5

Number of people in extreme poverty by region and selected countries, base case and accelerated 
progress scenarios, 2010–2050 (millions)

Region or country

Arab States

East Asia and the Pacific

China

Europe and Central Asia

Latin America and the Caribbean

South Asia

India

Sub-Saharan Africa

World

2010

25

211

94

14

34

557

416

371

1,212

2020

2030

2040

2050,

base case

19

74

13

2

29

382

270

333

841

17

42

5

3

26

243

134

297

627

16

29

1

3

27

135

53

275

485

17

29

1

4

32

81

21

267

430

2050,

accelerated 

progress

1

9

0

1

13

13

2

60

96

Note: Extreme poverty is defined as $1.25 a day in purchasing power parity terms. See Technical appendix for a discussion of the base case and fast track 
scenarios.
Source: HDRO calculations based on Pardee Center for International Futures (2013).

Chapter 4  Sustaining momentum    |    103

“Let us join hands to try to 
create a peaceful world where 
we can sleep in security 
and wake in happiness.”

Aung San Suu Kyi

“The forces that unite us are 
intrinsic and greater than 
the superimposed influences 
that keep us apart.”

Kwame Nkrumah

5.
Governance and partnerships 
for a new era

Today’s systems for international development and global governance are a mosaic of old structures and new arrange-
ments. The rise of the South will make these systems more diverse: international cooperation is likely to involve an even 
more complex web of bilateral, regional and global processes. All these structures, however, will need to work better in 
concert —particularly for the provision of public goods. Duplication of effort and failure to agree on common norms and 
goals are not just inefficient, but potentially counterproductive, setting back human progress. It is vital to strengthen both 
global and regional organizations while extending representation and accountability to a wider group of states and stake-
holders to reflect the emergence of these new forces. This chapter considers options and offers conclusions for this new 
era of partnership.

Countries of the South have been developing 
rapidly, and many are much more actively en-
gaged on the world stage. They have been pur-
suing their individual and collective interests 
through a variety of channels, particularly re-
gional arrangements and bilateral partnerships 
that permit them to engage on issues of their 
choosing, often very much on their own terms. 
Brazil, China, India and other emerging econo-
mies have forged deeper and stronger economic 
relations with their neighbours and across the 
developing world: they are rapidly expanding 
their  global  markets  and  production;  they 
have presented innovative complements to the 
Bretton Woods financing institutions; they are 
increasingly influential in global regulation of 
trade, money and finance; and they are influ-
encing culture, science, the environment, peace 
and security.

The  new  arrangements  promoted  by  the 
South and the resulting pluralism are challeng-
ing existing institutions and processes in the tra-
ditional domains of multilateralism—finance, 
trade,  investment  and  health—sometimes 
directly and sometimes indirectly through alter-
native regional and subregional systems. Global 
and regional governance is becoming a multi-
faceted combination of new arrangements and 
old structures that need collective nurturing in 
multiple ways. Reforms in global institutions 
must be complemented by stronger cooperation 
with regional institutions—and in some cases 
broader  mandates  for  those  regional  institu-
tions. The accountability of organizations must 
be extended to a wider group of countries, as 
well as to a wider group of stakeholders. In some 

respects,  progress  has  become  more  difficult. 
Country groups are in flux, their coordination 
mechanisms have become increasingly unwieldy 
and in many cases deliberations among groups 
have  come  to  a  near  standstill.1  The  growing 
diversity of voices in international governance 
thus brings both opportunities and challenges 
for human development.

At the same time, there are signs of a more di-
verse global civil society.2 New voices from the 
South are calling for more accountability and 
broader  representation.  Civil  society  organi-
zations  have  already  influenced  global  trans-
parency and rule setting on aid, debt, human 
rights, health and climate change. Civil society 
networks can now take advantage of new me-
dia and new communications technologies that 
make it easier to establish links between local 
and transnational activists and allow people to 
share ideas and concerns and to generate collec-
tive perspectives in a global public sphere.

In an interconnected world, every country’s 
actions  have  implications  for  its  neighbours 
and, ultimately, for people everywhere, today 
and in the future. Responsible sovereignty re-
quires carefully and conscientiously taking into 
account the global and regional consequences 
of national behaviour.

Some  major  challenges  can  be  addressed 
constructively at the regional or bilateral level, 
including  regional  trade  and  security  issues. 
But  these  issues  also  require  longer  term  in-
ternational solutions. The continuing impasse 
in  negotiations  at  the  Doha  World  Trade 
Organization (WTO) round impedes progress 
towards  agricultural  self-sufficiency  and  the 

Chapter 5  Governance and partnerships for a new era    |    105

areas of global 
international concern 
meriting urgent attention 
include trade, migration, 
climate change and 
development. each 
area, along with its 
governance, has been 
significantly altered by 
the rise of the South

eradication  of  poverty  and  hunger  in  Africa 
and elsewhere in the developing world. Other 
urgent issues such as climate change can be re-
solved only globally, and failing to act on them 
collectively today will make them even more 
acute and costly in the future.

A new global view of public goods

This changing world has profound implications 
for the provision of public goods such as clean 
air and other shared resources that the market 
alone produces or allocates insufficiently or not 
at all and for which state mechanisms are es-
sential.3 Desirable global public goods include 
a stable climate and a healthy global commons. 
They  require  rules  for  more  stable  financial 
markets,  progress  on  trade  reforms  (such  as 
those  involved  in  the  Doha  round  of  trade 
negotiations) and mechanisms to finance and 
produce green technologies.

To  that  end,  we  need  to  rethink  what  is 
public and what is private, what is best pro-
vided unilaterally and what multilaterally, and, 
importantly,  when  taking  collective  action, 

what our respective responsibilities are. Public 
provision of goods is important at the national 
and global levels, but coexistence of the public 
and the private is inevitable (box 5.1). For ex-
ample, in responding to climate change and the 
depletion of natural resources such as coal, oil 
and water, governments have partnered with 
the private sector to invest in research and de-
velopment for alternative sources of energy.

Areas of global international concern merit-
ing urgent attention and cooperation include 
trade,  migration,  climate  change  and  devel-
opment. Each area, along with its governance, 
has been significantly altered by the rise of the 
South. At the same time, the new position of 
the South presents opportunities for agreement 
and improved cooperation.

trade

Countries throughout the South would ben-
efit  from  the  completion  of  the  far-reaching 
international trade agreements envisioned by 
the  Doha  development  round  of  the  WTO. 
However,  the  Doha  round  remains  stalled 
while an increasingly complex web of bilateral 

Box 5.1

The shifting line between public and private in transportation

Whether mass transportation is provided publicly or privately has an impor-
tant bearing on shared development goals of sustainability and affordable 
access. A society more concerned with equitable outcomes is more likely to 
provide greater amounts of public transportation. Cost savings from econo-
mies of scale are passed on to the public in the form of relatively cheap 
access to public transportation. In more egalitarian societies, low-earning 
groups, including students, the elderly and the disabled, are likely to receive 
further discounts and subsidies. The idea is to reduce the excludability of 
transportation services.

Mass public transport can minimize the congestion and carbon emis-
sions  from  vehicles  traditionally  associated  with  private  transportation. 
When a sizeable public transportation system already exists, it can be more 
amenable to the quick introduction of greener technologies. For example, 
New Delhi mandates the use of compressed natural gas in public buses, a 
much greener fuel than gasoline (the buses are run by both the public and 
the private sectors).

Environmentally conscious societies tend to incentivize the use of public 
over private transport through congestion and carbon taxes on private ve-
hicles, as in London, Milan and Singapore (and considered by San Francisco). 
Making public transportation affordable is not the only challenge. Because 

more-affluent  people  generally  prefer  private  transport,  the  answer  is  to 
make public transport less of an inferior good by ensuring safety, efficiency 
and reliability.

Public-private partnerships could be one way forward. They tend to result 
in more efficient construction and operation of projects. The public partner 
safeguards  property  rights,  provides  the  regulatory  framework  and  some-
times uses subsidies to meet the gap between private and social returns.

Most railway projects in Latin America and the Caribbean have been 
implemented through public-private partnerships. India has one of the most 
rapidly expanding public-private partnership programmes in transport; be-
tween 1995 and 2006, about 230 public-private partnership projects costing 
$15.8  billion  were  implemented.  China  has  extensively  used  the  build- 
operate- transfer model of public-private partnerships for toll roads and other 
infrastructure, especially since the 2000s.

Spurred by increasing gas prices, private companies are likely to conduct 
research on greener fuels and technologies on their own account. However, 
public funding and incentives are also required to ensure socially optimal 
levels of research into greener fuels and technologies. Indeed, green tech-
nological breakthroughs are one of the most essential global public goods 
and must remain in the public domain.

Source: World Bank 2003, n.d.; Cheng, Hu and Zhao 2009.

106    |    HUMAN DEvELOPMENT REPORT 2013

With the rise of the 
South, migration patterns 
are changing. Nearly 
half of remittances sent 
home to countries in 
the South come from 
emigrant workers in other 
developing countries

and regional trade arrangements has developed. 
These arrangements, involving fewer and some-
times  more-homogeneous  players,  can  align 
interests  and  realize  mutual  gains  for  those 
engaged, without the deadlock encountered at 
the multilateral level.

Subregional  trade  and  investment  groups, 
such  as  the  Economic  Community  of  West 
Africa  States  and  the  Common  Market  of 
the  South,  have  facilitated  greater  economic 
interaction  and  policy  cooperation  in  other 
areas as well, from security to water resource 
management.  These  bilateral  and  regional 
arrangements  offer  opportunities  for  further 
South–South economic integration and pro-
vide a training ground for building competitive 
strengths.4

Still, despite the benefits of bilateral and re-
gional trade agreements, without better global 
trade rules and coordinating mechanisms there 
are  considerable  efficiency  costs.  While  en-
couraging freer trade among members, trading 
blocs tend to erect barriers to free trade with 
each other, ultimately reducing global welfare.5 
Other  efficiency  losses  can  result  from  the 
increased market power that countries gain by 
consolidating into trading blocs.6 As research 
for this Report has shown, freer and fairer trade 
rules can accelerate human development when 
coupled with sustained public investment in 
human capabilities—including health, educa-
tion  and  other  social  services—and  essential 
infrastructure—such as modern transportation 
and telecommunications links.

Many aspects of a freer, nondiscriminatory 
trade regime are best overseen by a stronger, 
reinvigorated  set  of  multilateral  agreements, 
but since regionalism may be here to stay, one 
way forward is to gradually “multilateralize re-
gionalism”. This would involve the WTO’s ini-
tiating “soft-law” ideas, such as the negotiation 
of voluntary best-practice guidelines for new 
regional  trade  agreements  and  modifications 
of existing ones: the WTO could, for example, 
organize a hierarchy of guidelines for North–
North,  North–South  and  South–South  re-
gional trade agreements.7

Migration

In 2010, at least 25 economies of the South 
reported  remittance  inflows  from  migrants 

exceeding  10%  of  GDP.  Yet  governance  of 
migration is largely unilateral, by destination 
countries  or  bilateral.  There  are  few  mecha-
nisms for multilateral coordination.8 Real hu-
man development concerns are at stake, most 
importantly, the rights of migrants. While re-
mittances provide income for poor households, 
social upheaval and disruption also come with 
large-scale migration. Multilateral mechanisms 
could  liberalize  and  simplify  channels  that 
allow people to seek work abroad, ensure basic 
rights for migrants, reduce transaction costs as-
sociated with migration and improve outcomes 
for  migrants  and  destination  communities 
alike.9

With the rise of the South, migration pat-
terns are changing. Nearly half of remittances 
sent home to countries in the South come from 
emigrant  workers  in  other  developing  coun-
tries.  In  recent  years,  regional  organizations 
and economic integration processes have added 
migration to their agendas. These include the 
Association  of  Southeast  Asian  Nations,  the 
African  Union,  the  Common  Market  of  the 
South and the Southern African Development 
Community.10 In 2012, the Global Forum on 
Migration and Development held discussions 
on South–South migration for the first time.

While  the  governance  of  migration  is  not 
inevitably  or  exclusively  a  multilateral  issue, 
international coordination mechanisms could 
provide a supporting framework for the emerg-
ing networks of regional and bilateral agree-
ments. The beneficial impact of these dialogues 
could  be  multiplied  by  global  initiatives  on 
migration issues.

With  the  continuing  growth  in  annual 
international  migration—from  an  estimated 
70  million  four  decades  ago  to  more  than 
200  million  today,  originating  largely  from 
the South—there is a growing need for rules 
to protect the rights of migrants and provide 
agreed international norms for the flow of im-
migrants between source and host countries.11 
Such  rules  would  benefit  all  parties,  in  both 
economic and social terms, while the costs of 
inaction will continue to mount. These costs 
are not solely or even primarily financial: they 
include the profound human costs of forcibly 
prolonged family separation, all-too-common 
mistreatment in the workplace and the unnec-
essary and indefensible degradation of human 

Chapter 5  Governance and partnerships for a new era    |    107

dignity when foreign resident workers are not 
accorded basic legal rights.

Climate change

Climate  change  is  perhaps  the  most  widely 
recognized issue that requires global cooper-
ation  through  multilateral  agreements.  The 
South is going beyond bilateral approaches by 
incorporating  ways  to  tackle  climate  change 
into  national  development  strategies.  China 
has  pledged  to  reduce  its  carbon  intensity 
(carbon dioxide emissions per unit of GDP) 
40%–45% from 2005 levels by 2020.12 In 2010, 
India announced voluntary targeted reductions 
of 20%–25% in carbon intensity.13 Korean law-
makers approved a national emissions trading 
programme in March 2012 to reduce emissions 
from factories and power plants.14 At the UN 
Conference  on  Sustainable  Development 
in  Rio  de  Janeiro  in  2012,  Mozambique  an-
nounced  a  new  Green  Economy  Roadmap. 
And Mexico recently enacted the world’s first 
comprehensive climate change law, aiming to 
cut emissions and build the renewable energy 
sector.15

Addressing  climate  change  requires  true 
multilateralism. For example, to reduce global 
greenhouse emissions by the amount required, 
the North and the South have to reach a mu-
tually acceptable and fair agreement on how 
to  share  responsibilities  while  ensuring  that 
the legitimate development aspirations of the 
South can be met.

The  2012  UN  Conference  on  Sustainable 
Development in Rio de Janeiro created oppor-
tunities for collaboration and alliances among 
groups of rich and poor; public and private; 
and civil, corporate and state bodies. For ex-
ample, Unilever, Coca-Cola and Walmart were 
among  20  large  multinational  corporations 
that committed, through the Consumer Goods 
Forum,  to  eliminating  deforestation  from 
their  supply  chains.16  Microsoft  promised  to 
go carbon-neutral by 2012. And FEMSA, the 
Latin American soft drink bottler, said it would 
obtain 85% of its energy needs in Mexico from 
renewable resources.17 Despite many promising 
initiatives though, a wide gap remains between 
the emissions reductions needed, on the one 
hand, and the modest reductions promised, on 
the other.

addressing climate 
change requires true 
multilateralism

108    |    HUMAN DEvELOPMENT REPORT 2013

Development cooperation

An  essential  component  of  more-inclusive 
international  governance  should  be  more- 
inclusive and more- effective forms of develop-
ment  cooperation.  Developing  countries  are 
increasingly providing development assistance 
and  investment  bilaterally  and  regionally, 
through new financing arrangements and tech-
nological  cooperation  that  offer  alternatives 
to  or  complement  the  approaches  of  tradi-
tional donors and strengthen choices for aid 
recipients.

In  2011,  developing  countries  and  civil 
society  organizations  endorsed  the  Busan 
Partnership  for  Effective  Development  Co-
operation  at  the  4th  High  Level  Forum  on 
Aid Effectiveness in Busan, Republic of Korea. 
Ownership, focus on results, inclusive develop-
ment partnerships, mutual accountability and 
transparency were selected as the underlying 
pillars for a new global monitoring framework. 
Stronger emphasis was placed on country sys-
tems as the way of doing business, coupled with 
a  demand  on  behalf  of  partner  countries  to 
explain any deviance. Traditional Organisation 
for Economic Co-operation and Development 
(OECD)  donors  recognized  that  a  different 
governance structure would be needed to sup-
port a broader partnership and accommodate 
emerging economies.18 Based on the core prin-
ciples of national ownership and capacity, this 
partnership  would  establish  an  international 
governing mechanism and indicators for assess-
ing progress.

Along  with  traditional  donors,  new  de-
velopment  partners,  including  Brazil,  China 
and India, endorsed the principles of national 
ownership and capacity building. However, the 
Busan Declaration noted that these partners 
have domestic development challenges of their 
own  and  have  their  established  methods  of 
foreign cooperation. This was reflected in the 
text of the declaration, which stated that for 
these countries the “principles, commitments 
and actions agreed in Busan shall be the ref-
erence for south-south partnerships on a vol-
untary basis”.19 Moving forward, the OECD’s 
Development Assistance Committee and the 
United Nations Development Programme are 
to jointly support the new Global Partnership 
for  Effective  Development  Cooperation 

through  the  UN  Development  Cooperation 
Forum.  Despite  signatories’  commitment  to 
transparency,  the  outcome  document  does 
not contain any other time-bound measurable 
commitments or targets to which citizens can 
hold them to account.

The  post-Busan  architecture  has  yet  to 
take  shape.  But  some  intermediate  priorities 
have  surfaced.  One  is  for  traditional  donors 
to  meet  their  commitments  from  the  2005 
Group of Eight Gleneagles summit to increase 
aid and to deliver on better coordination and 
alignment.20 Traditional donors can also work 
with  emerging  donors,  who  can  contribute 
knowledge and experience from a developing 
country perspective. The United Nations, with 
its  universal  membership,  is  well  positioned 
to engage partners from the South in such tri-
lateral development cooperation through the 
UN Development Cooperation Forum. One 
of the main tasks is to achieve better alignment 
between North–South and South–South de-
velopment cooperation and global norms.

The Busan agreement marks a first step in re-
shaping development cooperation so that it can 
be more effective and better harness the poten-
tial of emerging countries. As with other global 
public goods, once common understanding is 
reached at the global level, operationalizing the 
principles can in most cases be decentralized to 
national  governments  using  the  agreed  com-
mon policy frameworks. Take the Millennium 
Declaration of September 2000 and the global 
agreement  on  the  Millennium  Development 
Goals  that  eventually  emerged.  Agreement 
on these goals gave impetus to a wide range of 
activities and institutions by highlighting a sim-
ple truth: enhancing the capabilities of people 
and advancing the development of all societies 
are important global public goods.21 The actual 
progress in the achievement of these goals has 
been very much at the country level, through 
national initiatives and ownership.

Better representation 
for the South

The current institutions and principles for in-
ternational governance require rethinking or at 
least recalibrating to accommodate the growing 
diversity  in  voice  and  power  and  to  sustain 

long-term development progress. Many were 
designed, long before the rise of the South, for 
a post–Second World War order that does not 
match contemporary reality.

As a consequence, these institutions greatly 
underrepresent the South. Voting quotas in the 
Bretton Woods institutions are weighted to-
wards countries in the North, despite changing 
global economic realities. For example, China, 
which is the world’s second largest economy 
and  holds  more  than  $3  trillion  in  foreign 
reserves, has had a smaller voting share in the 
World Bank than both France and the United 
Kingdom.

Similarly,  the  United  Nations  Security 
Council makes decisions on global peace and 
security  with  a  permanent  membership  that 
reflects the geopolitical structure of 1945. At 
the  2012  United  Nations  General  Assembly 
meeting  in  New  York,  several  heads  of  gov-
ernment  from  the  South  again  voiced  their 
long-standing demands for permanent seats on 
the council for Africa, Latin America and such 
unrepresented  developing  country  powers  as 
India.22

The  major  international  institutions  need 
to be more representative, transparent and ac-
countable. The Bretton Woods institutions, the 
regional development banks and even the UN 
system all risk diminishing relevance if they fail 
to represent all member states and their people 
adequately. These bodies need to respect and 
draw constructively on the experiences of both 
the South and the North and to aim for equi-
table and sustainable outcomes for present and 
future generations.

At  the  same  time,  the  rising  South  has  to 
assume more responsibility on the global stage, 
in line with its increasing economic power and 
political clout, including by contributing more 
resources to multilateral organizations.23 The 
South has to take larger leadership roles at both 
the regional and global levels. Greater transpar-
ency and accountability in global institutions, 
while desirable in and of themselves, will facili-
tate more such participation by the South.

There have been some positive moves in this 
direction.  Developing  countries  are  already 
playing a greater role in the Bretton Woods in-
stitutions and in global dialogues through the 
summits for Group of 20 (G20) heads of state. 
The OECD has opened membership to some 

Current institutions 
and principles for 
international governance 
require rethinking to 
accommodate the 
growing diversity in 
voice and power and 
to sustain long-term 
development progress

Chapter 5  Governance and partnerships for a new era    |    109

International governance 
is increasingly influenced 
by a multitude of voices 
and actors through 
global movements 
and transnational 
activist networks

developing  countries.  Developed  countries 
should welcome these changes, as the success 
of the South extends benefits to the North and 
advances the prosperity of all.

Indeed,  some  intergovernmental  processes 
would be invigorated by greater participation 
from  the  South,  which  can  bring  substantial 
financial, technological and human resources. 
Emerging economies could lead in achieving 
the Millennium Development Goals, innovat-
ing in climate change mitigation and conclud-
ing the Doha development round.

Global organizations that are more represent-
ative of the world’s countries would in principle 
be accountable to the world’s people through 
national governments. However, state media-
tion alone is inadequate. International govern-
ance is increasingly influenced by a multitude 
of voices and actors through global movements 
and  transnational  activist  networks.  Indeed, 
this  has  been  the  thrust  of  antiglobalization 
movements, sometimes self-described as “glob-
al democracy” movements, which cut across a 
range of issues, articulate diverse concerns and 
embrace an almost endless variety of political 
messages but share the basic concern of making 
transnational power and governance accounta-
ble to civil society.

To this end, today’s multilateral institutions 
are encouraged to recalibrate their representa-
tion and guiding principles, in areas such as:
•  Voice.  Matching  the  circles  of  stakeholders 
and  decisionmakers  so  that  all  have  an  ef-
fective voice in global matters that concern 
them.

•  Public goods. Building bridges across organ-
izational  lines  to  facilitate  the  multilevel, 
multisector,  multiactor  production  that 
many global public goods require.

•  Leadership. Encouraging global leaders, state 
and nonstate, individually or collectively, to 
exercise leadership to assist the international 
community on issues that are caught in glob-
al  policy  stalemates  and  problems  that  are 
reaching crisis proportions.

•  Convening. Realigning existing organizations 
to  reflect  changing  global  economic  and 
political realities, and vesting them with the 
authority and expertise to effectively mediate 
among different stakeholders.

•  Information  and  resources.  Helping  poorer 
countries  in  the  South  participate  more 

effectively in global governance through bet-
ter access to information, technical assistance 
and finance.

•  Citizen participation. Drawing on the wealth 
of  ideas  and  views  emerging  from  citizen 
networks and from participants previously 
sidelined from the global discourse.
International  organizations  are  becoming 
more  inclusive  and  sensitive  to  the  require-
ments of a rapidly changing world. The United 
Nations  Economic  and  Social  Council,  for 
example,  has  established  the  Development 
Cooperation Forum to promote more broad-
based  discussion  of  development  assistance. 
There  is  scope  for  renewed  multilateralism. 
However,  there  have  been  only  modest  gov-
ernance reforms at the International Monetary 
Fund (IMF) and the World Bank. The United 
Nations Security Council’s core structure re-
mains unchanged, despite decades of debate. 
More-determined reform is needed for multi-
lateral institutions to facilitate cross-national 
collaboration  on  stalemated  global  issues  in 
ways viewed as fair and just by all countries.

Global civil society

International  governance  institutions  can  be 
held to account not just by member states, but 
also by global civil society, which can shape the 
exercise of power and act as a countervailing 
force to states and markets. All kinds of volun-
tary associations—including nongovernmental 
organizations,  social  movements,  advocacy 
groups, unions and community groups—have 
used  channels  of  influence  such  as  elections, 
lobbying, media and public campaigns to be-
come drivers of social change within many lead-
ing countries of the South—including Brazil, 
Egypt, India and South Africa. In the Indian 
state of Kerala a rich history of civic engage-
ment influenced the government to prioritize 
extensive  social  rights  and  equity- promoting 
public policies. In Brazil, the Sanitarista move-
ment  of  health  care  professionals  played  a 
central role in developing the country’s public 
health care system and expanding services to 
the poor.24

National  civil  society  groups  are  increas-
ingly  using  their  experience  engaging  with 
national governments to open up independent 

110    |    HUMAN DEvELOPMENT REPORT 2013

networks of North–South and South–South 
dialogues outside traditional official interna-
tional governance channels. These transnation-
al networks are laying the groundwork for an 
emerging global civil society that is pushing for 
action on issues ranging from climate change to 
migration policy to human rights.

The potential for global civil society to influ-
ence decisionmaking on critical global issues 
has  been  greatly  magnified  by  the  Internet 
revolution, which enables hyperconnectivity 
of  disparate  groups  and  offers  platforms  for 
citizens’ ideas and concerns to spread rapidly 
around  the  globe.  People  can  speak  to  peo-
ple, and communities of scientists and other 
professionals can share ideas, unmediated by 
state power or markets. This new ease of global 
communication  is  fuelling  creative  partner-
ships, empowering individuals and social or-
ganizations, leading to new forms of solidarity 
and  allowing  people  to  interact  and  express 
their values internationally.

The recent uprisings in several Arab States 
countries, the culmination of complex histori-
cal developments, have shown that social media 
is a force that world leaders and global institu-
tions ignore at their peril. The rapid spread and 
wide response to the video Kony 2012, about 
indicted war criminal Joseph Kony of the Lord’s 
Resistance Army, showed that social media can 
engage many millions of people in discussion 
of important issues within days.25 There may be 
disagreement over the legitimacy of particular 
concerns and platforms, but the rapid sharing 
of information across social networks clearly 
sways public opinion on issues that matter to 
the global citizenry and ultimately influences 
international governance.

Indeed,  one  of  the  most  valuable  tools  of 
global civil society is the ability to diffuse new 
norms that transform the behaviour of state and 
private actors. By taking up and framing issues 
and  pressuring  states,  civil  society  networks 
can put new issues on the table and influence 
government and international action towards 
new treaties, stronger enforcement mechanisms 
and even direct intervention. Classic examples 
of  civil  society  influence  on  global  norms 
include  the  global  diffusion  of  the  women’s 
suffrage movement, the antislavery movement 
and the Red Cross movement that led to the 
production of the Geneva conventions and the 

International Federation of the Red Cross and 
Red Crescent Societies. More recently, global 
civil society networks have been influential in 
institutionalizing  anti–land  mine  legislation, 
more open access to AIDS medicines and cam-
paigns opposing violence against women.

While  global  civil  society  holds  much 
potential  for  influencing  international  gov-
ernance norms and decisionmaking, the likely 
contribution  of  civil  society  organizations 
and transnational networks should be kept in 
perspective. Higher levels of resourcing lead 
the international nongovernmental organiza-
tions of the North to wield disproportionate 
influence  in  the  global  civil  society  space.26 
The  international  human  rights  regime,  for 
example, often emphasizes civil and political 
rights, which are of particular concern to civil 
society in Eastern Europe, rather than social 
rights,  which  figure  much  more  centrally  in 
the  demands  of  popular  movements  in  the 
South.  Limitations  on  civic  space  as  well  as 
other constraints can affect the capacity of civil 
society organizations to function.27 A further 
consideration  is  one  of  transparency,  as  it 
can be unclear how autonomous civil society 
groups are from state and market forces. When 
civil society organizations become extensions 
of  state  power,  economic  influence  or  tra-
ditional  authority,  civil  society  activity  may 
magnify rather than reduce inequalities and 
instability.28

The future legitimacy of international gov-
ernance will depend on the capabilities of in-
stitutions to engage with citizen networks and 
communities—understanding  their  concerns 
and borrowing from their ideas and approaches 
to find direction for their own efforts and ener-
gies. Such engagement will maximize the legiti-
macy of their actions and ensure accountability 
to the citizens of member states (box 5.2). The 
idea  of  ecological  citizenship,  for  example, 
may be a promising way to construct from the 
ground up global public opinion on the provi-
sioning of global public goods.29

To be effective, international organizations 
need to form productive partnerships with so-
cial media communities and nongovernmental 
organizations  in  the  South  and  North  alike. 
They should engage with citizen groups to sup-
port policy changes and a transition towards 
more-equitable principles and institutions of 

Global civil society has 
the ability to diffuse new 
norms that transform 
the behaviour of state 
and private actors

Chapter 5  Governance and partnerships for a new era    |    111

Box 5.2 

A world parliament for global democracy?

Jo Leinen, Member of the European Parliament

Legitimacy and representativeness of the world’s people in global decision-
making  are  imperative  for  the  governance  of  global  issues,  but  global 
decisionmaking bodies have no institutional mechanisms for effective and 
influential citizen participation. At a time when intergovernmental decision-
making has shown its limits, the quest for equity and sustainability and the 
urgency of addressing defining challenges for our planet require the engage-
ment of the global citizenship.

A  world  parliament  would  complement  the  United  Nations  General 
Assembly—either formally integrated in the UN system or instituted as a 
separate body. This idea is not new, but as it matures, it is receiving increas-
ing support from civil society actors and regional parliaments (including the 
European, Latin American and African Parliaments) and was recently high-
lighted in the Manifesto for Global Democracy put forward by a multina-
tional group of intellectuals.1

A world parliament would be composed of delegates from national par-
liaments,  representing  multiple  political  parties  from  each  country.  Since 
the great majority of national parliaments are democratically elected, such 

a  body  would  have  a  high  level  of  representativeness  and  political  ac-
countability.  A  world  parliament  would  serve  as  a  link  between  national 
policymaking and global decisionmaking, providing incentives for national 
parliaments and governments to consider the implications of decisions be-
yond national borders and instilling national parliaments with knowledge 
and experience on governing global issues.

This assembly could have one extended annual session, during which 
it would issue recommendations and add agenda items to the UN General 
Assembly  and,  by  a  qualified  majority,  submit  agenda  items  to  the  UN 
Security Council for debate and decisions. The deliberations would possess 
a high moral and political authority, although the final decisionmaking power 
would remain with national governments. The composition of each national 
delegation could be determined either by national parliaments or through 
special elections allowing citizens to choose representatives for the world 
parliament. Delegation size would be proportional to a country’s population, 
an approach considerably different from international bodies where voting 
quotas are based on monetary contributions.

1.  Beeston 2012.

with shared norms and goals supporting varied 
yet complementary regional and global devel-
opment initiatives.

international  governance.  The  World  Health 
Organization,  for  example,  has  had  to  man-
age state interests carefully and adjust to the 
emphasis  on  privatizing  health  services  that 
became dominant in the 1980s. Its core com-
mitments to public health and its ties to civil 
society, however, have enabled it to continue to 
pursue policies that emphasize a rights-based 
approach to health.30

Towards coherent pluralism

The challenge facing the multilateral system in 
response to the rise of the South is not a false 
choice between globalism and regionalism or 
between older structures devised and managed 
by  the  traditional  powers  of  the  North  and 
newer arrangements responding to the needs of 
the developing world. Rather, it is integrating, 
coordinating and in some cases reforming these 
institutions  so  that  they  can  all  work  more 
effectively together. Diversity and flexibility in 
global governance mechanisms can be net pos-
itives for the international system but cannot 
substitute for the global pursuit of solutions to 
problems that are inherently global in nature. 
Policymakers  working  both  regionally  and 
internationally  should  strive  towards  a  more 
coherent pluralism in multilateral governance, 

the challenge facing 
the multilateral system 
is not a false choice 
between older structures 
devised by the North and 
newer arrangements 
responding to the 
needs of the developing 
world. It is integrating, 
coordinating and in 
some cases reforming 
these institutions so 
that they can work more 
effectively together

112    |    HUMAN DEvELOPMENT REPORT 2013

Recent  experience  in  much  of  the  South 
has  shown  that  some  public  goods  can  be 
effectively  provided  at  the  regional  level.  As 
noted  in  chapter  2,  regional  institutions  can 
sometimes respond to regional needs faster and 
more efficiently than can global forums—for 
example, programmes for eradicating endemic 
diseases,  protecting  shared  ecosystems  and 
removing barriers to intraregional commerce. 
In such  cases, it makes sense for like-minded 
neighbouring states to address these challenges 
cooperatively while pursuing global responses 
to these issues where needed.

Increasing regional cooperation can also have 
disadvantages—adding further complexity to 
an already diverse array of multilateral institu-
tions, with all the attendant risks of exclusion, 
duplication  and  interagency  competition.  In 
many areas, regional institutions have the po-
tential to complement global structures, even if 
that kind of coordination seems rare or inade-
quately synchronized today.

Global  governance  arrangements  must 
respect  the  mixed  strategies  that  countries 
are  choosing.  It  is  clear  that  developing  and 
emerging economies are choosing to cooperate 
in  different  ways—bilaterally,  regionally  and 

the ultimate purpose 
of “coherent pluralism” 
is to ensure that 
institutions at all levels 
work in a coordinated 
fashion to provide 
global public goods

internationally. Over time, as new sets of chal-
lenges  have  emerged,  countries  have  created 
new forms of governance to deal with these. In 
finance, for example, countries want to diversi-
fy their exposure and their “insurance policies”. 
They seek to use a mixture of national reserves, 
bilateral credit lines, regional arrangements and 
the IMF. The international regime needs to be 
pluralist while ensuring that cooperation at the 
regional  and  subregional  levels  is  consistent 
with mechanisms and policies at the interna-
tional level.

The  ultimate  purpose  of  this  “coherent 
pluralism” is to ensure that institutions at all 
levels work in a coordinated fashion to provide 
global public goods. The complementarity not 
just between global and regional institutions, 
but also across public, private and civil society 
organizations, has the potential to be construc-
tive, even if it may appear fledgling and inade-
quate at present. Where new arrangements and 
new partnerships arise to meet the gaps left by 
old arrangements, they should be encouraged, 
avoiding duplication to the greatest extent pos-
sible. New arrangements at all levels must work 
in  concert  with  each  other  and  in  step  with 
existing  multilateral  organizations,  aligning 
interests and sharing responsibilities.

While  pluralism  and  greater  diversity  are 
welcome developments, duplication and ineffi-
ciency occur among the plethora of new organ-
izations. Moving towards a coherent structure, 
some organizations will survive, and others will 
be deemed redundant.

The governance of global public goods for 
sustained progress in human development re-
quires effective multilateralism. International 
institutions can also provide guidance on hu-
man rights and other universal principles and 
arbitrate in such areas as public international 
law. However, multilateralism will need to be 
more flexible to deal with new challenges and 
geopolitical realities. In a coherent pluralistic 
system, international institutions can serve as 
coordinating bodies, playing a catalytic or con-
vening role for all stakeholders. To do this, they 
need the mandate and sufficient expertise and 
resources to mediate and facilitate, to analyse 
and respond to often divergent interests and 
to propose workable and mutually beneficial 
outcomes.  To  fully  engage  the  South,  many 
international  organizations  need  updating 

and transforming. The South in turn is more 
likely to use and fully support multilateral in-
stitutions that are seen to be acting as much in 
the interests of the South as in the interests of 
developed countries.

Financial architecture: redesign 
for the rising South

The rise of the South is creating new patterns of 
resource accumulation, potentially leading to a 
denser, multilayered and more heterogeneous 
financial  architecture.  This  could  promote 
financial stability and resilience, support long-
run  productive  capacities,  advance  human 
development and enlarge national policy space.
In  some  cases,  these  emerging  institutions 
and  arrangements  could  substitute  for  some 
of the functions of the Bretton Woods institu-
tions, but in most cases, they complement the 
existing global financial architecture. Moreover, 
emerging institutions may prove transformative 
by prodding the Bretton Woods institutions to 
respond to concerns about representation, gov-
ernance principles and conditionalities.

The South has already developed several al-
ternative institutions and approaches, including 
regional monetary and support arrangements:
•  The Chiang Mai Initiative emerged in the 
wake of the 1997 Asian financial crisis, tak-
ing the form of a series of swap arrangements 
among Asian countries. It evolved into the 
Chiang  Mai  Initiative  Multilateralization, 
which  allows  members  to  draw  on  the 
multilateral  swap  facility  to  address  bal-
ance of payments and short-term liquidity 
difficulties.

•  The Arab Monetary Fund, founded in 1976 
by the 22 member countries of the League of 
Arab States, has some $2.7 billion to support 
emergency financing for member countries 
as  well  as  broader  monetary  cooperation. 
There is also an aspiration for a unified Arab 
currency.31

•  The  Reserve  Bank  of  India  recently  an-
nounced  a  $2  billion  swap  facility  for 
members of the South Asian Association for 
Regional Cooperation.32

•  The  Latin  American  Reserve  Fund,  with  a 
capitalization  of  about  $2.3  billion,  offers 
balance  of  payments  support  to  members. 
It  also  guarantees  third-party  loans  and 

Chapter 5  Governance and partnerships for a new era    |    113

•  The  Andean  Development  Corporation  is 
gaining attention due to its fourfold growth 
in  lending  over  1991–2007  and  almost 
exclusive ownership by members, nearly all 
of  which  are  developing  countries  (except 
Portugal and Spain).34

Such regional arrangements, however, do not 
necessarily reduce the role of the IMF. Large 
disbursements from the funds can require bor-
rowing countries to be under IMF surveillance 
programmes, as with the Chiang Mai Initiative 
Multilateralization (box 5.3).

facilitates reserve investments and regional 
coordination  of  monetary  policies.  Its  po-
tential is limited by its incomplete regional 
membership;  Brazil,  the  region’s  largest 
economy, does not participate.33

The evolving regional financial architecture 
fostered  by  countries  of  the  South  offers  re-
newed space for policies that emphasize prag-
matism rather than ideology and ensures that 
conditionality  is  narrow  and  appropriate  to 
the country (box 5.4).35 Regional institutions 
that lend closer to home are also more likely 
to design programmes that are more sensitive 

to political concerns and economically appro-
priate,  with  light-touch  surveillance  and  less 
emphasis on conditionality.

Some institutions, such as the nascent Bank 
of  the  South,36  renounce  conditionality  al-
together.  Others,  including  the  Chiang  Mai 
Initiative  Multilateralization  and  the  Arab 
Monetary  Fund,  use  conditionality  only  in 
specific circumstances, and it remains a point of 
discussion among members. Still others, such as 
the Latin American Reserve Fund, apply sur-
veillance but do not use the IMF’s top-down 
approach and instead collaborate with borrow-
ing governments.

Regional trade agreements

Regional and subregional trade arrangements 
have expanded and deepened in Africa, Asia 
and Latin America, even as the Doha round 
of  global  trade  negotiations  has  stalled. 
Agreements that open up South–South trade 
hold  enormous  potential,  with  benefits  at 
least as large as those providing greater access 
to  markets  in  the  North.  OECD  estimates 

Box 5.3

Regional finance in Asia: Chiang Mai Initiative Multilateralization and the Asian Development Bank

The  current  financial  crisis  has  been  a  powerful  impetus  for  expanding 
the  scope  of  the  Chiang  Mai  Initiative,  a  regional  agreement  among  the 
Association of Southeast Asian Nations, plus China, Japan and the Republic 
of Korea (ASEAN+3). In early 2009, the initiative was multilateralized and 
renamed  the  Chiang  Mai  Initiative  Multilateralization.  At  that  time,  dis-
bursements of more than 20% of the credits available to a country required 
that the borrowing country be under an International Monetary Fund (IMF) 
surveillance programme to address the difficult task of devising and imple-
menting regional surveillance.

ASEAN+3 members have continued to deepen the Chiang Mai Initiative 
Multilateralization. In May 2012, the size of the currency swap pool was dou-
bled to $240 billion. For 2012–2013, the need to be under an IMF programme 
does not become operative until the swap drawn equals 30% of the maximum 
for the country (40% in 2014, pending the outcome of current discussions). The 
maturity of both the IMF-linked and the delinked swaps were lengthened. And 
for the first time, a precautionary credit line facility was introduced, allowing 
members to draw on swaps governed by a formula based on country size. (The 
Asian Bond Market Initiative was also expanded in May 2012.)

The ASEAN+3 Macroeconomic Research Office opened on 30 January 
2012 to conduct IMF Article Iv–type monitoring of members. It describes 
itself  as  the  “regional  surveillance  unit  of  the  Chiang  Mai  Initiative 

Multilateralization”. Its purposes are to monitor and analyse regional econ-
omies and to contribute to the early detection of risks, implementation of 
remedial actions and effective decisionmaking by the initiative. Some ob-
servers have noted the tensions over the mandate and the continuing re-
luctance in Asia to criticize the policies of regional neighbours and thus the 
obstacles to conducting firm surveillance.

Prior to the global financial crisis, the Asian Development Bank (ADB) 
was already lending more in the region than the World Bank was. The crisis 
accelerated this trend. In some cases, the ADB responded more quickly and 
with larger loans than the IMF and the World Bank did, and it introduced 
new  types  of  temporary  rapid  financing  programmes  and  countercyclical 
lending facilities to support developing and low-income countries. In April 
2009,  Indonesia  proposed  that  a  portion  of  the  IMF’s  new  financing  be 
devolved to the ADB. With Group of 20 backing, the ADB introduced the 
Countercyclical Support Facility to provide up to $3 billion to economies in 
Asia affected by the crisis.

Between 2008 and 2009, the ADB’s lending commitments grew 42% 
and its disbursements 33%. Other regional development banks quickly fol-
lowed the ADB’s example and were granted a portion of the new funds com-
mitted to the IMF to establish new regional lending facilities to promote 
rapid counter cyclical support within their region.

Source: Woods 2010; Chin 2010, 2012; Ocampo and others 2010; ADB 2009; Ciorciari 2011; AMRO 2012.

114    |    HUMAN DEvELOPMENT REPORT 2013

a welfare gain for the South of $59 billion if 
South–South  tariffs  were  lowered  to  that  of 
North–South  levels.37  Even  within  Africa, 
given  appropriate  institutional  arrangements 
for more open agricultural trade, there is huge 
potential for increasing the trade of the region’s 
many and diverse crops.

An example of a successful regional arrange-
ment is the Sao Paulo Round in 2010, in which 
22 developing countries agreed to reduce tariffs 
at least 20% on about 70% of the trade among 
themselves.  The  reductions  were  negotiated 
within  the  1989  framework  of  the  Global 
System of Trade Preferences, established to take 
advantage  of  the  enabling  clause  within  the 
agreements of the WTO, which allows devel-
oping countries to provide concessions to each 

Box 5.4 

CAF: a Latin American development bank

other without jeopardizing their most favoured 
nation obligations.

Bilateral  arrangements  can  facilitate  trade 
flows  when  multilateral  negotiations  stall. 
Other  options  such  as  preferential  trade  ar-
rangements  for  furthering  the  goal  of  freer, 
nondiscriminatory trade could be overseen by a 
global multilateral institution like the WTO or 
by regional bodies.

Take,  for  example,  negotiations  aimed  at 
reducing  the  massive  production  and  export 
subsidies  in  agriculture  given  mainly  by  de-
veloped  countries.  Those  subsidies  distort 
world trade and expose farmers in developing 
countries to unfair competition. However, this 
issue is almost impossible to settle satisfactorily 
in  a  bilateral  or  regional  setting;  it  requires 

Enrique Garcia, President, CAF

When established in 1970, the multilateral bank CAF had five Andean coun-
try  members  (Bolivia,  Colombia,  Ecuador,  Peru  and  venezuela).  Today,  its 
shareholders include 18 countries from Latin America, the Caribbean and 
Europe as well as 14 private banks, and it obtains most of its funding in 
global  financial  markets.  CAF  promotes  sustainable  development  and  re-
gional integration through credit operations, grants and technical support 
and offers financial structuring to public and private sector projects in Latin 
America. Its headquarters are in Caracas, and it has offices in Asuncion, 
Bogota,  Brasilia,  Buenos  Aires,  La  Paz,  Lima,  Madrid,  Montevideo,  Quito 
and Panama City. Over the last decade, Latin America has experienced rapid 
economic growth thanks to a favourable external environment, which has 
resulted in higher commodity prices, a stable macroeconomic environment 
and greater domestic demand due to poverty reduction and higher income. 
CAF has helped its member countries take advantage of these favourable 
economic conditions through a comprehensive development agenda that in-
cludes projects and programmes designed to support the region’s productive 
transformation and its competitive participation in the global economy, to 
improve the quality of institutions and to promote environmental conserva-
tion. CAF has provided substantial financing at times when markets were 
“dry” and other international financial institutions were imposing stringent 
conditions on their financing.

Among the reasons for CAF’s success in the region are its Latin American 
essence, the strong political and financial commitment of its member coun-
tries, the maintenance of prudent financial policies (especially in times of 
economic stress) and its policy of nonconditionality. Today, CAF is one of 
the main sources of multilateral financing for infrastructure and energy in 
the region, with approvals of more than $10 billion at the end of 2011, or 
some 30% of total multilateral lending for Latin America (compared with 
and $12.4 billion for the Inter-American Development Bank and $13.9 billion 
for the World Bank; see Ocampo and Titelman 2012). CAF’s countercyclical 
role in times of economic turbulence in international markets and its support 

to shareholders when financing has become scarce have been especially 
valuable. In addition to channelling funds from international markets to the 
region,  directed  mainly  to  infrastructure  projects,  CAF,  together  with  its 
member countries, has designed and implemented an ambitious agenda of 
programmes and projects supported by grants aimed at tackling some of 
Latin America’s major obstacles to growth.

CAF borrows in international capital markets through a funding strategy 
that aims to diversify sources of financing to mitigate interest rate and cur-
rency risks while matching the average maturity of its assets and liabilities 
to maintain sufficient liquidity in its portfolio. CAF obtained its first credit 
ratings in 1993 from the three main rating agencies, and its ratings have 
steadily improved, even during economic crises in the region. CAF is now 
the highest rated frequent bond issuer in Latin America. Since 1993 CAF 
has borrowed more than $13.9 billion through 87 bond issues in the most 
important international capital markets in the Asia, Europe Latin America 
and the United States. Prudent financial policies have made CAF a profit-
able institution that reinvests, through grants and technical cooperation, in 
programmes and projects to support its member countries.

CAF’s  performance  has  been  distinguished  due  to  capacity  to  adapt 
to a changing and challenging environment. Of particular importance has 
been its governance structure. Since its foundation, CAF’s shareholders have 
given the institution the autonomy to design and implement operational poli-
cies without political pressure. Member countries have always supported 
the institution. Never in CAF’s history has a member country defaulted on its 
obligation, even during economic crises. With an ownership that is almost 
entirely Latin American (Portugal and Spain are minority shareholders due 
to their historical ties to the region), CAF has avoided the conflicts that have 
arisen in other multilateral institutions where donors’ and recipients’ aims 
are not always aligned. In this regard, CAF is recognized as an institution run 
by and for Latin America, providing a useful example of pragmatic financial 
integration.

Chapter 5  Governance and partnerships for a new era    |    115

Responsible sovereignty 
takes the long-term 
interests of the world as a 
whole into account when 
formulating national policy

multilateral disciplines that can be negotiated 
only at the WTO. Most countries accept the 
necessity of a strong multilateral body to refer-
ee the rules of world trade while knowing that 
regionalism is here to stay; one way forward is 
to gradually “multilateralize regionalism”.38

Responsible sovereignty

While  most  governments  support  the  prin-
ciples of multilateralism, they are also under-
standably concerned with preserving national 
sovereignty. Overly strict adherence to the pri-
macy  of  national  sovereignty  can  encourage 
cross-border rivalries and zero-sum thinking. 
Countries on their own are less able to defend 
themselves from the contagion effects of finan-
cial crises or the ill effects of global warming. 
National action does not ensure that a coun-
try’s citizens have access to global public goods. 
Some  governments  are  unable  to  sufficiently 
protect the human rights of their citizenry. A 
better strategy is responsible sovereignty—that 
is, taking the long-term interests of the world 
as a whole into account when formulating na-
tional policy.

Most  global  public  goods  depend  on  the 
effective  management  of  cross-border  conse-
quences and an adequate provision of national 
and regional public goods, and thus on national 
institutional capacity and a willingness to co-
operate regionally and globally. Countries must 
take into account their respective international 
responsibilities  in  providing  public  goods 
and avoid undermining the collective welfare 
and the well-being of other countries, such as 
through pollution or other abuses of the global 
or regional commons. Responsible sovereign-
ty  includes  taking  steps  towards  collective 
 endeavours—such as trade liberalization and 
climate change mitigation—that, if designed 
effectively, could greatly enhance global collec-
tive welfare.

In a highly interconnected world, effective 
national decisionmaking cannot be carried out 
in isolation from regional and global policies. 
National  policies  have  regional  and  global 
consequences; examples include protectionist 
national responses to international economic 
downturns  and  the  failure  to  regulate  over-
fishing and ocean pollution. At the same time, 

regional and global policies provide a context 
for  national  policymaking.  Countries  and 
regional  and  multilateral  organizations  must 
come  together  and  align  national  policies 
towards  common  international  goals.  In  an 
increasingly  globalized  and  interconnected 
world,  this  is  a  matter  of  enlightened  self- 
interest: decisions taken at the national level 
today can affect people in all countries for gen-
erations to come.

If national leaders are unable to look beyond 
narrowly conceived immediate national inter-
ests, the potential gains from cooperation will 
be lost, and the costs of inaction will mount. 
National  policies  will  undermine  rather 
than  reinforce  and  complement  each  other. 
Examples include public spending and stimu-
lus policies in the wake of the global financial 
crisis: coordination by central banks around 
the  world  to  lower  interest  rates  in  concert 
helped avert further deepening of the world-
wide recession.

The South, due to its rising economic stat-
ure and political influence, is an increasingly 
important partner in global decisionmaking. 
The rise of the South, accompanied by strong-
er  cross-border  links,  makes  decisionmaking 
more  interdependent  than  ever.  The  North 
and the South must find common ground for 
meaningful progress on today’s pressing global 
problems.

Responsible  sovereignty  also  requires  that 
states honour agreed universal human rights 
and  obligations  towards  people  residing  in 
their territories and ensure their security and 
safety. The Responsibility to Protect initiative, 
for example, is an attempt to develop a new 
international security and human rights norm 
that can address the international community’s 
failures  to  prevent  and  stop  genocides,  war 
crimes,  ethnic  cleansing  and  crimes  against 
humanity.  In  this  view,  sovereignty  is  seen 
not just as a right, but also as a responsibility. 
While  a  positive  step  towards  establishing 
guiding  principles  on  global  governance  in 
human security, the initiative lacks procedures 
to  ensure  that  the  principles  are  upheld.39 
There are no agreed thresholds of violations 
or atrocities that would automatically activate 
international  interventions.  This  mismatch 
between principles and procedures highlights 
the  importance  of  building  capacities  into 

116    |    HUMAN DEvELOPMENT REPORT 2013

the rise of the 
South presents 
opportunities 
for innovative 
new structures for 
development partnerships 
and new approaches to 
development policy, both 
globally and regionally

international governance systems to hold gov-
ernments and political systems accountable to 
the  people  they  represent.  Without  binding 
mechanisms for holding states accountable to 
their  citizens,  the  legitimacy  of  institutions 
such as the United Nations Security Council 
is brought into question. But agreement on a 
principle of responsible and mutually support-
ive sovereignty will be forthcoming only if the 
preconditions  of  global  fairness  and  justice 
are met.

New institutions, new mechanisms

The  rise  of  the  South  presents  opportunities 
for innovative new structures for development 
partnerships  and  new  approaches  to  devel-
opment  policy,  both  globally  and  regionally. 
The substantial foreign reserves accumulated 
by the leading economies of the South could 
be leveraged for development financing in less 
developed countries, for example. New mech-
anisms for aid, trade and technology exchange 
within  regions  of  the  developing  world  can 
usefully parallel and complement existing ar-
rangements. The countries of the South them-
selves could take greater leadership roles in the 
global policy dialogue about the most urgent 
international development needs and about the 
most effective ways to meet these 21st century 
challenges.

Infrastructure development banks

The rise of the South is also creating new possi-
bilities for financing equitable and sustainable 
human development. Brazil, China, India, the 
Russian Federation and South Africa, for ex-
ample, have proposed a BRICS Development 
Bank that would draw upon their considera-
ble reserves to finance projects in developing 
countries.40  Like  the  European  Bank  for 
Reconstruction and Development, such a bank 
could offer a range of instruments, including 
loans,  equity  and  guarantees.  In  addition  to 
financing productive projects, this flow of re-
sources would also assist with global financial 
rebalancing.

An important use for such reserves would be 
building infrastructure. To meet urgent needs, 
infrastructure spending in developing countries 

must reach $1.8–$2.3 trillion a year by 2020, or 
about 6%–8% of GDP, compared with current 
levels of $0.8–$0.9 trillion a year, or about 3% 
of GDP.41 One means of enabling and facilitat-
ing such investments would be through a devel-
opment bank for infrastructure and sustainable 
development.  That  could  bolster  developing 
country  borrowing  to  finance  economically 
productive infrastructure.

Because  borrowers  need  to  be  concerned 
about debt sustainability, efforts are required to 
go beyond domestic government borrowing by 
leveraging other forms of financial assistance. A 
new institution could crowd in the right type 
of capital through guarantees and other instru-
ments.42 New institutions will be more effective 
if they work in concert with existing regional 
and global institutions, filling gaps in funding 
and investment.

Chapter 4 presented an accelerated progress 
scenario that set ambitious targets for raising 
the Human Development Index (HDI) value 
in all regions by 2050 through a series of pub-
lic spending initiatives. This scenario assumes 
about 20% improvement in infrastructure by 
2050, universal access to electricity by 2030, 
elimination  of  solid  fuels  as  the  primary 
source for heating and cooking in the home 
by 2030, renewable energy production 50% 
above  the  base  case  by  2050  and  universal 
access to mobile telephone and broadband by 
2030. The largest projected increases in HDI 
value under this scenario are in Sub-Saharan 
Africa  (65%)  and  South  Asia  (47%;  figure 
5.1).  Current  average  public  investment  in 
Sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia is around 
7.7% of GDP.43

Allocating  a  small  fraction  of  the  interna-
tional  reserves  of  the  nine  G20  countries  of 
the South could provide substantial additional 
resources for public investment in infrastruc-
ture  in  Sub-Saharan  Africa  and  South  Asia 
(figure 5.2). Depending on the share of reserves 
allocated, public investment would rise 17.6%–
52.8%. In fact, allocating just 3% of liquid in-
ternational reserves of the nine G20 countries 
of the South would increase the share of public 
investment in these countries 4.1%–11.7% of 
GDP, close to the average level of public invest-
ment for all developing countries.44

For reserve-holding countries and their sov-
ereign wealth funds, investing in developing 

Chapter 5  Governance and partnerships for a new era    |    117

FIGuRe 5.1

Under the accelerated progress scenario, 
the largest projected increases in the Human 
Development Index are in Sub-Saharan Africa and 
South Asia

Arab States

East Asia and the Paciﬁc

Europe and Central Asia

Latin America and the Caribbean

South Asia

Sub-Saharan Africa

28%

24%

18%

16%

47%

65%

0.0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

HDI

2010

2050 (projected)

Note: See chapter 4 for discussion of the accelerated progress scenario.
Source: HDRO calculations based on Pardee Center for International Futures 
2013.

FIGuRe 5.2

Allocating a small fraction of the international 
reserves of the nine G20 countries of the South 
could provide substantial additional resources for 
public investment in infrastructure in Sub-Saharan 
Africa and South Asia

Additional resources for public investment ($ billions)
140

52.8% rise
(4.1% of GDP)

120

100

80

60

40

20

0

35.2% rise 
(2.7% of GDP)

17.6% rise 
(1.4% of GDP)

1%

2%

3%

Share of reserves allocated

Note: Numbers in parentheses are the increase in public investment as a share 
of GDP.
Source: HDRO calculations based on World Bank (2012a).

countries  is  financially  attractive,  allowing 
them to diversify while gaining higher profits 
without added risks.45 Sovereign wealth funds 
have long investment horizons and low risk 
of redemption, enabling them to make long-
term investments. Since many give priority to 
social over private returns, they can also take 
socially  responsible  positions.  For  example, 
Norway  has  applied  global  sustainability 
criteria  to  its  sovereign  wealth  fund  invest-
ments through the Norges Bank Investment 
Management, committing to the UN Global 
Compact Norms and investing in initiatives 
to reduce deforestation in Guyana, Indonesia 
and Tanzania.46 The governance challenge is 
to operationalize socially responsible invest-
ment,  define  suitable  benchmarks  and  pro-
vide sovereign wealth funds easier access to 
investments with a high human development 
impact.47

Institutions from the South, ranging from 
the BRICS Bank to the Chiang Mai Initiative 
Multilateralization  to  the  African  Union, 
have  considerable  potential  to  influence 
international  governance.  Collective  action 
requires a shared vision. The premise for this 
vision cannot be taken for granted. The pro-
liferation of regional and other arrangements 
shows that governments recognize the bene-
fits of, and have a commitment to, collective 
development.

a new South Commission?

In  1987,  leaders  of  the  Non-Aligned  Move-
ment established the South Commission to ex-
plore policy options and areas for cooperation 
for the countries of the South. Its final report 
in  1990,  The  Challenge  to  the  South,  pro-
duced under the leadership of Julius Nyerere, 
then-president of Tanzania, and the economist 
Manmohan  Singh,  future  prime  minister  of 
India, was a seminal and prescient analysis.48 
It identified climate change as a priority and 
underscored challenges that stubbornly persist 
today,  such  as  poverty,  social  exclusion  and 
the  widening  gap  between  rich  and  poor.49 
Equally  important,  the  South  Commission 
looked closely at the then-emerging possibil-
ities  of  greater  South–South  cooperation  in 
aid, trade and other aspects of international 
policymaking.

118    |    HUMAN DEvELOPMENT REPORT 2013

The  world  and  the  South  have  been 
thoroughly  transformed  over  the  past  two 
decades.  The  South  of  the  21st  century  is 
led by fast-growing economies with trillions 
of  dollars  of  foreign  exchange  reserves  and 
trillions  more  to  invest  outside  their  bor-
ders.  Businesses  from  the  South  number 
among  the  world’s  largest.  The  possibilities 
for collective action have never been greater; 
however, agreement on this cannot be taken 
for granted. The institutions for South–South 
co operation—the  Group  of  77,  the  Non-
Aligned  Movement  and  South  Summits—
were forged in the crucible of decolonization, 
which created strong political, economic, so-
cial, and cultural bonds among the emerging 
countries of the developing world. That form-
ative experience is increasingly distant from 
the current generation, and the commitment 
to South solidarity common to their elders is 
in many cases now giving way to the pursuit of 
national interests.

The new realities of the 21st century require 
a fresh look at these issues and at institutions 
led by the countries of the South themselves. 
A  new  South  Commission,  building  on  the 
legacy of the first commission but reflecting the 
strengths and needs of the South today, could 
provide a fresh vision, based on recognition of 
how the diversity of the South can be a force 
for a new kind of solidarity, aimed at acceler-
ating human development progress for decades 
to come. The economic links within the South 
and  the  mutual  benefits  of  cooperation  are 
likely to provide further incentives to establish 
such a body.

Conclusions: partners in a new era

The  rise  of  the  South  has  to  some  extent 
caught  the  world  by  surprise.  The  previous, 
if unspoken, assumption was that developing 
countries would steadily approach the stand-
ards of human development in industrialized 
countries (“convergence”) but that the indus-
trialized countries would remain in a strong, 
leading position. In many respects, that is still 
the case: average HDI values are substantially 
lower in many countries of the South. What 
has caught the world unawares, however, is that 
even at lower levels of human development, the 

countries of the South are now weighty players 
on the global stage, with the financial resourc-
es  and  political  clout  to  sway  international 
decisionmaking.

This  was  already  evident  during  the  early 
years of the 21st century, as China and other 
emerging  economies  accumulated  vast  re-
serves, which they held as US Treasury bonds, 
effectively propping up the US dollar. But the 
situation came into sharper relief after 2008, 
following  the  banking  crisis  and  subsequent 
economic shocks that pushed some of the rich-
er countries into recession and threatened the 
survival of one of the world’s major currencies. 
Now the countries of the North are looking to 
those of the South to keep the global economy 
moving forward.

In  practice,  each  group  of  countries  needs 
the other more than ever. The North needs the 
most vigorous countries of the South to sus-
tain demand for exported goods and services, 
especially as a number of their own economies 
and societies are weakened by fierce austerity 
programmes. The South needs the North not 
only as a mature market, but also as a source of 
innovation and complex technologies.

Rather than looking to 
the North for inspiration, 
developing countries are 
looking to their peers in 
the South for appropriate 
development models

The rise of the South demonstrates that the 
world  has  become  more  diffuse  and  cross- 
connected.  One  consequence  is  that  rather 
than  looking  to  the  North  for  inspiration, 
developing countries are looking to their peers 
in  the  South  for  appropriate  development 
models.  Here,  rather  than  seeing  a  sterile 
menu of ideological options, they can examine 
what  has  worked,  under  what  circumstanc-
es,  and  choose  the  most  appropriate  tools. 
Chapter 3 provided examples of programmes 
and policies that have worked to improve hu-
man development in emerging economies of 
the South, from investments in public health 
and  education  to  conditional  cash  transfer 
programmes. Such examples can inspire sim-
ilar policies in other countries, but with un-
derstandings of specific national conditions, 
institutions and needs.

This  Report  has  summarized  some  of  the 
most effective drivers of development: a pro-
active  developmental  state,  the  capacity  to 
tap  into  global  markets  and  the  promotion 
of  social  inclusion  and  broad-based  human 
development. Within each of these there are 
multiple  options  but  no  universal  solutions. 

Chapter 5  Governance and partnerships for a new era    |    119

Good policymaking 
requires greater focus 
on enhancing social 
capacities, not just 
individual capabilities

What worked in one country might have stood 
little chance in another.

Nevertheless,  the  most  successful  coun-
tries  have  demonstrated  that  innovative  and 
sometimes counterintuitive options can work. 
Paying parents to take their children to health 
clinics may seem unnecessary, but as the case 
of Mexico illustrates, it can work to improve 
children’s health; its conditional cash transfer 
programmes have sparked interest around the 
world.  Similarly,  using  a  mobile  phone  for 
banking  made  eminent  sense  in  Kenya  and 
the Philippines to people who had never had 
a personal bank account before and often lived 
nowhere near a bank office.

The countries of the South have thus been 
using their own ideas and energy to create a 
new momentum for human development. In a 
complex global political, economic and social 
environment, however, this dynamism may still 
not yield sustainable outcomes. Already there 
are  signs  of  rising  inequality  and  frustrated 
expectations that could lead to violent social 
strife. And there are serious concerns that over-
exploitation of global resources combined with 
the effects of climate change could wreck the 
earth for future generations.

That is why this Report has also focused on 
what is needed to ensure that human develop-
ment proceeds in ways that are both productive 
and sustainable. This includes measures aimed 
at enhancing equity, enabling voice and partic-
ipation, confronting environmental pressures 
and managing demographic change.

Addressing these issues will demand con-
siderable skill and commitment from national 
governments and civil society. As this chapter 
has argued, it will also demand much more 
fruitful global cooperation as national gov-
ernments, international organizations and a 
nascent global civil society feel their way to-
wards new models of mutual understanding 
and cooperation. Some of these will involve 
refashioning existing institutions to accom-
modate a new global power balance. Others 
may  take  any  number  of  new  institutional 
forms.

Through all this, the fundamental principles 
of  human  development  endure.  As  ever,  the 
aim is to expand the choices and capabilities for 
everyone, wherever they live. Many countries of 
the South have already demonstrated what can 

be done, but they have gone only part of the 
way. For the years ahead, this Report suggests 
five broad conclusions.

Rising economic strength in the 
South must be matched by a full 
commitment to human development

Investments in human development are justi-
fied not only on moral grounds, but also be-
cause good health, education and social welfare 
are key to success in a more competitive and dy-
namic world economy. In particular, these in-
vestments should target the poor— connecting 
them to markets and increasing their livelihood 
opportunities. Poverty is an injustice that can 
and should be remedied by determined action. 
There are sufficient global resources to achieve 
that  goal,  if  they  are  directed  towards  that 
purpose.

Good  policymaking  also  requires  greater 
focus on enhancing social capacities, not just 
individual  capabilities.  Individuals  function 
within  social  institutions  that  can  limit  or 
enhance their development potential. Policies 
that change social norms that limited human 
potential, such as new legal strictures against 
early  marriages  or  dowry  requirements,  can 
open up additional opportunities for individu-
als to reach their full potential.

As this Report highlights, one consequence 
of the rise of the South is that most countries 
now have growing policy and fiscal space to set 
bold  targets—to  eliminate  poverty,  push  for 
full employment commitments and innovate 
towards low-carbon pathways. More countries 
are unencumbered by conditionalities often at-
tached to international aid and resource trans-
fers, and the recent rise in commodity prices 
has reversed the long decline in terms of trade 
faced by many primary goods producers.50 This 
provides  a  cushion  of  resources  that  can  be 
managed in ways that enhance national human 
development  by  governments  committed  to 
avoiding the “resource curse”.

Projections presented in chapter 4 reinforce 
this point. They show that with strong com-
mitment to human development and prudent 
macroeconomic policies, it is possible to reduce 
poverty dramatically in Sub-Saharan Africa—a 
region where baseline scenarios show a likely 
future increase in the number of poor people 

120    |    HUMAN DEvELOPMENT REPORT 2013

because population growth outpaces economic 
growth.

less developed countries can learn 
and benefit from the success of 
emerging economies in the South

The  unprecedented  accumulation  of  finan-
cial  reserves  and  sovereign  wealth  funds  in 
the South ($6.8 trillion) as well as the North 
($3.3  trillion)  provides  an  opportunity  to 
accelerate broad-based progress. Even a small 
portion of these funds dedicated to human de-
velopment and poverty eradication could have 
a large effect. As mentioned, public investment 
in South Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa could 
increase  to  11.7%  of  GDP  using  just  3%  of 
international reserves from some of the largest 
economies in the South.

At  the  same  time,  South–South  trade  and 
investment flows can leverage foreign markets 
in new ways, such as participating in regional 
and global value chains to facilitate the spread 
of ideas and technologies. Burgeoning South–
South trade and investment in particular can 
lay the basis for shifting manufacturing capacity 
to other less developed regions and countries. 
Recent Chinese and Indian joint ventures and 
startup  manufacturing  investments  in  Africa 
serve as a prelude to a much expanded force 
that this potential represents. To harness the 
full extent of this potential, new and innovative 
institutions  may  be  called  for.  International 
production networks provide opportunities to 
speed up the development process by allowing 
countries  to  leap-frog  to  more  sophisticated 
production  nodes  while  offering  the  double 
benefit  of  protection  against  the  vagaries  of 
foreign exchange fluctuations.

South–South development cooperation and 
technology  transfer  hold  immense  potential 
to support human development. Technology 
transfers from the North require costly adap-
tation due to differences in absorptive capacity, 
but technological transfers within the South 
are more likely to need little adaptation and 
to involve more-appropriate technologies and 
products.  Growing  markets  in  developing 
countries provide companies in the South an 
opportunity  to  mass  market  innovative  and 
affordable  versions  of  standard  products,  in-
cluding food, clothing, appliances and motor 

vehicles.  Importantly,  the  sharp  drop  in  the 
price  of  capital  goods  as  a  result  of  intense 
global  competition  led  by  China  and  India 
could  accelerate  the  creation  of  manufactur-
ing production capacities in many developing 
countries. Such production can be adapted to 
the income levels and tastes of local consum-
ers. This dynamic has the potential to provide 
the  poor  access  to  consumer  goods,  while 
innovators  create  jobs  and  develop  producer 
capabilities.

New institutions and new partnerships 
can facilitate regional integration 
and South–South relationships

New  institutions  and  partnerships  can  help 
countries  share  knowledge,  experiences  and 
technology.

In  finance  and  aid,  the  South  is  already 
actively establishing regional governance insti-
tutions. Regional alternatives to the IMF, such 
as the Chiang Mai Initiative Multilateralization 
and  the  Latin  American  Reserve  Fund,  have 
freed  up  policy  space  for  countries  to  pro-
tect  national  priorities  while  also  addressing 
balance- of-payments problems and short-term 
liquidity issues.

The  foundations  exist  for  strong  regional 
institutions, but more can be done to accelerate 
and deepen these relationships and ensure in-
clusiveness. As wealthy countries have curtailed 
aid to address domestic issues, regional devel-
opment banks and bilateral aid relationships 
provide additional resources for development 
projects.  These  new  aid  mechanisms  also 
tend to emphasize pragmatism over ideology. 
Infrastructure development banks, for example, 
offer new possibilities for development finance. 
Brazil,  China,  India,  the  Russian  Federation 
and South Africa have proposed a development 
bank to mobilize their considerable reserves to 
finance  projects  across  developing  countries. 
Building infrastructure would be an important 
use of such reserves.

Trade with other developing countries now 
accounts  for  a  majority  of  merchandise  and 
manufactures exports from developing coun-
tries, and these exports are increasingly skill- 
and technology-intensive. Stronger institutions 
are  now  needed  to  facilitate  these  South–
South trade and investment links. Expanded 

the foundations exist 
for strong regional 
institutions, but more can 
be done to accelerate 
and deepen these 
relationships and 
ensure inclusiveness

Chapter 5  Governance and partnerships for a new era    |    121

South–South trade and investment can reduce 
vulnerability  to  economic  downturns  in  the 
North and provide opportunities to leverage 
foreign markets in new ways.

Regional trade and investment relationships 
can also be strengthened by streamlining tran-
sit, transport and customs procedures; harmo-
nizing regulatory schemes; investing in regional 
transport infrastructure; and lowering tariffs on 
South–South trade in final products. Lowering 
such tariffs could yield collective gains of an 
estimated $59 billion for the economies of the 
South.51

A new South Commission for the early 21st 
century could help bring a fresh vision of how 
the strength and diversity of the South can be 
a global force for development solidarity. The 
key elements are there: different endowments 
provide a basis for expanded exchange, diverse 
experiences are ripe for sharing, new cross-bor-
der partnerships can compete in world markets 
and, above all, the recognition and implemen-
tation of win-win strategies can motivate new 
forms of South–South cooperation.

Greater representation for the South 
and civil society can accelerate 
progress on major global challenges

The  rise  of  the  South  is  leading  to  a  greater 
diversity  of  voice  on  the  world  stage.  This 
represents an opportunity to build governance 
institutions that fully represent all constituen-
cies that would make productive use of this di-
versity in finding solutions to world problems.
New  guiding  principles  for  international 
organizations are needed that incorporate the 
experience of the South. The G20 incorporates 
their experience, but the countries of the South 
also  need  more-equitable  representation  in 
the  Bretton  Woods  institutions,  the  United 
Nations and other international bodies.

Active  civil  society  and  social  movements, 
both national and transnational, are using the 
media to amplify their calls for just and fair 
governance. The spread of movements and in-
creasing platforms for vocalizing key messages 
and demands challenge governance institutions 
to adapt more-democratic and more-inclusive 
principles. More generally, a fair and less une-
qual world requires space for a multiplicity of 
voices and a system of public discourse.

a fair and less unequal 
world requires space for a 
multiplicity of voices and a 
system of public discourse

122    |    HUMAN DEvELOPMENT REPORT 2013

the rise of the South presents 
new opportunities for generating 
a greater supply of public goods

A sustainable world requires both better gov-
ernance  and  a  greater  availability  of  global 
public goods. Global issues today are increasing 
in  number  and  urgency,  from  mitigation  of 
climate  change  and  international  economic 
and financial instability to the fight against ter-
rorism and nuclear proliferation. They require 
a  global  response.  Yet  in  many  areas,  inter-
national cooperation continues to be slow—
and at times dangerously hesitant. The rise of 
the South presents new opportunities for pro-
viding global public goods more effectively and 
for unlocking today’s many stalemated global 
issues.

“Publicness”  and  “privateness”  are  in  most 
cases  not  innate  properties  of  a  public  good 
but social constructs. As such, they represent a 
policy choice. National governments can step 
in when there is underprovision at the national 
level, but when global challenges arise, interna-
tional cooperation is necessary and can happen 
only by voluntary action of many governments. 
Given the many pressing challenges, progress in 
determining what is public and what is private 
will require strong, committed, personal and 
institutional leadership.

* 

 

 

 

* 

 

 

 

*

The  rise  of  the  South  is  fundamentally  the 
story of the fast-paced transformation of the 
developing  world  and  its  profound  impact 
on  diverse  facets  of  human  development. 
Global discussions of this phenomenon so far 
have focused almost exclusively on economic 
growth  in  the  biggest  developing  countries. 
This  Report  uses  a  human  development  lens 
to cast a wider net and show that the impacts 
are widespread in terms of the large number of 
developing  countries  involved  and  the  inter-
twining of ever-growing global challenges and 
possibilities—from environmental sustainabil-
ity and equity to poverty eradication and the 
reform of global institutions. The changes are 
occurring  at  unprecedented  speed  and  scale, 
propelled by interaction with the wider world 
through trade, travel and telecommunications 
in ways that were not possible before.

The  fast-developing  countries  chose  their 
own distinct development pathways. Yet they 
share  important  characteristics,  including 
effective  leadership  from  governments,  open 
engagement with the world economy and in-
novative social policies addressing domestic hu-
man development needs. They also face many 
of the same challenges, from social inequalities 
to environmental risks. And they have devel-
oped  their  own  domestic  policy  approaches 
with increasing autonomy, for their own sov-
ereign national reasons, without the strictures 
of enforced conditionality or imposed external 
models.

The  South’s  progress  is  propelled  by  inter-
connections  with  developed  countries  and 
increasingly  with  the  developing  world.  In 
fact,  economic  exchanges  are  expanding 
faster   “horizontally”—on  a  South–South 
basis—than on the traditional North–South 
axis. People are sharing ideas and experiences 
through  new  communications  channels  and 
seeking  greater  accountability  from  govern-
ments and international institutions alike. The 
South as a whole is driving global economic 
growth and societal change for the first time in 
centuries. The South still needs the North, but, 
increasingly, the North also needs the South.

Chapter 5  Governance and partnerships for a new era    |    123

Notes

Overview
1  Atsmon and others 2012.
2  Samake and Yang 2011.
3 

The demographic dividend is 
considered a window of opportunity 
for additional economic growth when 
the proportion of the working-age 
population increases. As fertility 
levels fall in a demographic transi-
tion, the number of children declines 
while the working-age population 
increases, lowering the dependency 
ratio. A country can reap the benefits 
of increased productive capacity 
associated with the lower proportion 
of dependents. As fertility levels 
continue to decline, however, depen-
dency ratios eventually rise with the 
increase in retired workers.

Introduction
1  According to World Bank (2012a), 

the average GDP growth rate in 
2009 for high-income members 
of the Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development was 
–3.9%, compared with 7.5% in East 
Asia and Pacific, 7.4% in South Asia, 
3.6% in the Middle East and North 
Africa and 2.1% in Sub-Saharan 
Africa.

2  According to Maddison (2010), GDP 
per capita (in international dollars) 
rose from $1,250 in 1700 to $2,330 in 
1850 in the United Kingdom and from 
$1,257 in 1820 to $2,445 in 1870 in 
the United States.

3  Atsmon and others 2012.
4 

In addition to increased voting 
shares and senior appointments at 
the International Monetary Fund and 
the World Bank, in recent years, the 
South has held leadership positions at 
the International Labour Organization, 
the World Health Organization, 
the World Trade Organization and 
the World Intellectual Property 
Organization.

5  Chen and Ravallion (2012) using the 

6 

$1.25 a day poverty line.
For example, in 1990, Uganda’s HDI 
(0.306) was comparable to that of 
Benin, Central African Republic and 
Gambia. By 2012, Uganda’s HDI had 
increased to 0.456, a substantial 
improvement compared with its 
peers (and statistically significant 
at the 95% level). Benin’s increased 
from 0.314 to 0.436, Central African 
Republic’s from 0.312 to 0.352 and 
Gambia’s from 0.323 to 0.439.

7 

8 

In purchasing power parity terms, the 
standard GDP and GNI calculus in 
Human Development Reports.
Japan is not included in the long-term 
historical comparison between the 
other Group of Seven economies and 
Brazil, China and India because it 
did not industrialize until late in the 
19th century and did not emerge as a 
major world economic power until the 
second half of the 20th century.
In current US dollars.

9 
10  Proportion of the population living 
on less than $1.25 a day (in 2005 
purchasing power parity terms), ac-
cording to World Bank (2012a).

11  Estimates refer to years between 

2002 and 2011.

12  The measures used—life expectancy 
and mean years of schooling—have 
upper bounds towards which develop-
ing countries tend to eventually 
converge. There is no upper threshold 
of convergence for income.

13  HDRO calculations based on 

Brookings Institution (2012). The 
middle class includes people earning 
or spending $10–$100 a day in 2005 
purchasing power parity terms.
14  Dobbs and others 2012. Ali and 

Dadush (2012), using car ownership 
as a proxy for the middle class, sug-
gest that there are up to 600 million 
people in the middle class in the 
developing G20 countries, about 50% 
more than previous estimates by 
Milanovi´c and Yitzhaki (2002), who 
counted people earning $10–$50 a 
day in purchasing power parity terms 
as belonging to the middle class.
15  UNDP 2009; World Bank 2010a.
16  UNCTAD 2010.
17  Zuckerberg 2012.
18  Estevadeordal, Frantz and Taylor 

(2003); the trade to GDP ratio is the 
sum of exports and imports of goods 
and services divided by total output.
19  The current trade ratio is a five-year 
average from 2006 to 2010, obtained 
from World Bank (2012a).

20  Hamdani 2013.
21  Heilmann 2008.
22  United Nations 2012a.
23  United Nations 2012a.
24  Based on data between 2005 and 

2008 from Kharas, Makino and Jung 
(2011) and extrapolation thereafter.

Chapter 1
1 

This is in nominal terms. In purchas-
ing power parity terms, the share is 
about 46%.

2 
3 

IMF 2011b.
Iley and Lewis (2011); see also IMF 
(2011b).

4  HDRO calculations based on data 

5 

on general government expen-
diture on social protection from 
the Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development show 
that some industrialized countries, 
including Australia, Austria, Denmark 
and Norway, increased expenditure 
on social protection between 2007 
and 2010.
For some countries confronting high 
debt levels (such as Greece, Italy and 
Japan), the subprime crisis spiralled 
into a sovereign debt crisis, leaving 
little fiscal space to postpone fiscal 
consolidation. Holland and Portes 
(2012) suggest that, while in normal 
times fiscal consolidation would 
lower debt to GDP ratios, under cur-
rent circumstances, in the European 
Union, it will likely lead to higher debt 
to GDP ratios in the region in 2013, 
with the exception of Ireland.

ILO 2012.

6  Guajardo, Leigh and Pescatori 2011.
ILO 2012.
7 
8  Sen 2012.
9  Keynes 1937.
10 
11  Throughout the crisis, the solutions 
implemented (such as fiscal consoli-
dation and easy monetary policies) 
have been criticized for reaching their 
limits, for their secondary effects and 
for their transitory nature. In some 
countries, the solutions have caused 
the economy to contract, and in 
others, they have pushed short-term 
interest rates in key money markets 
close to zero. These policies run the 
risk of creating new asset bubbles 
and exporting inflationary pressures 
to countries in the South. See Naqvi 
and Acharya (2012 , pp. 11–12) for 
more detail.
IMF (2011b, p. 29) points out that 
“emerging and developing economies 
account for about half of global out-
put and two-thirds of global growth in 
purchasing power parity (PPP) terms.” 
Moreover, it argues that although the 
share of emerging and developing 
countries’ consumption (measured as 
consumption in constant US dollars, 
not as GDP in purchasing power parity 
terms) does not make up for the lower 
consumption contribution of advanced 
economies on their own, it is large 
enough to rebalance when combined 
with US (or European) consumption.

12 

13  HDRO calculations show that 

countries as disparate as China and 
the United States have benefited in 
the long term from government invest-
ment in health and education (see 
chapter 3 for more details).

14  Given by the ratio of GNI per capita 

for Seychelles ($22,615) and the 
Democratic Republic of Congo ($319).

15  HDRO calculations based on Burd-

Sharp and Lewis (2010).

16  These disparities are of a similar 
order of magnitude as the dispar-
ity between the HDI values of, say, 
Mexico (0.78) or Ecuador (0.72) 
on the one hand, and Nigeria, 
Senegal or Mauritania (0.47), on the 
other. Subnational HDI values are not 
directly comparable with national 
HDI values because they consist of 
different indicators and are for differ-
ent years.

17  These disparities are of a similar 

order of magnitude as the disparity 
between the HDI values of Belgium 
(0.90), on the one hand, and Honduras 
or Kiribati (0.63), on the other.

18  Based on a balanced panel com-

parison and data from World Bank 
(2012a).

19  Since income is a flow variable and 
education and health outcomes are 
stock variables, sometimes a positive 
difference between GNI per capita 
and HDI rank can emerge when a 
country has built up its development 
achievements but its income falls in 
the short term (as in Zimbabwe).

20  United Nations 2012a.
21  World Bank 2012a.
22  United Nations Enable 2012.
23  Sen 2007.
24  Smith 1776.
25  UNDP 2011a.
26  Estimates refer to years between 

2002 and 2011.

27  World Bank 2012b.
28  See, for example, Wilkinson and 

29 

Pickett (2009).
Inequality in the HDI components is 
measured by the Atkinson inequal-
ity index, which takes into account 
inequality in distribution within and 
across groups consistently. In addi-
tion, it puts more weight on the lower 
end of the distribution, thus account-
ing for child mortality, illiteracy and 
income poverty better than the Gini 
coefficient.

30  OECD (2011b) shows that in the 

context of Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development 

Notes    |    125

countries, the provision of health 
care, education and acceptable living 
standards have important direct and 
indirect redistributive effects, espe-
cially among population groups at 
high risk of poverty. Among a range of 
public services, health and education 
contribute by far the most to reducing 
inequality.

31  Anand and Segal 2008.
32  Sala-i-Martin 2006. He uses 

population-weighted GDP per capita 
to calculate the mean of country-
level distributions and obtains the 
dispersion around each mean from 
micro surveys. After estimating a 
distribution of income for each coun-
try and year, he constructs the world 
distribution of income by integrating 
all country distributions.

33  Milanovi´c 2009.
34  Bourguignon and Morrisson 2002.
35  The Supreme Court in India recently 
upheld a government mandate that 
private schools offer a quarter of their 
seats to underprivileged children, 
a measure with the potential to 
substantially dilute the economic 
segregation in access to education.
36  Based on 78 countries for which the 

GII is available.

37  China (1.18), Azerbaijan (1.15), 
Armenia (1.14), Georgia (1.11), 
Republic of Korea (1.10), Solomon 
Islands (1.09), India (1.08), the former 
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia 
(1.08), Montenegro (1.08), Papua New 
Guinea (1.08), Samoa (1.08), Serbia 
(1.08) and Suriname (1.08).

38  Dowry here refers to the payment of 
cash and gifts by a woman’s family 
to her husband’s family at the time 
of the wedding. Many countries 
have dowry systems that involve 
small or moderate gifts, but in some 
countries, such as India, exorbi-
tant amounts can be extracted in 
dowry from the bride’s family during 
marriages.

39  For instance, the Dowry Prohibition 

Act of 1961 makes giving or receiving 
dowry illegal in India. However, the 
practice continues, sporadically fuel-
ling both female feticide and dowry 
deaths of new brides.

40  Cleland 2002; Drèze and Murthi 1999; 

Martin and Juarez 1995.

41  Elson 2002.
42  Fukuda-Parr 2003.
43  As indicated in the 1994 Human 

Development Report (UNDP 1994), the 
universalism of life claims advocates 
equality of opportunity, not equality of 
income—though in a civilized society 
a basic minimum income should be 
guaranteed to everyone.

44  UNDP 1994, p. 18.
45  Rockström and others 2009, p. 32.

46  United Nations Secretary-General’s 

High Level Panel on Global 
Sustainability 2012.

47  Global Footprint Network 2011.
48  The ecological footprint is a measure 
of humanity’s demand on nature that 
takes into account the quantity of 
land and water area that a country 
uses to provide all it takes from 
nature, including areas used to 
produce the resource it consumes, the 
space for accommodating its buildings 
and roads, and the ecosystems for 
absorbing its waste emissions such 
as carbon dioxide (Global Footprint 
Network 2011).

49  Blanden and others (2005); Wilkinson 

and Pickett (2012).

50  UNDP 2010b.
51  Bourguignon, Ferreira and Menéndez 

2007.

52  De Hoyos, Martinez de la Calle and 

53 

Székely 2009.
Ivanov and others 2003; Ivanov and 
others 2006.
54  UNDP 1994.
55  Rosenfeld, Messner and Baumer 

(2001) hypothesized that civic 
engagement and trust, core elements 
of social integration, are associ-
ated with strong social organization 
and therefore are indicators of low 
criminal violence.

56  UNDP 2012.
57  Data refer to the most recent year 
available between 2005 and 2012. 
Homicide data suffer from reporting 
errors in the Supplementary Homicide 
Reports and inconsistency among 
reporting systems at the country level, 
among other problems.

58  Sen 2007, p. 106.
59  The average incidence of murder 
is 2.7 per 100,000 people across 
all Indian cities and 2.9 in Delhi. In 
comparison, the incidence is 2.4 in 
London, 5.0 in New York, 8.8 in Los 
Angeles, 21.5 in Johannesburg, 24.0 
in São Paulo and an astonishing 34.9 
in Rio de Janeiro.

60  United Kingdom, Office of the Deputy 
Prime Minister, Social Exclusion Unit 
2002. Many prisoners have been so-
cially excluded all their lives. Relative 
to the general population, prisoners 
are much more likely to have been in 
state care as a child (13 times), to be 
unemployed (13 times), to have had a 
family member convicted of a criminal 
offence (2.5 times) and to be HIv posi-
tive (15 times).

61  Many prisoners were effectively 

excluded from access to services. An 
estimated 50% of prisoners had no 
physician before coming into custody; 
prisoners are more than 20 times 
more likely than the general popula-
tion to have been excluded from 

126    |    HUMAN DEvELOPMENT REPORT 2013

school; and in at least one instance, 
although 70% of those entering the 
prison had a drug misuse problem, 
80% of them had never received 
any drug treatment services (United 
Kingdom, Office of the Deputy Prime 
Minister, Social Exclusion Unit 2002).

62  Pinker 2011; Center for Systemic 

Peace 2012.

63  Branczik 2004.
64  Dahal and others 2003.
65 
66  Since a large number of participants 

Iyer 2009.

in internal conflicts are nonstate 
actors, there are no official records of 
their expenditure on armaments. Data 
on military expenditure refer to ex-
penditure by governments alone and 
not expenditure by nonstate actors.

67  Bird 1981.
68  Green 2010.
69  Justino 2008.
70  UNDP 1991, p. 37.

Chapter 2
1 

Three-quarters of the 1.6 billion 
people who are multidimensionally 
poor live in middle-income countries 
of the South.

2  HDRO calculations based on UNSD 

3 

(2012).
Internet-related data are from World 
Bank (2012a); tourism data are from 
UNWTO (2011).
Estevadeordal, Frantz and Taylor 2003.

4 
5  World Bank (2012a). These ratios 

are based on gross values, not value 
added in exports and imports, for 
which globally comparable data are 
not yet available. The World Trade 
Organization (WTO) has an ongoing 
initiative, Made in the World, to 
measure and analyse trade in value 
added.

6  Based on a balanced panel of 127 

developing countries. Based on 
HDRO calculations, when the trade 
to output ratio is adjusted to cover 
only trade with the South, 141 of 144 
economies (for which data are avail-
able) increased trade with the South 
between 1990–1991 and 2010–2011 
(the exceptions were the small 
economies of Dominica, the Maldives 
and Tuvalu); in contrast, 92 decreased 
trade with the North.

7  World Bank (2008). Contrary to popu-
lar perception, real prices of air and 
maritime transport have not changed 
much since the 1970s, but the 
decreasing weight to value ratio of 
international shipments and the grow-
ing use of air transport have favoured 
time-sensitive goods such as fashion, 
processed food and electronics.

8  HDRO calculations based on UNSD 

(2012).

9  World Bank 2012a.

10  The eight countries are Argentina, 

Brazil, China, India, Indonesia, 
Mexico, South Africa and Turkey. 
However, the least developed 
countries saw only about an eightfold 
increase, from less than $20 billion to 
$150 billion.

11  When service exports are added to 
merchandise exports, the difference 
in export earnings per capita between 
Sub-Saharan Africa and India narrows 
from $221 to $130. Smaller countries 
tend to engage more in international 
trade than larger ones such as India, 
whose intranational trade is high. 
Furthermore, African exports are 
dominated by commodities whose 
prices increased in the 2000s.
12  Based on 2011 nominal values 

adjusted to be comparable to 1996 
values.

13  Removing fuel, metals and ores from 
aggregate trade statistics means that 
the share of South–South trade in 
world trade rose from 6.3% in 1980 
to 26.1% in 2011 and that the share 
of North–North trade declined from 
50.6% in 1980 to 31.4% in 2011.

14  The traditional classification of goods 
as high or low technology has become 
less meaningful as trade in parts and 
components has increased.

15  Romero 2012.
16  AfDB and others 2011.
17  Gupta and Wang 2012.
18  Hook and Clark 2012.
19  Tourism-related statistics in this 

paragraph draw on UNWTO (2011).

20  Based on United Nations Conference 
on Trade and Development data. Its 
category of developing economies, 
which includes Hong Kong, China 
(SAR), the Republic of Korea, 
Singapore and Taiwan Province of 
China but excludes Commonwealth 
of Independent States countries, 
accounted for 5.3% of overall FDI 
inflows in 1990–1991 and 8% in 
2009–2010.

21  UNCTAD 2011b.
22  Furthermore, South–South FDI is less 

deterred by differences in institu-
tional quality between host and 
receiving countries. By similar logic, 
employment of local personnel and 
lower overhead costs are likely to 
make South–South FDI more resilient 
to local crises. Because the motives 
for investing and selecting sectors 
often differ, South–South FDI does 
not necessarily displace North–South 
FDI; it can even attract more of it 
(Bera and Gupta 2009; Aleksynska and 
Havrylchyk 2011).

23  This figure is for 2010 and includes 

Hong Kong, China (SAR).

24  The evidence in this paragraph draws 

on Hamdani (2013).

25  Blinder 2006.
26  UNIDO 2009.
27  UNDP 2009; World Bank 2010a.
28  These HDRO calculations are based 
on the bilateral migration matrix in 
World Bank (2010a).

29  Ratha and Shaw 2007.
30  As explained in World Bank (2006), 

estimates of South–South remittances 
depend on which explanatory variable 
is used to apportion the aggregate 
remittance received by each country 
among the destination countries of 
its migrant nationals. The estimate 
of South–South remittances is higher 
(30%) when flows are a function of 
migrant stock and lower (18%) when 
they are a function of migrant stock 
plus average incomes of host and 
sending countries. The upper limit of 
45% is obtained when Saudi Arabia is 
counted as a developing country.

31  See Felbermayr and Jung (2009) and 

other citations in Kugler and Rapoport 
(2011).

32  Foley and Kerr 2011.
33  See The Economist (2011a) and works 

cited therein.

34  HDRO calculation based on data 

for 144 countries from World Bank 
(2012a) and ITU (2012).

35  socialbakers.com 2012. A more recent 

update by Zuckerberg (2012) is that 
there are now 1 billion active monthly 
users of Facebook, with the largest 
number of users located in Brazil, 
India, Indonesia, Mexico and the 
United States.

36  The labour force consists of employed 

47  Jenkins and Barbosa 2012.
ICTSD 2011.
48 
49  Davies 2011.
50  Bräutigam 2009.
51  Sonobe, Akoten and Otsuka 2009.
52  Bräutigam 2009.
53  United Nations 2012b.
54  Moyo 2012.
55  According to Hiemstra-van der Horst 

(2011), China now accounts for a third 
of the world furniture market.

56  Kaplinsky, Terheggen and Tijaja 2011.
57  United Nations 2012b.
58  These points draw on Dobbs and 
others (2012); surveys found that 
positive product recommendations 
from friends and family were, for 
example, three times as important for 
consumers in Egypt than in the United 
Kingdom or the United States.
59  HDRO calculations based on 
Brookings Institution (2012).

60  Dobbs and others 2012.
61  World Bank 2012a.
62 

In 2008, South–South aid amounted 
to $15.3 billion—about 10% of total 
aid flows (UNDESA 2010).

63  Based on data for 2005 and 2008 in 
Kharas, Makino and Jung (2011) and 
extrapolated for later years.

64  Kragelund 2013.
65  United Nations 2012b.
66 

Its wide-ranging technical assistance 
initiatives include, among others, 
broadband connectivity of African 
health and education institutions with 
centres in India and bringing some 
1,600 young Africans to study in India 
each year (United Nations 2012b).

people and unemployed people 
actively seeking employment.

67  United Nations 2012b.
68  The larger developing countries 

37  Fu 2008.
38  When the sample excludes developed 
countries, the correlation coefficient 
remains statistically significant but 
drops from 0.66 to 0.48.

39  See Whalley and Weisbrod (2011) for 

estimates of the contribution to an-
nual growth rates attributed to inward 
Chinese FDI in resource-rich countries 
such as Angola, Democratic Republic 
of Congo, Niger, Nigeria, Sudan and 
Zambia. Average FDI inflow into these 
six countries nearly quadrupled from 
$2.4 billion in 1990–2000 to $9 billion 
in 2001–2011, according to UNCTAD 
(2011a).

40  Jones and Kierzkowski 2001.
41  vos 2010.
IMF 2011a.
42 
43  Samake and Yang 2011.
44  Whalley and Weisbrod 2011.
45  Hazard and others 2009; Kamau, 

McCormick and Pinaud 2009; 
Kaplinsky 2008.

46  See Kamau, McCormick and Pinaud 

(2009) for the Kenyan case; Kaplinsky 
and Morris (2009).

have had long-standing, if modest, 
development assistance programmes 
to Africa. India’s Technical and 
Economic Cooperation Programme 
was launched in 1964. The Brazilian 
Cooperation Agency was established 
in 1987. China’s cooperation with 
Africa has an even longer history, 
though it is now formalized in the 
Forum on China–Africa Cooperation, 
established in 2000 (Kragelund 2013).

69  Bremmer 2012.
70  World Bank 2010c.
71  According to United Nations (2012b), 

they were the Islamic Development 
Bank, the Kuwait Fund for Arab 
Economic Development, the Arab Fund 
for Economic and Social Development, 
the Arab Bank for Economic 
Development in Africa, the Saudi Fund 
for Development and the Abu Dhabi 
Fund for Development.

72  These regional institutions have 

tended to draw their policy inspiration 
from the Bretton Woods institutions. 
Neither the Asian Development Bank 
nor the Inter-American Development 

Bank, under their prevailing charters, 
is empowered to modify their 
ownership structure in any substantial 
way. The United States retains veto 
power over changes in the capital 
base, which has narrowed the policy 
space in the two organizations. If, 
for example, the Asian Development 
Bank were to be reconstructed as a 
fully Asian entity that retained the 
flexibility to establish its own policy 
space, it would need to reconstitute 
its ownership structure by assigning 
much larger contributions and voting 
rights to countries such as China, 
India and the Republic of Korea 
(Sobhan 2013).

73  Mwase and Yang 2012.
74  Zuzana and Ndikumana forthcoming.
75  Developing countries could gain an 
estimated $59 billion from lowering 
South–South tariffs to North–South 
levels (OECD 2010a).

76  Grabel 2013.
77  Grabel 2013.
78  Opportunity costs capture the benefits 
that can be obtained from alternative 
uses of these resources. See Rodrik 
(2006) and IMF (2011b).

79  China has the fifth largest voting 

share, but an agreement reached in 
2010 by the Board of Governors, if 
implemented, will make China the 
third largest voteholder (IMF 2010).

80  World Bank 2010d.
81  Hansen 2010.
82  UNDP 2009.
83  Leape 2012.
84  Romero and Broder 2012.
85  Keohane and victor 2010.
86  Li 2010; Bradsher 2010.
87  REN21 2012.
88  See Jacob (2012); Chinese infra-

structure companies in Africa are, for 
instance, boosting demand for heavy 
machinery and other capital imports.

89  Akyuz (2012) argues that large 

countries need to change course. 
Developing countries benefited 
unusually in the 2000s from the 
unsustainable consumption patterns 
in advanced economies; since the 
global financial crisis, developing 
countries have relied more on domes-
tic demand.

Chapter 3
1 

Life expectancy, for example, had 
nearly doubled from 35 years in 1949 
to 67.9 in 1981 (UNDP 2008).

2  One caveat is that the identification 

of rapid improvers on the HDI through 
this method is biased towards coun-
tries with high HDI values. But iden-
tifying rapid improvers by calculating 
simple percentage improvement on 
the HDI provides a bias towards coun-
tries with low HDI values. Neither 

3 

4 

method is completely satisfactory 
(Ranis and Stewart 2005).
Excluded from this list are all 
developed economies in 1990 as well 
as Hong Kong, China (SAR), Israel, 
Singapore and countries from Central 
and Eastern Europe that have joined 
the European Union. This gives a bal-
anced panel of 96 countries between 
1990 and 2012.
The internal armed conflict also 
meant that national statistics often 
excluded the northeast of the country.

5  UNDP 1993, 1996.
6  UNDP 1996.
7  Abe 2006.
8 

For elaboration of the concepts of 
ownership and capacity for develop-
ment, see Fukuda-Parr, Lopes and 
Malik (2002).

9  See Commission on Growth and 

Development (2008).

10  For example, Rodrik (2004) empha-
sized that no short list of evident 
policy reforms can be applied to yield 
growth in developing countries.

11  Hausmann, Pritchett and Rodrik 2005.
12  Serra and Stiglitz 2008.
13  Hausmann, Rodrik and velasco 2005.
14  Arrighi (2007) argues that self-

regulating markets are not the means 
to development and that governments 
must play a leading role in organizing 
market exchange and divisions of 
labour.

15  A country is said to have comparative 

advantage in an economic activity 
if it can undertake that activity at a 
lower opportunity cost than another 
country can.

16  See Harrison and Rodriguez-Clare 
(2010) for single-industry, cross-in-
dustry and cross-country evidence on 
infant industry protection and other 
forms of industrial policy. Succeeding 
in world markets is just one criterion 
(“Mill” test) for justifying government 
support. Such success can come at a 
net welfare cost to the economy and 
fail the “Bastable” test, which re-
quires the discounted future benefits 
to compensate for short-term costs 
of protection. According to Harrison 
and Rodriguez-Clare (2010), more 
instances of industrial policy satisfy 
the Mill test than the Bastable test.

India Ministry of Finance 2012.

17  Rodrik 2012, p. 9.
18  Chibber 1999.
19  Osmani 2005.
20  Ranis and Stewart 2005.
21 
22  Rodrik 2005.
23  See Das (2000) and DeLong (2004).
24  UNCTAD 2003.
25  Done 2011. Between 1996 and 2005 
Embraer delivered 710 regional jets 
around the world (Baer 2008).

26  Pasha and Palanivel 2004.

Notes    |    127

27  UNDP 1993, 1996.
28  Fine and others (2012), whose clas-
sification of Africa includes North 
Africa as well as Sub-Saharan Africa.

29  Fine and others 2012.
30  AfDB and others 2012.
31  Subramanian and Roy 2001.
32  Chuhan-Pole and Angwafo 2011.
33  The headcount poverty rate fell 

from 52% in 1983–1984 to 50% in 
1991–1992; by 2000, it had dropped 
to 40% (Osmani and others 2006).

34  Khan 2005.
35  Nielsen and Spenceley 2011.
36  Kabananukye and others 2004.
37  The figures for Thailand and Brazil 
in this paragraph draw on Fine and 
others (2012).
Islam (2002) discussed in Khan (2005).

38 
39  Khan 2005.
40  Kaminski and Ng 2006.
41  Ayadi and others 2005.
42  Cammett 2007.
43  Lautier 2008.
44  Agosin 1997.
45  Hussain and Stern 2006, p. 14.
46  Malik 2006.
47  Howell 2004.
48  Ravallion 2009.
49  Malik 2012.
50  Rodrik 2011.
51  For faster economic growth, accessing 

world markets alone is not enough: 
the sophistication of exports matters 
equally, for which constant upgrading 
with the aid of foreign knowhow 
is key (see Hausmann, Hwang and 
Rodrik 2007).

52  Commission on Growth and 
Development (2008, p. 22).

53  Rodrik 2001.
54  See Rodriguez and Rodrik (2001) for 
a critique of four influential works 
in this vein: Dollar (1992), Sachs and 
Warner (1995), Edwards (1998) and 
Frankel and Romer (1999).

55  Winters 2004.
56  The case for the use of in-depth 

country-specific case studies to un-
derstand and evaluate policy regimes 
is best articulated by Bhagwati and 
Srinivasan (2001). They note that 
even if the theoretical, data and 
methodological weaknesses inherent 
in most cross-country regressions 
were ignored, cross-country results 
indicate only average effects, mask-
ing differences in individual country 
responses.

57  Rodrik 2001.
58  See Baldwin (2004) and refer-

ences therein to notable country case 
studies.

59  Wacziarg and Welch 2008.
60  Rodrik 2011.
61  Mauritius embraced global markets 

early in the 1970s by fully using trade 
preferences and quotas, notably to 

export sugar and clothing. In the 
2000s, with the termination of quotas 
that governed world trade in textiles 
and clothing and the reduction of 
EU sugar protocol prices, Mauritius 
sought to diversify more into light 
manufacturing and services such as 
offshore banking and ICT (Zafar 2011).

62  While the state monopolies were 

abolished early, they were replaced 
by tariffs, nontariff barriers and 
import-restricting licences until the 
mid-1990s. Between 1980 and 2000, 
China consolidated its industrial 
base without facing the constraints 
imposed by the international rules of 
the World Trade Organization (which 
it joined in 2001).

63  Between 2008 and 2010, China (ex-
cluding Hong Kong, China [SAR]) at-
tracted an average of 7.2% of global 
FDI inflows (UNCTAD 2011a).

64  China can be viewed as a case that 

shows the usefulness of a gradual ap-
proach. As Arrighi (2007) argues, the 
steps taken in China’s reforms includ-
ed gradualism, the use of the market 
as an instrument of governance, the 
initial reforms occurring in agriculture 
and then moving to industry and 
foreign trade, making capitalists 
compete among themselves.

65  Ahluwalia 2002.
66  OECD 2007.
67  Ahluwalia 2002.
68  World Bank 2012a.
69  Celasun 1994.
70 

In addition to import protection, 
export promotion measures were also 
used to further industrial develop-
ment. These included subsidized 
credit, tax breaks, export processing 
zones, bonded manufacturing ware-
houses, duty drawbacks, privatization 
of customs administration and direct 
export subsidies.

71  World Bank 2010b. Foreign firms are 
noticing the strengthening of compe-
tencies in Thailand despite political 
instability in recent years. In 2010, 
new investment plans were announced 
by Ford, General Motors, Mazda and 
Toyota, with new investors such as 
BMW and Tata also expected to join.
72  See Athukorala (2011) for a detailed 
study of Penang’s rise as an export 
hub.

73  World Bank 2011a.
74  NEAC 2010.
75  Athukorala and Waglé 2011.
76  Radelet, Sachs and Lee 1997.
77  Sharma 2012.
78  Clapp 1995; Agosin 1997; Rodrik 

2004.

with the Short Term and Long Term 
Arrangements Regarding International 
Trade in Cotton Textiles, followed by 
the Multi-Fibre Arrangement between 
1974 and 1994 and the World Trade 
Organization Agreement on Textiles 
and Clothing until 2004. The Multi-
Fibre Arrangement in particular 
forced many successful exporting 
economies (especially from East Asia) 
to shift investment to countries less 
restrained by bilateral quotas. This 
distorted world trade but benefited 
such countries as Bangladesh and 
Mauritius in their efforts to diversify 
into manufacturing.

81  Kabeer and Mahmud 2004.
82  Based on mirrored trade data from 

the United Nations Commodity Trade 
Statistics Database; products belong-
ing to Standard International Trade 
Classification (Revision 3) Division 84 
were classified as apparel exports. 
Analysis is limited to countries that 
reported data for apparel exports in 
each year.

83  Subramanian and Roy 2001.
84  Chuhan-Pole and Angwafo 2011.
85  Ofosu-Asare 2011.
86  Suri and others 2011. In particular, 

they find that for a one standard 
deviation decrease in infant mortality 
rate, over a decade there would be 
a 2.2 percentage point increase in 
economic growth. Similarly, a one 
standard deviation increase in life 
expectancy over a decade implies 
a 2.7 percentage point increase in 
growth, while a one standard devia-
tion increase in secondary enrolment 
rate over a decade increases growth 
1.9 percentage points.

87  Commission on Growth and 

Development 2008.

88  Hanushek and others (2008) found 
that across the 50 countries they 
studied, each additional year of aver-
age schooling in a country increased 
the average 40 year growth rate of 
GDP about 0.37 percentage point. 
However, they found that a country 
whose test score performance was 
0.5 standard deviation higher than 
another country during the 1960s had 
a growth rate that was, on average, 1 
percentage point higher annually over 
the following 40 year period.

89  To address this question, Hanushek 

and others (2008) measured the share 
of students in each country who reach 
a threshold of basic competency in 
mathematics and science, as well as 
the share of students who perform at 
very high levels.

79  UNCTAD 2006.
80  World trade in apparel and textiles 

was governed by quotas for more 
than 40 years, beginning in the 1960s 

90  Bloom, Canning and Sevilla (2007) 
found that a one year increase in a 
population’s life expectancy contributes 
to a 4% increase in output. Similar 

128    |    HUMAN DEvELOPMENT REPORT 2013

positive effects are also associated 
with improvements in reproductive 
health. In a study of 97 countries, 
Bloom and others (2009) found that 
higher fertility is associated with lower 
labour force participation of women 
during their fertile years. On average, 
each additional child reduces female 
labour force participation 5–10 percent-
age points for women ages 20–44.

91  Stern 2003.
92  Cornia 2004.
93  Rodrik 1998.
94  Stern 2003.
95  Ssewanyana, Matovu and Twimukye 

2011.

96  Foster and Mijumbi 2002.
97  Bertrand and Mullainathan 2003.
98  Essama-Nssah 2011.
99  Sivananthiran and venkata Ratnam 

2005.

100  Tsounta 2009.
101  Tangcharoensathien and others 2011.
102  UNESCAP 2011.
103  Frenk, Gómez-Dantés and Knaul 2009.
104  Kanbur 2004.
105  Ravallion 2009.
106  Glewwe and Kassouf 2008.

Chapter 4
1 

The distinction between equity and 
equality is linked to the difference 
between what can be observed and 
what cannot be. Equity is associated 
with equal opportunities, which are 
not observable. Unfortunately, as 
only outcomes can be observed and 
measured, the evaluation of whether 
a society is equitable can only be 
approximated based on the degree of 
prevailing inequality.
Inequalities across racial, ethnic and 
religious groups are particularly likely 
to cause political violence and tend 
to be extremely persistent unless 
confronted by comprehensive policies 
(Stewart 2013).
This beneficial trend in Latin America 
is driven by declining labour income 
inequality, a closing wage gap 
between skilled and unskilled workers 
and conditional cash transfers (see 
López-Calva and Lustig 2010).

2 

3 

4  Cleland 2002. Martin and Juarez 
(1995) argue that in some cases, 
over the short term, education does 
not necessarily immediately affect 
reproductive behaviour. See also Hori 
(2011); Serbessa (2002); Cochrane 
(1979); Bloom and others (2009); 
Psacharopoulos and Tzannatos (1992).
Taylor, Newman and Kelly 1976.

5 
6  UNDESA 2007; Diamond, Newby and 

7 

varle 1999; Population Reference 
Bureau 2000.
This indicator is more commonly 
reported as deaths per 1,000 live 
births, or the infant mortality rate, 

which is 61.7 deaths per 1,000 live 
birth per year.

8  UNDP 1995.
9 

ILO 2012. The International Labour 
Organization constructed the index 
using Gallup survey data.

10  Westaway 2012.
11  Lagi, Bertrand and Bar-Yam 2011. The 

12 

Food and Agriculture Organization 
food price index topped 180 in 2008.
ILO 2012. According to International 
Labour Organization estimates based 
on Gallup data, the majority of people 
in nearly all regions of the world are 
not satisfied with the availability of 
quality jobs. Dissatisfaction is highest 
in Central and Eastern Europe and 
Sub-Saharan Africa, followed by the 
Middle East and North Africa.

13  Bland 2012.
14  Tejada 2012.
15  Gooch 2012.
16 
17  See, for example, Jenkins and 

ILO 2012.

Wallace (1996), who find an associa-
tion between education and protest 
involvement, and Dalton, van Sickle 
and Weldon (2010), who find a strong 
positive correlation between educa-
tion levels and protest involvement 
across a wide range of developed and 
developing countries.

18  Between now and 2050, under varying 

assumptions, the share of the global 
population older than age 15 that 
is uneducated is projected to fall to 
either 3% or 8% depending on the 
scenario, down from 12% in 2010; the 
share of the population with second-
ary or tertiary education will rise to 
either 50% or 64% depending on the 
scenario, up from 44% in 2010 (see 
figure 4.1).
19  Hook 2012.
20  LaFraniere 2011; Wines and 

LaFraniere 2011.

21  Amartya Sen makes this distinction: 

unfair exclusion means that some 
people are kept out or left out; unjust 
inclusion means that some people 
are included on deeply unfavourable 
terms (APRI 2003).

22  Huntington (1968), cited in Campante 

and Chor (2012).

23  See Campante and Chor (2012).
24  Based on health, education and 

income attainments in 78 countries 
over 1980–2011. Unlike mean years of 
schooling, health and income attain-
ments have been reversed during this 
period in some countries.
25  Campante and Chor 2012.
26  Campante and Chor 2012, p. 175.
27  Polanyi 1944.
28  FitzGerald, Stewart and venugopal 

2006.

29  For example, Guangdong Province and 

Liaoning Province have similar HDI 

values, but Guangdong has more than 
three times the carbon productivity of 
Liaoning (UNDP 2010c).

30  UNDP 2011a.
31  See UNDP (2011a) for more detail.
32  The United Nations International 
Strategy for Disaster Reduction 
defines resilience as “the ability 
of a system, community or society 
exposed to hazards to resist, absorb, 
accommodate to and recover from the 
effects of a hazard in a timely and 
efficient manner, including through 
the preservation and restoration of 
its essential basic structures and 
functions” (United Nations Office for 
Disaster Risk Reduction 2009).

33  Daniell and vervaeck 2012.
34 
35  Each age group in a population 

IPCC 2012.

faces different needs and behaves 
differently. Young people (ages 0–14) 
require investments in health and 
education. Working-age adults (ages 
15–64) require jobs and financial 
infrastructure to support production 
and savings. Older adults (ages 65 
and older) require health care and 
retirement income. A country’s age 
structure thus alters its challenges 
and opportunities.

36  With fewer children to support, 

parents invest more in their children’s 
education (Becker, Murphy and 
Tamura 1990; Galor 2006), save more 
for their retirement (Bloom, Canning 
and Sevilla 2003), and women 
increasingly participate in the formal 
labour market (Bloom and others 
2009). As a result, economic growth 
accelerates, yielding what has been 
called “the demographic dividend” 
(Bloom, Canning and Sevilla 2003).

37  A low dependency ratio can generate 

a demographic dividend, since the 
increase in the labour force can 
spur economic growth and greater 
investment, given the low demand 
for spending from dependents. (See 
Abdurazakov, Minsat and Pineda 
[2013] for a detailed analysis of 
demographic trends based on projec-
tions by Lutz and KC 2013.) But coun-
tries can reap these dividends only if 
they provide productive employment 
for the large number of new entrants 
to the labour force.
38  Lutz and KC 2013.
39  A scenario of education level 

distribution where universal primary 
education is complemented by broad-
based secondary education brings 
the highest annual economic growth 
rates for a typical low HDI country 
with a large share of young people 
(IIASA 2008). This analysis uses a 
dataset that disaggregates each 
country’s population by age, sex and 

educational attainment. Thus, each 
five-year cohort’s population share 
can be described as having no educa-
tion, primary education, secondary 
education or tertiary education. And 
these attainments can be differenti-
ated by gender. The proportion of the 
population in each five-year cohort 
changes with trends in fertility, mor-
tality and migration. The proportion 
of the young, working-age and elderly 
populations will thus also change 
over time.

40  This approach is consistent with that 
of the Millennium Development Goals 
and the Education for All initiative. 
Governing this scenario are several 
key targets: near universal (99%) 
primary education by 2015, 50% 
lower secondary education by 2030 
and 90% by 2030, and 60% tertiary 
education by 2050.

41  HDRO calculations based on Lutz and 

KC (2013).

42  UNDESA 2007. For developed 

countries, international migration is 
unlikely to ease the economic impacts 
of an ageing population because the 
volume of migration needed is much 
larger than is politically feasible. In 
scenario III of the study, the migra-
tion needed to halt the expected 
increase in the ratio of the elderly 
over 1995–2050 ranges from an aver-
age annual net inflow of 1.1 million 
people for the United Kingdom and 
1.7 million for France to more than 
10 million each for Japan and the 
United States.

43  Becker, Murphy and Tamura 1990; 

Galor 2006; Bloom, Canning and 
Sevilla 2003; Bloom and others 2009.

44  Bloom and others 2012. In Sub-

Saharan Africa, the youth dependency 
ratio is 1.07 for the poorest 20% of 
households but 0.72 for the wealthi-
est 20%. In Latin America, the ratio is 
0.91 for the poorest households and 
0.57 for the wealthiest.

45  See The Economist (2012b) for a 

discussion of the main results of the 
Bloom and others (2012) study.

46  Hausmann and Székely (2001) found 

that the demographic transition in 
Latin America accentuated existing 
inequality trends, with faster and 
earlier demographic shifts among 
the wealthiest population groups 
widening the gap between the rich 
and the poor. Giroux (2008) found 
that although fertility differen-
tials associated with education 
have remained relatively stable in 
Sub-Saharan African countries as 
national fertility has fallen, inequal-
ity has increased. They show that 
changes in the education composi-
tion of the population have shaped 

recent variations in reproductive 
inequality in the region.
47  Bloom and others 2012.
48  World Bank 2011c.
49 

In many countries, if the current age 
of retirement is unchanged, this win-
dow will close in a matter of decades. 
This suggests that important discus-
sions about the retirement age will 
take place in many countries where 
the population is ageing quickly.

50  The previous section discussed the 

role of migration on demographic 
trends; here the role of migration is 
more comprehensive, since it is fully 
integrated into a model in which 
demographic trends are just one part 
of several modules used in these pro-
jections exercise. See Pardee Center 
for International Futures (2013).

Chapter 5
1 

The Doha round for trade negotiations 
at the World Trade Organization have 
been at an impasse since 2008 (Castle 
and Landler 2008; WTO n.d.). At the 
United Nations Framework Convention 
on Climate Change 18th Conference 
of the Parties in Doha in December 
2012, the main legally binding global 
agreement on climate change, the 
Kyoto Protocol, was extended until 
2020. Countries reiterated that they 
are determined to adopt, in 2015, 
a new “protocol, another legal instru-
ment or an agreed outcome with legal 
force” to come into effect from 2020. 
However, any agreement on the struc-
ture of the new protocol and financing 
mechanisms was left until next year. 
(Broder 2012; Harvey 2012)

2  Heller 2013.
3  Global public goods are those that 
have cross-border consequences. 
National governments, acting on their 
own, as well as markets, are unable 
to produce sufficient quantities of 
global public goods, and collective 
intergovernmental action is needed. In 
a world where trade, financial flows, 
environmental resources and pollu-
tion increasingly transcend national 
borders, multilateral cooperation for 
the provision of global public goods 
becomes crucial for human develop-
ment (Kaul 2013).

4  While bilateral arrangements can 

sometimes disadvantage the weaker 
partner, regional arrangements can 
help empower poorer regions in their 
negotiations with richer ones.
This is called trade diversion. 
Lowering of tariff barriers that leads 
to more trade is called trade creation. 
See Krugman (1991).

5 

6  See Krugman (1991), who argues 

further that the net effect on world 
efficiency is unlikely to be negative 

Notes    |    129

because trading blocs consist of 
geographical neighbours. Since 
these countries would be natural 
trading partners even without special 
arrangements, the losses from trade 
diversion are small, while gains from 
trade creation are large.

7  Multilateralizing regionalism also 

8 

requires harmonizing a diverse array 
of trade regulations (such as varying 
rules of origin for determining local 
content) and expanding regional 
agreements to include as many de-
veloping country partners as possible. 
These ideas draw on Baldwin (2007).
The International Organization for 
Migration, not a part of the UN 
system, has the broadest mandate for 
migration issues of any interna-
tional institution. With 146 member 
states, it has become an increasingly 
prominent forum for discussions on 
international migration.

9  UNDP 2009.
10  Hansen 2010.
11  Betts and others 2013.
12  King, Richards and Tyldesley 2011.
13  UNDP 2011a.
14  Han 2012.
15  Leape 2012.
16  Leape 2012.
17  Romero and Broder 2012.
18  Glennie 2011.
19  OECD 2011c.
20  G8 2005.
21  Ocampo 2010.
22  General Assembly addresses by heads 

of government Sept. 25-Oct.1 (UN 
News Service www.un.org/news/).
23  At the Group of 20 Summit in Los 
Cabos in 2012, Brazil, China, India, 

the Russian Federation and South 
Africa announced contributions of 
$75 billion towards International 
Monetary Fund resources. These 
funds come with several conditions. 
They can be called upon only after 
existing resources are substantially 
used. The money was also given in 
anticipation that “all the reforms 
agreed upon in 2010 will be fully 
implemented in a timely manner, 
including a comprehensive reform 
of voting power and reform of quota 
shares” (Chowla 2012).

24  Heller 2013.
25  The video received more than 100 mil-

lion views and is one of the most 
“viral” videos of all time.

26  Chandhoke 2009; Heller 2013.
27  This takes many forms— restrictive 

nongovernmental organization 
laws, foreign currency and taxation 
regulations, registration require-
ments and the like—and is justified 
by governments on grounds such as 
national security, accounting failures 
by nongovernmental organizations, 
coordination and control, among 
others. The International Center for 
Non-profit Law and CIvICUS have 
consistently been reporting on and 
analyzing this situation worldwide.

28  Castells 2003; Burawoy 2003.
29  British political theorist Andrew 
Dobson developed the idea of an 
“ecological citizenship”. Thinking 
ecologically implies a broad notion 
of citizenship, one that includes the 
goal of reducing ecologic footprints. 
Ecological citizenship goes beyond 
individual responsibility, since 

ecological thinking views citizens as 
products of and influences on their 
communities (and their ecosystems) 
(Revkin 2012).
30  Chorev 2012.
31  Grabel 2013. For a useful summary 

see also Lamberte and Morgan (2012).

32  Reserve Bank of India 2012.
33  Grabel 2013.
34  Ocampo and Titelman 2009.
35  Grabel 2013.
36  The Bank of the South was founded 

in 2007 by venezuelan President 
Hugo Chavez and officially launched 
in 2009. Initially envisaged with a 
very broad mission, by the time of its 
launch in 2009, its mandate had been 
narrowed to project finance in the 
South American region (Chin 2010). 
Its precise functions and goals are 
still being debated among member 
countries.

37  OECD 2010a.
38  Baldwin 2006.
39  See United Nations Security Council 
(2011), which contains the concept 
note on responsibility while protect-
ing, as developed by the government 
of Brazil.
India Ministry of External Affairs 
2012.

40 

41  Bhattacharya, Romani and Stern 2012.
42  Bhattacharya, Romani and Stern 2012.
43  HDRO calculations based on World 
Bank (2012a) data on average spend-
ing for each country in the region 
between 2005 and 2010.

44  Based on HDRO calculations us-
ing World Bank (2012a) data on 
international reserves. Given that in-
ternational reserves play a prominent 

role in monetary and exchange rate 
policy, it may be too ambitious to 
expect a larger proportion of the 
reserves to be allocated for other 
purposes.

45  Some have proposed a global 

infrastructure initiative whereby rich 
countries channel investment funds 
to developing countries, generating 
a greater return on investment than 
they could at home (Harding 2012). 
The same principle applies to invest-
ment by emerging economies.

46  Bolton, Samama and Stiglitz 2011. 
Norway has also offered $1 billion 
to Brazil for its deforestation efforts, 
albeit not through its sovereign 
wealth fund.

47  Public-private partnerships and 

community-level initiatives can also 
help broaden the scope and impact of 
sovereign wealth fund investments.

48  See Hamdani (2013) and South 

Commission (1990).

49  The South Commission was formally 
established in 1987, following years 
of informal discussion among leaders 
from the South. The report of the 
South Commission (1990) emphasized 
that developing countries have many 
problems and much experience in 
common. It found that the South is 
not well organized at the global level 
and has been unable to effectively 
mobilize its combined expertise, 
experience and bargaining power. 
The report made practical sugges-
tions to be carried out by concerned 
policymakers.

50  Mwase and Yang 2012.
51  OECD 2010a.

130    |    HUMAN DEvELOPMENT REPORT 2013

References

Abdurazakov, A., A. Minsat, and J. Pineda. 2013. 
“Implications of Education Policies in a Country’s 
Demographic Prospects: Detailed Analysis of 
Demographic Trends Based on Projections by Lutz and 
KC.” Human Development Research Paper. United Nations 
Development Programme, Human Development Report 
Office, New York.

Abe, M. 2006. “The Developmental State and Educational 

Advance in East Asia.” Educate 6 (1): 6–12.

ADB (Asian Development Bank). 2009. Annual Report 

2009. vol. 1. Manila. www.adb.org/documents/ 
adb-annual-report-2009. Accessed 15 May 2012.

AfDB (African Development Bank), OECD (Organisation 

for Economic Co-operation and Development), 
UNDP (United Nations Development Programme), 
and UNECA (United Nations Economic Commission 
for Africa). 2011. African Economic Outlook 2011: Africa 
and Its Emerging Partners. Paris and Tunis.

———. 2012. African Economic Outlook 2012: Promoting 

Youth Employment. Paris and Tunis.

Agosin, M. 1997. “Trade and Growth in Chile: Past 

Performance and Future Prospects.” United Nations 
Economic Commission for Latin America, International 
Trade Unit, Santiago. www.eclac.org/cgi-bin/getProd.
asp?xml=/publicaciones/xml/4/4234/P4234.xml&xsl=/
comercio/tpl-i/p9f.xsl&base=/comercio/tpl/top-bottom.
xsl. Accessed 15 May 2012.

Ahluwalia, M.S. 2002. “Economic Reforms in India since 

1991: Has Gradualism Worked?” Journal of Economic 
Perspectives 16 (3): 67–88.

Akyuz, Y. 2012. “The Staggering Rise of the South.” 

Research Paper 44. South Center, Geneva.

Aleksynska, M., and O. Havrylchyk. 2011. “FDI from 

the South: The Role of Institutional Distance and 
Natural Resources.” Working Paper 2011-05. Centre 
D’Études Prospectives et D’Informations Internationales, 
Paris. www.cepii.fr/anglaisgraph/workpap/pdf/2011/ 
wp2011-05.pdf. Accessed 15 May 2012.

Ali, S., and U. Dadush. 2012. In Search of the Global Middle 
Class: A New Index. Washington, DC: Carnegie Endowment 
for International Peace. http://carnegieendowment.org/
files/middle_class-edited.pdf. Accessed 4 October 2012.
AMRO (ASEAN+3 Macroeconomic Research Office). 

2012. “The Joint Statement of the 15th ASEAN+3 Finance 
Ministers and Central Bank Governors’ Meeting.” Manila. 
www.amro-asia.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/05/ 
120503AFMGM+3-JS.pdf. Accessed 31 May 2012.

Anand, S., and P. Segal. 2008. “What Do We Know about 
Global Income Inequality?” Journal of Economic Literature 
46: 57–94.

Anderson, L. 2011. “Demystifying the Arab Spring: Parsing 

the Differences between Tunisia, Egypt, and Libya.” 
Foreign Affairs 90 (3): 2–7.

APRI (Asia Pacific Regional Human Development 
Reports Initiative). 2003. “Potential and Challenges 
in Human Development Reporting.” Report of the UNDP 
Training Workshop, 24–26 September 2003, Colombo, Sri 
Lanka. UNDP Asia-Pacific Regional Centre, Bangkok.

Arrighi, G. 2007. “China’s Market Economy in the Long 

Berg, J., and S. Cazes. 2007. “The Doing Business 

Run.” In Ho-Fung Hung, ed., China and the Transformation 
of Global Capitalism. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins 
University Press.

Indicators: Measurement Issues and Political 
Implications.” Economic and Labour Market Paper 2007/6. 
International Labour Organization, Geneva.

Athukorala, P. 2011. “Production Networks and Trade 

Patterns in East Asia: Regionalization or Globalization?” 
Asian Economic Papers 10 (1): 65–95.

Athukorala, P., and S. Waglé. 2011. “Foreign Direct 

Investment in Southeast Asia: Is Malaysia Falling 
Behind?” ASEAN Economic Bulletin 28 (2): 115–33.

Atkinson, A. 2011. “Public Economics after the Idea of 

Justice.” 1st Annual Amartya Sen Lecture, 5 September, 
The Hague, The Netherlands. www.ethicsandtechnology.
eu/images/uploads/1stAnnualAmartyaSenLecture_ 
TonyAtkinson.pdf. Accessed 15 May 2012.

———. 2012. “Public Economics in an Age of Austerity.” 

Agnar Sandmo Lecture, 12 January, Norwegian School of 
Economics and Business Administration, Bergen, Norway.
Atsmon, Y., P. Child, R. Dobbs, and L. Narasimhan. 2012. 

“Winning the $30 Trillion Decathlon: Going for Gold in 
Emerging Markets.” McKinsey Quarterly, August. www.
mckinseyquarterly.com/Winning_the_30_trillion_de-
cathlon_Going_for_gold_in_emerging_markets_3002. 
Accessed 15 August 2012.

Ayadi, M., G. Boulila, M. Lahoulel, and P. Montigny. 

2005. “Pro-Poor Growth in Tunisia.” International 
Development and Strategies, Paris.

Baer, W. 2008. The Brazilian Economy: Growth and 

Development. Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner Publishers.

Baldwin, R.E. 2004. “Openness and Growth: What’s 
the Empirical Relationship? In R.E. Baldwin and L.A. 
Winters, eds., Challenges to Globalization: Analyzing the 
Economics. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press. www.
nber.org/chapters/c9548.pdf. Accessed 6 August 2012.
———. 2006. “Multilateralizing Regionalism: Spaghetti 

Bowls as Building Blocks on the Path to Global Free 
Trade.” World Economy 29 (11): 1451–1518.

———. 2007. “Ideas for a WTO Action Plan on Regionalism: 

Implications for Asia.” Post-event Statement. Asian 
Development Bank Institute Distinguished Speaker 
Seminar, 26 November, Tokyo. www.adbi.org/event/2366.
dance.east.asia.reflections/. Accessed 23 October 2012.
Barro, R.J., and J.-W. Lee. 2010. Educational Attainment 

Dataset. www.barrolee.com. Accessed 5 May 2012.

Becker, G., K. Murphy, and R. Tamura. 1990. “Human 

Capital, Fertility, and Economic Growth.” Journal of 
Political Economy 98 (5): S12–S37.

Beeston, K. 2012. “Time for Democracy 2.0? The Launch 

of the Manifesto For A Global Democracy.” Global 
Policy Journal, 5 July. www.globalpolicyjournal.com/
blog/05/07/2012/time-democracy-20-launch-manifesto 
-global-democracy. Accessed 28 December 2012.

Bera, S., and S. Gupta. 2009. “South-South FDI vs. North-

South FDI: A Comparative Analysis in the Context of 
India.” Working Paper 238. Indian Council of Research in 
International Economic Relations, New Delhi. www.icrier.
org/pdf/WorkingPaper238.pdf. Accessed 15 May 2012.

Bertrand, M., and S. Mullainathan. 2003. Are Emily and 
Greg More Employable than Lakisha and Jamal? A Field 
Experiment on Labor and Market Discrimination. Working 
Paper 9873. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic 
Research. www.nber.org/papers/w9873. Accessed 
15 May 2012.

Betts, A., J. Prantl, D. Sridhar, and N. Woods. 2013. 
“Transforming Global Governance for the Twenty-First 
Century.” Human Development Research Paper. United 
Nations Development Programme, Human Development 
Report Office, New York. www.spp.nus.edu.sg/docs/ 
HDR-GEG2012-LKYSPP.pdf. Accessed 15 May 2012.

Bhagwati, J., and Srinivasan, T. 2001. “Outward-

Orientation and Development: Are Revisionists Right?” 
In D. Lal and R. Snape, eds., Trade, Development, and 
Political Economy. London: Palgrave.

Bhattacharya, A., M. Romani, and N. Stern. 2012. 

“Infrastructure for Development: Meeting the Challenge.” 
Centre for Climate Change Economics and Policy, London. 
www.cccep.ac.uk/Publications/Policy/docs/PP-infrastructure 
-for-development-meeting-the-challenge.pdf. Accessed 15 
May 2012.

Bird, L.A. 1981. Costa Rica: A Country without an Army. 

Bolton, UK: Leeds Northern Friends Peace Board.

Bland, B. 2012. “vietnam’s Factories Grapple with Growing 

Unrest.” Financial Times, 19 January. www.ft.com/intl/
cms/s/0/67380b5c-427e-11e1-97b1-00144feab49a.html. 
Accessed 21 December 2012.

Blanden, J., A. Goodman, P. Gregg, and S. Machin. 

2005. “Changes in Intergenerational Income Mobility in 
Britain.” In M. Corak, ed., Generational Income Mobility 
in North America and Europe. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge 
University Press.

Blinder, A. 2006. “Offshoring: The Next Industrial 

Revolution?” Foreign Affairs 85 (2): 113.

Block, F. 2008. “Swimming Against the Current: The Rise 
of a Hidden Developmental State in the United States.” 
Politics and Society 36 (2): 169–206.

———. 2013. “Can the Path of the World’s Richer Nations 

be Sustained? The Future of the U.S. Model.” Human 
Development Research Paper. United Nations Development 
Programme, Human Development Report Office, New York.
Bloom, D.E., D. Canning, G. Fink, and J.E. Finlay. 2009. 

“Fertility, Female Labor Force Participation, and the 
Demographic Dividend.” Journal of Economic Growth 14 
(2): 79–101.

———. 2012. “Microeconomic Foundations of the 

Demographic Dividend.” Working Paper 93. Harvard 
University, Program on the Global Demography of 
Aging, Cambridge, MA. www.hsph.harvard.edu/pgda/
WorkingPapers/2012/PGDA_WP_93.pdf. Accessed 
27 December 2012.

Bloom, D.E., D. Canning, and J. Sevilla. 2003. The 
Demographic Dividend: A New Perspective on the 

References    |    131

Economic Consequences of Population Change. Santa 
Monica, CA: Rand Corporation.

In G. Helleiner, ed., Trade and Industrialization in Turbulent 
Times. London: Routledge.

———. 2007. “The Effect of Health on Economic Growth: 

Center for Systemic Peace. 2012. “Global Conflict 

A Production Function Approach.” Working Paper 28. 
Harvard University, Program on the Global Demography 
of Aging, Cambridge, MA. www.hsph.harvard.edu/pgda/
WorkingPapers/2007/PGDA_WP_28.pdf. Accessed 10 
August 2012.

Bolton, P, F. Samama, and J. Stiglitz. 2011. Sovereign 

Wealth Funds and Long-Term Investing. New York: 
Columbia University Press.

Bourguignon, F., F.H.G. Ferreira, and M. Menéndez. 
2007. “Inequality of Opportunity in Brazil.” Review of 
Income and Wealth 53 (4): 585–618.

Bourguignon, F., and C. Morrisson. 2002. “Inequality 

among World Citizens: 1820–1992.” American Economic 
Review 92 (4): 727–744.

BRAC. n.d. “About BRAC Bangladesh.” www.brac.net/

Trends: Measuring Systemic Peace.” vienna, vA. www.
systemicpeace.org/conflict.htm. Accessed 15 May 2012.
Chandhoke, N. 2009. “What Is the Relationship Between 

Participation and Representation?” In O. Törnquist, 
N. Webster, and K. Stokke, eds. Rethinking Popular 
Representation. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Chang, H.J. 2010. “How to ‘Do’ a Developmental 

State: Political, Organizational and Human Resource 
Requirements for the Developmental State.” In 
O. Edigheji, ed., Constructing a Democratic Developmental 
State in South Africa, Potentials and Challenges. Cape 
Town: HSRC Press.

Chen, S., and M. Ravallion. 2012. “More Relatively-Poor 
People in a Less Absolutely-Poor World.” Policy Research 
Working Paper 6114. Washington, DC, World Bank.

content/about-brac-bangladesh. Accessed 15 May 2012.

Cheng, H., Y. Hu, and J. Zhao. 2009. “Meeting China’s 

Water Shortage Crisis: Current Practices and Challenges. 
Environmental Science & Technology 43 (2): 240–244.

Chibber, V. 1999. “Building a Developmental State: The Korean 

Cochrane, S.H. 1979. Fertility and Education: What Do We 
Really Know? Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University 
Press.

Commission on Growth and Development. 2008. The 

Growth Report: Strategies for Sustained Growth and 
Inclusive Development. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Cornia, G.A. 2004. Inequality, Growth and Poverty in an Era 

of Liberalization and Globalization. Oxford, UK: Oxford 
University Press.

Dahal, S.H., H. Gazdar, S.I. Keethaponcalan, and P. 

Murthy. 2003. “Internal Conflict and Regional Security 
in South Asia.” United Nations Institute for Disarmament 
Research, Geneva. www.unidir.org/pdf/ouvrages/pdf-1 
-92-9045-148-3-en.pdf. Accessed 15 May 2012.

Dalton, R., A. Van Sickle, and S. Weldon. 2010. “The 
Individual–Institutional Nexus of Protest Behaviour.” 
British Journal of Political Science 40 (1): 51–73.
Daniell, J., and A. Vervaeck. 2012. “Damaging 

Earthquakes Database 2011—the Year in Review.” Center 
for Disaster Management and Risk Reduction Technology, 
Potsdam, Germany. http://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.
int/files/resources/Full_Report_3285.pdf.

Bradsher, K. 2010. “China Leading Global Race to Make 
Clean Energy.” The New York Times, 30 January. www.
nytimes.com/2010/01/31/business/energy-environment/ 
31renew.html. Accessed 15 May 2012.

Branczik, A. 2004. “Humanitarian Aid and Development 

Assistance.” Beyond Intractability. www.beyondintractability 
.org/bi-essay/humanitarian-aid. Accessed 15 May 2012.
Bräutigam, D. 2009. The Dragon’s Gift: The Real Story of 

China in Africa. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.

Bremmer, I. 2012. “Africa and the Power of the Pivot.” The 
New York Times, 14 May. www.nytimes.com/2012/05/15/
opinion/africa-and-the-power-of-the-pivot.html. Accessed 
15 May 2012.

Broder, J.M. 2012. “Climate Talks Yield Commitment to 
Ambitious, but Unclear, Actions.” The New York Times, 
8 December. www.nytimes.com/2012/12/09/ science/earth/ 
talks-on-climate-produce-promises-and-complaints.html. 
Accessed 8 December 2012.

Brookings Institution. 2012. “Middle Class Measures.” 

Development, Aid and Governance Indicators. Washington, 
DC. www.brookings.edu/research/interactives/ 
development-aid-governance-indicators. Accessed 
4 October 2012.

Burawoy, M. 2003. “For A Sociological Marxism: The 

Complementary Convergence of Antonio Gramsci and Karl 
Polanyi.” Politics and Society 31 (2): 193–261.

Burd-Sharp, S., and K. Lewis. 2010. The Measure of 

America 2010–2011: Mapping Risks and Resilience. New 
York: NYU Press.

Cammett, M. 2007. “Business-Government Relations and 
Industrial Change: The Politics of Upgrading in Morocco 
and Tunisia.” World Development 35 (11): 1889–1903.
Campante, F., and D. Chor. 2012. “Why Was the Arab 

Spring Poised for Revolution? Schooling, Economic 
Opportunities, and the Arab Spring.” Journal of Economic 
Perspectives 26 (2): 167–188.

Castells, M. 2003. The Power of Identity. Malden, MA: 

Blackwell.

Castle, S., and M. Landler. 2008. “After 7 Years, Talks 

Collapse on World Trade.” The New York Times, 30 July.
Celasun, M. 1994. “Trade and Industrialization in Turkey: 
Initial Conditions, Policy and Performance in the 1990s.” 

132    |    HUMAN DEvELOPMENT REPORT 2013

Case Reconsidered.” Politics & Society 27 (3): 309–346.

Das, G. 2000. India Unbound: The Social and Economic 

Chin, G. 2010. “Remaking the Architecture: The Emerging 

Powers, Self-Insuring and Regional Insulation.” 
International Affairs 86 (3): 693–715.

———. 2012. “Responding to the Global Financial Crisis: 

The Evolution of Asian Regionalism and Economic 
Globalization.” Working Paper 343. Asian Development 
Bank Institute, Tokyo. www.adbi.org/working-paper/ 
2012/01/31/4846.gfc.evolution.asian.regionalism 
.economic.globalization/. Accessed 15 May 2012.
China Daily. 2012. “Overseas M&A Deals Hit $43b 

in 2011.” 27 February. www.chinadaily.com.cn/
bizchina/2012-02/27/content_14703801.htm. Accessed 
15 May 2012.

Chorev, N. 2012. The World Health Organization between 

North and South. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.

Chowla, P. 2012. “Spotlight G20: Does BRICS Money for the 
IMF Mean They Are Bailing Out Europe?” 21 June. Triple 
Crisis: Global Perspectives on Finance, Development, and 
Environment. http://triplecrisis.com/spotlight-g-20-does-
brics-money-for-the-imf-mean-they 
-are-bailing-out-europe/. Accessed 8 December 2012.

Chuhan-Pole, P., and M. Angwafo, eds. 2011. Yes 

Africa Can: Success Stories From A Dynamic Continent. 
Washington, DC: World Bank. http://siteresources. 
worldbank.org/AFRICAEXT/Resources/258643 
-1271798012256/YAC_Consolidated_Web.pdf. Accessed 
10 August 2012.

Ciorciari, J. 2011. “Chiang Mai Initiative, Multilateralization 

International Politics and Institution-Building in Asia.” 
Asian Survey 51 (5): 926–952.

Clapp, R.A. 1995. “Creating Comparative Advantage: Forest 
Policy as Industrial Policy in Chile.” Economic Geography 
71 (3): 273–296.

Cleland, J. 2002. “Education and Future Fertility Trends 
with Special Reference to Mid-Transitional Countries.” 
United Nations Department of Economic and Social 
Affairs, Population Division, New York. www.un.org/
esa/population/publications/completingfertility/
RevisedCLELANDpaper.PDF. Accessed 15 May 2012.

Revolution from Independence to the Global Information 
Age. New York: Anchor Books.

Davies, J.E. 2011. “Washington’s Growth and Opportunity Act 
or Beijing’s Overarching Brilliance: Will African Governments 
Choose Neither?” Third World Quarterly 32 (6): 1147–1163.

De Hoyos, R., J.M. Martínez de la Calle, and M. 
Székely. 2009. “Education and Social Mobility in 
Mexico.” Mexico Education Ministry, Mexico City. 
www.pegnet.ifw-kiel.de/activities/de_hoyos_de_la_ 
calle_szekely2009.pdf. Accessed 15 May 2012.

Deloitte. 2011. “The Connected Archipelago: The Role of the 

Internet in Indonesia’s Economic Development.” Deloitte 
Access Economics, Sydney. www.deloitte.com/view/
en_gx/global/bde64a5db2134310vgnvCM1000001a 
56f00aRCRD.htm. Accessed 15 May 2012.

———. 2012a. “Lateral Trades, Breathing Fire into the 

BRICS: China Outbound M&A Activity into Brazil, Russia, 
India and South Africa.” China Services Group, Beijing. 
www.deloitte.com.mx/documents/BoletinFactorChina/
LateralTrades-BreathingFireintotheBRICS-English.pdf. 
Accessed 21 June 2012.

———. 2012b. “Turkish Outbound M&A.” Corporate 

Finance, Istanbul. www.deloitte.com/assets/Dcom-Turkey/ 
Local%20Assets/Documents/turkey_tr_mnaoutbound_ 
27012012.pdf. Accessed 10 May 2012.

DeLong, J.B. 2004. “India since Independence: An Analytic 

Growth Narrative.” In D. Rodrik, ed., Modern Economic 
Growth: Analytical Country Studies. Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press.

Diamond, I., M. Newby, and S. Varle. 1999. “Female 

Education and Fertility: Examining the Links.” In C. 
Bledsoe, J. Casterline, J. Johnson-Kuhn, and J. Haaga, 
eds., Critical Perspectives on Schooling and Fertility in the 
Developing World. Washington, DC: National Academy of 
Science Press.

Dobbs, R., J. Remes, J. Manyika, C. Roxburgh, S. Smit, 
F. Schaer. 2012. Urban World: Cities and the Rise of the 
Consuming Class. New York: McKinsey Global Institute. 
www.mckinsey.com/insights/mgi/research/urbanization/

urban_world_cities_and_the_rise_of_the_consuming_ 
class. Accessed 28 August 2012.

Dolan, P., R. Layard, and R. Metcalfe. 2011. Measuring 

Subjective Well-Being for Public Policy. London: UK Office 
for National Statistics.

Dollar. D. 1992. “Outward-Oriented Developing Countries 
Really Do Grow More Rapidly: Evidence from 95 LDCs, 
1976–85.” Economic Development and Cultural Change 40 
(30): 523–544.

Done, K. 2011. “Embraer Faces Headwinds.” Financial 

Times, 10 October.

Drèze, J., and M. Murthi. 1999. “Fertility, Education and 
Development: Further Evidence from India.” Research 
Paper DEDPS20. London School of Economics, Suntory 
and Toyota Centres for Economics and Related Disciplines, 
London, UK.

Duhigg, C., and K. Bradsher. 2012. “How the U.S. Lost Out 
on iPhone Work.” The New York Times, 21 January. www.
nytimes.com/2012/01/22/business/apple-america-and-a 
-squeezed-middle-class.html. Accessed 22 January 2012.
Duhigg, C., and S. Greenhouse. 2012. “Electronic Giant 

vowing Reforms in China Plants.” The New York Times, 30 
March. www.nytimes.com/2012/03/30/business/apple 
-supplier-in-china-pledges-changes-in-working-conditions.
html. Accessed 15 May 2012.

The Economist. 2011a. “The Magic of Diasporas.” 

19 November. www.economist.com/node/21538742. 
Accessed 15 May 2012.

———. 2011b. “South-North FDI: Role Reversal.” 

24 September. www.economist.com/node/21528982. 
Accessed 15 May 2012.

———. 2012a. “Indian Takeovers Abroad: Running with the 

Bulls.” 3 March. www.economist.com/node/21548965. 
Accessed 15 May 2012.

———. 2012b. “Points of Light.” 14 July. www.economist.

com/node/21558591. Accessed 4 November 2012.

Edigheji, O. 2010. Constructing a Democratic Developmental 

State in South Africa: Potentials and Challenges. Cape 
Town: HSRC Press.

Edwards, S. 1998. “Openness, Productivity, and Growth: 

What Do We Really Know?” Economic Journal 108 (447): 
383–398.

Elson, D. 2002. “Gender Justice, Human Rights and Neo-

liberal Economic Policies.” In M. Molyneux and S. Razavi, 
eds., Gender Justice, Development and Rights. Oxford, UK: 
Oxford University Press.

Engerman, S.L., and K.L. Sokoloff. 2002. Factor 

Endowments, Inequality, and Paths of Development among 
New World Economics. Working Paper 9259. Cambridge, 
MA: National Bureau of Economic Research. www.nber.
org/papers/w9259. Accessed 15 May 2012.

Essama-Nssah, B. 2011. “Achieving Universal Primary 
Education through School Fee Abolition: Some Policy 
Lessons from Uganda.” In P. Chuhan-Pole and M. 
Angwafo, eds., Yes Africa Can: Success Stories From 
A Dynamic Continent. Washington, DC: World Bank. 
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/AFRICAEXT/
Resources/258643-1271798012256/YAC_Consolidated_
Web.pdf. Accessed 10 August 2012.

Estevadeordal, A., B. Frantz, and A.M. Taylor. 2003. 

“The Rise and Fall of World Trade, 1870–1939.” Quarterly 
Journal of Economics 2 (118): 359–407.

Evans, P.B. 2010. “Constructing the 21st Century 

Developmental State: Potentialities and Pitfalls.” In 
O. Edigheji, ed., Constructing a Democratic Developmental 
State in South Africa: Potentials and Challenges. Cape 
Town: HSRC Press.

Fan, S., B. Nestorova, and T. Olofinbiyi. 2010. “China’s 

Agricultural and Rural Development: Implications for 
Africa.” China–Development Assistance Committee 
Study Group on Agriculture, Food Security and Rural 
Development, 27–28 April, Bamako. www.ifpri.org/sites/
default/files/publications/chinaafricadac.pdf. Accessed 23 
October 2012.

Fan, S., and A. Saurkar. 2006. “Public Spending in 

Developing Countries: Trends, Determination, and Impact.” 
World Bank, Washington, DC. http://siteresources.
worldbank.org/EXTRESPUBEXPANAAGR/Resources/ifpri2.
pdf. Accessed 23 October 2012.

Felbermayr, G.J., and B. Jung. 2009. “The Pro-Trade Effect 

of the Brain Drain: Sorting Out Confounding Factors.” 
Economics Letters 104 (2): 72–75.

Fine, D., A. van Wamelen, S. Lund, A. Cabral, M. 

Taoufiki, N. Dörr, A. Leke, C. Roxburgh, J. Schubert, 
and P. Cook. 2012. Africa at Work: Job Creation 
and Inclusive Growth. New York: McKinsey Global 
Institute. www.mckinsey.com/insights/mgi/research/
africa_europe_middle_east/africa_at_work. Accessed 
23 September 2012.

FitzGerald, V., F. Stewart, and R. Venugopal. 2006. 

Globalization, Violent Conflict and Self-Determination. 
Basingstoke: UK: Palgrave Macmillan.

Foley, C.F., and W. R. Kerr. 2011. “Ethnic Innovation and 
U.S. Multinational Firm Activity.” Working Paper 12-006. 
Harvard Business School, Cambridge, MA. www.people.
hbs.edu/ffoley/foleykerr.pdf. Accessed 15 May 2012.

Foster, M., and P. Mijumbi. 2002. “How, When and Why 

Does Poverty Get Budget Priority: Poverty Reduction 
Strategy and Public Expenditure in Uganda.” Case Study 1. 
Working Paper 163. Overseas Development Institute, 
London. www.odi.org.uk/resources/docs/2061.pdf. 
Accessed 15 May 2012.

Frankel, J.A., and D. Romer. 1999. “Does Trade Cause 
Growth?” American Economic Review 89 (3) 379–399.

Frenk, J., O. Gómez-Dantés, and F.M. Knaul. 2009. 
“The Democratization of Health in Mexico: Financial 
Innovations for Universal Coverage.” Bulletin of the World 
Health Organization 87 (7): 542–548.

Fu, X. 2008. “Foreign Direct Investment, Absorptive Capacity 

and Regional Innovation Capabilities in China.” Oxford 
Development Studies 36 (1): 89–110.

Fukuda-Parr, S. 2003. “The Human Development Paradigm: 

Operationalizing Sen’s Ideas on Capabilities.” Feminist 
Economics 19 (2–3: 301–317.

Fukuda Parr, S., C. Lopes, and K. Malik. 2002. “Overview. 

Institutional Innovations for Capacity Development.” 
In Capacity for Development: New Solutions to Old 
Problems. London: Earthscan.

G8 (Group of Eight). 2005. “The Gleneagles Communiqué: 
Climate Change, Energy and Sustainable Development.” 
8 July. www.unglobalcompact.org/docs/about_the_gc/
government_support/PostG8_Gleneagles_Communique.
pdf. Accessed 15 May 2012.

Gallup. 2012. Gallup World Poll Database. http://worldview.

gallup.com. Accessed 15 May 2012.

Galor, O. 2006. “Economic Growth in the very Long-Run.” 

Working Paper 2006-16. Brown University, Department of 
Economics, Providence, RI.

Giroux, S.C. 2008. “Child Stunting Across Schooling 

and Fertility Transitions: Evidence from Sub-Saharan 
Africa.” DHS Working Paper 57. United States Agency 
for International Development, Washington, DC. http://
pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PNADM570.pdf. Accessed 
21 December 2012.

Glennie, J. 2011. “Busan Has Been an Expression of Shifting 

Geopolitical Realities.” The Guardian, 2 December. www.
guardian.co.uk/global-development/poverty-matters/ 
2011/dec/02/busan-shifting-geopolitical-realities. 
Accessed 15 May 2012.

Glewwe, P., and A.L. Kassouf. 2008. “The Impact of the 
Bolsa Escola/Família: Conditional Cash Transfer Program 
on Enrollment, Grade Promotion and Drop-Out Rates in 
Brazil.” Annals of the 36th Brazilian Economics Meeting 
of the Brazilian Association of Graduate Programs in 
Economics. www.anpec.org.br/encontro2008/artigos/ 
200807211140170-.pdf. Accessed 15 May 2012.
Global Footprint Network. 2011. “The National 

Footprint Accounts, 2011 Edition.” Oakland, CA. www.
footprintnetwork.org/en/index.php/GFN/page/footprint 
_data_and_results/. Accessed 15 May 2012.

Gooch, L. 2012. “Seeking the Right to Be Female in 

Malaysia.” The New York Times, 5 October. www.nytimes.
com/2012/10/06/world/asia/seeking-the-right-to-be 
-female-in-malaysia.html. Accessed 21 December 2012.
Government of India. 2009. “The Right of Children to Free 

and Compulsory Education Act, 2009.” The Gazette of 
India, 2009: 35.

Grabel, I. 2013. “Financial Architectures and Development: 

Resilience, Policy Space, and Human Development.” 
Human Development Research Paper. United Nations 
Development Programme, Human Development Report 
Office, New York.

Grameen Bank. n.d. “A Short History of Grameen Bank”. 

www.grameen-info.org/index.php?option=com_content& 
task=view&id=19&Itemid=114. Accessed 15 May 2012.

Green, G. 2010. “Imagine There’s No Army.” Diplomat 

Magazine, 1 September. www.diplomatmagazine.com/
index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=321 
&Itemid=. Accessed 15 May 2012.

Guajardo, J., D. Leigh, and A. Pescatori. 2011. 

“Expansionary Austerity: New International Evidence.” 
Working Paper WP/11/158. International Monetary Fund, 
Washington, DC. www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/wp/2011/
wp11158.pdf. Accessed 15 May 2012.

Gupta, A., and H. Wang. 2012. “India’s Misguided China 
Anxiety.” Businessweek, 21 March. www.businessweek.
com/printer/articles/14394-indias-misguided-china-anxiety. 
Accessed 15 May 2012.

Hailu, D., and V. Veras Soares. 2008. “Cash Transfers in 
Africa and Latin America: An Overview.” Poverty in Focus 
15. International Poverty Centre for Inclusive Growth, 
Brasilia.

Hamdani, K. 2013. “The Challenge of the South.” 

Human Development Research Paper. United Nations 
Development Programme, Human Development Report 
Office, New York.

Han, S. 2012. “South Korean Parliament Approves Carbon 
Trading System.” Bloomberg, 2 May. www.bloomberg 

References    |    133

.com/news/2012-05-02/south-korean-parliament-approves 
-carbon-trading-system.html. Accessed 15 May 2012.
Hansen. R. 2010. “An Assessment of Principal Regional 

Consultative Processes.” Migration Research Series 38. 
International Organization for Migration, Geneva.
Hanushek, E.A., D. Jamison, E. Jamison, and L. 

Woessmann. 2008. “Education and Economic Growth.” 
Education Next, Spring. http://media.hoover.org/sites/
default/files/documents/ednext_20082_62.pdf. Accessed 
8 August 2012.

Harding, R. 2012. “Interview: Justin Yifu Lin: Funding 
Developing World Infrastructure Could Buy Time for 
Europe to Reform, Hears Robin Harding.” Financial Times, 
6 June.

Harrison, A., and A. Rodriguez-Clare. 2010. “Trade, 

Foreign Investment and Industrial Policy for Developing 
Countries.” In D. Rodrik and M. Rosenzweig, eds., 
Handbook of Development Economics, vol. 5. New York: 
North-Holland.

Harvey, F. 2012. “Doha Climate Change Deal Clears Way 

for ‘Damage Aid’ to Poor Nations.” The Observer, 8 
December. www.guardian.co.uk/environment/2012/
dec/08/doha-climate-change-deal-nations?intcmp=122. 
Accessed 8 December 2012.

Hausmann, R., J. Hwang, and D. Rodrik. 2007. “What You 
Export Matters.” Journal of Economic Growth 12 (1): 1–25.

Hausmann, R., L. Pritchett, D. Rodrik. 2005. “Growth 

Accelerations.” Journal of Economic Growth 10 (4): 
303–329.

Hausmann, R., D. Rodrik, and A. Velasco. 2005. “Growth 
Diagnostics.” Harvard University, John F. Kennedy School 
of Government, Cambridge, MA.

Hausmann, R., and M. Székely. 2001. “Inequality and 

the Family in Latin America.” In N. Birdsall, A.C. Kelley, 
and S. Sinding, eds., Population Matters: Demographic 
Change, Economic Growth, and Poverty in the Developing 
World. New York: Oxford University Press.

Hazard, E., L. De Vries, M.A. Barry, A.A. Anouan, and N. 

Pinaud. 2009. “The Developmental Impact of the Asian 
Drivers in Senegal.” World Economy 32 (11): 1563–1585.

Heilmann, S. 2008. “Policy Experiments in China’s Economic 
Rise.” Studies in Comparative International Development 
43 (1): 1–26.

Heller, P. 2013. “Civil Society and Social Movements in 
a Globalizing World.” Human Development Research 
Paper. United Nations Development Programme, Human 
Development Report Office, New York.

Hiemstra-van der Horst, G. 2011. “We Are Scared to Say 

No: Facing Foreign Timber Companies in Sierra Leone’s 
Community Woodlands.” Journal of Development Studies 
47 (4): 574–594.

HM Treasury. 2010. Spending Review. London. http://cdn.

hm-treasury.gov.uk/sr2010_completereport.pdf. Accessed 
15 May 2012.

Hoff, K. 2003. “Paths of Institutional Development: A view 
from Economic History.” World Bank Research Observer 
18 (2): 205–226.

Holland, D., and K. Portes. 2012. “Self-Defeating 

Austerity?” National Institute Economic Review 222 (1): 
F4–F10.

cms/s/0/4fcbab6c-c67d-11e1-963a-00144feabdc0.html. 
Accessed 15 July 2012.

Hook, L., and P. Clark. 2012. “China’s Wind Groups Pick up 

Speed.” The Financial Times, 15 July. www.ft.com/intl/
cms/s/0/fb4bc872-c674-11e1-963a-00144feabdc0.html. 
Accessed 15 July 2012.

Hori, T. 2011. “Educational Gender Inequality and Inverted 

U-Shaped Fertility Dynamics.” Japanese Economic Review 
62 (1): 126–150.

Howell, J. 2004. Governance in China. Lanham, MA: 

Rowman & Littlefield.

Huntington, S. 1968. Political Order in Changing Societies. 

Fredericksburg, vA: BookCrafters, Inc.

Hussain, A., and N. Stern. 2006. “Public Finance: The 

Role of the State and Economic Transformation in China: 
1978–2020.” Comparative Studies 26: 25–55.

Hvistendahl, M. 2011. “Unnatural Selection.” Psychology 

Today, 5 July. www.psychologytoday.com/articles/ 
201107/unnatural-selection. Accessed 24 July 2012.

ICTSD (International Centre for Trade and Sustainable 

Development). 2011. “Brazil Pushes Forward with 
Currency Discussion at WTO.” Bridges Weekly Trade 
News Digest 15 (32): 5–7. http://ictsd.org/i/news/
bridgesweekly/114573/.

IIASA (International Institute for Applied Systems 
Analysis). 2008. “Economic Growth in Developing 
Countries: Education Proves Key.” Policy Brief 03. 
Laxenburg, Austria. www.iiasa.ac.at/Admin/PUB/ 
policy-briefs/pb03-web.pdf. Accessed 4 June 2012.

Iley, R.A., and M.K. Lewis. 2011. “Has the Global Financial 

Crisis Produced a New World Order?” Accounting Forum 
35 (2): 90–103.

ILO (International Labour Organization). 2012. World 
of Work Report 2012: Better Jobs for a Better Economy. 
Geneva. www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---dgreports/ 
---dcomm/---publ/documents/publication/wcms_179453.
pdf. Accessed 4 June 2012.

IMF (International Monetary Fund). 2010. “IMF 

Executive Board Approves Major Overhaul of Quotas and 
Governance.” Press release 10/418. Washington, DC. 
www.imf.org/external/np/sec/pr/2010/pr10418.htm. 
Accessed 15 May 2012.

———. 2011a. “New Growth Drivers for Low-Income 

Countries: The Role of BRICs.” Strategy, Policy, and Review 
Department, Washington, DC. www.imf.org/external/np/ 
pp/eng/2011/011211.pdf. Accessed 15 May 2012.

———. 2011b. World Economic Outlook. Washington, DC. 
www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2011/02/. Accessed 
15 May 2012.

India Ministry of External Affairs. 2012. “Fourth BRICS 

Summit – Delhi Declaration.” 29 March. New Delhi. www.
mea.gov.in/mystart.php?id=190019162. Accessed 15 May 
2012.

India Ministry of Finance. 2012. “Human Development.” In 
Economic Survey 2011–2012. New Delhi. www.indiabudget 
.nic.in/es2011-12/echap-13.pdf. Accessed 15 May 2012.

Institute for Economics and Peace. 2012. “Global Peace 

Index Fact Sheet.” Sydney. www.visionofhumanity.org/
wp-content/uploads/2012/06/2012GPI-Fact-Sheet2.pdf. 
Accessed 28 August 2012

Hook, L. 2012. “China’s Post-90 Generation Make their 
Mark.” The Financial Times, 9 July. www.ft.com/intl/

IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). 

2012. Managing the Risks of Extreme Events and 

134    |    HUMAN DEvELOPMENT REPORT 2013

Disasters to Advance Climate Change Adaptation. Special 
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. http://
ipcc-wg2.gov/SREX/images/uploads/SREX-All_FINAL.pdf. 
Accessed 15 May 2012.

Islam, I. 2002. “Poverty, Employment and Wages: 

An Indonesian Perspective.” International Labour 
Organization, Recovery and Reconstruction Department, 
Geneva.

ITU (International Telecommunications Union). 2012. 

World Telecommunication/ICT Indicators Database. www.
itu.int/ITU-D/ict/statistics/. Accessed 15 May 2012.

Ivanov, A., M. Collins, C. Grosu. J. Kling, S. Milcher, N. 
O’Higgins, B. Slay, and A. Zhelyazkova. 2006. At Risk: 
Roma and the Displaced in Southeast Europe. Bratislava: 
United Nations Development Programme Regional Bureau 
for Europe and the Commonwealth of Independent States.

Ivanov, A., K. Mizsei, B. Slay, D. Mihailov, and N. 

O’Higgins. 2003. Avoiding the Dependency Trap: The 
Roma Human Development Report. Bratislava: United 
Nations Development Programme Regional Bureau for 
Europe and the Commonwealth of Independent States.
Iyer, L. 2009. “The Bloody Millennium: Internal Conflict in 
South Asia.” Working Paper 09-086. Harvard Business 
School, Cambridge, MA. www.hbs.edu/research/pdf/ 
09-086.pdf. Accessed 15 May 2012.

Jacob, R. 2012. “Flagging Western Demand Drives China’s 

Exporters to New Markets.” Financial Times, 13 June. 
www.ftchinese.com/story/001045040/en/. Accessed 
15 May 2012.

Jenkins, J.C., and M. Wallace. 1996. “The Generalized 
Action Potential of Protest Movements: The New Class, 
Social Trends and Political Exclusion Explanations.” 
Sociological Forum 11 (2): 183–207.

Jenkins, R., and A. Barbosa. 2012. “Fear for 

Manufacturing? China and the Future of Industry in Brazil 
and Latin America.” The China Quarterly 209: 59–81.

Jones, R., and H. Kierzkowski. 2001. “Horizontal Aspects 
of vertical Fragmentation.” In L. Cheng and H. Kierzkowski, 
eds., Global Production and Trade in East Asia. Norwell, 
MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers.

Justino, P. 2008. “Tackling Civil Unrest: Policing or 
Redistribution?” MICROCON Policy Briefing Paper 
2. Institute of Development Studies, Brighton, UK. 
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_
id=1141142&http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.
cfm?abstract_id=1141142. Accessed 15 May 2012.

Kabananukye, K. I. B., A. E.K. Kanbananukye, 

J. Krishnamurty, and D. Owomugasho. 2004. 
“Economic Growth, Employment, Poverty and Pro-Poor 
Policies in Uganda.” Issues in Employment and Poverty 
Discussion Paper 16. International Labour Organization, 
Geneva. www.ilo.org/employment/Whatwedo/
Publications/WCMS_120732/lang--en/index.htm. 
Accessed 24 September 2012.

Kabeer, N., and S. Mahmud. 2004. “Rags, Riches and 

Women Workers: Export Oriented Garment Manufacturing 
in Bangladesh.” In M. Carr, ed., Chains of Fortune: Linking 
Women Producers and Workers with Global Markets. 
London: Commonwealth Secretariat.

Kahneman, D., and A. Krueger. 2006. “Developments in 
the Measurement of Subjective Well-Being.” Journal of 
Economic Perspectives 20 (21): 3–24.

Kamau, P., D. McCormick, and N. Pinaud. 2009. “The 
Developmental Impact of Asian Drivers on Kenya with 
Emphasis on Textiles and Clothing Manufacturing.” World 
Economy 32 (11): 1586–1612.

Kaminski, B., and F. Ng. 2006. “Turkey’s Evolving Trade 

Integration into Pan-European Markets.” Working 
Paper 3908. World Bank, Development Research Group, 
Washington, DC. http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.
cfm?abstract_id=1294804. Accessed 15 May 2012.

Kanbur, R. 2004. “Growth, Inequality and Poverty: Some 
Hard Questions.” Commentary prepared for the State 
of the World Conference at the Princeton Institute for 
International and Regional Studies, 13–14 February, 
Princeton, NJ. www.arts.cornell.edu/poverty/kanbur/
GroIneqPov.pdf. Accessed 15 May 2012.

Kaplinsky, R. 2008. “What Does the Rise of China do for 

Industrialisation in Sub-Saharan Africa?” Review of 
African Political Economy 35 (1): 7–22.

Kaplinsky, R., and M. Morris. 2009. “The Asian 

Drivers and SSA: Is There a Future for Export-Oriented 
African Industrialization?” The World Economy 32 (11): 
1638–1655.

Kaplinsky, R., A. Terheggen, and J. Tijaja. 2011. “China 
as a Final Market: The Gabon Timber and Thai Cassava 
value Chains.” World Development 39 (7): 1177–1190.
Karimuddin, A. 2011. “MarkPlus Insight Survey: Indonesia 

Has 55 Million Internet Users.” DailySocial.net, 
1 November. http://dailysocial.net/en/2011/11/01/markplus 
-insight-survey-indonesia-has-55-million-internet-users/. 
Accessed 15 May 2012.

Kaul, I. 2013. “The Rise of the Global South: Implications 

for the Provisioning of Global Public Goods.” Human 
Development Research Paper. United Nations 
Development Programme, Human Development Report 
Office, New York.

Keohane, R., and D. Victor. 2010. “The Regime Complex 
for Climate Change.” Discussion Paper 10-33. Harvard 
University, John F. Kennedy School of Government, 
Harvard Project on International Climate Agreements. 
http://belfercenter.ksg.harvard.edu/files/Keohane_victor_
Final_2.pdf. Accessed 15 May 2012.

Keynes, J.M. 1937. “How to Avoid a Slump.” The Times, 
12–14 January. Reprinted in The Collected Writings of 
John Maynard Keynes vol. 21. London: Macmillan.

Khan, A.R. 2005. “Growth, Employment and Poverty: An 

Analysis of the vital Nexus Based on Some Recent 
UNDP and ILO/SIDA Studies.” Issues in Employment and 
Poverty Discussion Paper 19. International Labour Office, 
Geneva. www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_emp/
documents/publication/wcms_120683.pdf. Accessed 
24 September 2012.

Kharas, H., K. Makino, and W. Jung, eds. 2011. 

Catalyzing Development: A New Vision of Aid. 
Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.

King, D., K. Richards, and S. Tyldesley. 2011. “International 

Climate Change Negotiations: Key Lessons and Next 
Steps.” University of Oxford, Smith School of Enterprise and 
the Environment, UK. www.smithschool.ox.ac.uk/ 
wp-content/uploads/2011/03/Climate-Negotiations-report_
Final.pdf. Accessed 15 May 2012.

Kraemer, K., G. Linden, and J. Dedrick. 2011. “Capturing 

value in Global Networks: Apple’s iPad and iPhone.” 
University of California, Irvine, University of California, 

Berkeley, and Syracuse University, NY. http://pcic.merage.
uci.edu/papers/2011/value_iPad_iPhone.pdf. Accessed 
15 May 2012.

Kragelund, P. 2013. “New Development Partnerships.” 
Human Development Research Paper. United Nations 
Development Programme, Human Development Report 
Office, New York.

Krueger, A.B., and D.A. Schkade. 2008. “The Reliability 
of Subjective Well-Being Measures.” Journal of Public 
Economics 92 (8–9): 1833–1845.

Krugman, P. 1991. “The Move Towards Free Trade Zones.” 
Symposium of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 
22–24 August, Jackson Hole, WY. www.kansascityfed.
org/publicat/sympos/1991/S91krugm.pdf. Accessed 
23 October 2012.

Kugler, M., and H. Rapoport. 2011. “Migration, FDI, and the 
Margins of Trade.” Working Paper 222. Harvard University, 
Center for International Development, Cambridge, MA.
LaFraniere, S. 2011. “Five Days Later, Chinese Concede 

Design Flaw Had Role in Wreck.” The New York 
Times, 28 July. www.nytimes.com/2011/07/29/world/
asia/29trains.html. Accessed 15 May 2012.

Lamberte, M., and P.J. Morgan. 2012. “Regional and 
Global Monetary Cooperation.” Working Paper 346. 
Asian Development Bank Institute, Tokyo. www.adbi.
org/working-paper/2012/02/21/5006.regional.global.
monetary.cooperation/. Accessed 15 May 2012.
Lautier, M. 2008. “Export of Health Services from 

Developing Countries: The Case of Tunisia.” Social 
Science and Medicine 67: 101–110.

Leape, J. 2012. “It’s Happening, But Not in Rio.” The New 

York Times, 24 June. www.nytimes.com/2012/06/25/
opinion/action-is-happening-but-not-in-rio.html. Accessed 
24 June 2012

Li, J. 2010. “Decarbonising Power Generation in China—Is 

the Answer Blowing in the Wind?” Renewable and 
Sustainable Energy Reviews 14 (4): 1154–1171.

López-Calva, L., and N. Lustig, eds. 2010. Declining 
Inequality in Latin America: A Decade of Progress? 
Harrisonburg, vA: RR Donnelley.

Luedi, T. 2008. “China’s Track Record in M&A.” McKinsey 
Quarterly, June. www.mckinseyquarterly.com/Chinas_
track_record_in_MA_2151. Accessed 15 May 2012.
Lutz, W., and S. KC. 2013. “Demography and Human 

Development: Education and Population Projections.” 
Human Development Research Paper. United Nations 
Development Programme, Human Development Report 
Office, New York.

Maddison, A. 2010. Statistics on World Population, GDP 
and Per Capita GDP, 1–2008 AD. Groningen Growth and 
Development Centre, The Netherlands. www.ggdc.net/
MADDISON/oriindex.htm. Accessed 15 May 2012.

Malik, M. 2006. “Bilateral Investment Treaties of South 
Asian States: Implications for Development.” United 
Nations Development Programme, Asia-Pacific Trade and 
Investment Initiative, Colombo.

———. 2012. Why Has China Grown So Fast For So Long? 

New Delhi: Oxford University Press India.

Martin, T.C., and F. Juarez. 1995. “The Impact of Women’s 

Education on Fertility in Latin America: Searching for 
Explanations.” International Family Planning Perspectives 
12 (2): 52–57, 80.

Milanovi´c, B. 2009. “Global Inequality and the Global 
Inequality Extraction Ratio.” Policy Research Working 
Paper 5044. World Bank, Development Research Group, 
Poverty and Inequality Team, Washington, DC. http://
www-wds.worldbank.org/servlet/WDSContentServer/
WDSP/IB/2009/09/09/000158349_20090909092401/
Rendered/PDF/WPS5044.pdf. Accessed 15 May 2012.
———. 2010. The Haves and the Have-Nots: A Brief and 

Idiosyncratic History of Global Inequality. New York: Basic 
Books.

Milanovi´c, B., and S. Yitzhaki. 2002. “Decomposing 

World Income Distribution: Does the World Have a Middle 
Class?” Review of Income and Wealth 48(2): 155–178.

Moyo, D. 2012. “Beijing, a Boon for Africa.” The New York 
Times, 27 June. www.nytimes.com/2012/06/28/opinion/
beijing-a-boon-for-africa.html. Accessed 28 August 2012.

Mwase, N., and Y. Yang. 2012. “BRICs’ Philosophies for 
Development Financing and Their Implications for LICs.” 
Working Paper WP/12/74. International Monetary Fund, 
Washington, DC.

Nagel, T. 1974. “What Is It Like To Be a Bat?” The 

Philosophical Review 83 (4): 435–450.

Naqvi, H., and V.V. Acharya. 2012. “Bank Liquidity 

and Bubbles: Why Central Banks Should Lean Against 
Liquidity. In D. Evanoff, G. Kaufman, and A.G. Malliaris, 
eds., New Perspectives on Asset Price Bubbles: Theory, 
Evidence and Policy. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.

Nayyar, D. 2012. “Macroeconomics and Human 

Development.” Journal of Human Development and 
Capabilities 13 (1): 7–30.

NEAC (Malaysia National Economic Advisory Council). 
2010. “New Economic Model for Malaysia, Parts 1 and 2.” 
Kuala Lumpur.

Nielsen H., and A. Spenceley. 2011. “The Success of 

Tourism in Rwanda: Gorillas and More.” In P. Chuhan-Pole 
and M. Angwafo, eds., Yes Africa Can: Success Stories 
from a Dynamic Continent. Washington, DC: World 
Bank. http://siteresources.worldbank.org/AFRICAEXT/
Resources/258643-1271798012256/YAC_Consolidated_
Web.pdf. Accessed 10 August 2012.

Ocampo, J.A. 2010. “Rethinking Global Economic and Social 

Governance.” Journal of Globalization and Development 
1 (1).

Ocampo J.A., S. Griffith-Jones, A. Noman, A. Ortiz, 

J. Vallejo, and J. Tyson. 2010. “The Great Recession 
and the Developing World.” Paper presented at the 
conference on Development Cooperation in Times of Crisis 
and on Achieving the MDGs, 9–10 June, Madrid.

Ocampo, J.A., and D. Titelman. 2009. “Subregional 

Financial Cooperation: the South American Experience.” 
Journal of Post-Keynesian Economics 32 (2): 249–68.
———. 2012. “Regional Monetary Cooperation in Latin 

America.” Columbia University, Initiative for Policy 
Dialogue, New York, and United Nations Economic 
Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean, 
Financing for Development Division, Santiago.

OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 

Development). 2006. Promoting Pro-Poor Growth: 
Agriculture. Paris. www.oecd.org/dac/povertyreduction/ 
37922155.pdf. Accessed 23 October 2012.

———. 2007. “Economic Survey of India, 2007.” OECD 

Observer, October. Policy Brief. www.oecd.org/economy/

References    |    135

economicsurveysandcountrysurveillance/39452196.pdf. 
Accessed 6 August 2012.

———. 2010a. Perspectives on Global Development 2010: 

Shifting Wealth. Paris.

———. 2010b. PISA 2009 Results: What Students Know 

and Can Do. vol. I. Paris. www.oecd.org/dataoecd/10/61/ 
48852548.pdf. Accessed 24 July 2012.

———. 2011a. “Brazil.” In Agricultural Policy Monitoring 

and Evaluation 2011. Paris. www.oecd-ilibrary.org/
agriculture-and-food/agricultural-policy-monitoring-and 
-evaluation-2011/brazil_agr_pol-2011-22-en. Accessed 
23 October 2012.

———. 2011b. Divided We Stand: Why Inequality Keeps 

Rising. Paris.

———. 2011c. “Busan Partnership for Effective 

Development Cooperation.” Paris. www.oecd.org/dac/
aideffectiveness/busanpartnership.htm. Accessed 24 July 
2011.

Ofosu-Asare, K. 2011. “Mobile Phone Revolution in Ghana’s 

Cocoa Industry.” International Journal of Business and 
Social Science 2 (13): 91–99.

Osmani, S.R. 2005. “The Employment Nexus between 
Growth and Poverty: An Asian Perspective.” Swedish 
International Development Cooperation Agency, 
Stockholm.

Osmani, S.R., W. Mahmud, B. Sen, H. Dagdeviren, 
and A. Seth. 2006. “The Macroeconomics of Poverty 
Reduction: The Case Study of Bangladesh.” United 
Nations Development Programme, Asia-Pacific Regional 
Programme on the Macroeconomics of Poverty Reduction, 
New York.

Pardee Center for International Futures. 2013. 

“Development-Oriented Policies and Alternative Human 
Development Paths.” Background paper for the 2013 
Human Development Report. United Nations Development 
Programme, Human Development Report Office, New York.

Park, K. 2011. “New Development Partners and a Global 

Development Partnership.” In H. Kharas, K. Makino, and 
W. Jung, eds., Catalyzing Development: A New Vision for 
Aid. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.

Pasha, H.A., and T. Palanivel. 2004. “Pro-Poor Growth 
and Policies: The Asian Experience.” United Nations 
Development Programme, Asia-Pacific Regional Programme 
on the Macroeconomics of Poverty Reduction, New York.

Pinker, S. 2011. “violence vanquished.” The Wall Street 
Journal, 24 September. http://online.wsj.com/article/ 
SB10001424053111904106704576583203589408180.html. 
Accessed 15 May 2012.

Polanyi, K. 1944. The Great Transformation. New York: 

Rinehart.

Population Reference Bureau. 2000. “Is Education the 
Best Contraceptive?” Policy Brief. Population Reference 
Bureau, Washington, DC. www.prb.org/Publications/
PolicyBriefs/ IsEducationtheBestContraceptive.aspx. 
Accessed 15 May 2012.

Psacharopoulos G., and Z. Tzannatos. 1992. “Latin 

American Women’s Earnings and Participation in the Labor 
Force.” Working Paper 856. World Bank, Washington, DC. 
http://econ.worldbank.org/external/default/main?pagePK 
=64165259&theSitePK=469372&piPK=64165421&menuPK 
=64166322&entityID=000009265_3961002093302. 
Accessed 15 May 2012.

136    |    HUMAN DEvELOPMENT REPORT 2013

Radelet, S., J. Sachs, and J.-W., Lee. 1997. “Economic 

Growth in Asia.” Development Discussion Paper 
609. Harvard Institute for International Development, 
Cambridge, MA.

Ranis, G., and F. Stewart. 2005. “Dynamic Links Between 

the Economy and Human Development.” Working Paper 8. 
United Nations Department of Economic and Social 
Affairs, New York. www.un.org/esa/desa/papers/2005/
wp8_2005.pdf. Accessed 15 May 2012.

Ratha, D., and W. Shaw. 2007. “South-South Migration 

and Remittances.” Working Paper 102. World Bank, 
Washington, DC. http://siteresources.worldbank.org/
INTPROSPECTS/Resources/334934-1110315015165/
SouthSouthMigrationandRemittances.pdf. Accessed 
15 May 2012.

Ravallion, M. 2009. “A Comparative Perspective on Poverty 

Reduction in Brazil, China and India.” Policy Research 
Working Paper 5080. World Bank, Washington, DC. http://
econ.worldbank.org/external/default/main?pagePK= 
64165259&theSitePK=469382&piPK=64165421&menuPK 
=64166093&entityID=000158349_20091130085835. 
Accessed 15 May 2012.

REN21 (Renewable Energy Policy Network for the 

21st Century). 2012. Renewables Global Status Report. 
Paris. www.map.ren21.net/GSR/GSR2012.pdf. Accessed 
15 May 2012.

Reserve Bank of India. 2012. “Reserve Bank of India 

Announces SAARC Swap Arrangement.” Press Release, 
16 May. Mumbai. www.rbi.org.in/scripts/BS_PressRelease 
Display.aspx?prid=26475. Accessed 15 May 2012.
Revkin, A. 2012. “Beyond Rio: Pursuing ‘Ecological 

Citizenship.’” The New York Times, 25 June. http://dotearth.
blogs.nytimes.com/2012/06/25/beyond-rio-pursuing 
-ecological-citizenship/. Accessed 25 June 2012.

Ribas, R., V. Veras Soares, and G. Hirata. 2008. “The 
Impact of CCTs: What We Know and What We Are Not 
Sure About.” Poverty in Focus 15. International Poverty 
Centre for Inclusive Growth, Brasilia.

Rockström, J., W. Steffen, K. Noone, Å. Persson, F.S. 
Chapin, III, E. Lambin, T.M. Lenton, M. Scheffer, C. 
Folke, H. Schellnhuber, B. Nykvist, C.A. De Wit, T. 
Hughes, S. van der Leeuw, H. Rodhe, S. Sörlin, P.K. 
Snyder, R. Costanza, U. Svedin, M. Falkenmark, 
L. Karlberg, R.W. Corell, V.J. Fabry, J. Hansen, B. 
Walker, D. Liverman, K. Richardson, P. Crutzen, and 
J. Foley. 2009. “Planetary Boundaries: Exploring the 
Safe Operating Space for Humanity.” Ecology and Society 
14 (2). www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol14/iss2/art32/. 
Accessed 15 May 2012.

Rodriguez, F., and D. Rodrik. 2001. “Trade Policy and 

Economic Growth: A Skeptic’s Guide to the Cross-National 
Evidence.” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2000 15: 
261–338.

Rodrik, D. 1998. Democracies Pay Higher Wages. Working 

Paper 6364. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic 
Research.

———. 2001. “The Global Governance of Trade as if 
Development Really Mattered.” Background Paper 
prepared for the United Nations Development Programme. 
www.wcfia.harvard.edu/sites/default/files/529__Rodrik5.
pdf. Accessed 6 August 2012.

———. 2004. “Industrial Policy for the Twenty-first 

Century.” Draft prepared for the United Nations Industrial 

Development Organization. Harvard University, John 
F. Kennedy School of Government, Cambridge, MA. 
www.hks.harvard.edu/fs/drodrik/Research%20papers/
UNIDOSep.pdf. Accessed 6 August 2012.

———. 2005. “Notes on Trade and Industrialization Policy, 
in Turkey and Elsewhere.” METU Studies in Development 
32 (1): 259–274.

———. 2006. The Social Cost of Foreign Exchange 

Reserves. Working Paper 11952. Cambridge, MA: National 
Bureau of Economic Research. www.nber.org/papers/
w11952. Accessed 15 May 2012.

———. 2011. The Globalization Paradox: Democracy and 

the Future of the World Economy. New York: W.W. Norton.

———. 2012. “Global Poverty amid Global Plenty: Getting 
Globalization Right.” Americas Quarterly, Spring: 40–45.
Romero, S. 2012. “Brazil Gains Business and Influence as 
It Offers Aid and Loans in Africa.” The New York Times, 
7 August. www.nytimes.com/2012/08/08/world/americas/ 
brazil-gains-in-reaching-out-to-africa.html. Accessed 
8 August 2012.

Romero, S., and J.M. Broder. 2012. “Progress on the 

Sidelines as Rio Conference Ends.” The New York Times, 
23 June. www.nytimes.com/2012/06/24/world/americas/
rio20-conference-ends-with-some-progress-on-the 
-sidelines.html. Accessed 4 November 2012.

Rose, P. 1995. “Female Education and Adjustment Programs: 
A Cross-Country Statistical Analysis.” World Development 
23 (11): 1931–1949.

Rosenfeld, R., S. Messner, and E. Baumer. 2001. “Social 

Capital and Homicide.” Social Forces 80 (1): 283–310.

Sachs, J.D., and A. Warner. 1995. “Economic Reform and 
the Process of Global Integration.” Brookings Papers on 
Economic Activity 1: 1–118.

Sala-i-Martin, X. 2006. “The World Distribution of Income: 

Falling Poverty and . . . Convergence, Period.” Quarterly 
Journal of Economics 121 (2): 351–397.

Samake, I., and Y. Yang. 2011. “Low-Income Countries’ 
BRIC Linkage: Are There Growth Spillovers?” Working 
Paper 11/267. International Monetary Fund, Washington, 
DC. www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/wp/2011/wp11267.
pdf. Accessed 15 May 2012.

Sen, A. 2007. “Unity and Discord in Social Development.” 
Keynote lecture delivered at the 15th Symposium of the 
International Consortium for Social Development at the 
Polytechnic University of Hong Kong, 16–20 July, Hong 
Kong, China (SAR).

———. 2012. “A Crisis of European Democracy.” The New 

York Times, 22 May. www.nytimes.com/2012/05/23/
opinion/the-crisis-of-european-democracy.html. Accessed 
15 July 2012.

Serbessa, D.D. 2002. “Differential Impact of Women’s 

Educational Level on Fertility in Africa: The Case of Ethiopia.” 
Hiroshima University, Japan. http://home.hiroshima-u 
.ac.jp/cice/e-forum/69Differential%20Impact%20Ed%20
on%20Pop%20_Final_.pdf. Accessed 15 May 2012.
Serra, N., and J. E. Stiglitz. 2008. The Washington 
Consensus Reconsidered: Towards a New Global 
Governance. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.

Sharma, R. 2012. Breakout Nations: In Pursuit of the Next 

Economic Miracles. New York: W.W. Norton.

Sivananthiran, A., and C.S. Venkata Ratnam, eds. 
2005. Informal Economy: The Growing Challenge for 

Labor Administration. Geneva: International Labour 
Office.

Anr.” Supreme Court judgement of 12 April 2012 on Writ 
Petition (C) No. 95 of 2010.

Smith, A. 1776. An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the 

Wealth of Nations. New York: Modern Library.

Sobhan, R. 2010. Challenging the Injustice of Poverty. 

Washington, DC: Sage.

Suri, T., M.A. Boozer, G. Ranis, and F. Stewart. 2011. 
“Paths to Success: The Relationship between Human 
Development and Economic Growth.” World Development 
39 (4): 506–522.

———. 2008. China Human Development Report 2007/08: 
Access for All: Basic Public Services for 1.3 Billion People. 
Beijing: China Translation and Publishing Corporation.

———. 2009. Human Development Report 2009: 

Overcoming Barriers: Human Mobility and Development. 
New York: Palgrave Macmillian.

Tangcharoensathien, V., W. Patcharanarumol, P. Ir, 

———. 2010a. Human Development Report 2010: The Real 

Ssewanyana, S., J.M. Matovu, and E. Twimukye. 

Tsounta, E. 2009. “Universal Health Care 101: Lessons 

———. 2013. “Commentary on Financial Architectures 

and Development: Resilience, Policy Space, and Human 
Development in the Global South by Prof. Ilene Grabel.” 
Human Development Research Paper. United Nations 
Development Programme, Human Development Report 
Office, New York.

Socialbakers.com. 2012. Facebook Statistics by Country. 
www.socialbakers.com/facebook-statistics/. Accessed 
15 May 2012.

Sonobe, T., J.E. Akoten, and K. Otsuka. 2009. “An 

Exploration into the Successful Development of 
the Leather-Shoe Industry in Ethiopia.” Review of 
Development Economics 13 (4): 719–736.

South Commission. 1990. The Challenge to the South: 

The Report of the South Commission. Oxford, UK: Oxford 
University Press. www.southcentre.org/files/Old%20
Books/The%20Challenge%20to%20the%20Southresized.
pdf. Accessed 23 October 2012.

2011. “Building on Growth in Uganda.” In P. Chuhan-Pole 
and M. Angwafo, eds., Yes Africa Can: Success Stories 
From A Dynamic Continent. Washington, DC: World 
Bank. http://siteresources.worldbank.org/AFRICAEXT/
Resources/258643-1271798012256/YAC_Consolidated_
Web.pdf. Accessed 10 August 2012.

Stads, G.-J., and N.M. Beintema. 2009. Public Agricultural 
Research in Latin America and the Caribbean: Investment 
and Capacity Trends. ASTI Synthesis Report. Washington: 
International Food Policy Research Institute. www.asti.
cgiar.org/pdf/LAC_Syn_Report.pdf. Accessed 23 October 
2012.

Stern, N. 2003. “Public Policy for Growth and Poverty 
Reduction.” CESifo Economic Studies 49 (1): 5–25.

———. 2006. The Stern Review Report on the Economics 
of Climate Change. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University 
Press.

Stewart, F. 2013. “Capabilities and Human Development: 

Beyond the Individual: The Critical Role of Social 
Institutions and Social Competencies.” Human 
Development Research Paper. United Nations 
Development Programme, Human Development Report 
Office, New York.

Stiglitz, J.E. 2012. “Macroeconomic Fluctuations, 

Inequality, and Human Development.” Journal of Human 
Development and Capabilities 13 (1): 31–58.

Stiglitz, J.E., A. Sen, and J.-P. Fitoussi. 2009. Report by the 
Commission on the Measurement of Economic Performance 
and Social Progress. Paris: Commission on the Measure-
ment of Economic Performance and Social Progress.

Subramanian, A., and D. Roy. 2001. “Who Can Explain 

the Mauritian Miracle: Meade, Romer, Sachs, or Rodrik?” 
Working Paper 01/116. International Monetary Fund, 
Washington, DC. www.imf.org/external/pubs/cat/longres.
cfm?sk=15215.0. Accessed 15 May 2012.

Supreme Court of India. 2012. “Society for Un-aided 

Private Schools of Rajasthan Petitioner(s) versus U.O.I. & 

S.M. Aljunid, A.G. Mukti, K. Akkhavong, E. Banzon, 
D.B. Huong, H. Thabrany, and A. Mills. 2011. “Health-
Financing Reforms in Southeast Asia: Challenges in 
Achieving Universal Coverage.” The Lancet 377 (9768): 
863–873.

Taylor, C.E., J.S. Newman, and N.U. Kelly. 1976. “The 
Child Survival Hypothesis.” Population Studies 30 (2): 
263–278.

Tejada, C. 2012. “China Cancels Waste Project after Protests 
Turn violent.” Wall Street Journal, 28 July. http://business 
.newsplurk.com/2012/07/china-cancels-waste-project 
-after.html. Accessed 21 December 2012.

Thorp, R., and M. Paredes. 2011. Ethnicity and the 

Persistence of Inequality: The Case of Peru. Basingstoke, 
UK: Palgrave Macmillan.

Tomlinson, B.R. 2003. “What Was the Third World?” 

Journal of Contemporary History 38 (2): 307–321.

from the Eastern Caribbean and Beyond.” Working Paper 
WP/09/61. International Monetary Fund, Washington, 
DC. www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/wp/2009/wp0961.pdf. 
Accessed 15 May 2012.

UNCTAD (United Nations Conference on Trade and 
Development). 2003. World Investment Report 2003: 
FDI Policies for Development: National and International 
Perspectives. New York and Geneva.

———. 2006. A Case Study of the Salmon Industry in 

Chile. New York and Geneva. http://unctad.org/en/docs/
iteiit200512_en.pdf. Accessed 15 May 2012.

———. 2011a. World Investment Report 2011 Annex 

Tables. http://archive.unctad.org/Templates/Page.
asp?intItemID=5823&lang=1. Accessed 15 May 2012.

———. 2011b. “South-South Integration Is Key to 

Rebalancing the Global Economy.” Policy Brief 22. United 
Nations Conference on Trade and Development, Geneva. 
http://unctad.org/en/Docs/presspb20114_en.pdf. 
Accessed 2 November 2012.

UNDESA (United Nations Department of Economic and 
Social Affairs). 2007. World Economic and Social Survey 
2007: Development in an Ageing World. New York: United 
Nations Publications.

———. 2010. Development Cooperation for the MDGs: 

Maximizing Results. New York: United Nations.

UNDP (United Nations Development Programme). 1991. 

Human Development Report 1991. New York: Oxford 
University Press.

———. 1993. Human Development Report 1993. New York: 

Oxford University Press.

Wealth of Nations: Pathways to Human Development. 
New York: Oxford University Press.

———. 2010b. Regional Human Development Report for 

Latin America and the Caribbean 2010: Acting on the 
Future: Breaking the Intergenerational Transmission of 
Inequality. New York.

———. 2010c. China Human Development Report 2009/10: 

China and A Sustainable Future: Towards a Low Carbon 
Economy and Society. Beijing: China Translation and 
Publishing Corporation.

———. 2011a. Human Development Report 2011: 

Sustainability and Equality: A Better Future for All. New 
York: Palgrave Macmillian

———. 2011b. Regional Human Development Report: 

Beyond Transition: Towards Inclusive Societies. Bratislava.

———. 2012. Caribbean Human Development Report 

2012: Human Development and the Shift to Better Citizen 
Security. New York.

UNESCAP (United Nations Economic and Social 
Commission for Asia and the Pacific). 2011. The 
Promise of Protection: Social Protection and Development 
in Asia and the Pacific. Bangkok.

UNESCO (United Nations Educational, Scientific, 

and Cultural Organization) Institute for Statistics. 
Various years. Data Centre. http://stats.uis.unesco.org. 
Accessed 15 May 2012.

UNIDO (United Nations Industrial Development 

Organization). 2009. Industrial Development Report 
2009: Breaking In and Moving Up: New Industrial 
Challenges for the Bottom Billion and the Middle-Income 
Countries. vienna.

United Kingdom, Office of the Deputy Prime Minister, 
Social Exclusion Unit. 2002. “Reducing Re-Offending 
by Ex-Prisoners.” London. www.thelearningjourney.co.uk/
file.2007-10-01.1714894439/file_view. Accessed 15 May 
2012.

United Nations. 2012a. “The State of South-South 

Cooperation: Report of the Secretary-General.” Sixty-
Seventh Session of the General Assembly. New York.

———. 2012b. The Millennium Development Goals Report 

2012. New York. www.un.org/millenniumgoals/pdf/
MDG%20Report%202012.pdf. Accessed 15 May 2012.

United Nations Enable. 2012. “Factsheet on Persons with 
Disabilities.” www.un.org/disabilities/default.asp?id=18. 
Accessed 24 July 2012.

United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction. 

2009. “Terminology.” Geneva. www.unisdr.org/we/inform/
terminology. Accessed 8 December 2012.

———. 1994. Human Development Report 1994. New York: 

United Nations Secretary- General’s High Level Panel 

Oxford University Press.

———. 1995. Human Development Report 1995. New York: 

Oxford University Press.

———. 1996. Human Development Report 1996. New York: 

Oxford University Press.

on Global Sustainability. 2012. Resilient People, 
Resilient Planet: A Future Worth Choosing. New York: 
United Nations.

United Nations Security Council. 2011. “Letter Dated 
9 November 2011 from the Permanent Representative 
of Brazil to the United Nations Addressed to the 

References    |    137

Secretary-General.” Sixty-Sixth Session, Agenda Items 
14 and 117. UN-Doc A/66/551-S/2011/701. www.un.int/
brazil/speech/Concept-Paper-%20RwP.pdf. Accessed 15 
May 2012.

Wiseman, P. 2002. “China Thrown Off Balance as Boys 

Outnumber Girls.” USA Today, 19 June. www.usatoday.
com/news/world/2002/06/19/china-usat.htm. Accessed 
24 July 2012.

UNODC (United Nations Office on Drug and Crime). 

2012. 2011 Global Study on Homicide: Trends, Contexts, 
Data. www.unodc.org/documents/data-and-analysis/ 
statistics/Homicide/Globa_study_on_homicide_2011_
web.pdf. Accessed 30 May 2012.

UNSD (United Nations Statistics Division). 2012. United 

Nations Commodity Trade Statistics Database. http://
comtrade.un.org. Accessed 15 May 2012.

UNWTO (World Tourism Organization). 2011. Tourism 

Highlights: 2011 Edition. Geneva.

Vos, R. 2010. “The Crisis of Globalization as an Opportunity 
to Create a Fairer World.” Journal of Human Development 
and Capabilities 11 (1): 143–160.

Wacziarg, R., and K.H. Welch. 2008. “Trade Liberalization 

and Growth: New Evidence.” World Bank Economic 
Review 22 (2): 187–231.

Westaway, J. 2012. “Globalization, Sovereignty and Social 

Unrest.” Journal of Politics and Law 5 (2): 132–139.

Whalley, J., and A. Weisbrod. 2011. “The Contribution of 
Chinese FDI to Africa’s Pre-Crisis Growth Surge.” voxEU, 
21 December. www.voxeu.org/article/contribution 
-chinese-fdi-africa-s-growth. Accessed 15 May 2012.

Wilkinson, R., and K. Pickett. 2009. The Spiritual Level. 

New York: Bloomsbury Press.

———. 2012. “Sorry Nick Clegg – Social Mobility and 

Austerity Just Don’t Mix.” The Guardian, 15 May. www.
guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2012/may/15/nick-clegg-
social-mobility-austerity. Accessed 15 May 2012.

Wines, M., and S. LaFraniere. 2011. “In Baring Facts of 

Train Crash, Blogs Erode China Censorship.” The New York 
Times, 28 July. www.nytimes.com/2011/07/29/world/
asia/29china.html. Accessed 15 May 2012.

Winters, L.A. 2004. “Trade Liberalisation and Economic Perfor-
mance: An Overview.” Economic Journal 114 (493): F4–F21.

Woods, N. 2010. “Global Governance after the Financial 
Crisis: A New Multilateralism or the Last Gasp of the 
Great Powers?” Global Policy 1 (1): 51–63.

World Bank. 2003. Private Participation in Infrastructure: 

Trends in Developing Countries in 1990–2001. 
Washington, DC. http://documents.worldbank.org/
curated/en/2003/01/2522708/private-participation 
-infrastructure-trends-developing-countries-1990-2001. 
Accessed 15 May 2012.

———. 2006. Global Economic Prospects: Economic 

Implications of Remittances and Migration. Washington, 
DC. http://go.worldbank.org/0G6XW1UPP0. Accessed 
15 May 2012.

———. 2008. World Development Report 2009: Reshaping 
Economic Geography. Washington, DC. http://web.world-
bank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/EXTDEC/EXTRESEARCH/ 
EXTWDRS/0,,contentMDK:23062295~pagePK:478093~piPK:
477627~theSitePK:477624,00.html. Accessed 15 May 2012.
———. 2010a. Bilateral Migration and Remittances. http://
go.worldbank.org/JITC7NYTT0 . Accessed 15 May 2012.

———. 2010b. Thailand Economic Monitor. Bangkok. 
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/THAILANDEXTN/
Resources/333295-1280288892663/THM_June2010_ 
fullreport.pdf. Accessed 15 May 2012.

———. 2010c. Arab Development Assistance: Four 
Decades of Cooperation. Washington, DC. http://
siteresources.worldbank.org/INTMENA/Resources/
ADAPub82410web.pdf. Accessed 15 May 2012.

———. 2010d. “World Bank Reforms voting Power, Gets 
$86 Billion Boost.” Press Release, 25 April. Washington, 
DC. http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/NEWS/
0,,contentMDK:22556045~pagePK:64257043~piPK:437376 
~theSitePK:4607,00.html. Accessed 15 May 2012.
———. 2011a. Malaysia Economic Monitor: Brain 

Drain. Washington, DC. http://documents.worldbank.

org/ curated/en/2011/04/14134061/malaysia-economic 
-monitor-brain-drain. Accessed 15 May 2012.

———. 2011b. Growing Old in Older Brazil. Washington, 

DC.

———. 2012a. World Development Indicators Database. 

http://data.worldbank.org/. Accessed 15 May 2012.

———. 2012b. “An Update to World Bank’s Estimates of 
Consumption Poverty in the Developing World.” Briefing 
Note. Washington, DC. http://siteresources.worldbank.
org/INTPOvCALNET/Resources/Global_Poverty_
Update_2012_02-29-12.pdf. Accessed 15 May 2012.
———. n.d. “India Transport: Public Private Partnership.” 

http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/COUNTRIES/ 
SOUTHASIAEXT/0,,contentMDK:22020973~pagePK:146736~ 
piPK:146830~theSitePK:223547,00.html. Accessed 15 May 
2012.

WTO (World Trade Organization). n.d. “The Doha Round.” 

www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/dda_e/dda_e.htm. 
Accessed 28 December 2012.

Xing, Y., and N. Detert. 2010. “How the iPhone Widens the 

United States Trade Deficit with the People’s Republic 
of China.” Working Paper 257. Asian Development Bank 
Institute, Tokyo. www.adbi.org/working-paper/2010/12/ 
14/4236.iphone.widens.us.trade.deficit.prc/. Accessed 
15 May 2012.

Zafar. A. 2011. “Mauritius: An Economic Success Story.” 

In P. Chuhan-Pole and M. Angwafo, eds., Yes Africa Can: 
Success Stories From A Dynamic Continent. Washington, 
DC: World Bank. http://siteresources.worldbank.org/
AFRICAEXT/Resources/258643-1271798012256/YAC_
Consolidated_Web.pdf. Accessed 10 August 2012.

Zuckerberg, M. 2012. “One Billion People on Facebook.” 
http://newsroom.fb.com/News/457/One-Billion-People 
-on-Facebook. Accessed 4 October 2012.

Zuzana, B., and L. Ndikumana. Forthcoming. “The 

Global Financial Crisis and Africa: The Effects and Policy 
Responses.” In G. Epstein and M. H. Wolfson, eds., The 
Oxford Handbook of the Political Economy of Financial 
Crisis. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.

138    |    HUMAN DEvELOPMENT REPORT 2013

Statistical annex

Readers guide 

Key to HDI countries and ranks, 2012 

Statistical tables 
Human development indices
1  Human Development Index and its components 
2  Human Development Index trends, 1980–2012 
Inequality-adjusted Human Development Index 
3 

Experimental indices
4  Gender Inequality Index 
5  Multidimensional Poverty Index 

Human development indicators
6  Command over resources 
7  Health 
8  Education 
9  Social integration 
10  International trade flows of goods and services 
11  International capital flows and migration 
12  Innovation and technology 
13  Environment 
14  Population trends 

Regions 

Statistical references 

Technical appendix: explanatory note for projections exercise 

140

143

144

144
148
152

156
160

162
166
170
174
178
182
186
190
194

198

199

200

Statistical annex    |    139

Human Development RepoRt 2013The Rise of the South Human progress in a Diverse WorldReaders guide

The 14 statistical tables provide an overview of key aspects of 
human development. The tables include composite indices esti-
mated by the Human Development Report Office (HDRO) 
using data available to the HDRO on 15 October 2012. All 
indicators, along with the technical notes on the calculation of 
composite indicators and additional sources of information, are 
available online at http://hdr.undp.org/en/statistics.

Countries and territories are ranked by their 2012 HDI value. 
Robustness and reliability analysis has shown that for most 
countries the HDI is not statistically significant at the third dec-
imal place (see Aguna and Kovacevic 2011 and Høyland, Moene 
and Willumsen 2011). For this reason countries with the same 
HDI value at the third decimal place are listed with tied ranks.

Sources and definitions 

The HDRO uses data from international data agencies with 
the mandate, resources and expertise to collect national data 
on specific indicators, unless otherwise noted.

Definitions of indicators and sources for original data com-
ponents are given at the end of each table, with full source 
details in Statistical references.

Comparisons over time and across editions 
of the Report 

Because national and international data agencies continually 
improve their data series, the data— including the HDI values 
and ranks— presented in this Report are not comparable to 
those published in earlier editions. For the HDI, trends using 
consistent data  calculated at five-year intervals for 1980–2012 
are presented in table 2. 

Discrepancies between national and 
international estimates 

National and international data estimates can vary because 
international agencies harmonize national data for comparabil-
ity across countries, produce an estimate of missing data or do 
not incorporate the most recent national data. When HDRO 
becomes aware of discrepancies, these are brought to the atten-
tion of national and international data authorities.

140    |    HuMan DEvEloPMEnt REPoRt 2013

Country groupings and aggregates 

Several weighted aggregates are presented in the tables. In gen-
eral, an aggregate is shown only when data are available for at 
least half the countries and represent at least two-thirds of the 
available population in that classification. Aggregates for each 
classification represent only the countries for which data are 
available.

Human development classification 

HDI classifications are relative—based on quartiles of HDI 
distribution across the 187 countries denoted as very high, 
high,  medium  (each  with  47  countries)  and  low  (with  46 
countries).

Regional groupings 

Regional groupings are based on United Nations Development 
Programme regional classification. Least Developed Countries 
and Small Island Developing States are defined according to 
UN classifications. The composition of each region is presented 
in Regions.

Country notes

Data for China do not include Hong Kong Special Admin-
istrative  Region  of  China,  Macao  Special  Administrative 
Region of China or Taiwan Province of China, unless oth-
erwise noted. Data for Sudan include South Sudan unless 
otherwise noted.

Symbols 

A dash between two years, as in 2005–2012, indicates that the 
data are the most recent year available in the period specified. A 
slash between years, as in 2005/2012, indicates average for the 
period defined. Growth rates are usually average annual rates 
of growth between the first and last years of the period shown.

The following symbols are used in the tables: 

Not available 

 ..  
0 or 0.0   Nil or negligible 
—  

Not applicable

Statistical acknowledgements

The Report’s composite indices and other statistical resources 
draw on a wide variety of the most respected international 
data providers in their specialized fields. We are particularly 
grateful to the Carbon Dioxide Information Analysis Center 
of the US Department of Energy; Centre for Research on the 
Epidemiology of Disasters; Eurostat; Food and Agricultural 
Organization;  Gallup;  ICF  Macro;  International  Energy 
Agency;  International  Labour  Organization;  International 
Monetary Fund; International Telecommunication Union; 
International Union for Conservation of Nature; Inter-Parlia-
mentary Union; Luxembourg Income Study; Organisation for 
Economic Co-operation and Development; Stockholm Inter-
national Peace Research Institute; United Nations Children’s 
Fund; United Nations Conference on Trade and Development; 
United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs; 
United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and 
the Caribbean; United Nations Educational, Scientific and 
Cultural Organization Institute for Statistics; United Nations 
Office on Drug and Crime; United Nations World Tourism 
Organization; World Bank; World Health Organization; and 
World Intellectual Property Organization. The international 
educational database maintained by Robert Barro (Harvard 
University) and Jong-Wha Lee (Korea University) is another 
invaluable source for the calculation of the Report’s indices.

Statistical tables

The first five tables contain the composite human development 
indices and their components; the remaining nine tables pres-
ent a broader set of indicators related to human development. 
Four  composite  human  development  indices—the  Human 
Development Index (HDI), the Inequality-adjusted Human 
Development  Index  (IHDI),  the  Gender  Inequality  Index 
(GII) and the Multidimensional Poverty Index (MPI)—have 
been presented since the 2010 Human Development Report. 
The GII and the MPI remain experimental indices.

HDI values along with values of the four component indi-
cators on life expectancy, educational attainment and income 
are presented in table 1. Countries are ranked according to 
HDI value. The difference between rank by gross national 
income and HDI indicates whether a country is efficiently 
using its income for advancement in the two nonincome HDI 
dimensions. The nonincome HDI is calculated to provide an 
additional means of cross- country comparison and to order 
countries  by  achievements  in  the  nonincome  dimensions. 
A time series of HDI values based on data available in 2012, 
thus  using  the  most  recent  revision  of  historical  data  and 

methodology, is presented in table 2. It is the only means for 
comparing HDI values for 2012 with those for past years. The 
change in HDI rank over the last five years and between 2011 
and 2012 as well as the average annual HDI growth rate across 
four time periods allow for easy assessment of the direction and 
speed of HDI changes.

Table 3 presents the IHDI, which goes beyond a country’s 
average  achievements  in  health,  education  and  income  to 
show how the achievements are distributed among residents 
by discounting the value of each dimension according to its 
level of inequality. The IHDI can be interpreted as the actual 
level of human development (accounting for inequality), while 
the HDI is the potential human development that could be 
obtained if achievements were distributed equally among resi-
dents. The difference between the HDI and IHDI, expressed as 
a percentage, defines the loss in potential human development 
due to inequality. The difference in ranking by the HDI and 
the IHDI indicates that taking inequality into account would 
either lower a country’s rank (negative value) or improve it 
(positive).

Table 4 presents the Gender Inequality Index, an experimen-
tal composite measure of inequality in achievement between 
women and men in three dimensions: reproductive health, 
empowerment and the labour market. The GII is designed to 
provide empirical foundations for policy analysis and advocacy 
efforts. A high value indicates high inequality between women 
and men.

The Multidimensional Poverty Index, an experimental meas-
ure designed to capture the overlapping deprivations that people 
face in education, health and living standards, is presented in 
table 5. The MPI gives both the incidence of nonincome multi-
dimensional poverty (a headcount of those in multidimensional 
poverty) and its intensity (the relative number of deprivations 
people experience at the same time). The contributions of dep-
rivations in each dimension to overall poverty are included to 
provide a comprehensive picture of people living in poverty. 
Countries are presented alphabetically in two groups according 
to the year of the survey used to estimate the MPI.

Table 6 combines macroeconomic indicators such as gross 
domestic product (GDP), gross fixed capital formation and the 
consumer price index with public spending indicators. During 
economic uncertainty or recession, gross fixed capital forma-
tion typically declines. The consumer price index is presented as 
a measure of inflation. Indicators of public spending are given 
for two points in time to allow for analysis of change in spend-
ing. These indicators can be used to examine priorities in public 
spending and the pattern of expenditure and how it relates to 
human development outcomes.

Several indicators on the health of children, youth and adults 
as well as two indicators of health care quality are presented 

Readers guide    |    141

the growth of world trade and for economic development in 
countries of the South.

Indicators on two aspects of globalization: capital flows and 
human mobility are shown in table 11. Increasing foreign 
investment is one measure of growing economic globalization. 
Migration is an opportunity for work and to send funds back 
home while expanding the labour force in recipient countries. 
Human  mobility  in  all  forms  is  also  a  potential  factor  in 
cross-cultural understanding.

Table 12 captures the importance of investment in research 
and development to advancing human development and build-
ing country capacities to effectively adopt and use technologies. 
Table 13 sheds light on environmental sustainability. It shows 
the proportion of fossil fuels and renewable energy sources in 
the energy supply, presents three ways of looking at carbon 
dioxide and greenhouse gas emissions data and shows impor-
tant measures for ecosystems and natural resources. The table 
also presents indicators on the direct human impacts of changes 
to the physical environment.

Major population indicators needed to understand current 
population conditions and the direction of changes are presented 
in table 14. Statistics on median age of the population, depend-
ency ratios and total fertility rates can be compared to assess the 
burden on the labour force and the ability of societies to sustain 
themselves. Deviations from the natural sex ratio at birth have 
implications  for  population  replacement  levels  and  indicate 
gender bias and potential future social and economic problems.

in table 7. Table 8 comprises standard education indicators 
along with indicators on education quality, including average 
test scores (and deviations from the average scores) in reading, 
mathematics and science. The education quality indicators are 
based on standardized tests assigned to 15-year-old students by 
the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Develop-
ment–managed Programme on International Student Assess-
ment using the 2009 dataset for 63 UN Member States. Two 
additional indicators of education quality, primary education 
teachers trained to teach and a perception-based indicator of 
satisfaction with the quality of education, complement the test-
based quality indicators.

Table 9’s data on social integration indicate whether a soci-
ety is inclusive and integrated. In particular, indicators show 
the extent of equal rights and opportunities for employment, 
overall inequality, human safety, and trust and community 
satisfaction.  Complementary  objective  indicators  and  per-
ception-based indicators allow for a more nuanced picture of 
social integration. Life, freedom and job satisfaction focus on 
individuals’ views of their personal conditions, while trust in 
people and government, along with community satisfaction, 
give insight into people’s satisfaction with broader society.

The extent to which a country is integrated into the global 
economy is reflected in table 10. A distinction between trade 
in final goods and trade in parts and components is made to 
capture the phenomenon of global value added and produc-
tion sharing, which have important policy implications for 

142    |    HuMan DEvEloPMEnt REPoRt 2013

Key to HDI countries and ranks, 2012

afghanistan 
albania 
algeria 
andorra 
angola 
antigua and Barbuda 
argentina 
armenia 
australia 
austria 
azerbaijan 
Bahamas 
Bahrain 
Bangladesh 
Barbados 
Belarus 
Belgium 
Belize 
Benin 
Bhutan 
Bolivia, Plurinational State of 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Botswana 
Brazil 
Brunei Darussalam 
Bulgaria 
Burkina Faso 
Burundi 
Cambodia 
Cameroon 
Canada 
Cape verde 
Central african Republic 
Chad 
Chile 
China 
Colombia 
Comoros 
Congo 
Congo, Democratic Republic of the 
Costa Rica 
Côte d’Ivoire 
Croatia 
Cuba 
Cyprus 
Czech Republic 
Denmark 
Djibouti 
Dominica 
Dominican Republic 
Ecuador 
Egypt 
El Salvador 
Equatorial Guinea 
Eritrea 
Estonia 
Ethiopia 
Fiji 
Finland 
France 
Gabon 
Gambia 

175
70
93
33
148
67
45
87
2
18
82
49
48
146
38
50
17
96
166
140
108
81
119
85
30
57
183
178
138
150
11
132
180
184
40
101
91
169
142
186
62
168
47
59
31
28
15
164
72
96
89
112
107
136
181
33
173
96
21
20
106
165

Georgia 
Germany 
Ghana 
Greece 
Grenada 
Guatemala 
Guinea 
Guinea-Bissau 
Guyana 
Haiti 
Honduras 
Hong Kong, China (SaR) 
Hungary 
Iceland 
India 
Indonesia 
Iran, Islamic Republic of 
Iraq 
Ireland 
Israel 
Italy 
Jamaica 
Japan 
Jordan 
Kazakhstan 
Kenya 
Kiribati 
Korea, Republic of 
Kuwait 
Kyrgyzstan 
lao People’s Democratic Republic 
latvia 
lebanon 
lesotho 
liberia 
libya 
liechtenstein 
lithuania 
luxembourg 
Madagascar 
Malawi 
Malaysia 
Maldives 
Mali 
Malta 
Mauritania 
Mauritius 
Mexico 
Micronesia, Federated States of 
Moldova, Republic of 
Mongolia 
Montenegro 
Morocco 
Mozambique 
Myanmar 
namibia 
nepal 
netherlands 
new Zealand 
nicaragua 
niger 
nigeria 

72
5
135
29
63
133
178
176
118
161
120
13
37
13
136
121
76
131
7
16
25
85
10
100
69
145
121
12
54
125
138
44
72
158
174
64
24
41
26
151
170
64
104
182
32
155
80
61
117
113
108
52
130
185
149
128
157
4
6
129
186
153

norway 
oman 
Pakistan 
Palau 
Palestine, State of 
Panama 
Papua new Guinea 
Paraguay 
Peru 
Philippines 
Poland 
Portugal 
Qatar 
Romania 
Russian Federation 
Rwanda 
Saint Kitts and nevis 
Saint lucia 
Saint vincent and the Grenadines 
Samoa 
Sao tome and Principe 
Saudi arabia 
Senegal 
Serbia 
Seychelles 
Sierra leone 
Singapore 
Slovakia 
Slovenia 
Solomon Islands 
South africa 
Spain 
Sri lanka 
Sudan 
Suriname 
Swaziland 
Sweden 
Switzerland 
Syrian arab Republic 
tajikistan 
tanzania, united Republic of 
thailand 
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia 
timor-leste 
togo 
tonga 
trinidad and tobago 
tunisia 
turkey 
turkmenistan 
uganda 
ukraine 
united arab Emirates 
united Kingdom 
united States 
uruguay 
uzbekistan 
vanuatu 
venezuela, Bolivarian Republic of 
viet nam 
Yemen 
Zambia 
Zimbabwe 

1
84
146
52
110
59
156
111
77
114
39
43
36
56
55
167
72
88
83
96
144
57
154
64
46
177
18
35
21
143
121
23
92
171
105
141
7
9
116
125
152
103
78
134
159
95
67
94
90
102
161
78
41
26
3
51
114
124
71
127
160
163
172

Key to HDI countries and ranks, 2012    |    143

E1

l
b
a
T

Human Development Index 
and its components

Human Development 

Index (HDI)

Life expectancy 

at birth

Mean years of 

schooling

Expected years 

of schooling 

Gross national income 

(GNI) per capita 

GNI per capita rank 

minus HDI rank

Nonincome  

HDI

HDI rank
VERy HIGH HuMaN DEVELopMENt

1 norway
2 australia
3 united States
4 netherlands
5 Germany
6 new Zealand
7 Ireland
7 Sweden
9 Switzerland
10 Japan
11 Canada
12 Korea, Republic of
13 Hong Kong, China (SaR)
13 Iceland
15 Denmark
16 Israel
17 Belgium
18 austria
18 Singapore
20 France
21 Finland
21 Slovenia
23 Spain
24 liechtenstein
25 Italy
26 luxembourg
26 united Kingdom
28 Czech Republic
29 Greece
30 Brunei Darussalam
31 Cyprus
32 Malta
33 andorra
33 Estonia
35 Slovakia
36 Qatar
37 Hungary
38 Barbados
39 Poland
40 Chile
41 lithuania
41 united arab Emirates
43 Portugal
44 latvia
45 argentina
46 Seychelles
47 Croatia
HIGH HuMaN DEVELopMENt
48 Bahrain
49 Bahamas
50 Belarus
51 uruguay
52 Montenegro
52 Palau
54 Kuwait
55 Russian Federation
56 Romania
57 Bulgaria
57 Saudi arabia
59 Cuba
59 Panama
61 Mexico

value

2012

0.955
0.938
0.937
0.921
0.920
0.919
0.916
0.916
0.913
0.912
0.911
0.909
0.906
0.906
0.901
0.900
0.897
0.895
0.895
0.893
0.892
0.892
0.885
0.883
0.881
0.875
0.875
0.873
0.860
0.855
0.848
0.847
0.846
0.846
0.840
0.834
0.831
0.825
0.821
0.819
0.818
0.818
0.816
0.814
0.811
0.806
0.805

0.796
0.794
0.793
0.792
0.791
0.791
0.790
0.788
0.786
0.782
0.782
0.780
0.780
0.775

(years)

2012

(years)

2010a

(years)

2011b

(2005 PPP $)

2012

81.3
82.0
78.7
80.8
80.6
80.8
80.7
81.6
82.5
83.6
81.1
80.7
83.0
81.9
79.0
81.9
80.0
81.0
81.2
81.7
80.1
79.5
81.6
79.8
82.0
80.1
80.3
77.8
80.0
78.1
79.8
79.8
81.1
75.0
75.6
78.5
74.6
77.0
76.3
79.3
72.5
76.7
79.7
73.6
76.1
73.8
76.8

75.2
75.9
70.6
77.2
74.8
72.1
74.7
69.1
74.2
73.6
74.1
79.3
76.3
77.1

12.6
12.0 c
13.3
11.6 c
12.2
12.5
11.6
11.7 c
11.0 c
11.6 c
12.3
11.6
10.0
10.4
11.4 c
11.9
10.9 c
10.8
10.1 c
10.6 c
10.3
11.7
10.4 c
10.3 g
10.1 c
10.1
9.4
12.3
10.1 c
8.6
9.8
9.9
10.4 i
12.0
11.6
7.3
11.7
9.3
10.0
9.7
10.9
8.9
7.7
11.5 c
9.3
9.4 l
9.8 c

9.4
8.5
11.5 l
8.5 c
10.5 l
12.2
6.1
11.7
10.4
10.6 c
7.8
10.2
9.4
8.5

17.5
19.6 d
16.8
16.9
16.4 e
19.7 d
18.3 d
16.0
15.7
15.3
15.1
17.2
15.5
18.3 d
16.8
15.7
16.4
15.3
14.4 f
16.1
16.9
16.9
16.4
11.9
16.2
13.5
16.4
15.3
16.3
15.0
14.9
15.1
11.7
15.8
14.7
12.2
15.3
16.3
15.2
14.7
15.7
12.0
16.0
14.8
16.1
14.3
14.1

13.4 e
12.6
14.7
15.5
15.0
13.7 e
14.2
14.3
14.5
14.0
14.3
16.2
13.2
13.7

48,688
34,340
43,480
37,282
35,431
24,358
28,671
36,143
40,527
32,545
35,369
28,231
45,598
29,176
33,518
26,224
33,429
36,438
52,613
30,277
32,510
23,999
25,947
84,880 h
26,158
48,285
32,538
22,067
20,511
45,690
23,825
21,184
33,918 j
17,402
19,696
87,478 k
16,088
17,308
17,776
14,987
16,858
42,716
19,907
14,724
15,347
22,615
15,419

19,154
27,401
13,385
13,333
10,471
11,463 m
52,793
14,461
11,011
11,474
22,616
5,539 n
13,519
12,947

2012

4
15
6
8
10
26
19
6
2
11
5
15
–6
12
4
13
3
–5
–15
4
2
12
8
–22
5
–20
–5
10
13
–23
4
9
–15
13
9
–35
13
10
7
13
7
–31
0
10
7
–9
4

–3
–21
11
11
24
18
–51
0
16
12
–21
44
1
4

value

2012

0.977
0.978
0.958
0.945
0.948
0.978
0.960
0.940
0.926
0.942
0.934
0.949
0.907
0.943
0.924
0.942
0.917
0.908
0.880
0.919
0.912
0.936
0.919
0.832
0.911
0.858
0.886
0.913
0.899
0.832
0.869
0.876
0.839
0.892
0.872
0.761
0.874
0.859
0.851
0.863
0.850
0.783
0.835
0.856
0.848
0.808
0.837

0.806
0.777
0.830
0.829
0.850
0.840
0.730
0.816
0.836
0.826
0.774
0.894
0.810
0.805

144    |    HuMan DEvEloPMEnt REPoRt 2013

Human Development 

Index (HDI)

Life expectancy 

at birth

Mean years of 

schooling

Expected years 

of schooling 

Gross national income 

(GNI) per capita 

GNI per capita rank 

minus HDI rank

Nonincome  

HDI

HDI rank
62 Costa Rica
63 Grenada
64 libya
64 Malaysia
64 Serbia
67 antigua and Barbuda
67 trinidad and tobago
69 Kazakhstan
70 albania
71 venezuela, Bolivarian Republic of
72 Dominica
72 Georgia
72 lebanon
72 Saint Kitts and nevis
76 Iran, Islamic Republic of
77 Peru
78 the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
78 ukraine
80 Mauritius
81 Bosnia and Herzegovina
82 azerbaijan
83 Saint vincent and the Grenadines
84 oman
85 Brazil
85 Jamaica
87 armenia
88 Saint lucia
89 Ecuador
90 turkey
91 Colombia
92 Sri lanka
93 algeria
94 tunisia
MEDIuM HuMaN DEVELopMENt
95 tonga
96 Belize
96 Dominican Republic
96 Fiji
96 Samoa
100 Jordan
101 China
102 turkmenistan
103 thailand
104 Maldives
105 Suriname
106 Gabon
107 El Salvador
108 Bolivia, Plurinational State of
108 Mongolia
110 Palestine, State of
111 Paraguay
112 Egypt
113 Moldova, Republic of
114 Philippines
114 uzbekistan
116 Syrian arab Republic
117 Micronesia, Federated States of
118 Guyana
119 Botswana
120 Honduras
121 Indonesia
121 Kiribati
121 South africa

value

2012
0.773
0.770
0.769
0.769
0.769
0.760
0.760
0.754
0.749
0.748
0.745
0.745
0.745
0.745
0.742
0.741
0.740
0.740
0.737
0.735
0.734
0.733
0.731
0.730
0.730
0.729
0.725
0.724
0.722
0.719
0.715
0.713
0.712

0.710
0.702
0.702
0.702
0.702
0.700
0.699
0.698
0.690
0.688
0.684
0.683
0.680
0.675
0.675
0.670
0.669
0.662
0.660
0.654
0.654
0.648
0.645
0.636
0.634
0.632
0.629
0.629
0.629

(years)

(years)

(years)

(2005 PPP $)

2012
79.4
76.1
75.0
74.5
74.7
72.8
70.3
67.4
77.1
74.6
77.6
73.9
72.8
73.3
73.2
74.2
75.0
68.8
73.5
75.8
70.9
72.5
73.2
73.8
73.3
74.4
74.8
75.8
74.2
73.9
75.1
73.4
74.7

72.5
76.3
73.6
69.4
72.7
73.5
73.7
65.2
74.3
77.1
70.8
63.1
72.4
66.9
68.8
73.0
72.7
73.5
69.6
69.0
68.6
76.0
69.2
70.2
53.0
73.4
69.8
68.4
53.4

2010a
8.4
8.6 e
7.3
9.5
10.2 c
8.9
9.2
10.4
10.4
7.6 c
7.7 l
12.1 o
7.9 l
8.4 e
7.8
8.7
8.2 o
11.3
7.2
8.3 l
11.2 l
8.6 e
5.5 l
7.2
9.6
10.8
8.3 e
7.6
6.5
7.3
9.3 c
7.6
6.5

10.3 c
8.0 c
7.2 c
10.7 c
10.3 l
8.6
7.5
9.9 p
6.6
5.8 c
7.2 o
7.5
7.5
9.2
8.3
8.0 l
7.7
6.4
9.7
8.9 c
10.0 o
5.7 c
8.8 p
8.5
8.9
6.5
5.8
7.8 e
8.5 c

2011b
13.7
15.8
16.2
12.6
13.6
13.3
11.9
15.3
11.4
14.4
12.7
13.2
13.9
12.9
14.4
13.2
13.4
14.8
13.6
13.4
11.7
13.3
13.5
14.2
13.1
12.2
12.7
13.7
12.9
13.6
12.7
13.6
14.5

13.7
12.5
12.3
13.9
13.0
12.7
11.7
12.6 e
12.3
12.5
12.4
13.0
12.0
13.5
14.3
13.5
12.1
12.1
11.8
11.7
11.6
11.7 e
11.4 e
10.3
11.8
11.4
12.9
12.0
13.1 e

2012
10,863
9,257
13,765
13,676
9,533
13,883
21,941
10,451
7,822
11,475
10,977
5,005
12,364
12,460
10,695
9,306
9,377
6,428
13,300
7,713
8,153
9,367
24,092
10,152
6,701
5,540
7,971
7,471
13,710
8,711
5,170
7,418
8,103

4,153
5,327
8,506
4,087
3,928
5,272
7,945
7,782
7,722
7,478
7,327
12,521
5,915
4,444
4,245
3,359 q
4,497
5,401
3,319
3,752
3,201
4,674 r
3,352 m
3,387
13,102
3,426
4,154
3,079
9,594

2012
12
21
–8
–7
16
–12
–28
8
21
–2
–1
37
–5
–5
–1
6
2
22
–17
13
5
–1
–51
–8
14
16
1
7
–32
–6
18
4
–6

26
8
–11
24
28
8
–11
–10
–10
–9
–7
–40
–5
7
10
20
4
–6
19
11
19
–2
14
11
–55
8
–3
13
–42

value

2012
0.816
0.827
0.791
0.791
0.823
0.776
0.743
0.791
0.807
0.774
0.771
0.845
0.762
0.763
0.769
0.780
0.777
0.813
0.745
0.787
0.780
0.767
0.694
0.755
0.792
0.808
0.768
0.772
0.720
0.751
0.792
0.755
0.746

0.807
0.767
0.726
0.794
0.800
0.766
0.728
0.727
0.715
0.715
0.710
0.668
0.723
0.740
0.746
0.761
0.730
0.702
0.747
0.724
0.740
0.692
0.719
0.703
0.596
0.695
0.672
0.701
0.608

taBlE 1  Human Development Index and its components    |    145

Human Development RepoRt 2013The Rise of the South Human progress in a Diverse WorldHDI rank
124 vanuatu
125 Kyrgyzstan
125 tajikistan
127 viet nam
128 namibia
129 nicaragua
130 Morocco
131 Iraq
132 Cape verde
133 Guatemala
134 timor-leste
135 Ghana
136 Equatorial Guinea
136 India
138 Cambodia
138 lao People’s Democratic Republic
140 Bhutan
141 Swaziland
Low HuMaN DEVELopMENt
142 Congo
143 Solomon Islands
144 Sao tome and Principe
145 Kenya
146 Bangladesh
146 Pakistan
148 angola
149 Myanmar
150 Cameroon
151 Madagascar
152 tanzania, united Republic of
153 nigeria
154 Senegal
155 Mauritania
156 Papua new Guinea
157 nepal
158 lesotho
159 togo
160 Yemen
161 Haiti
161 uganda
163 Zambia
164 Djibouti
165 Gambia
166 Benin
167 Rwanda
168 Côte d’Ivoire
169 Comoros
170 Malawi
171 Sudan
172 Zimbabwe
173 Ethiopia
174 liberia
175 afghanistan
176 Guinea-Bissau
177 Sierra leone
178 Burundi
178 Guinea
180 Central african Republic
181 Eritrea
182 Mali
183 Burkina Faso
184 Chad
185 Mozambique

Human Development 

Index (HDI)

Life expectancy 

at birth

Mean years of 

schooling

Expected years 

of schooling 

Gross national income 

(GNI) per capita 

GNI per capita rank 

minus HDI rank

Nonincome  

HDI

value

2012
0.626
0.622
0.622
0.617
0.608
0.599
0.591
0.590
0.586
0.581
0.576
0.558
0.554
0.554
0.543
0.543
0.538
0.536

0.534
0.530
0.525
0.519
0.515
0.515
0.508
0.498
0.495
0.483
0.476
0.471
0.470
0.467
0.466
0.463
0.461
0.459
0.458
0.456
0.456
0.448
0.445
0.439
0.436
0.434
0.432
0.429
0.418
0.414
0.397
0.396
0.388
0.374
0.364
0.359
0.355
0.355
0.352
0.351
0.344
0.343
0.340
0.327

(years)

2012
71.3
68.0
67.8
75.4
62.6
74.3
72.4
69.6
74.3
71.4
62.9
64.6
51.4
65.8
63.6
67.8
67.6
48.9

57.8
68.2
64.9
57.7
69.2
65.7
51.5
65.7
52.1
66.9
58.9
52.3
59.6
58.9
63.1
69.1
48.7
57.5
65.9
62.4
54.5
49.4
58.3
58.8
56.5
55.7
56.0
61.5
54.8
61.8
52.7
59.7
57.3
49.1
48.6
48.1
50.9
54.5
49.1
62.0
51.9
55.9
49.9
50.7

(years)

2010a
6.7 e
9.3
9.8
5.5
6.2
5.8
4.4
5.6
3.5 e
4.1
4.4 s
7.0
5.4 o
4.4
5.8
4.6
2.3 s
7.1

5.9
4.5 p
4.7 s
7.0
4.8
4.9
4.7 s
3.9
5.9
5.2 p
5.1
5.2 s
4.5
3.7
3.9
3.2
5.9 c
5.3
2.5
4.9
4.7
6.7
3.8 o
2.8
3.2
3.3
4.2
2.8 p
4.2
3.1
7.2
2.2 s
3.9
3.1
2.3 o
3.3
2.7
1.6 s
3.5
3.4 e
2.0 c
1.3 o
1.5 p
1.2

(years)

(2005 PPP $)

2011b
10.6
12.6
11.5
11.9
11.3
10.8
10.4
10.0
12.7
10.7
11.7
11.4
7.9
10.7
10.5
10.1
12.4
10.7

10.1
9.3
10.8
11.1
8.1
7.3
10.2
9.4
10.9
10.4
9.1
9.0
8.2
8.1
5.8 e
8.9
9.6
10.6
8.7
7.6 e
11.1
8.5
5.7
8.7
9.4
10.9
6.5
10.2
10.4
4.5
10.1
8.7
10.5 e
8.1
9.5
7.3 e
11.3
8.8
6.8
4.6
7.5
6.9
7.4
9.2

2012
3,960
2,009
2,119
2,970
5,973
2,551
4,384
3,557
3,609
4,235
5,446
1,684
21,715
3,285
2,095
2,435
5,246
5,104

2,934
2,172
1,864
1,541
1,785
2,566
4,812
1,817
2,114
828
1,383
2,102
1,653
2,174
2,386
1,137
1,879
928
1,820
1,070
1,168
1,358
2,350
1,731
1,439
1,147
1,593
986
774
1,848
424 t
1,017
480
1,000
1,042
881
544
941
722
531
853
1,202
1,258
906

2012
–1
24
19
9
–27
10
–13
–4
–6
–14
–29
22
–97
–3
9
2
–31
–30

–5
1
7
15
9
–9
–35
5
–4
28
10
–6
4
–12
–15
11
–8
16
–7
7
5
0
–22
–9
–5
0
–9
4
10
–19
14
–2
11
–3
–6
0
4
–4
1
3
–4
–18
–20
–9

value

2012
0.672
0.738
0.731
0.686
0.611
0.671
0.608
0.623
0.617
0.596
0.569
0.646
0.463
0.575
0.597
0.584
0.516
0.515

0.553
0.572
0.579
0.588
0.567
0.534
0.479
0.537
0.520
0.601
0.527
0.482
0.501
0.473
0.464
0.526
0.476
0.542
0.474
0.521
0.511
0.483
0.435
0.448
0.459
0.476
0.444
0.484
0.492
0.405
0.542
0.425
0.502
0.393
0.373
0.380
0.423
0.368
0.386
0.418
0.359
0.332
0.324
0.327

146    |    HuMan DEvEloPMEnt REPoRt 2013

table 1 Human Development inDex anD its componentsHDI rank
186 Congo, Democratic Republic of the
186 niger
otHER CouNtRIES oR tERRItoRIES
Korea, Democratic People’s Rep. of
Marshall Islands
Monaco
nauru
San Marino
Somalia
South Sudan
tuvalu

Human Development Index groups

very high human development
High human development
Medium human development
low human development

Regions

arab States
East asia and the Pacific
Europe and Central asia
latin america and the Caribbean
South asia
Sub-Saharan africa

Least developed countries
Small island developing states
world

Human Development 

Index (HDI)

Life expectancy 

at birth

Mean years of 

schooling

Expected years 

of schooling 

Gross national income 

(GNI) per capita 

GNI per capita rank 

minus HDI rank

Nonincome  

HDI

value

2012
0.304
0.304

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

0.905
0.758
0.640
0.466

0.652
0.683
0.771
0.741
0.558
0.475
0.449
0.648
0.694

(years)

2012
48.7
55.1

69.0
72.3
82.3
80.0
81.9
51.5
..
67.5

80.1
73.4
69.9
59.1

71.0
72.7
71.5
74.7
66.2
54.9
59.5
69.8
70.1

(years)

2010a
3.5
1.4

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

11.5
8.8
6.3
4.2

6.0
7.2
10.4
7.8
4.7
4.7
3.7
7.3
7.5

(years)

2011b
8.5
4.9

..
11.7
..
9.3
12.5
2.4
..
10.8

16.3
13.9
11.4
8.5

10.6
11.8
13.7
13.7
10.2
9.3
8.5
10.7
11.6

(2005 PPP $)

2012
319
701

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

33,391
11,501
5,428
1,633

8,317
6,874
12,243
10,300
3,343
2,010
1,385
5,397
10,184

2012
0
–4

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

—
—
—
—

—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—

value

2012
0.404
0.313

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

0.927
0.781
0.661
0.487

0.658
0.712
0.801
0.770
0.577
0.479
0.475
0.673
0.690

NotES
a  Data refer to 2010 or the most recent year available.
b  Data refer to 2011 or the most recent year available.
c  updated by HDRo based on unESCo Institute for 

Statistics (2012) data.

d  For the HDI calculation this value is capped at 

18 years.

e  Based on cross-country regression.
f  Calculated by the Singapore Ministry of Education.
g  assumes the same adult mean years of schooling 

as Switzerland before the most recent update.
h  Estimated using the purchasing power parity 

(PPP) rate and the projected growth rate of 
Switzerland.

i  assumes the same adult mean years of schooling 

as Spain before the most recent update.

n  PPP estimate based on cross-country regression; 
projected growth rate based on EClaC (2012) and 
unDESa (2012c) projected growth rates.

o  Based on data from unICEF Multiple Indicator 

Cluster Surveys for 2002–2012.

p  Based on data on years of schooling of adults 

from household surveys in the World Bank’s 
International Income Distribution Database.

q  Based on an unpublished estimate of the PPP 

conversion rate from the World Bank and 
projected growth rates from unESCWa (2012) 
and unDESa (2012c).

r  Based on projected growth rates from unDESa 

(2012c).

s  Based on data from ICF Macro (2012).
t  Based on PPP data from IMF (2012).

j  Estimated using the PPP rate and the projected 

DEFINItIoNS

growth rate of Spain.

k  Based on implied PPP conversion factors from 

IMF (2012).

l  Based on the unESCo Institute for Statistics 

(2012) estimate of educational attainment 
distribution.

m  Based on projected growth rates by aDB (2012).

Human Development Index (HDI): a composite 
index measuring average achievement in three basic 
dimensions of human development—a long and 
healthy life, knowledge and a decent standard of 
living. See Technical note 1 at http://hdr.undp.org/
en/media/HDR_2013_En_technotes.pdf for details 
on how the HDI is calculated.

Life expectancy at birth: number of years a 
newborn infant could expect to live if prevailing 
patterns of age-specific mortality rates at the time of 
birth stay the same throughout the infant’s life.

Nonincome HDI: value of the HDI computed from 
the life expectancy and education indicators only.

MaIN Data SouRCES

Mean years of schooling: average number of 
years of education received by people ages 25 and 
older, converted from educational attainment levels 
using official durations of each level.

Column 1: HDRo calculations based on data from 
unDESa (2011), Barro and lee (2011), unESCo 
Institute for Statistics (2012), World Bank (2012a) 
and IMF (2012).

Expected years of schooling: number of years 
of schooling that a child of school entrance age 
can expect to receive if prevailing patterns of 
age-specific enrolment rates persist throughout the 
child’s life.

Gross national income (GNI) per capita: 
aggregate income of an economy generated by 
its production and its ownership of factors of 
production, less the incomes paid for the use of 
factors of production owned by the rest of the world, 
converted to international dollars using PPP rates, 
divided by midyear population.

GNI per capita rank minus HDI rank: Difference 
in rankings by GnI per capita and by the HDI. a 
negative value means that the country is better 
ranked by GnI than by the HDI.

Column 2: unDESa (2011).

Column 3: Barro and lee (2011) and HDRo updates 
based on data on educational attainment from 
unESCo Institute for Statistics (2012) and on 
methodology from Barro and lee (2010).

Column 4: unESCo Institute for Statistics (2012).

Column 5: HDRo calculations based on data from 
World Bank (2012a), IMF (2012) and unSD (2012a).

Column 6: Calculated based on data in columns 
1 and 5.

Column 7: Calculated based on data in columns 
2, 3 and 4.

 

taBlE 1  Human Development Index and its components    |    147

Human Development RepoRt 2013The Rise of the South Human progress in a Diverse WorldE2

l
b
a
T

Human Development Index trends, 1980–2012

HDI rank
VERy HIGH HuMaN DEVELopMENt

Human Development Index (HDI) 

value

HDI rank

Change

average annual HDI growth

(%)

1980

1990

2000

2005

2007

2010

2011

2012

2007–2012a 2011–2012a 1980/1990

1990/2000

2000/2010

2000/2012

1 norway
2 australia
3 united States
4 netherlands
5 Germany
6 new Zealand
7 Ireland
7 Sweden
9 Switzerland
10 Japan
11 Canada
12 Korea, Republic of
13 Hong Kong, China (SaR)
13 Iceland
15 Denmark
16 Israel
17 Belgium
18 austria
18 Singapore
20 France
21 Finland
21 Slovenia
23 Spain
24 liechtenstein
25 Italy
26 luxembourg
26 united Kingdom
28 Czech Republic
29 Greece
30 Brunei Darussalam
31 Cyprus
32 Malta
33 andorra
33 Estonia
35 Slovakia
36 Qatar
37 Hungary
38 Barbados
39 Poland
40 Chile
41 lithuania
41 united arab Emirates
43 Portugal
44 latvia
45 argentina
46 Seychelles
47 Croatia
HIGH HuMaN DEVELopMENt
48 Bahrain
49 Bahamas
50 Belarus
51 uruguay
52 Montenegro
52 Palau
54 Kuwait
55 Russian Federation
56 Romania
57 Bulgaria
57 Saudi arabia
59 Cuba
59 Panama
61 Mexico
62 Costa Rica

0.804
0.857
0.843
0.799
0.738
0.807
0.745
0.792
0.818
0.788
0.825
0.640
0.712
0.769
0.790
0.773
0.764
0.747
..
0.728
0.766
..
0.698
..
0.723
0.735
0.748
..
0.726
0.765
0.715
0.713
..
..
..
0.729
0.709
0.706
..
0.638
..
..
0.644
0.675
0.675
..
..

0.644
..
..
0.664
..
..
0.695
..
..
0.673
0.575
0.626
0.634
0.598
0.621

0.852
0.880
0.878
0.842
0.803
0.835
0.793
0.823
0.840
0.837
0.865
0.749
0.788
0.815
0.816
0.809
0.817
0.797
0.756
0.784
0.801
..
0.756
..
0.771
0.796
0.784
..
0.772
0.782
0.779
0.757
..
0.728
0.754
0.743
0.714
0.760
..
0.702
0.732
..
0.714
0.699
0.701
..
0.716

0.713
..
..
0.693
..
..
0.712
0.730
0.706
0.704
0.653
0.681
0.666
0.654
0.663

0.922
0.914
0.907
0.891
0.870
0.887
0.879
0.903
0.882
0.878
0.887
0.839
0.815
0.871
0.869
0.865
0.884
0.848
0.826
0.853
0.845
0.842
0.847
..
0.833
0.861
0.841
0.824
0.810
0.830
0.808
0.801
..
0.786
0.785
0.801
0.790
0.790
0.778
0.759
0.756
..
0.783
0.738
0.755
0.774
0.755

0.781
..
..
0.741
..
0.765
0.781
0.713
0.709
0.721
0.717
0.690
0.724
0.723
0.705

0.948
0.927
0.923
0.899
0.901
0.908
0.907
0.905
0.898
0.896
0.906
0.875
0.857
0.901
0.893
0.885
0.884
0.867
0.852
0.877
0.882
0.876
0.865
..
0.869
0.875
0.865
0.862
0.862
0.848
0.817
0.827
..
0.830
0.814
0.828
0.820
0.798
0.798
0.789
0.802
0.831
0.796
0.792
0.771
0.781
0.787

0.802
..
0.730
0.744
0.756
0.786
0.784
0.753
0.756
0.756
0.748
0.735
0.746
0.745
0.732

0.952
0.931
0.929
0.911
0.907
0.912
0.918
0.909
0.901
0.903
0.909
0.890
0.877
0.908
0.898
0.892
0.891
0.879
..
0.885
0.890
0.888
0.874
..
0.878
0.879
0.867
0.869
0.865
0.853
0.827
0.829
..
0.841
0.830
0.833
0.826
0.808
0.806
0.800
0.810
0.827
0.806
0.808
0.787
0.792
0.798

0.802
..
0.756
0.771
0.775
0.792
0.787
0.770
0.772
0.766
0.756
0.770
0.758
0.758
0.744

0.952
0.935
0.934
0.919
0.916
0.917
0.916
0.913
0.912
0.909
0.909
0.905
0.900
0.901
0.899
0.896
0.896
0.892
0.892
0.891
0.890
0.892
0.884
0.882
0.881
0.875
0.874
0.871
0.866
0.854
0.849
0.844
0.846
0.839
0.836
0.827
0.829
0.823
0.817
0.813
0.810
0.816
0.817
0.805
0.805
0.799
0.804

0.794
0.791
0.785
0.785
0.787
0.779
0.786
0.782
0.783
0.778
0.777
0.775
0.770
0.770
0.768

0.953
0.936
0.936
0.921
0.919
0.918
0.915
0.915
0.912
0.910
0.910
0.907
0.904
0.905
0.901
0.899
0.897
0.894
0.894
0.893
0.892
0.892
0.885
0.883
0.881
0.875
0.875
0.872
0.862
0.854
0.849
0.846
0.847
0.844
0.838
0.832
0.830
0.824
0.819
0.817
0.814
0.817
0.817
0.809
0.810
0.804
0.804

0.795
0.792
0.789
0.789
0.791
0.786
0.788
0.784
0.784
0.780
0.780
0.777
0.776
0.773
0.770

0.955
0.938
0.937
0.921
0.920
0.919
0.916
0.916
0.913
0.912
0.911
0.909
0.906
0.906
0.901
0.900
0.897
0.895
0.895
0.893
0.892
0.892
0.885
0.883
0.881
0.875
0.875
0.873
0.860
0.855
0.848
0.847
0.846
0.846
0.840
0.834
0.831
0.825
0.821
0.819
0.818
0.818
0.816
0.814
0.811
0.806
0.805

0.796
0.794
0.793
0.792
0.791
0.791
0.790
0.788
0.786
0.782
0.782
0.780
0.780
0.775
0.773

0
0
0
2
5
–1
–3
0
3
1
–4
4
10
–4
–2
–2
–2
2
7
–1
–5
–3
1
..
–2
–5
2
–1
0
0
4
2
..
–2
–1
–3
1
2
3
5
–2
–5
–1
–4
4
1
–1

–4
..
12
3
0
–4
–4
0
–3
0
5
–4
1
–1
4

0
0
–1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
–1
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
–1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
–1
–3
1
–1
0
–1

0
0
1
0
–2
2
–1
0
–1
0
0
0
1
0
0

0.59
0.27
0.40
0.52
0.85
0.34
0.62
0.38
0.27
0.61
0.48
1.58
1.02
0.58
0.33
0.45
0.67
0.66
..
0.75
0.45
..
0.80
..
0.64
0.81
0.47
..
0.62
0.22
0.86
0.59
..
..
..
0.18
0.07
0.73
..
0.96
..
..
1.04
0.35
0.38
..
..

1.02
..
..
0.42
..
..
0.25
..
..
0.45
1.29
0.83
0.49
0.89
0.65

0.79
0.37
0.33
0.56
0.81
0.60
1.04
0.93
0.49
0.48
0.25
1.14
0.34
0.67
0.63
0.68
0.79
0.62
0.89
0.85
0.54
..
1.15
..
0.78
0.78
0.70
..
0.48
0.59
0.36
0.57
..
0.76
0.40
0.76
1.02
0.38
..
0.78
0.32
..
0.93
0.55
0.74
..
0.52

0.92
..
..
0.68
..
..
0.92
–0.23
0.05
0.24
0.93
0.14
0.85
1.00
0.62

0.32
0.23
0.29
0.31
0.53
0.33
0.42
0.11
0.33
0.35
0.24
0.76
1.00
0.34
0.34
0.34
0.14
0.51
0.77
0.44
0.52
0.58
0.43
..
0.56
0.16
0.39
0.56
0.67
0.28
0.50
0.52
..
0.65
0.64
0.32
0.48
0.41
0.49
0.68
0.68
..
0.43
0.87
0.64
0.31
0.63

0.16
..
..
0.58
..
0.18
0.06
0.93
0.99
0.77
0.81
1.17
0.62
0.64
0.85

0.29
0.22
0.27
0.28
0.47
0.29
0.35
0.12
0.29
0.32
0.22
0.67
0.89
0.33
0.30
0.33
0.12
0.46
0.67
0.38
0.45
0.48
0.37
..
0.46
0.14
0.33
0.48
0.50
0.25
0.41
0.46
..
0.62
0.57
0.33
0.42
0.37
0.46
0.64
0.65
..
0.35
0.82
0.60
0.33
0.54

0.15
..
..
0.55
..
0.27
0.10
0.84
0.86
0.67
0.74
1.02
0.62
0.59
0.76

148    |    HuMan DEvEloPMEnt REPoRt 2013

HDI rank
63 Grenada
64 libya
64 Malaysia
64 Serbia
67 antigua and Barbuda
67 trinidad and tobago
69 Kazakhstan
70 albania
71 venezuela, Bolivarian Republic of
72 Dominica
72 Georgia
72 lebanon
72 Saint Kitts and nevis
76 Iran, Islamic Republic of
77 Peru
78 the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
78 ukraine
80 Mauritius
81 Bosnia and Herzegovina
82 azerbaijan
83 Saint vincent and the Grenadines
84 oman
85 Brazil
85 Jamaica
87 armenia
88 Saint lucia
89 Ecuador
90 turkey
91 Colombia
92 Sri lanka
93 algeria
94 tunisia
MEDIuM HuMaN DEVELopMENt
95 tonga
96 Belize
96 Dominican Republic
96 Fiji
96 Samoa
100 Jordan
101 China
102 turkmenistan
103 thailand
104 Maldives
105 Suriname
106 Gabon
107 El Salvador
108 Bolivia, Plurinational State of
108 Mongolia
110 Palestine, State of
111 Paraguay
112 Egypt
113 Moldova, Republic of
114 Philippines
114 uzbekistan
116 Syrian arab Republic
117 Micronesia, Federated States of
118 Guyana
119 Botswana
120 Honduras
121 Indonesia
121 Kiribati
121 South africa
124 vanuatu
125 Kyrgyzstan

1980
..
..
0.563
..
..
0.680
..
..
0.629
..
..
..
..
0.443
0.580
..
..
0.551
..
..
..
..
0.522
0.612
..
..
0.596
0.474
0.556
0.557
0.461
0.459

..
0.621
0.525
0.572
..
0.545
0.407
..
0.490
..
..
0.526
0.471
0.489
..
..
0.549
0.407
..
0.561
..
0.501
..
0.513
0.449
0.456
0.422
..
0.570
..
..

Human Development Index (HDI) 

value

1990
..
..
0.635
..
..
0.685
..
0.661
0.635
..
..
..
..
0.540
0.619
..
0.714
0.626
..
..
..
..
0.590
0.642
0.628
..
0.635
0.569
0.600
0.608
0.562
0.553

0.656
0.653
0.584
0.614
..
0.592
0.495
..
0.569
..
..
0.610
0.528
0.557
0.559
..
0.578
0.502
0.650
0.581
..
0.557
..
0.502
0.586
0.520
0.479
..
0.621
..
0.609

2000
..
..
0.712
0.726
..
0.707
0.663
0.698
0.662
0.722
..
..
..
0.654
0.679
..
0.673
0.676
..
..
..
..
0.669
0.679
0.648
..
0.659
0.645
0.658
0.653
0.625
0.642

0.689
0.672
0.641
0.670
0.663
0.650
0.590
..
0.625
0.592
..
0.627
0.620
0.620
0.564
..
0.617
0.593
0.592
0.610
..
0.596
..
0.578
0.587
0.563
0.540
..
0.622
..
0.582

2005
..
0.746
0.742
0.751
..
0.741
0.721
0.729
0.694
0.732
0.713
0.714
..
0.685
0.699
0.711
0.718
0.708
0.724
..
..
..
0.699
0.695
0.695
..
0.682
0.684
0.681
0.683
0.680
0.679

0.704
0.694
0.669
0.693
0.689
0.684
0.637
..
0.662
0.639
0.666
0.653
0.655
0.647
0.622
..
0.641
0.625
0.636
0.630
0.617
0.618
..
0.610
0.604
0.582
0.575
..
0.604
..
0.601

2007
..
0.760
0.753
0.760
..
0.752
0.734
0.737
0.712
0.739
0.732
0.728
..
0.706
0.716
0.719
0.732
0.720
0.729
..
..
..
0.710
0.701
0.723
..
0.688
0.702
0.698
0.693
0.691
0.694

0.705
0.696
0.683
0.695
0.695
0.695
0.662
..
0.676
0.663
0.672
0.662
0.671
0.652
0.638
..
0.650
0.640
0.644
0.636
0.630
0.623
..
0.617
0.619
0.594
0.595
..
0.609
..
0.612

2010
0.768
0.773
0.763
0.767
0.761
0.758
0.744
0.746
0.744
0.743
0.735
0.743
0.745
0.740
0.733
0.736
0.733
0.732
0.733
0.734
0.731
0.728
0.726
0.727
0.722
0.723
0.719
0.715
0.714
0.705
0.710
0.710

0.709
0.700
0.697
0.699
0.699
0.699
0.689
0.688
0.686
0.683
0.679
0.676
0.678
0.668
0.657
0.662
0.668
0.661
0.652
0.649
0.644
0.646
0.639
0.628
0.633
0.629
0.620
0.628
0.621
0.623
0.615

2011
0.770
0.725
0.766
0.769
0.759
0.759
0.750
0.748
0.746
0.744
0.740
0.744
0.745
0.742
0.738
0.738
0.737
0.735
0.734
0.732
0.732
0.729
0.728
0.729
0.726
0.724
0.722
0.720
0.717
0.711
0.711
0.710

0.709
0.701
0.700
0.700
0.701
0.699
0.695
0.693
0.686
0.687
0.681
0.679
0.679
0.671
0.668
0.666
0.670
0.661
0.657
0.651
0.649
0.646
0.640
0.632
0.634
0.630
0.624
0.627
0.625
0.625
0.621

2012
0.770
0.769
0.769
0.769
0.760
0.760
0.754
0.749
0.748
0.745
0.745
0.745
0.745
0.742
0.741
0.740
0.740
0.737
0.735
0.734
0.733
0.731
0.730
0.730
0.729
0.725
0.724
0.722
0.719
0.715
0.713
0.712

0.710
0.702
0.702
0.702
0.702
0.700
0.699
0.698
0.690
0.688
0.684
0.683
0.680
0.675
0.675
0.670
0.669
0.662
0.660
0.654
0.654
0.648
0.645
0.636
0.634
0.632
0.629
0.629
0.629
0.626
0.622

HDI rank

Change

average annual HDI growth

(%)

2007–2012a 2011–2012a 1980/1990

1990/2000

2000/2010

2000/2012

..
–5
1
–5
..
–1
2
0
9
–3
0
3
..
7
3
1
–5
–2
–6
..
..
..
0
4
–7
..
10
–1
0
5
5
2

–7
–4
4
–3
–3
–7
4
..
–1
1
–2
0
–3
0
4
..
–1
0
–2
0
1
0
..
1
–1
3
1
..
0
..
–3

–1
23 b
1
0
–1
–1
–1
–1
–1
0
3
0
–1
–2
–1
–2
0
–1
–1
–1
–2
–1
0
–2
–1
0
0
0
0
0
–1
0

0
0
2
2
0
0
0
0
1
–1
0
0
–1
0
2
1
–2
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
–1
0
3
0
1
–2
0

..
..
1.21
..
..
0.08
..
..
0.11
..
..
..
..
1.99
0.65
..
..
1.28
..
..
..
..
1.23
0.47
..
..
0.63
1.85
0.76
0.88
2.01
1.87

..
0.51
1.07
0.71
..
0.83
1.96
..
1.50
..
..
1.49
1.14
1.31
..
..
0.52
2.12
..
0.35
..
1.07
..
–0.21
2.71
1.33
1.26
..
0.87
..
..

..
..
1.15
..
..
0.32
..
0.54
0.41
..
..
..
..
1.94
0.93
..
–0.58
0.77
..
..
..
..
1.26
0.57
0.33
..
0.37
1.26
0.93
0.72
1.07
1.51

0.49
0.29
0.93
0.87
..
0.95
1.78
..
0.94
..
..
0.27
1.62
1.08
0.08
..
0.66
1.68
–0.93
0.49
..
0.67
..
1.41
0.00
0.79
1.21
..
0.01
..
–0.45

..
..
0.69
0.56
..
0.70
1.15
0.66
1.17
0.28
..
..
..
1.25
0.78
..
0.85
0.81
..
..
..
..
0.82
0.69
1.08
..
0.89
1.04
0.82
0.78
1.28
1.01

0.28
0.40
0.85
0.43
0.52
0.72
1.55
..
0.93
1.43
..
0.75
0.90
0.75
1.54
..
0.79
1.08
0.96
0.61
..
0.80
..
0.83
0.77
1.12
1.39
..
–0.01
..
0.54

..
..
0.64
0.49
..
0.60
1.08
0.59
1.03
0.26
..
..
..
1.05
0.73
..
0.80
0.73
..
..
..
..
0.73
0.61
0.98
..
0.79
0.95
0.75
0.76
1.10
0.86

0.25
0.35
0.76
0.39
0.48
0.62
1.42
..
0.82
1.26
..
0.72
0.78
0.71
1.51
..
0.67
0.92
0.91
0.58
..
0.70
..
0.79
0.66
0.97
1.28
..
0.11
..
0.56

taBlE 2  Human Development Index trends, 1980–2012    |    149

Human Development RepoRt 2013The Rise of the South Human progress in a Diverse WorldHDI rank
125 tajikistan
127 viet nam
128 namibia
129 nicaragua
130 Morocco
131 Iraq
132 Cape verde
133 Guatemala
134 timor-leste
135 Ghana
136 Equatorial Guinea
136 India
138 Cambodia
138 lao People’s Democratic Republic
140 Bhutan
141 Swaziland
Low HuMaN DEVELopMENt
142 Congo
143 Solomon Islands
144 Sao tome and Principe
145 Kenya
146 Bangladesh
146 Pakistan
148 angola
149 Myanmar
150 Cameroon
151 Madagascar
152 tanzania, united Republic of
153 nigeria
154 Senegal
155 Mauritania
156 Papua new Guinea
157 nepal
158 lesotho
159 togo
160 Yemen
161 Haiti
161 uganda
163 Zambia
164 Djibouti
165 Gambia
166 Benin
167 Rwanda
168 Côte d’Ivoire
169 Comoros
170 Malawi
171 Sudan
172 Zimbabwe
173 Ethiopia
174 liberia
175 afghanistan
176 Guinea-Bissau
177 Sierra leone
178 Burundi
178 Guinea
180 Central african Republic
181 Eritrea
182 Mali
183 Burkina Faso
184 Chad
185 Mozambique
186 Congo, Democratic Republic of the
186 niger

Human Development Index (HDI) 

value

HDI rank

Change

average annual HDI growth

(%)

1980
..
..
..
0.461
0.371
..
..
0.432
..
0.391
..
0.345
..
..
..
..

0.470
..
..
0.424
0.312
0.337
..
0.281
0.373
..
..
..
0.322
0.340
0.324
0.234
0.422
0.357
..
0.335
..
0.405
..
0.279
0.253
0.277
0.348
..
0.272
0.269
0.367
..
0.298
0.209
..
0.255
0.217
..
0.285
..
0.176
..
..
0.217
0.286
0.179

1990
0.615
0.439
0.569
0.479
0.440
..
..
0.464
..
0.427
..
0.410
..
0.379
..
0.533

0.510
..
..
0.463
0.361
0.383
..
0.305
0.431
..
0.353
..
0.368
0.357
0.368
0.341
0.474
0.382
0.286
0.399
0.306
0.398
..
0.323
0.314
0.233
0.360
..
0.295
0.301
0.427
..
..
0.246
..
0.247
0.272
..
0.312
..
0.204
..
..
0.202
0.297
0.198

2000
0.529
0.534
0.564
0.529
0.512
..
0.532
0.523
0.418
0.461
0.498
0.463
0.444
0.453
..
0.502

0.482
0.486
..
0.447
0.433
0.419
0.375
0.382
0.429
0.428
0.369
..
0.405
0.418
0.415
0.401
0.429
0.426
0.376
0.422
0.375
0.376
..
0.360
0.380
0.314
0.392
..
0.352
0.364
0.376
0.275
0.304
0.236
..
0.244
0.270
..
0.294
..
0.270
..
0.290
0.247
0.234
0.234

2005
0.582
0.573
0.579
0.572
0.558
0.564
..
0.551
0.461
0.491
0.523
0.507
0.501
0.494
..
0.504

0.506
0.510
0.488
0.472
0.472
0.485
0.406
0.435
0.453
0.467
0.395
0.434
0.441
0.441
0.429
0.429
0.425
0.436
0.428
0.437
0.408
0.399
0.405
0.375
0.414
0.377
0.405
0.425
0.363
0.390
0.352
0.316
0.301
0.322
0.348
0.315
0.298
0.331
0.308
..
0.312
0.301
0.317
0.287
0.258
0.269

2007
0.587
0.590
0.592
0.583
0.571
0.567
..
0.570
0.519
0.506
0.533
0.525
0.520
0.510
..
0.520

0.511
0.522
0.503
0.491
0.488
0.498
0.472
0.464
0.459
0.478
0.408
0.448
0.454
0.454
..
0.440
0.431
0.442
0.444
..
0.427
0.411
0.419
0.383
0.420
0.400
0.412
0.425
0.381
0.401
0.355
0.350
0.334
0.346
0.355
0.331
0.323
0.342
0.316
..
0.328
0.314
0.319
0.301
0.280
0.278

2010
0.612
0.611
0.604
0.593
0.586
0.578
0.581
0.579
0.565
0.540
0.547
0.547
0.532
0.534
0.525
0.532

0.529
0.522
0.520
0.511
0.508
0.512
0.502
0.490
0.488
0.484
0.466
0.462
0.470
0.464
0.458
0.458
0.452
0.452
0.466
0.450
0.450
0.438
0.431
0.437
0.432
0.425
0.427
0.426
0.413
0.411
0.374
0.387
0.367
0.368
0.361
0.346
0.348
0.349
0.344
0.342
0.344
0.334
0.336
0.318
0.295
0.298

2011
0.618
0.614
0.606
0.597
0.589
0.583
0.584
0.580
0.571
0.553
0.551
0.551
0.538
0.538
0.532
0.536

0.531
0.526
0.522
0.515
0.511
0.513
0.504
0.494
0.492
0.483
0.470
0.467
0.471
0.464
0.462
0.460
0.456
0.455
0.459
0.453
0.454
0.443
0.442
0.440
0.434
0.429
0.426
0.428
0.415
0.419
0.387
0.392
0.381
0.371
0.364
0.348
0.352
0.352
0.348
0.346
0.347
0.340
0.336
0.322
0.299
0.297

2012
0.622
0.617
0.608
0.599
0.591
0.590
0.586
0.581
0.576
0.558
0.554
0.554
0.543
0.543
0.538
0.536

0.534
0.530
0.525
0.519
0.515
0.515
0.508
0.498
0.495
0.483
0.476
0.471
0.470
0.467
0.466
0.463
0.461
0.459
0.458
0.456
0.456
0.448
0.445
0.439
0.436
0.434
0.432
0.429
0.418
0.414
0.397
0.396
0.388
0.374
0.364
0.359
0.355
0.355
0.352
0.351
0.344
0.343
0.340
0.327
0.304
0.304

2007–2012a 2011–2012a 1980/1990

3
0
–2
0
0
1
..
–1
5
7
–2
–1
–1
3
..
–3

–1
–6
0
1
1
–1
1
1
1
–3
15
1
–2
–3
1
2
2
–2
–4
–6
0
3
0
5
–3
2
–3
–7
1
–3
0
1
3
0
–4
1
2
–2
2
..
–2
1
–2
0
0
1

1
0
0
0
0
1
–1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
–1

0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
–2
0
0
0
1
1
–2
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
–1
1
–1
1
–1
0
0
0
2
–1
–1
–1
1
–1
0
0
0
0
1

..
..
..
0.37
1.71
..
..
0.72
..
0.90
..
1.75
..
..
..
..

0.82
..
..
0.88
1.49
1.29
..
0.83
1.46
..
..
..
1.32
0.48
1.29
3.85
1.18
0.67
..
1.77
..
–0.18
..
1.47
2.16
–1.74
0.34
..
0.83
1.15
1.53
..
..
1.63
..
–0.28
2.26
..
0.94
..
1.50
..
..
–0.70
0.37
0.98

1990/2000
–1.50
1.98
–0.10
1.01
1.54
..
..
1.20
..
0.77
..
1.23
..
1.80
..
–0.59

–0.56
..
..
–0.33
1.83
0.89
..
2.27
–0.05
..
0.43
..
0.97
1.61
1.22
1.62
–0.99
1.11
2.78
0.56
2.06
–0.56
..
1.09
1.95
3.05
0.85
..
1.78
1.89
–1.26
..
..
–0.41
..
–0.15
–0.07
..
–0.59
..
2.86
..
..
2.00
–2.34
1.72

2000/2010

2000/2012

1.47
1.37
0.69
1.15
1.35
..
0.88
1.02
3.06
1.58
0.96
1.67
1.82
1.66
..
0.58

0.94
0.70
..
1.34
1.61
2.03
2.97
2.52
1.29
1.24
2.36
..
1.50
1.04
0.99
1.35
0.53
0.60
2.16
0.64
1.84
1.52
..
1.95
1.28
3.07
0.86
..
1.61
1.22
–0.04
3.49
1.88
4.54
..
3.58
2.59
..
1.59
..
2.45
..
1.47
2.57
2.35
2.42

1.36
1.22
0.64
1.04
1.20
..
0.81
0.89
2.71
1.60
0.90
1.50
1.68
1.53
..
0.55

0.86
0.71
..
1.24
1.46
1.74
2.56
2.23
1.20
1.02
2.15
..
1.25
0.92
0.96
1.21
0.61
0.62
1.66
0.65
1.65
1.46
..
1.65
1.14
2.73
0.81
..
1.44
1.08
0.46
3.09
2.04
3.91
..
3.29
2.31
..
1.50
..
2.04
..
1.32
2.37
2.19
2.20

150    |    HuMan DEvEloPMEnt REPoRt 2013

table 2 Human Development InDex trenDs, 1980–2012HDI rank
otHER CouNtRIES oR tERRItoRIES
Korea, Democratic People’s Rep. of
Marshall Islands
Monaco
nauru
San Marino
Somalia
South Sudan
tuvalu

Human Development Index groups

very high human development
High human development
Medium human development
low human development

Regions

arab States
East asia and the Pacific
Europe and Central asia
latin america and the Caribbean
South asia
Sub-Saharan africa

Least developed countries
Small island developing states
world

Human Development Index (HDI) 

value

HDI rank

Change

average annual HDI growth

(%)

1980

1990

2000

2005

2007

2010

2011

2012

2007–2012a 2011–2012a 1980/1990

1990/2000

2000/2010

2000/2012

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

0.773
0.605 c
0.419 c
0.315

0.443
0.432 c
0.651 c
0.574
0.357
0.366
0.290 c
0.530 c
0.561 c

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

0.817
0.656 c
0.481
0.350

0.517
0.502 c
0.701 c
0.623
0.418
0.387
0.327 c
0.571 c
0.600

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

0.867
0.695
0.549
0.385

0.583
0.584
0.709
0.683
0.470
0.405
0.367
0.600 c
0.639

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

0.889
0.725
0.589
0.424

0.622
0.626
0.743
0.708
0.514
0.432
0.401
0.623
0.666

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

0.896
0.738
0.609
0.442

0.633
0.649
0.757
0.722
0.531
0.449
0.421
0.658
0.678

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

0.902
0.753
0.631
0.461

0.648
0.673
0.766
0.736
0.552
0.468
0.443
0.645
0.690

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

0.904
0.755
0.636
0.464

0.650
0.678
0.769
0.739
0.555
0.472
0.446
0.647
0.692

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

0.905
0.758
0.640
0.466

0.652
0.683
0.771
0.741
0.558
0.475
0.449
0.648
0.694

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

—
—
—
—

—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

—
—
—
—

—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

0.56
0.81
1.38
1.05

1.56
1.51
0.74
0.83
1.58
0.58
1.22
0.75
0.68

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

0.59
0.58
1.32
0.95

1.21
1.51
0.12
0.93
1.19
0.44
1.15
0.50
0.64

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

0.40
0.80
1.41
1.82

1.07
1.43
0.77
0.74
1.60
1.47
1.91
0.73
0.77

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

0.36
0.72
1.29
1.62

0.94
1.31
0.70
0.67
1.43
1.34
1.70
0.65
0.68

NotES
a  a positive value indicates an improvement in rank.
b  the substantial change in rank is due to an 

updated International Monetary Fund estimate of 
libya’s GDP growth in 2011.

c  Based on fewer than half the countries in the 

group or region.

DEFINItIoNS

Human Development Index (HDI): a composite 
index measuring average achievement in three basic 
dimensions of human development—a long and 
healthy life, knowledge and a decent standard of 
living. See Technical note 1 at http://hdr.undp.org/
en/media/HDR_2013_En_technotes.pdf for details 
on how the HDI is calculated.

average annual HDI growth: a smoothed 
annualized growth of the HDI in a given period 
calculated as the annual compound growth rate.

MaIN Data SouRCES

Columns 1–8: HDRo calculations based on data 
from unDESa (2011), Barro and lee (2011), unESCo 

Institute for Statistics (2012), World Bank (2012a) 
and IMF (2012).

Columns 9–14: Calculated based on HDI values in 
the relevant year.

 

taBlE 2  Human Development Index trends, 1980–2012    |    151

Human Development RepoRt 2013The Rise of the South Human progress in a Diverse WorldE3

l
b
a
T

Inequality-adjusted 
Human Development Index

HDI rank
VERy HIGH HuMaN DEVELopMENt

1 norway
2 australia
3 united States
4 netherlands
5 Germany
6 new Zealand
7 Ireland
7 Sweden
9 Switzerland
10 Japan
11 Canada
12 Korea, Republic of
13 Hong Kong, China (SaR)
13 Iceland
15 Denmark
16 Israel
17 Belgium
18 austria
18 Singapore
20 France
21 Finland
21 Slovenia
23 Spain
24 liechtenstein
25 Italy
26 luxembourg
26 united Kingdom
28 Czech Republic
29 Greece
30 Brunei Darussalam
31 Cyprus
32 Malta
33 andorra
33 Estonia
35 Slovakia
36 Qatar
37 Hungary
38 Barbados
39 Poland
40 Chile
41 lithuania
41 united arab Emirates
43 Portugal
44 latvia
45 argentina
46 Seychelles
47 Croatia
HIGH HuMaN DEVELopMENt
48 Bahrain
49 Bahamas
50 Belarus
51 uruguay
52 Montenegro
52 Palau
54 Kuwait
55 Russian Federation
56 Romania
57 Bulgaria
57 Saudi arabia
59 Cuba
59 Panama

Human Development 

Index (HDI)

Inequality-adjusted 

HDI (IHDI)

Inequality-adjusted 
life expectancy index

Inequality-adjusted 

education index

Inequality-adjusted 

income index

Quintile 

income ratio

Income Gini 
coefficient

value

2012

0.955
0.938
0.937
0.921
0.920
0.919
0.916
0.916
0.913
0.912
0.911
0.909
0.906
0.906
0.901
0.900
0.897
0.895
0.895
0.893
0.892
0.892
0.885
0.883
0.881
0.875
0.875
0.873
0.860
0.855
0.848
0.847
0.846
0.846
0.840
0.834
0.831
0.825
0.821
0.819
0.818
0.818
0.816
0.814
0.811
0.806
0.805

0.796
0.794
0.793
0.792
0.791
0.791
0.790
0.788
0.786
0.782
0.782
0.780
0.780

value

2012

0.894
0.864
0.821
0.857
0.856
..
0.850
0.859
0.849
..
0.832
0.758
..
0.848
0.845
0.790
0.825
0.837
..
0.812
0.839
0.840
0.796
..
0.776
0.813
0.802
0.826
0.760
..
0.751
0.778
..
0.770
0.788
..
0.769
..
0.740
0.664
0.727
..
0.729
0.726
0.653
..
0.683

..
..
0.727
0.662
0.733
..
..
..
0.687
0.704
..
..
0.588

overall 
loss (%)

2012

Difference from 

HDI ranka

2012

6.4
7.9
12.4
6.9
6.9
..
7.2
6.2
7.0
..
8.7
16.5
..
6.4
6.2
12.3
8.0
6.6
..
9.0
6.0
5.8
10.1
..
11.9
7.2
8.3
5.4
11.5
..
11.5
8.2
..
9.0
6.3
..
7.4
..
9.9
19.0
11.0
..
10.8
10.9
19.5
..
15.1

..
..
8.3
16.4
7.4
..
..
..
12.6
9.9
..
..
24.6

0
0
–13
0
0
..
0
3
1
..
–4
–18
..
3
3
–8
–1
3
..
–2
6
7
–1
..
–4
4
2
9
–3
..
–4
3
..
2
6
..
3
..
0
–10
–1
..
1
–1
–8
..
–3

..
..
3
–4
8
..
..
..
2
5
..
..
–15

value

2012

0.928
0.930
0.863
0.916
0.915
0.907
0.915
0.937
0.942
0.965
0.913
0.915
0.962
0.945
0.887
0.935
0.903
0.919
0.935
0.930
0.909
0.898
0.930
..
0.937
0.913
0.903
0.874
0.899
0.862
0.901
0.893
..
0.813
0.825
0.854
0.810
0.814
0.834
0.871
0.767
0.836
0.893
0.784
0.796
..
0.845

0.815
0.783
0.737
0.815
0.803
..
0.803
0.689
0.770
0.776
0.754
0.882
0.776

loss (%)

2012

3.7
4.7
6.6
4.3
4.0
5.2
4.3
3.3
4.1
3.5
5.0
4.3
2.9
3.0
4.4
3.9
4.4
4.2
2.9
4.2
3.9
4.1
4.1
..
3.9
3.5
4.8
3.9
4.8
5.8
4.1
5.1
..
6.0
5.7
7.2
5.7
9.2
5.8
6.6
7.2
6.3
4.9
7.1
9.7
..
5.5

6.2
10.9
7.4
9.3
6.8
..
6.7
10.8
9.6
7.8
11.5
5.4
12.4

value

2012b

0.968
0.965
0.941
0.897
0.927
..
0.933
0.878
0.856
..
0.879
0.702
..
0.889
0.891
0.840
0.822
0.838
..
0.788
0.859
0.905
0.823
..
0.740
0.729
0.806
0.904
0.759
..
0.672
0.771
..
0.894
0.856
..
0.854
..
0.767
0.689
0.830
..
0.700
0.837
0.716
..
0.703

..
..
0.819
0.682
0.817
..
..
..
0.779
0.760
..
..
0.609

loss (%)

2012

2.2
1.7
5.3
3.9
1.8
..
3.2
3.8
2.0
..
3.2
25.5
..
2.5
3.1
7.9
7.6
2.5
..
9.4
2.4
3.3
5.5
..
13.1
6.3
2.6
1.3
11.3
..
16.3
5.5
..
2.6
1.5
..
4.1
..
6.3
13.7
5.0
..
5.6
3.6
12.1
..
10.4

..
..
5.4
10.8
2.5
..
..
..
5.0
6.1
..
..
17.8

value

2012b

0.797
0.719
0.681
0.766
0.741
..
0.720
0.772
0.760
..
0.718
0.679
..
0.727
0.764
0.627
0.756
0.760
..
0.732
0.757
0.729
0.659
..
0.673
0.807
0.709
0.712
0.644
..
0.698
0.683
..
0.627
0.692
..
0.658
..
0.634
0.488
0.605
..
0.619
0.583
0.487
..
0.537

..
..
0.636
0.521
0.600
..
..
0.647
0.540
0.592
..
..
0.431

loss (%)

2012

2000–2010c

2000–2010c

12.8
16.6
24.1 d
12.3
14.5
..
13.8
11.2
14.3
..
17.1
18.4
..
13.2
11.0
23.7
11.9
12.7
..
13.3
11.3
9.9
19.7
..
18.1
11.6
16.9
10.7
18.1
..
13.6
13.6
..
17.7
11.3
..
12.2
..
17.1
34.1
20.1
..
20.8
20.9
34.4
..
27.8

..
..
12.1
27.9
12.6
..
..
11.9
22.2
15.4
..
..
40.5

3.9
..
8.4
..
4.3
..
5.7
4.0
5.5
..
5.5
..
..
..
..
7.9
4.9
4.4
..
..
3.8
4.8
6.0
..
6.5
4.6
..
..
6.2
..
..
..
..
6.4
3.6
13.3
4.8
..
5.5
13.5
6.7
..
..
6.6
11.3
18.8
5.2

..
..
4.0
10.3
4.6
..
..
7.3
4.6
4.3
..
..
17.1

25.8
..
40.8
..
28.3
..
34.3
25.0
33.7
..
32.6
..
..
..
..
39.2
33.0
29.2
..
..
26.9
31.2
34.7
..
36.0
30.8
..
..
34.3
..
..
..
..
36.0
26.0
41.1
31.2
..
34.1
52.1
37.6
..
..
36.6
44.5
65.8
33.7

..
..
27.2
45.3
30.0
..
..
40.1
30.0
28.2
..
..
51.9

152    |    HuMan DEvEloPMEnt REPoRt 2013

Human Development 

Index (HDI)

Inequality-adjusted 

HDI (IHDI)

Inequality-adjusted 
life expectancy index

Inequality-adjusted 

education index

Inequality-adjusted 

income index

Quintile 

income ratio

Income Gini 
coefficient

HDI rank
61 Mexico
62 Costa Rica
63 Grenada
64 libya
64 Malaysia
64 Serbia
67 antigua and Barbuda
67 trinidad and tobago
69 Kazakhstan
70 albania
71 venezuela, Bolivarian Republic of
72 Dominica
72 Georgia
72 lebanon
72 Saint Kitts and nevis
76 Iran, Islamic Republic of
77 Peru
78 the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
78 ukraine
80 Mauritius
81 Bosnia and Herzegovina
82 azerbaijan
83 Saint vincent and the Grenadines
84 oman
85 Brazil
85 Jamaica
87 armenia
88 Saint lucia
89 Ecuador
90 turkey
91 Colombia
92 Sri lanka
93 algeria
94 tunisia
MEDIuM HuMaN DEVELopMENt
95 tonga
96 Belize
96 Dominican Republic
96 Fiji
96 Samoa
100 Jordan
101 China
102 turkmenistan
103 thailand
104 Maldives
105 Suriname
106 Gabon
107 El Salvador
108 Bolivia, Plurinational State of
108 Mongolia
110 Palestine, State of
111 Paraguay
112 Egypt
113 Moldova, Republic of
114 Philippines
114 uzbekistan
116 Syrian arab Republic
117 Micronesia, Federated States of
118 Guyana
119 Botswana
120 Honduras
121 Indonesia

value

2012
0.775
0.773
0.770
0.769
0.769
0.769
0.760
0.760
0.754
0.749
0.748
0.745
0.745
0.745
0.745
0.742
0.741
0.740
0.740
0.737
0.735
0.734
0.733
0.731
0.730
0.730
0.729
0.725
0.724
0.722
0.719
0.715
0.713
0.712

0.710
0.702
0.702
0.702
0.702
0.700
0.699
0.698
0.690
0.688
0.684
0.683
0.680
0.675
0.675
0.670
0.669
0.662
0.660
0.654
0.654
0.648
0.645
0.636
0.634
0.632
0.629

value

2012
0.593
0.606
..
..
..
0.696
..
0.644
0.652
0.645
0.549
..
0.631
0.575
..
..
0.561
0.631
0.672
0.639
0.650
0.650
..
..
0.531
0.591
0.649
..
0.537
0.560
0.519
0.607
..
..

..
..
0.510
..
..
0.568
0.543
..
0.543
0.515
0.526
0.550
0.499
0.444
0.568
..
..
0.503
0.584
0.524
0.551
0.515
..
0.514
..
0.458
0.514

overall 
loss (%)

Difference from 

HDI ranka

2012
23.4
21.5
..
..
..
9.5
..
15.3
13.6
13.9
26.6
..
15.3
22.8
..
..
24.3
14.7
9.2
13.3
11.5
11.4
..
..
27.2
19.1
10.9
..
25.8
22.5
27.8
15.1
..
..

..
..
27.3
..
..
19.0
22.4
..
21.3
25.2
23.0
19.5
26.6
34.2
15.9
..
..
24.1
11.6
19.9
15.8
20.4
..
19.1
..
27.5
18.3

2012
–12
–10
..
..
..
8
..
–3
3
0
–17
..
–2
–9
..
..
–10
2
13
5
11
11
..
..
–12
2
13
..
–8
–1
–11
11
..
..

..
..
–15
..
..
5
0
..
0
–8
–2
6
–11
–12
13
..
..
–7
18
4
13
3
..
2
..
–3
3

value

2012
0.801
0.862
0.798
0.782
0.799
0.788
..
0.660
0.624
0.797
0.754
..
0.720
0.718
..
0.703
0.727
0.784
0.687
0.760
0.794
0.636
0.710
0.777
0.725
0.710
0.728
0.773
0.754
0.743
0.732
0.786
0.717
0.752

0.712
0.777
0.708
0.676
0.718
0.732
0.731
0.521
0.768
0.834
0.680
0.489
0.699
0.553
0.623
0.725
0.681
0.724
0.693
0.654
0.578
0.793
0.625
0.618
0.394
0.694
0.652

loss (%)

2012
10.9
7.8
9.6
9.7
6.7
8.3
..
16.6
16.2
11.2
12.2
..
15.1
13.5
..
16.1
14.8
9.4
10.5
9.8
9.6
20.6
14.0
7.2
14.4
15.3
14.9
10.4
14.1
12.8
13.7
9.4
14.5
12.6

13.8
12.2
16.0
13.0
13.4
13.1
13.5
26.7
10.1
7.3
15.0
27.8
15.2
25.1
18.8
13.1
17.8
13.9
11.2
15.2
24.3
10.0
19.2
21.7
24.3
17.4
16.8

value

2012b
0.564
0.601
..
..
..
0.709
..
0.652
0.781
0.640
0.571
..
0.814
0.531
..
..
0.538
0.612
0.808
0.570
0.668
0.697
..
..
0.503
0.669
0.735
..
0.529
0.442
0.523
0.618
..
..

..
..
0.458
..
..
0.541
0.481
..
0.491
0.335
0.504
0.611
0.429
0.537
0.661
..
..
0.347
0.670
0.587
0.706
0.372
..
0.559
..
0.413
0.459

loss (%)

2012
21.9
15.7
..
..
..
9.9
..
6.6
6.9
11.9
18.1
..
3.3
24.1
..
..
24.6
12.3
6.1
13.5
5.2
8.3
..
..
25.3
10.6
3.7
..
22.1
27.4
21.5
14.6
..
..

..
..
26.8
..
..
22.4
23.2
..
18.0
41.2
20.1
7.3
32.4
27.6
8.9
..
..
40.9
6.1
13.5
1.4
31.5
..
10.5
..
28.2
20.4

value

2012b
0.463
0.430
..
..
..
0.603
..
0.621
0.567
0.526
0.385
..
0.428
0.498
..
..
0.452
0.524
0.548
0.602
0.518
0.620
..
..
0.411
0.434
0.510
..
0.390
0.534
0.366
0.461
..
..

..
..
0.410
..
..
0.462
0.455
..
0.424
0.489
0.426
0.556
0.415
0.294
0.444
..
0.374
0.505
0.429
0.375
0.409
0.464
..
0.393
..
0.335
0.453

loss (%)

2012
35.6
37.9
..
..
..
10.3
..
21.9
17.3
18.3
44.9
..
25.9
30.0
..
..
32.5
21.8
10.9
16.6
19.2
4.5
..
..
39.7
30.1
13.9
..
38.8
26.5
44.5
20.8
..
..

..
..
37.6
..
..
21.1
29.5
..
34.0
23.2
32.8
22.1
31.1
47.4
19.7
..
33.4
14.2
17.0
30.0
20.1
18.3
..
24.4
..
35.8
17.7

2000–2010c

2000–2010c

11.3
14.5
..
..
11.3
4.2
..
..
4.2
5.3
11.5
..
8.9
..
..
7.0
13.5
9.5
3.8
..
6.5
5.3
..
..
20.6
9.6
4.5
..
12.5
7.9
20.1
6.9
..
8.1

..
..
11.3
8.0
..
5.7
9.6
..
7.1
6.8
..
7.8
14.3
27.8
6.2
5.8
17.3
4.4
5.3
8.3
6.2
5.7
40.2
..
..
29.7
5.1

48.3
50.7
..
..
46.2
27.8
..
..
29.0
34.5
44.8
..
41.3
..
..
38.3
48.1
43.2
26.4
..
36.2
33.7
..
..
54.7
45.5
30.9
..
49.3
39.0
55.9
40.3
..
41.4

..
..
47.2
42.8
..
35.4
42.5
..
40.0
37.4
..
41.5
48.3
56.3
36.5
35.5
52.4
30.8
33.0
43.0
36.7
35.8
61.1
..
..
57.0
34.0

taBlE 3 

Inequality-adjusted Human Development Index    |    153

Human Development RepoRt 2013The Rise of the South Human progress in a Diverse WorldHDI rank
121 Kiribati
121 South africa
124 vanuatu
125 Kyrgyzstan
125 tajikistan
127 viet nam
128 namibia
129 nicaragua
130 Morocco
131 Iraq
132 Cape verde
133 Guatemala
134 timor-leste
135 Ghana
136 Equatorial Guinea
136 India
138 Cambodia
138 lao People’s Democratic Republic
140 Bhutan
141 Swaziland
Low HuMaN DEVELopMENt
142 Congo
143 Solomon Islands
144 Sao tome and Principe
145 Kenya
146 Bangladesh
146 Pakistan
148 angola
149 Myanmar
150 Cameroon
151 Madagascar
152 tanzania, united Republic of
153 nigeria
154 Senegal
155 Mauritania
156 Papua new Guinea
157 nepal
158 lesotho
159 togo
160 Yemen
161 Haiti
161 uganda
163 Zambia
164 Djibouti
165 Gambia
166 Benin
167 Rwanda
168 Côte d’Ivoire
169 Comoros
170 Malawi
171 Sudan
172 Zimbabwe
173 Ethiopia
174 liberia
175 afghanistan
176 Guinea-Bissau
177 Sierra leone
178 Burundi
178 Guinea
180 Central african Republic
181 Eritrea
182 Mali

Human Development 

Index (HDI)

Inequality-adjusted 

HDI (IHDI)

Inequality-adjusted 
life expectancy index

Inequality-adjusted 

education index

Inequality-adjusted 

income index

Quintile 

income ratio

Income Gini 
coefficient

value

2012
0.629
0.629
0.626
0.622
0.622
0.617
0.608
0.599
0.591
0.590
0.586
0.581
0.576
0.558
0.554
0.554
0.543
0.543
0.538
0.536

0.534
0.530
0.525
0.519
0.515
0.515
0.508
0.498
0.495
0.483
0.476
0.471
0.470
0.467
0.466
0.463
0.461
0.459
0.458
0.456
0.456
0.448
0.445
0.439
0.436
0.434
0.432
0.429
0.418
0.414
0.397
0.396
0.388
0.374
0.364
0.359
0.355
0.355
0.352
0.351
0.344

value

2012
..
..
..
0.516
0.507
0.531
0.344
0.434
0.415
..
..
0.389
0.386
0.379
..
0.392
0.402
0.409
0.430
0.346

0.368
..
0.358
0.344
0.374
0.356
0.285
..
0.330
0.335
0.346
0.276
0.315
0.306
..
0.304
0.296
0.305
0.310
0.273
0.303
0.283
0.285
..
0.280
0.287
0.265
..
0.287
..
0.284
0.269
0.251
..
0.213
0.210
..
0.217
0.209
..
..

overall 
loss (%)

Difference from 

HDI ranka

2012
..
..
..
17.1
18.4
14.0
43.5
27.5
29.7
..
..
33.1
33.0
32.2
..
29.3
25.9
24.7
20.0
35.4

31.1
..
31.7
33.6
27.4
30.9
43.9
..
33.4
30.7
27.3
41.4
33.0
34.4
..
34.2
35.9
33.5
32.3
40.2
33.6
36.7
36.0
..
35.8
33.9
38.6
..
31.4
..
28.5
31.9
35.3
..
41.4
41.6
..
38.8
40.5
..
..

2012
..
..
..
8
2
14
–16
1
0
..
..
–3
–3
–3
..
1
3
4
8
–3

1
..
1
–2
5
2
–12
..
–1
1
5
–13
2
1
..
0
–1
3
6
–7
3
–2
1
..
–1
6
–3
..
7
..
5
1
0
..
–3
–3
..
0
–2
..
..

value

2012
..
0.376
0.681
0.606
0.548
0.755
0.528
0.735
0.686
0.622
0.746
0.659
0.471
0.508
0.270
0.525
0.488
0.589
0.568
0.296

0.374
0.602
0.503
0.390
0.595
0.487
0.267
0.537
0.288
0.549
0.414
0.286
0.432
0.391
0.508
0.622
0.297
0.371
0.541
0.461
0.331
0.269
0.380
0.404
0.343
0.330
0.352
0.440
0.329
0.440
0.357
0.404
0.367
0.225
0.224
0.242
0.264
0.311
0.247
0.485
0.269

loss (%)

2012
..
28.4
15.6
19.8
27.2
13.4
21.1
13.9
16.7
20.3
12.7
18.6
30.2
27.5
45.4
27.1
28.8
21.7
24.1
35.0

37.0
20.7
28.8
34.1
23.2
32.3
46.1
25.3
43.0
25.6
32.4
43.8
30.7
36.2
25.2
19.5
34.3
37.2
25.1
30.9
39.1
41.9
36.9
33.9
40.3
41.3
37.8
32.6
39.9
33.0
30.6
35.4
37.6
50.9
50.1
45.3
45.6
42.7
46.0
26.6
46.3

value

2012b
..
0.558
..
0.674
0.623
0.447
0.402
0.351
0.243
0.334
..
0.280
0.251
0.352
..
0.264
0.372
0.311
0.312
0.409

0.384
..
0.379
0.405
0.252
0.217
0.303
..
0.346
0.342
0.326
0.250
0.223
0.212
..
0.202
0.379
0.291
0.156
0.241
0.327
0.383
0.166
..
0.213
0.285
0.197
0.189
0.309
..
0.469
0.179
0.230
0.205
0.185
0.171
..
0.145
0.176
..
0.162

loss (%)

2012
..
20.8
..
6.5
12.2
17.1
27.8
33.3
45.8
33.0
..
36.1
47.6
40.9
..
42.4
28.3
31.2
12.2
29.8

25.4
..
20.0
30.7
39.4
45.2
34.6
..
35.3
30.1
28.3
45.2
44.6
42.1
..
43.6
24.3
41.5
49.8
40.7
32.2
23.8
47.0
..
42.0
29.4
43.2
47.4
30.2
..
17.8
38.3
46.4
39.3
40.3
47.4
..
42.0
45.9
..
36.9

value

2012b
..
..
..
0.336
0.383
0.444
0.191
0.317
0.430
..
..
0.318
0.485
0.303
..
0.434
0.358
0.374
0.450
0.343

0.348
..
0.241
0.259
0.350
0.426
0.286
..
0.361
0.199
0.307
0.295
0.325
0.346
..
0.225
0.229
0.263
0.353
0.182
0.257
0.221
0.365
..
0.301
0.251
0.268
..
0.232
..
0.137
0.271
0.188
..
0.234
0.222
..
0.228
0.210
..
..

loss (%)

2012
..
..
..
24.1
15.0
11.4
68.3
33.6
23.0
..
..
42.5
17.8
27.2
..
15.8
20.3
20.6
23.1
40.9

30.3
..
44.2
36.0
17.7
11.0
50.0
..
19.9
36.1
20.9
34.5
21.6
23.8
..
37.4
47.0
20.0
17.6
47.9
29.1
42.6 e
21.7
..
23.6
30.2
34.4
..
23.1
..
35.8
20.8
19.0
..
32.5
31.0
..
31.1
28.1
..
..

2000–2010c

2000–2010c

..
25.3
..
6.4
4.7
5.9
21.8
7.6
7.3
4.6
12.3
19.6
4.6
9.3
..
4.9
6.1
5.9
6.8
14.0

10.7
..
10.8
11.0
4.7
4.2
30.9
..
6.9
9.3
6.6
12.2
7.4
7.8
..
5.0
19.0
5.6
6.3
26.6
8.7
16.6
7.7
11.0
6.6
12.7
8.5
26.7
6.6
6.2
..
4.3
7.0
4.0
5.9
8.1
4.8
7.3
18.0
..
5.2

..
63.1
..
36.2
30.8
35.6
63.9
40.5
40.9
30.9
50.5
55.9
31.9
42.8
..
33.4
37.9
36.7
38.1
51.5

47.3
..
50.8
47.7
32.1
30.0
58.6
..
38.9
44.1
37.6
48.8
39.2
40.5
..
32.8
52.5
34.4
37.7
59.2
44.3
54.6
40.0
47.3
38.6
53.1
41.5
64.3
39.0
35.3
..
29.8
38.2
27.8
35.5
42.5
33.3
39.4
56.3
..
33.0

154    |    HuMan DEvEloPMEnt REPoRt 2013

table 3 InequalIty-adjusted Human development IndexHDI rank
183 Burkina Faso
184 Chad
185 Mozambique
186 Congo, Democratic Republic of the
186 niger
otHER CouNtRIES oR tERRItoRIES
Korea, Democratic People’s Rep. of
Marshall Islands
Monaco
nauru
San Marino
Somalia
South Sudan
tuvalu

Human Development Index groups

very high human development
High human development
Medium human development
low human development

Regions

arab States
East asia and the Pacific
Europe and Central asia
latin america and the Caribbean
South asia
Sub-Saharan africa

Least developed countries
Small island developing states
world

Human Development 

Index (HDI)

Inequality-adjusted 

HDI (IHDI)

Inequality-adjusted 
life expectancy index

Inequality-adjusted 

education index

Inequality-adjusted 

income index

Quintile 

income ratio

Income Gini 
coefficient

value

2012
0.343
0.340
0.327
0.304
0.304

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

0.905
0.758
0.640
0.466

0.652
0.683
0.771
0.741
0.558
0.475
0.449
0.648
0.694

value

2012
0.226
0.203
0.220
0.183
0.200

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

0.807
0.602
0.485
0.310

0.486
0.537
0.672
0.550
0.395
0.309
0.303
0.459
0.532

overall 
loss (%)

Difference from 

HDI ranka

2012
34.2
40.1
32.7
39.9
34.2

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

10.8
20.6
24.2
33.5

25.4
21.3
12.9
25.7
29.1
35.0
32.5
29.2
23.3

2012
4
–1
5
–1
0

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

—
—
—
— 

—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—

value

2012
0.329
0.226
0.286
0.226
0.317

loss (%)

2012
41.7
52.0
40.8
50.0
42.6

value

2012b
0.125
0.126
0.182
0.249
0.107

loss (%)

2012
36.2
43.4
18.2
31.2
39.5

value

2012b
0.281
0.295
0.205
0.108
0.236

loss (%)

2012
23.4
21.0
37.0 f
36.8
17.9

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

0.897
0.736
0.633
0.395

0.669
0.711
0.716
0.744
0.531
0.335
0.406
0.633
0.638

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

5.2
12.4
19.3
35.7

16.7
14.2
11.7
13.4
27.0
39.0
34.6
19.2
19.0

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

0.851
0.592
0.395
0.246

0.320
0.480
0.713
0.532
0.267
0.285
0.240
0.412
0.453

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

6.8
19.9
30.2
38.7

39.6
21.9
10.5
23.0
42.0
35.3
36.2
30.1
27.0

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

0.688
0.500
0.456
0.307

0.538
0.455
0.594
0.421
0.436
0.308
0.287
0.370
0.522

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

19.8
28.6
22.7
25.6

17.5
27.2
16.3
38.5
15.9
30.4
26.1
37.2
23.5

2000–2010c

2000–2010c

7.0
7.4
9.8
9.3
5.3

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

—
—
—
—

—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—

39.8
39.8
45.7
44.4
34.6

..
..
..
..
..
..
45.5
..

—
—
—
—

—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—

NotES
a  Based on countries for which the Inequality-

adjusted Human Development Index is calculated.
b  the list of surveys used to estimate inequalities 

is available at http://hdr.undp.org.

c  Data refer to the most recent year available 

during the period specified.

d  Based on the 2010 Current Population Survey 

(from the luxembourg Income Study database). 
In the 2011 Human Development Report income 
inequality was based on the 2005 american 
Community Survey (from the World Bank’s 
International Income Distribution Database). the 
two sources seem to be inconsistent.

e  Based on simulated income distribution from 

the 2007 Demographic and Health Survey. In the 
2011 Human Development Report inequality in 
consumption was based on the 2002–2003 living 
Conditions Monitoring Survey.

f  Based on simulated income distribution from 

the 2009 Demographic and Health Survey. In the 
2011 Human Development Report inequality in 
consumption was based on the 2003 national 
Household Survey of living Conditions.

 

DEFINItIoNS

Human Development Index (HDI): a composite 
index measuring average achievement in three basic 
dimensions of human development—a long and 
healthy life, knowledge and a decent standard of 
living. See Technical note 1 at http://hdr.undp.org/
en/media/HDR_2013_En_technotes.pdf for details 
on how the HDI is calculated.

Inequality-adjusted HDI (IHDI): HDI value 
adjusted for inequalities in the three basic 
dimensions of human development. See Technical 
note 2 at http://hdr.undp.org/en/media/HDR_2013_
En_technotes.pdf for details on how the IHDI is 
calculated.

overall loss: the loss in potential human 
development due to inequality, calculated as the 
percentage difference between the HDI and the IHDI.

Inequality-adjusted life expectancy index: the 
HDI life expectancy index adjusted for inequality in 
distribution of expected length of life based on data 
from life tables listed in Main data sources.

Inequality-adjusted education index: the 
HDI education index adjusted for inequality in 

distribution of years of schooling based on data from 
household surveys listed in Main data sources.

Column 3: Calculated based on data in columns 
1 and 2.

Inequality-adjusted income index: the HDI 
income index adjusted for inequality in income 
distribution based on data from household surveys 
listed in Main data sources.

Quintile income ratio: Ratio of the average income 
of the richest 20% of the population to the average 
income of the poorest 20% of the population.

Income Gini coefficient: Measure of the deviation 
of the distribution of income (or consumption) among 
individuals or households within a country from a 
perfectly equal distribution. a value of 0 represents 
absolute equality, a value of 100 absolute inequality.

MaIN Data SouRCES

Column 1: HDRo calculations based on data from 
unDESa (2011), Barro and lee (2011), unESCo 
Institute for Statistics (2012), World Bank (2012a) 
and IMF (2012).

Column 2: Calculated as the geometric mean of the 
values in columns 5, 7 and 9 using the methodology 
in Technical note 2.

Column 4: Calculated based on data in column 2 
and recalculated HDI ranks for countries with the 
IHDI.

Column 5: Calculated based on abridged life tables 
from unDESa (2011).

Column 6: Calculated based on data in column 5 
and the unadjusted life expectancy index.

Columns 7 and 9: Calculated based on data 
from lIS (2012), Eurostat (2012), World Bank 
(2012b), unICEF Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveys 
for 2002–2012 and ICF Macro (2012) using the 
methodology in Technical note 2.

Column 8: Calculated based on data in column 7 
and the unadjusted education index.

Column 10: Calculated based on data in column 9 
and the unadjusted income index.

Columns 11 and 12: World Bank (2012a).

taBlE 3 

Inequality-adjusted Human Development Index    |    155

Human Development RepoRt 2013The Rise of the South Human progress in a Diverse WorldE4

l
b
a
T

Gender Inequality Index

Gender Inequality 

Index

Maternal 

mortality ratioa

adolescent  
fertility rateb

Seats in national 

parliamentc

population with at least 
secondary education

Labour force participation rate 

HDI rank
VERy HIGH HuMaN DEVELopMENt

1 norway
2 australia
3 united States
4 netherlands
5 Germany
6 new Zealand
7 Ireland
7 Sweden
9 Switzerland
10 Japan
11 Canada
12 Korea, Republic of
13 Hong Kong, China (SaR)
13 Iceland
15 Denmark
16 Israel
17 Belgium
18 austria
18 Singapore
20 France
21 Finland
21 Slovenia
23 Spain
24 liechtenstein
25 Italy
26 luxembourg
26 united Kingdom
28 Czech Republic
29 Greece
30 Brunei Darussalam
31 Cyprus
32 Malta
33 andorra
33 Estonia
35 Slovakia
36 Qatar
37 Hungary
38 Barbados
39 Poland
40 Chile
41 lithuania
41 united arab Emirates
43 Portugal
44 latvia
45 argentina
46 Seychelles
47 Croatia
HIGH HuMaN DEVELopMENt
48 Bahrain
49 Bahamas
50 Belarus
51 uruguay
52 Montenegro
52 Palau
54 Kuwait
55 Russian Federation
56 Romania
57 Bulgaria
57 Saudi arabia
59 Cuba
59 Panama

Rank

2012

5
17
42
1
6
31
19
2
3
21
18
27
..
10
3
25
12
14
13
9
6
8
15
..
11
26
34
20
23
..
22
39
..
29
32
117
42
61
24
66
28
40
16
36
71
..
33

45
53
..
69
..
..
47
51
55
38
145
63
108

value

2012

0.065
0.115
0.256
0.045
0.075
0.164
0.121
0.055
0.057
0.131
0.119
0.153
..
0.089
0.057
0.144
0.098
0.102
0.101
0.083
0.075
0.080
0.103
..
0.094
0.149
0.205
0.122
0.136
..
0.134
0.236
..
0.158
0.171
0.546
0.256
0.343
0.140
0.360
0.157
0.241
0.114
0.216
0.380
..
0.179

0.258
0.316
..
0.367
..
..
0.274
0.312
0.327
0.219
0.682
0.356
0.503

156    |    HuMan DEvEloPMEnt REPoRt 2013

(deaths per 100,000 

live births)

(births per 1,000 women 

ages 15–19)

2010

2012d

7
7
21
6
7
15
6
4
8
5
12
16
..
5
12
7
8
4
3
8
5
12
6
..
4
20
12
5
3
24
10
8
..
2
6
7
21
51
5
25
8
12
8
34
77
..
17

20
47
4
29
8
..
14
34
27
11
24
73
92

7.4
12.5
27.4
4.3
6.8
18.6
8.8
6.5
3.9
6.0
11.3
5.8
4.2
11.6
5.1
14.0
11.2
9.7
6.7
6.0
9.3
4.5
10.7
6.0
4.0
8.4
29.7
9.2
9.6
22.7
5.5
11.8
7.3
17.2
16.7
15.5
13.6
40.8
12.2
56.0
16.1
23.4
12.5
12.8
54.2
47.6
12.8

14.8
28.3
20.5
59.0
14.8
12.7
14.4
23.2
28.8
36.2
22.1
43.9
75.9

(% ages 25 and older)

(% ages 15 and older)

(% female)

Female

Male

2012

39.6
29.2
17.0 f
37.8
32.4
32.2
19.0
44.7
26.8
13.4
28.0
15.7
..
39.7
39.1
20.0
38.9
28.7
23.5
25.1
42.5
23.1
34.9
24.0
20.7
25.0
22.1
21.0
21.0
..
10.7
8.7
50.0
19.8
17.3
0.1 h
8.8
19.6
21.8
13.9
19.1
17.5
28.7
23.0
37.7
43.8
23.8

18.8
16.7
29.7
12.3
12.3
6.9
6.3
11.1
9.7
20.8
0.1 h
45.2
8.5

2006–2010e

2006–2010e

95.6
92.2
94.7
87.5
96.2
82.8
74.8
84.4
95.1
80.0 g
100.0
79.4 g
68.7
91.0
99.3
82.7
76.4
100.0
71.3
75.9
100.0
94.2
63.3
..
68.0
77.1
99.6
99.8
57.7
66.6 g
71.0
58.0
49.5
94.4 g
98.6
70.1
93.2 g
89.5 g
76.9
72.1
87.9
73.1 g
40.9
98.6
57.0 g
66.9
57.4 g

74.4 g
91.2
..
50.6
97.5
..
53.7
93.5 g
83.4
90.9
50.3 g
73.9 g
63.5 g

94.7
92.2
94.3
90.4
96.9
84.7
73.0
85.5
96.6
82.3 g
100.0
91.7 g
76.4
91.6
99.4
85.5
82.7
100.0
78.9
81.3
100.0
97.1
69.7
..
78.1
78.7
99.8
99.8
66.6
61.2 g
78.1
67.3
49.3
94.6 g
99.1
62.1
96.7 g
87.6 g
83.5
75.9
93.1
61.3 g
40.2
98.2
54.9 g
66.6
72.3 g

80.4 g
87.6
..
48.8
98.8
..
46.6
96.2 g
90.5
94.4
57.9 g
80.4 g
60.7 g

Female

2011

61.7
58.8
57.5
58.3
53.0
61.6
52.6
59.4
60.6
49.4
61.9
49.2
51.0
70.8
59.8
52.5
47.7
53.9
56.5
51.1
55.9
53.1
51.6
..
37.9
49.2
55.6
49.6
44.8
55.5
57.2
35.2
..
56.7
51.2
51.8
43.8
64.8
48.2
47.1
54.1
43.5
56.5
55.2
47.3
..
46.0

39.4
69.3
50.2
55.6
..
..
43.4
56.3
48.6
48.6
17.7
43.3
49.6

Male

2011

70.1
72.3
70.1
71.3
66.5
74.1
68.5
68.1
75.0
71.7
71.4
71.4
68.1
78.4
69.1
62.4
60.6
67.6
76.6
61.9
64.2
65.1
67.4
..
59.6
65.2
68.5
68.2
65.0
76.5
71.5
67.4
..
68.2
68.1
95.2
58.4
76.2
64.3
74.2
63.9
92.3
68.0
67.2
74.9
..
59.7

87.3
79.3
62.6
76.5
..
..
82.3
71.0
64.9
60.3
74.1
69.9
82.5

Gender Inequality 

Index

Maternal 

mortality ratioa

adolescent  
fertility rateb

Seats in national 

parliamentc

population with at least 
secondary education

Labour force participation rate 

HDI rank
61 Mexico
62 Costa Rica
63 Grenada
64 libya
64 Malaysia
64 Serbia
67 antigua and Barbuda
67 trinidad and tobago
69 Kazakhstan
70 albania
71 venezuela, Bolivarian Republic of
72 Dominica
72 Georgia
72 lebanon
72 Saint Kitts and nevis
76 Iran, Islamic Republic of
77 Peru
78 the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
78 ukraine
80 Mauritius
81 Bosnia and Herzegovina
82 azerbaijan
83 Saint vincent and the Grenadines
84 oman
85 Brazil
85 Jamaica
87 armenia
88 Saint lucia
89 Ecuador
90 turkey
91 Colombia
92 Sri lanka
93 algeria
94 tunisia
MEDIuM HuMaN DEVELopMENt
95 tonga
96 Belize
96 Dominican Republic
96 Fiji
96 Samoa
100 Jordan
101 China
102 turkmenistan
103 thailand
104 Maldives
105 Suriname
106 Gabon
107 El Salvador
108 Bolivia, Plurinational State of
108 Mongolia
110 Palestine, State of
111 Paraguay
112 Egypt
113 Moldova, Republic of
114 Philippines
114 uzbekistan
116 Syrian arab Republic
117 Micronesia, Federated States of
118 Guyana
119 Botswana
120 Honduras
121 Indonesia

Rank

2012
72
62
..
36
42
..
..
50
51
41
93
..
81
78
..
107
73
30
57
70
..
54
..
59
85
87
59
..
83
68
88
75
74
46

90
79
109
..
..
99
35
..
66
64
94
105
82
97
56
..
95
126
49
77
..
118
..
104
102
100
106

value

2012
0.382
0.346
..
0.216
0.256
..
..
0.311
0.312
0.251
0.466
..
0.438
0.433
..
0.496
0.387
0.162
0.338
0.377
..
0.323
..
0.340
0.447
0.458
0.340
..
0.442
0.366
0.459
0.402
0.391
0.261

0.462
0.435
0.508
..
..
0.482
0.213
..
0.360
0.357
0.467
0.492
0.441
0.474
0.328
..
0.472
0.590
0.303
0.418
..
0.551
..
0.490
0.485
0.483
0.494

(deaths per 100,000 

live births)

(births per 1,000 women 

ages 15–19)

(% ages 25 and older)

(% ages 15 and older)

(% female)

Female

Male

Female

Male

2010
50
40
24
58
29
12
..
46
51
27
92
..
67
25
..
21
67
10
32
60
8
43
48
32
56
110
30
35
110
20
92
35
97
56

110
53
150
26
..
63
37
67
48
60
130
230
81
190
63
64
99
66
41
99
28
70
100
280
160
100
220

2012d
65.5
61.9
35.4
2.6
9.8
19.2
49.1
31.6
25.5
14.9
87.3
18.9
39.5
15.4
33.2
25.0
48.7
17.8
26.1
31.8
13.4
31.4
54.1
9.3
76.0
69.7
33.2
55.9
80.6
30.5
68.1
22.1
6.1
4.4

18.0
70.8
103.6
42.8
25.5
23.7
9.1
16.9
37.0
10.2
34.9
81.0
76.2
74.7
18.7
48.3
66.7
40.6
29.1
46.5
12.8
36.5
18.5
53.9
43.8
85.9
42.3

2012
36.0
38.6
17.9
16.5
13.2
32.4
19.4
27.4
18.2
15.7
17.0
12.5
6.6
3.1
6.7
3.1
21.5
30.9
8.0
18.8
19.3
16.0
17.4
9.6
9.6
15.5
10.7
17.2
32.3
14.2
13.6
5.8
25.6
26.7

3.6 i
13.3
19.1
..
4.1
11.1
21.3
16.8
15.7
6.5
11.8
16.7
26.2
30.1
12.7
..
13.6
2.2
19.8
22.1
19.2
12.0
0.1
31.3
7.9
19.5
18.2

2006–2010e

2006–2010e

51.2
54.4 g
..
55.6 g
66.0 g
80.1
..
59.4
99.3
78.8
55.1
29.7
89.7
53.0
..
62.1
47.3
72.0
91.5 g
45.2 g
..
90.0
..
47.2
50.5
74.0 g
94.1 g
..
36.6
26.7
43.8
72.6
20.9
29.9

71.6 g
35.2 g
43.3
57.5
64.3
68.9
54.8 g
..
29.0
20.7
40.5
53.8 g
34.8
39.8
83.0 g
48.0
35.0
43.4 g
91.6
65.9 g
..
27.4
..
61.5 g
73.6 g
20.7
36.2

57.0
52.8 g
..
44.0 g
72.8 g
90.7
..
59.2
99.4
85.0
49.8
23.2
92.7
55.4
..
69.1
59.1
85.3
96.1 g
52.9 g
..
95.7
..
57.1
48.5
71.1 g
94.8 g
..
36.6
42.4
42.4
75.5
27.3
44.4

76.7 g
32.8 g
41.7
58.1
60.0
77.7
70.4 g
..
35.6
30.1
47.1
34.7 g
40.8
49.7
81.8 g
56.2
39.0
59.3 g
95.3
63.7 g
..
38.2
..
48.8 g
77.5 g
18.8
46.8

2011
44.3
46.4
..
30.1
43.8
..
..
54.9
66.6
49.6
52.1
..
55.8
22.6
..
16.4
67.8
42.9
53.3
44.1
35.2
61.6
55.7
28.3
59.6
56.0
49.4
64.2
54.3
28.1
55.8
34.7
15.0
25.5

53.6
48.3
51.0
39.3
42.8
15.6
67.7
46.4
63.8
55.7
40.5
56.3
47.4
64.1
54.3
15.1
57.9
23.7
38.4
49.7
47.7
13.1
..
41.8
71.7
42.3
51.2

2011
80.5
78.9
..
76.8
76.9
..
..
78.3
77.2
71.3
80.2
..
74.2
70.8
..
72.5
84.7
68.9
66.6
75.5
58.6
68.5
78.4
81.6
80.9
71.8
70.2
77.3
82.7
71.4
79.7
76.3
71.9
70.0

75.0
81.8
78.6
79.5
77.8
65.9
80.1
76.0
80.0
76.8
68.7
65.0
78.6
80.9
65.5
66.3
86.3
74.3
45.1
79.4
74.7
71.6
..
79.1
81.6
82.8
84.2

taBlE 4  Gender Inequality Index    |    157

Human Development RepoRt 2013The Rise of the South Human progress in a Diverse WorldGender Inequality 

Index

Maternal 

mortality ratioa

adolescent  
fertility rateb

Seats in national 

parliamentc

population with at least 
secondary education

Labour force participation rate 

HDI rank
121 Kiribati
121 South africa
124 vanuatu
125 Kyrgyzstan
125 tajikistan
127 viet nam
128 namibia
129 nicaragua
130 Morocco
131 Iraq
132 Cape verde
133 Guatemala
134 timor-leste
135 Ghana
136 Equatorial Guinea
136 India
138 Cambodia
138 lao People’s Democratic Republic
140 Bhutan
141 Swaziland
Low HuMaN DEVELopMENt
142 Congo
143 Solomon Islands
144 Sao tome and Principe
145 Kenya
146 Bangladesh
146 Pakistan
148 angola
149 Myanmar
150 Cameroon
151 Madagascar
152 tanzania, united Republic of
153 nigeria
154 Senegal
155 Mauritania
156 Papua new Guinea
157 nepal
158 lesotho
159 togo
160 Yemen
161 Haiti
161 uganda
163 Zambia
164 Djibouti
165 Gambia
166 Benin
167 Rwanda
168 Côte d’Ivoire
169 Comoros
170 Malawi
171 Sudan
172 Zimbabwe
173 Ethiopia
174 liberia
175 afghanistan
176 Guinea-Bissau
177 Sierra leone
178 Burundi
178 Guinea
180 Central african Republic
181 Eritrea
182 Mali

Rank

2012
..
90
..
64
57
48
86
89
84
120
..
114
..
121
..
132
96
100
92
112

132
..
..
130
111
123
..
80
137
..
119
..
115
139
134
102
113
122
148
127
110
136
..
128
135
76
138
..
124
129
116
..
143
147
..
139
98
..
142
..
141

value

2012
..
0.462
..
0.357
0.338
0.299
0.455
0.461
0.444
0.557
..
0.539
..
0.565
..
0.610
0.473
0.483
0.464
0.525

0.610
..
..
0.608
0.518
0.567
..
0.437
0.628
..
0.556
..
0.540
0.643
0.617
0.485
0.534
0.566
0.747
0.592
0.517
0.623
..
0.594
0.618
0.414
0.632
..
0.573
0.604
0.544
..
0.658
0.712
..
0.643
0.476
..
0.654
..
0.649

158    |    HuMan DEvEloPMEnt REPoRt 2013

(deaths per 100,000 

live births)

(births per 1,000 women 

ages 15–19)

2010
..
300
110
71
65
59
200
95
100
63
79
120
300
350
240
200
250
470
180
320

560
93
70
360
240
260
450
200
690
240
460
630
370
510
230
170
620
300
200
350
310
440
200
360
350
340
400
280
460
730
570
350
770
460
790
890
800
610
890
240
540

2012d
16.4
50.4
50.6
33.0
25.7
22.7
54.4
104.9
10.8
85.9
69.2
102.4
52.3
62.4
114.6
74.7
32.9
30.1
44.9
67.9

112.6
64.6
55.4
98.1
68.2
28.1
148.1
12.0
115.1
122.7
128.7
111.3
89.7
71.3
62.0
86.2
60.8
54.3
66.1
41.3
126.4
138.5
19.5
66.9
97.0
35.5
105.7
51.1
105.6
53.0
53.4
48.3
123.0
99.6
96.2
104.2
20.9
133.7
98.6
53.7
168.9

(% ages 25 and older)

(% ages 15 and older)

(% female)

Female

Male

Female

2012
8.7
41.1 j
1.9
23.3
17.5
24.4
25.0
40.2
11.0
25.2
20.8
13.3
38.5
8.3
10.0
10.9
18.1
25.0
13.9
21.9

9.6
..
18.2
9.8
19.7
21.1
38.2 k
4.6
13.9
15.9
36.0
6.7
41.6
19.2
2.7
33.2
26.1
11.1
0.7
4.0
35.0
11.5
13.8
7.5
8.4
51.9
11.0
3.0
22.3
24.1
17.9
25.5
11.7
27.6
10.0
12.9
34.9
.. l
12.5
22.0
10.2

2006–2010e

2006–2010e

..
68.9
..
81.0 g
93.2 g
24.7 g
33.0 g
30.8 g
20.1 g
22.0 g
..
12.6
..
45.7 g
..
26.6 g
11.6
22.9 g
34.0
49.9 g

43.8 g
..
..
25.3
30.8 g
18.3
..
18.0 g
21.1 g
..
5.6 g
..
4.6
8.0 g
6.8 g
17.9 g
21.9
15.3 g
7.6 g
22.5 g
23.0
25.7
..
16.9 g
11.2 g
7.4 g
13.7 g
..
10.4 g
12.8 g
48.8 g
..
15.7 g
5.8 g
..
9.5 g
5.2 g
..
10.3 g
..
11.3

..
72.2
..
81.2 g
85.8 g
28.0 g
34.0 g
44.7 g
36.3 g
42.7 g
..
17.4
..
61.8 g
..
50.4 g
20.6
36.8 g
34.5
46.1 g

48.7 g
..
..
52.3
39.3 g
43.1
..
17.6 g
34.9 g
..
9.2 g
..
11.0
20.8 g
14.1 g
39.9 g
19.8
45.1 g
24.4 g
36.3 g
23.9
44.2
..
31.4 g
25.6 g
8.0 g
29.9 g
..
20.4 g
18.2 g
62.0 g
..
39.2 g
34.0 g
..
20.4 g
9.2 g
..
26.2 g
..
9.2

2011
..
44.0
61.3
55.5
57.4
73.2
58.6
46.7
26.2
14.5
50.8
49.0
38.4
66.9
80.6
29.0
79.2
76.5
65.8
43.6

68.4
53.2
43.7
61.5
57.2
22.7
62.9
75.0
64.2
83.4
88.2
47.9
66.1
28.7
70.6
80.4
58.9
80.4
25.2
60.1
76.0
73.2
36.0
72.4
67.4
86.4
51.8
35.1
84.8
30.9
83.0
78.4
57.9
15.7
68.0
66.3
83.7
65.4
72.5
79.8
36.8

Male

2011
..
60.8
79.7
78.6
75.1
81.2
69.9
80.0
74.7
69.3
83.3
88.3
74.1
71.8
92.3
80.7
86.7
79.5
76.5
70.8

72.9
79.9
76.6
71.8
84.3
83.3
77.1
82.1
77.4
88.7
90.3
63.3
88.4
79.2
74.1
87.6
73.4
81.4
72.0
70.6
79.5
85.6
67.2
83.1
78.2
85.4
81.2
80.4
81.3
76.5
89.5
89.8
64.4
80.3
78.2
69.1
82.1
78.3
85.1
90.0
70.0

table 4 Gender InequalIty IndexGender Inequality 

Index

Maternal 

mortality ratioa

adolescent  
fertility rateb

Seats in national 

parliamentc

population with at least 
secondary education

Labour force participation rate 

HDI rank
183 Burkina Faso
184 Chad
185 Mozambique
186 Congo, Democratic Republic of the
186 niger
otHER CouNtRIES oR tERRItoRIES
Korea, Democratic People’s Rep. of
Marshall Islands
Monaco
nauru
San Marino
Somalia
South Sudan
tuvalu

Human Development Index groups

very high human development
High human development
Medium human development
low human development

Regions

arab States
East asia and the Pacific 
Europe and Central asia 
latin america and the Caribbean 
South asia 
Sub-Saharan africa 

Least developed countries
Small island developing states
world

Rank

2012
131
..
125
144
146

value

2012
0.609
..
0.582
0.681
0.707

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

0.193
0.376
0.457
0.578

0.555
0.333
0.280
0.419
0.568
0.577
0.566
0.481
0.463

(deaths per 100,000 

live births)

(births per 1,000 women 

ages 15–19)

2010
300
1,100
490
540
590

81
..
..
..
..
1,000
..
..

15
47
121
405

176
73
28
74
203
475
394
193
145

2012d
117.4
138.1
124.4
170.6
193.6

0.6
37.7
1.5
23.0
2.5
68.0
..
21.5

18.7
45.9
44.7
86.0

39.2
18.5
23.1
70.6
66.9
105.2
90.9
61.1
51.2

(% ages 25 and older)

(% ages 15 and older)

(% female)

Female

Male

Female

2012
15.3
12.8
39.2
8.2
13.3

15.6
3.0
19.0
0.1
18.3
13.8
24.3
6.7

25.0
18.5
18.2
19.2

13.0
17.7
16.7
24.4
18.5
20.9
20.3
22.0
20.3

2006–2010e

2006–2010e

0.9
..
1.5 g
10.7 g
2.5 g

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

84.7
62.9
42.1
18.0

31.8
49.6
81.4
49.8
28.3
23.7
16.9
48.0
52.3

3.2
..
6.0 g
36.2 g
7.6 g

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

87.1
65.2
58.8
32.0

44.7
63.0
85.8
51.1
49.7
35.1
27.1
53.0
62.9

2011
77.5
64.4
86.0
70.2
39.9

71.6
..
..
..
..
37.7
..
..

52.7
46.8
50.5
56.4

22.8
65.2
49.6
53.7
31.3
64.7
64.8
53.0
51.3

Male

2011
90.4
80.2
82.9
72.5
89.9

83.7
..
..
..
..
76.8
..
..

68.7
75.3
79.9
79.9

74.1
80.6
69.0
79.9
81.0
76.2
82.4
73.9
77.2

NotES
a  Data were computed to ensure comparability 

g  Barro and lee (2011) estimate for 2010.
h  For calculating the Gender Inequality Index, a 

HDR_2013_En_technotes.pdf for details on how 
the Gender Inequality Index is calculated.

looking for work, expressed as a percentage of the 
working-age population.

across countries and are thus not necessarily the 
same as official country statistics, which may be 
based on alternative rigorous methods. Data are 
rounded according to the following scheme: less 
than 100, no rounding; 100–999, rounded to the 
nearest 10; and greater than 1,000, rounded to 
the nearest 100.

b  Based on medium-fertility variant.
c  For countries with bicameral legislative systems 

the share of seats in national parliament is 
calculated based on both houses.

d  Data are annual average of projected values for 

2010–2015.

e  Data refer to the most recent year available during 

the period specified.

f  the denominator of the calculation refers to voting 

members of the House of Representatives only.

 

value of 0.1% was used.

i  no women were elected in 2010; however, one 

woman was appointed to the cabinet.

j  Does not include the 36 rotating delegates 

appointed on an ad hoc basis.

k  Estimate is for prior to the 31 august 2012 

elections.

l  the parliament was dissolved following the 

December 2008 coup.

DEFINItIoNS

Gender Inequality Index: a composite measure 
reflecting inequality in achievements between 
women and men in three dimensions: reproductive 
health, empowerment and the labour market. See 
Technical note 3 at http://hdr.undp.org/en/media/

Maternal mortality ratio: Ratio of the number of 
maternal deaths to the number of live births in a 
given year, expressed per 100,000 live births.

adolescent fertility rate: number of births to 
women ages 15–19 per 1,000 women ages 15–19.

Seats in national parliament: Proportion of seats 
held by women in a lower or single house or an 
upper house or senate, expressed as percentage of 
total seats.

population with at least secondary education: 
Percentage of the population ages 25 and older that 
have reached secondary education.

Labour force participation rate: Proportion of 
a country’s working-age population that engages 
in the labour market, either by working or actively 

MaIN Data SouRCES

Columns 1 and 2: HDRo calculations based on 
WHo and others (2012), unDESa (2011), IPu (2012), 
Barro and lee (2010), unESCo Institute for Statistics 
(2012) and Ilo (2012).

Column 3: WHo and others (2012).

Column 4: unDESa (2011).

Column 5: IPu (2012).

Columns 6 and 7: unESCo Institute for Statistics 
(2012).

Columns 8 and 9: Ilo (2012).

taBlE 4  Gender Inequality Index    |    159

Human Development RepoRt 2013The Rise of the South Human progress in a Diverse WorldE5

l
b
a
T

Multidimensional Poverty Index

population in multidimensional povertya

Multidimensional 

poverty Index

Headcount

Intensity of 
deprivation

population 
vulnerable 
to poverty

population 
in severe 
poverty

Contribution of deprivation 

to overall poverty 

(%)

population below income 

poverty line 

(%)

ppp $1.25 

a day

National 
poverty line

EStIMatES baSED oN SuRVEyS FoR 2007–2011

Yearb

valuea

(%)

(thousands)

(%)

(%)

(%)

Education

Health

living 
standards

2002–2011c

2002–2012c

  albania
armenia

  Bangladesh
  Bhutan
  Bolivia, Plurinational State of

Burkina Faso

  Cambodia
  Colombia
  Congo
  Congo, Democratic Republic of the
  Dominican Republic

Egypt

  Ethiopia

Ghana
  Guyana
 
  Jordan
  Kenya

Indonesia

 

lesotho
liberia
Madagascar

  Malawi
Maldives

  Mauritania
  Morocco
  Mozambique

namibia
nepal
  nigeria
Pakistan

  Palestine, State of
  Peru

Philippines

  Rwanda

Sao tome and Principe

  Senegal
  Sierra leone
  South africa

Swaziland

  tanzania, united Republic of
  timor-leste
  ukraine
uganda
vanuatu
viet nam

  Zambia

Zimbabwe

2008/2009 (D)
2010 (D)
2007 (D)
2010 (M)
2008 (D)
2010 (D)
2010 (D)
2010 (D)
2009 (D)
2010 (M)
2007 (D)
2008 (D)
2011 (D)
2008 (D)
2009 (D)
2007 (D)
2009 (D)
2008/2009 (D)
2009 (D)
2007 (D)
2008/2009 (D)
2010 (D)
2009 (D)
2007 (M)
2007 (n)
2009 (D)
2006/2007 (D)
2011 (D)
2008 (D)
2006/2007 (D)
2006/2007 (n)
2008 (D)
2008 (D)
2010 (D)
2008/2009 (D)
2010/2011 (D)
2008 (D)
2008 (n)
2010 (M)
2010 (D)
2009/2010 (D)
2007 (D)
2011 (D)
2007 (M)
2010/2011 (M)
2007 (D)
2010/2011 (D)

EStIMatES baSED oN SuRVEyS FoR 2002–2006

argentina
azerbaijan
Belarus
Belize
Benin
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Brazil
Burundi
Cameroon
Chad
China
Croatia
Czech Republic

2005 (n)
2006 (D)
2005 (M)
2006 (M)
2006 (D)
2006 (M)
2006 (n)
2005 (M)
2004 (D)
2003 (W)
2002 (W)
2003 (W)
2002/2003 (W)

160    |    HuMan DEvEloPMEnt REPoRt 2013

0.005
0.001
0.292
0.119
0.089
0.535
0.212
0.022
0.208
0.392
0.018
0.024
0.564
0.144
0.030
0.095
0.008
0.229
0.156
0.485
0.357
0.334
0.018
0.352 d
0.048 d
0.512
0.187
0.217
0.310
0.264 d
0.005
0.066
0.064
0.350
0.154
0.439
0.439
0.057
0.086
0.332
0.360
0.008
0.367
0.129
0.017
0.328
0.172

0.011 f
0.021
0.000
0.024
0.412
0.003
0.011
0.530
0.287
0.344
0.056
0.016
0.010

1.4
0.3
57.8
27.2
20.5
84.0
45.9
5.4
40.6
74.0
4.6
6.0
87.3
31.2
7.7
20.8
2.4
47.8
35.3
83.9
66.9
66.7
5.2
61.7 d
10.6 d
79.3
39.6
44.2
54.1
49.4 d
1.4
15.7
13.4
69.0
34.5
74.4
77.0
13.4
20.4
65.6
68.1
2.2
69.9
30.1
4.2
64.2
39.1

2.9 f
5.3
0.0
5.6
71.8
0.8
2.7
84.5
53.3
62.9
12.5
4.4
3.1

45
6
83,207
198
1,972
13,834
6,415
2,500
1,600
48,815
439
4,699
72,415
7,258
58
48,352
145
18,863
759
3,218
13,463
9,633
16
1,982 d
3,287 d
18,127
855
13,242
83,578
81,236 d
52
4,422
12,083
6,900
56
7,642
4,321
6,609
242
28,552
749
1,018
24,122
67
3,690
7,740
4,877

1,160 f
461
0
16
5,652
30
5,075
6,128
9,149
5,758
161,675
196
316

37.7
35.2
50.4
43.9
43.7
63.7
46.1
40.9
51.2
53.0
39.4
40.7
64.6
46.2
39.2
45.9
34.4
48.0
44.1
57.7
53.3
50.1
35.6
57.1 d
45.3 d
64.6
47.2
49.0
57.3
53.4 d
37.3
42.2
47.4
50.8
44.7
58.9
57.0
42.3
41.9
50.7
52.9
35.5
52.5
42.7
39.5
51.2
44.0

37.6 f
39.4
35.1
42.6
57.4
37.2
39.3
62.7
53.9
54.7
44.9
36.3
33.4

7.4
3.0
21.2
17.2
18.7
7.1
21.4
6.4
17.7
15.1
8.6
7.2
6.8
21.6
12.3
12.2
1.3
27.4
26.7
9.7
17.9
23.4
4.8
15.1 d
12.3 d
9.5
23.6
17.4
17.8
11.0 d
8.8
14.9
9.1
19.4
24.3
11.7
13.1
22.2
23.1
21.0
18.2
1.0
19.0
33.5
7.9
17.2
25.1

5.8 f
12.5
0.8
7.6
13.2
7.0
7.0
12.2
19.3
28.2
6.3
0.1
0.0

0.1
0.0
26.2
8.5
5.8
65.7
17.0
1.1
22.9
45.9
0.7
1.0
71.1
11.4
1.0
7.6
0.1
19.8
11.1
57.5
35.4
31.4
0.3
40.7 d
3.3 d
60.7
14.7
20.8
33.9
27.4 d
0.1
3.9
5.7
34.7
10.7
50.6
53.2
2.4
3.3
33.4
38.7
0.2
31.2
6.5
0.7
34.8
11.5

0.2 f
0.6
0.0
1.1
47.2
0.1
0.2
61.9
30.4
44.1
4.5
0.3
0.0

32.0
25.8
18.7
40.4
19.8
36.2
22.1
31.8
10.4
18.0
39.1
48.1
25.9
32.1
17.4
15.7
49.6
12.7
21.9
29.7
34.3
19.5
13.6
32.0
35.5
23.9
15.1
21.8
27.0
30.8
33.9
18.6
15.8
19.5
28.8
31.8
31.5
7.5
16.7
18.3
21.3
4.7
15.6
29.7
32.8
17.5
10.2

41.9
24.4
16.6
22.8
33.6
29.2
39.0
31.5
25.7
40.9
64.8
45.0
0.0

44.9
64.8
34.5
21.2
27.5
27.9
32.7
33.5
45.6
25.1
22.6
37.3
27.6
19.5
50.4
50.6
47.4
30.1
18.9
25.0
16.7
27.1
81.1
21.6
27.5
36.2
31.0
33.7
32.2
37.9
55.3
20.8
56.5
30.9
27.5
40.6
19.3
50.5
29.9
26.4
31.0
91.1
34.1
17.3
25.1
27.9
33.6

12.9
49.4
61.8
35.8
25.1
51.8
40.2
22.4
24.5
4.6
9.9
46.7
99.9

23.0
9.4
46.8
38.4
52.6
35.9
45.1
34.7
44.0
56.9
38.2
14.5
46.5
48.4
32.2
33.8
3.1
57.2
59.2
45.3
49.1
53.3
5.3
46.5
37.0
39.9
53.9
44.4
40.8
31.2
10.8
60.6
27.7
49.6
43.6
27.6
49.2
42.0
53.4
55.3
47.7
4.2
50.4
53.0
42.1
54.7
56.3

45.2
26.2
21.7
41.4
41.3
19.0
20.7
46.1
49.8
54.5
25.2
8.3
0.1

0.6
1.3
43.3
10.2
15.6
44.6
22.8
8.2
54.1
87.7
2.2
1.7
39.0
28.6
..
18.1
0.1
43.4
43.4
83.8
81.3
73.9
..
23.4
2.5
59.6
31.9
24.8
68.0
21.0
0.0
4.9
18.4
63.2
..
33.5
53.4
13.8
40.6
67.9
37.4
0.1
51.5
..
40.1
68.5
..

0.9
0.4
0.1
..
47.3
0.0
6.1
81.3
9.6
61.9
13.1
0.1
..

12.4
35.8
31.5
23.2
60.1

30.1
37.2
50.1
71.3
34.4
22.0
38.9
28.5
..
12.5
13.3
45.9
56.6
63.8
68.7
52.4
..
42.0
9.0
54.7
38.0
25.2
54.7
22.3
21.9
31.3
26.5
44.9
66.2
50.8
66.4
23.0
69.2
33.4
49.9
2.9
31.1
..
28.9
59.3
72.0

..
15.8
5.4
33.5
39.0
14.0
21.4
66.9
39.9
55.0
2.8
11.1
..

population in multidimensional povertya

Multidimensional 

poverty Index

Headcount

Intensity of 
deprivation

population 
vulnerable 
to poverty

population 
in severe 
poverty

Contribution of deprivation 

to overall poverty 

(%)

population below income 

poverty line 

(%)

ppp $1.25 

a day

National 
poverty line

Côte d’Ivoire
Djibouti
Ecuador
Estonia
Gambia
Georgia
Guatemala
Guinea
Haiti
Honduras
Hungary
India
Iraq
Kazakhstan
Kyrgyzstan
lao People’s Democratic Republic
latvia
Mali
Mexico
Moldova, Republic of
Mongolia
Montenegro
nicaragua
niger
Paraguay
Russian Federation
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Somalia
Sri lanka
Suriname
Syrian arab Republic
tajikistan
thailand
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
togo
trinidad and tobago
tunisia
turkey
united arab Emirates
uruguay
uzbekistan
Yemen

Yearb
2005 (D)
2006 (M)
2003 (W)
2003 (W)
2005/2006 (M)
2005 (M)
2003 (W)
2005 (D)
2005/2006 (D)
2005/2006 (D)
2003 (W)
2005/2006 (D)
2006 (M)
2006 (M)
2005/2006 (M)
2006 (M)
2003 (W)
2006 (D)
2006 (n)
2005 (D)
2005 (M)
2005/2006 (M)
2006/2007 (D)
2006 (D)
2002/2003 (W)
2003 (W)
2005/2006 (M)
2003 (W)
2003 (W)
2006 (M)
2003 (W)
2006 (M)
2006 (M)
2005 (M)
2005/2006 (M)
2005 (M)
2006 (M)
2006 (M)
2003 (W)
2003 (D)
2003 (W)
2002/2003 (W)
2006 (M)
2006 (M)

valuea
0.353
0.139
0.009
0.026
0.324
0.003
0.127 d
0.506
0.299
0.159
0.016
0.283
0.059
0.002
0.019
0.267
0.006 d
0.558
0.015
0.007
0.065
0.006
0.128
0.642
0.064
0.005 d
0.003
0.000 e
0.000 e
0.514
0.021 d
0.039
0.021 e
0.068
0.006
0.008
0.284
0.020
0.010 d
0.028
0.002
0.006
0.008
0.283

(%)
61.5
29.3
2.2
7.2
60.4
0.8
25.9 d
82.5
56.4
32.5
4.6
53.7
14.2
0.6
4.9
47.2
1.6 d
86.6
4.0
1.9
15.8
1.5
28.0
92.4
13.3
1.3 d
0.8
0.0 e
0.0 e
81.2
5.3 d
8.2
5.5 e
17.1
1.6
1.9
54.3
5.6
2.8 d
6.6
0.6
1.7
2.3
52.5

(thousands)
11,083
241
286
97
935
36
3,134 d
7,459
5,346
2,281
466
612,203
3,996
92
249
2,757
37 d
11,771
4,313
72
403
9
1,538
12,437
755
1,883 d
79
0 e
0 e
6,941
1,027 d
41
1,041 e
1,104
1,067
39
3,003
74
272 d
4,378
20
57
603
11,176

(%)
57.4
47.3
41.6
36.5
53.6
35.2
49.1 d
61.3
53.0
48.9
34.3
52.7
41.3
36.9
38.8
56.5
37.9 d
64.4
38.9
36.7
41.0
41.6
45.7
69.4
48.5
38.9 d
40.0
0.0 e
0.0 e
63.3
38.7 d
47.2
37.5 e
40.0
38.5
40.9
52.4
35.1
37.1 d
42.0
35.3
34.7
36.2
53.9

(%)
15.3
16.1
2.1
1.3
17.6
5.3
9.8 d
9.3
18.8
22.0
0.0
16.4
14.3
5.0
9.2
14.1
0.0 d
7.6
5.8
6.4
20.6
1.9
17.4
4.0
15.0
0.8 d
3.6
0.0 e
0.4 e
9.5
14.4 d
6.7
7.1 e
23.0
9.9
6.7
21.6
0.4
4.9 d
7.3
2.0
0.1
8.1
13.0

(%)
39.3
12.5
0.6
0.2
35.5
0.0
14.5 d
62.3
32.3
11.3
0.0
28.6
3.1
0.0
0.9
28.1
0.0 d
68.4
0.5
0.1
3.2
0.3
11.2
81.8
6.1
0.2 d
0.1
0.0 e
0.0 e
65.6
0.6 d
3.3
0.5 e
3.1
0.2
0.3
28.7
0.3
0.2 d
1.3
0.0
0.0
0.1
31.9

Education

32.0
38.3
78.6
91.2
33.5
23.2
57.2
35.5
27.0
38.0
1.8
21.8
47.5
14.6
36.6
33.1
0.0
34.5
38.6
24.7
15.4
37.5
27.9
35.4
35.1
84.2
30.5
0.0
0.0
34.2
6.3
36.1
45.4
18.7
40.7
59.9
28.3
1.3
25.0
42.3
94.4
96.0
23.2
27.0

Health
38.7
24.6
3.3
1.2
30.7
33.8
10.0
23.0
21.5
18.5
95.6
35.7
32.1
56.8
36.9
27.9
88.0
26.2
23.9
34.3
27.9
47.6
13.6
21.5
19.0
2.5
40.1
0.0
0.0
18.6
35.4
18.8
42.7
45.0
31.2
12.8
25.4
94.3
47.3
38.4
0.4
0.6
55.7
40.5

living 
standards

2002–2011c

2002–2012c

29.3
37.1
18.1
7.6
35.8
43.0
32.8
41.5
51.5
43.6
2.7
42.5
20.4
28.7
26.4
39.0
12.0
39.3
37.5
41.1
56.6
14.9
58.5
43.2
45.9
13.3
29.4
0.0
0.0
47.2
58.3
45.1
11.8
36.3
28.1
27.3
46.3
4.4
27.6
19.2
5.2
3.4
21.1
32.4

23.8
18.8
4.6
0.5
33.6
15.3
13.5
43.3
..
17.9
0.2
32.7
2.8
0.1
6.2
33.9
0.1
50.4
1.2
0.4
..
0.1
11.9
43.6
7.2
0.0
0.3
0.1
0.1
..
7.0
..
1.7
6.6
0.4
0.0
38.7
..
1.4
0.0
..
0.2
..
17.5

42.7
..
32.8
..
48.4
24.7
51.0
53.0
..
60.0
..
29.8
22.9
8.2
33.7
27.6
5.9
47.4
51.3
21.9
35.2
6.6
46.2
59.5
34.7
11.1
9.2
..
..
..
8.9
..
..
46.7
8.1
19.0
61.7
..
3.8
18.1
..
18.6
..
34.8

NotES
a  not all indicators were available for all countries; 

caution should thus be used in cross-country 
comparisons. Where data are missing, indicator 
weights are adjusted to total 100%. For details 
on countries missing data, see alkire and others 
(2011) and alkire, Conconi and Roche (2012).
b  D indicates data are from Demographic and 
Health Surveys, M indicates data are from 
Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveys, W indicates 
data are from World Health Surveys and N 
indicates data are from national surveys.

c  Data refer to the most recent year available 

during the period specified.

d  lower bound estimate.
e  upper bound estimate.
f  Refers to only part of the country.

 

DEFINItIoNS

Multidimensional poverty Index: Percentage 
of the population that is multidimensionally poor 
adjusted by the intensity of the deprivations. See 
Technical note 4 at http://hdr.undp.org/en/media/
HDR_2013_En_technotes.pdf for details on how 
the Multidimensional Poverty Index is calculated.

Multidimensional poverty headcount: 
Percentage of the population with a weighted 
deprivation score of at least 33%.

Intensity of deprivation of multidimensional 
poverty: average percentage of deprivation 
experienced by people in multidimensional poverty.

population vulnerable to poverty: Percentage of the 
population at risk of suffering multiple deprivations—
that is, those with a deprivation score of 20%–33%.

population in severe poverty: Percentage of the 
population in severe multidimensional poverty—that 
is, those with a deprivation score of 50% or more.

Contribution of deprivation to overall poverty: 
Percentage of the Multidimensional Poverty Index 
attributed to deprivations in each dimension.

population below ppp $1.25 a day: Percentage of 
the population living below the international poverty 
line $1.25 (in purchasing power parity terms) a day.

population below national poverty line: 
Percentage of the population living below the 
national poverty line, which is the poverty line 
deemed appropriate for a country by its authorities. 
national estimates are based on population-
weighted subgroup estimates from household 
surveys.

MaIN Data SouRCES

Columns 1 and 2: Calculated from various 
household surveys, including ICF Macro 
Demographic and Health Surveys, united nations 
Children’s Fund Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveys 
and World Health organization World Health 
Surveys conducted between 2000 and 2010.

Columns 3–10: Calculated based on data on 
household deprivations in education, health and 
living standards from various household surveys as 
listed in column 1.

Columns 11 and 12: World Bank (2012a).

taBlE 5  Multidimensional Poverty Index    |    161

Human Development RepoRt 2013The Rise of the South Human progress in a Diverse WorldE6

l
b
a
T

Command over resources

ECoNoMy

pubLIC SpENDING

GDp per 
capita

Gross fixed capital 

formation 

Consumer 
price Index

General government final 
consumption expenditure 

Health

Education

Militarya

total debt service

(2005 PPP $)

(% of GDP)

(2005 = 100)

(% of GDP)

(% of GDP)

(% of GDP)

(% of GDP)

(% of GDP)

GDp

(2005 PPP 
$ billions)

2011

2011

2011

2010

2000

2011

2010

2010

2000

2005–2010b

2000

2010

2000

2009

232.7
781.5
13,238.3
621.9
2,814.4
108.4 c
159.9
331.3
300.3
3,918.9
1,231.6
1,371.0
310.0
10.7
180.6
207.5
364.7
306.1
277.8
1,951.2
173.8
51.2
1,251.3
..
1,645.0
35.4
2,034.2
252.8
255.0
18.2 c
21.0
9.6
..
24.0
112.9
145.8
172.5
4.8 d
691.2
263.7
54.1
333.7
226.8
30.6
631.9
2.0
71.2

26.9 c
9.8
125.0
44.9
6.6
0.3
135.1
2,101.8
233.3
88.2
601.8
..

46,982
34,548
42,486
37,251
34,437
24,818 c
35,640
35,048
37,979
30,660
35,716
27,541
43,844
33,618
32,399
26,720
33,127
36,353
53,591
29,819
32,254
24,967
27,063
..
27,069
68,459
32,474
23,967
22,558
45,507 c
26,045
23,007
..
17,885
20,757
77,987
17,295
17,564 d
18,087
15,272
16,877
42,293
21,317
13,773
15,501
23,172
16,162

21,345 c
28,239
13,191
13,315
10,402
13,176
47,935
14,808
10,905
11,799
21,430
..

20.2
27.1
14.7 c
18.6
18.2
18.9 c
11.5 c
18.4
20.9 c
20.1 c
22.1 c
28.6 c
21.5 c
14.1
17.2
18.7
20.9
21.1
23.4
20.1
19.2
19.5
21.7
..
19.5
19.0
14.3
23.9
14.0
15.9 c
18.4 c
15.0
..
21.5
22.4
39.6 d
16.7
14.6 c
19.9 c
23.2
17.6
23.8 c
18.1
22.4
22.6
22.0 d
21.9

26.6 d
26.0
37.6
19.0
22.1
..
17.8 d
23.1
32.2
23.3
19.0
9.9 c

112
116
112
108
108
115
107
108
104
100
109
116
112
149
111
114
111
109
114
108
110
115
112
..
110
111
114
115
117
105
113
112
..
126
115
136
130
132
115
101
129
115
109
139
154
185
117

114
113
162
142
122
..
130
163
135
138
129
..

19.3
17.6
14.3
22.0
19.0
17.3
14.2
25.8
11.1
16.9
18.6
12.0
9.1
23.4
25.1
25.8
21.3
19.0
10.9
22.9
20.6
18.7
17.1
..
18.3
15.1
18.6
20.3
18.9
25.8
16.0
18.2
..
19.8
20.1
19.7
21.5
21.2
17.4
12.5
22.8
..
19.0
20.8
13.8
24.2
23.8

17.6
10.8
19.5
12.4
21.9
..
21.5
15.1
7.2
19.0
26.0
29.6

21.5
18.0
17.5 c
28.1
19.5
20.3 c
18.9 c
26.6
11.5 c
19.8
21.8 c
15.3 c
8.4 c
25.2
28.6
23.9
24.1
19.3
10.3
24.5
23.9
20.6
20.3
..
20.5
16.5
22.5
20.9
17.5
22.4 c
19.7 c
21.1
..
19.5
18.1
24.8 d
10.0
20.3 c
18.9 c
11.8
18.9
8.2 c
20.1
15.6
15.1
11.1 d
21.2

15.5 d
15.0
13.5
13.0
18.2
..
13.5
16.9
15.8
15.4
19.8
37.9 c

6.4
5.4
5.8
5.0
8.2
6.0
4.6
7.0
5.6
6.2
6.2
2.2
..
7.7
6.8
4.7
6.1
7.6
1.3
8.0
5.1
6.1
5.2
..
5.8
5.2
5.6
5.9
4.7
2.6
2.4
4.9
4.9
4.1
5.6
1.6
5.0
4.1
3.9
3.4
4.5
2.5
6.4
3.2
5.0
4.0
6.7

2.7
2.8
4.9
6.1
5.4
8.5
1.9
3.2
3.5
3.6
3.1
6.1

8.0
5.9
9.5
9.4
9.0
8.4
6.4
7.8
6.8
7.8
8.0
4.1
..
7.6
9.7
4.6
8.0
8.5
1.4
9.3
6.7
6.9
6.9
..
7.4
6.6
8.1
6.6
6.1
2.4
2.5
5.7
5.3
4.7
5.8
1.4
5.1
5.2
5.4
3.8
5.2
2.7
7.5
4.1
4.4
3.1
6.6

3.6
3.6
4.4
5.6
6.1
7.9
2.1
3.2
4.4
3.7
2.7
9.7

6.6
4.7
..
5.0
..
..
4.2
7.2
5.2
3.7
5.6
..
..
6.7
8.3
6.5
..
5.7
3.4
5.7
5.9
..
4.3
..
4.4
..
4.5
4.0
3.4
3.7
5.3
..
..
5.4
3.9
..
5.0
5.6
5.0
3.9
..
1.3
5.2
5.4
4.6
..
..

..
2.8
6.2
2.4
..
9.8
..
2.9
2.9
..
5.9
7.7

7.3
5.1
5.4
5.9
4.6
7.2
5.7
7.3
5.4
3.8
4.8
5.0
3.6
7.8
8.7
5.8
6.4
5.5
3.3
5.9
6.8
5.7
5.0
2.1
4.7
..
5.6
4.5
4.1
2.0
7.9
5.8
2.9
5.7
4.1
2.4
5.1
6.7
5.1
4.5
5.7
1.0
5.8
5.6
6.0
5.0
4.3

2.9
..
4.5
2.9
..
..
3.8
4.1
4.3
4.4
5.6
12.9

1.7
1.8
3.0
1.5
1.5
1.2
0.7
2.0
1.1
1.0
1.1
2.6
..
0.0
1.5
8.0
1.4
1.0
4.6
2.5
1.3
1.1
1.2
..
2.0
0.6
2.4
2.0
3.6
5.7
3.0
0.7
..
1.4
1.7
..
1.7
..
1.8
3.8
1.7
9.4
1.9
0.9
1.1
1.7
3.1

1.5
1.9
4.8
1.4
1.4
1.2
0.6
1.3
0.8
1.0
1.5
2.7
..
0.1 d
1.5
6.5
1.1
0.9
3.7
2.3
1.4
1.6
1.0
..
1.7
0.6
2.6
1.3
2.3
3.2
2.1
0.7
..
1.7
1.3
2.3 e
1.0
..
1.9
3.2
1.1
6.9
2.1
1.1
0.9
1.3
1.7

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
8.2
9.7
..
..
7.7
9.4
3.4
..

4.0
..
1.3
2.8
..
..
7.2
3.7
2.5
2.7
10.6
..

3.4
..
1.4
2.0
1.9
..
3.6
3.9
1.3
1.9
10.1
..

..
..
2.9
5.3
..
..
..
4.6
6.7
10.0
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
6.2
24.3
..
..
43.9
3.8
5.0
..

..
..
2.6
3.5
2.4
..
..
4.2
11.5
8.4
..
..

HDI rank
VERy HIGH HuMaN DEVELopMENt

1 norway
2 australia
3 united States
4 netherlands
5 Germany
6 new Zealand
7 Ireland
7 Sweden
9 Switzerland
10 Japan
11 Canada
12 Korea, Republic of
13 Hong Kong, China (SaR)
13 Iceland
15 Denmark
16 Israel
17 Belgium
18 austria
18 Singapore
20 France
21 Finland
21 Slovenia
23 Spain
24 liechtenstein
25 Italy
26 luxembourg
26 united Kingdom
28 Czech Republic
29 Greece
30 Brunei Darussalam
31 Cyprus
32 Malta
33 andorra
33 Estonia
35 Slovakia
36 Qatar
37 Hungary
38 Barbados
39 Poland
40 Chile
41 lithuania
41 united arab Emirates
43 Portugal
44 latvia
45 argentina
46 Seychelles
47 Croatia
HIGH HuMaN DEVELopMENt
48 Bahrain
49 Bahamas
50 Belarus
51 uruguay
52 Montenegro
52 Palau
54 Kuwait
55 Russian Federation
56 Romania
57 Bulgaria
57 Saudi arabia
59 Cuba

162    |    HuMan DEvEloPMEnt REPoRt 2013

ECoNoMy

pubLIC SpENDING

GDp per 
capita

Gross fixed capital 

formation 

Consumer 
price Index

General government final 
consumption expenditure 

Health

Education

Militarya

total debt service

(2005 PPP $)

(% of GDP)

(2005 = 100)

(% of GDP)

(% of GDP)

(% of GDP)

(% of GDP)

(% of GDP)

GDp

(2005 PPP 
$ billions)

HDI rank
59 Panama
61 Mexico
62 Costa Rica
63 Grenada
64 libya
64 Malaysia
64 Serbia
67 antigua and Barbuda
67 trinidad and tobago
69 Kazakhstan
70 albania
71 venezuela, Bolivarian Republic of
72 Dominica
72 Georgia
72 lebanon
72 Saint Kitts and nevis
76 Iran, Islamic Republic of
77 Peru
78 the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
78 ukraine
80 Mauritius
81 Bosnia and Herzegovina
82 azerbaijan
83 Saint vincent and the Grenadines
84 oman
85 Brazil
85 Jamaica
87 armenia
88 Saint lucia
89 Ecuador
90 turkey
91 Colombia
92 Sri lanka
93 algeria
94 tunisia
MEDIuM HuMaN DEVELopMENt
95 tonga
96 Belize
96 Dominican Republic
96 Fiji
96 Samoa
100 Jordan
101 China
102 turkmenistan
103 thailand
104 Maldives
105 Suriname
106 Gabon
107 El Salvador
108 Bolivia, Plurinational State of
108 Mongolia
110 Palestine, State of
111 Paraguay
112 Egypt
113 Moldova, Republic of
114 Philippines
114 uzbekistan
116 Syrian arab Republic
117 Micronesia, Federated States of
118 Guyana
119 Botswana

2011
49.2
1,466.6
50.7
1.0
96.2 d
394.6
71.2
1.3
30.6
191.5
25.3
329.6
0.8
21.6
54.9
0.7
765.2 d
266.0
19.5
290.6
16.4
28.5
81.5
1.0
72.1 c
2,021.3
19.2
15.8
1.4
109.2
991.7
415.8
102.9
275.0
88.1

0.4
2.1
87.0
3.6
0.7
32.6
9,970.6
41.1
530.6
2.5
3.7 c
21.5
37.6
45.4
11.7
..
31.2
457.8
10.6
344.4
85.2
96.9 c
0.3
2.3 c
26.3

2011
13,766
12,776
10,732
9,806
15,361 d
13,672
9,809
14,139
22,761
11,568
7,861
11,258
11,120
4,826
12,900
13,291
10,462 d
9,049
9,451
6,359
12,737
7,607
8,890
9,482
25,330 d
10,278
7,074
5,112
8,231
7,443
13,466
8,861
4,929
7,643
8,258

4,092
5,896
8,651
4,199
4,008
5,269
7,418
8,055
7,633
7,834
7,110 c
13,998
6,032
4,499
4,178
..
4,752
5,547
2,975
3,631
2,903
4,741 c
3,017
3,104 c
12,939

2011
27.5 c
20.4
19.8
23.1 d
..
20.3 c
25.3
18.3 d
..
23.9
24.9
17.0
22.3 c
17.2
30.0
30.3 d
..
23.8
21.5
19.3
24.4
20.7
17.2
23.5 d
..
19.3
22.9
30.9
33.5 c
24.2
20.0
21.9
34.6
38.3 d
24.0

24.3 c
..
16.7
..
..
21.3
45.5
60.0
25.8
..
..
25.1
14.2
16.6 c
48.6
..
21.3
19.4
23.9
15.8
23.5
18.8 c
..
26.3 c
27.9

2010
123
124
158
121
125
114
153
112
155
162
115
163
116
143
105
122
206
115
115
195
137
118
164
124
131
126
179
131
115
124
153
126
172
122
123

131
113
136
127
131
134
115
..
116
138
145
113
119
137
168
..
140
173
153
127
..
142
..
136
156

2000
13.2
11.1
13.3
11.7
20.8
10.2
19.6
19.0
9.3
12.1
8.9
12.4
18.5
8.5
17.3
17.6
13.9
10.6
18.2
20.9
14.1
..
9.5
16.4
20.7
19.2
14.3
11.8
18.2
9.8
11.7
16.7
10.5
13.6
16.7

18.2
12.9
7.8
17.2
..
23.7
15.8
14.2
11.3
22.9
37.5
9.6
10.2
14.5
15.3
27.0
12.7
11.2
10.3
11.4
18.7
12.4
..
24.7
25.4

2011
11.2 c
12.0
17.6 c
15.6 d
..
12.7 c
18.2
17.6 d
..
9.8
9.3
10.4
17.2 c
9.4
12.3
16.0 d
..
9.8
18.0
18.8
14.0
22.1
11.8
19.5 d
19.9 d
20.7
17.7
11.8
16.0 c
15.8
8.1
10.6
7.5
14.2 d
13.4

18.9 c
..
5.2
..
..
18.9
13.1
11.1
13.3
..
..
8.8
11.1
13.2
14.0
..
10.4
11.3
22.7
10.2
16.6
10.1 c
..
15.1 c
19.9

2010
5.3
2.4
5.0
4.2
1.9
1.7
5.2
3.3
1.7
2.1
2.3
2.4
4.1
1.2
3.2
3.3
1.9
2.8
4.9
2.9
2.0
4.1
0.9
3.6
2.5
2.9
2.9
1.1
3.2
1.3
3.1
5.5
1.8
2.6
3.3

4.0
2.2
2.2
3.2
4.0
4.7
1.8
3.2
1.9
4.1
3.9
1.0
3.6
3.7
3.9
..
3.7
2.2
3.2
1.6
2.5
2.0
7.7
4.6
2.9

2010
6.1
3.1
7.4
2.6
2.7
2.4
6.4
4.3
3.4
2.5
2.6
1.7
5.2
2.4
2.8
4.0
2.2
2.7
4.5
4.4
2.5
6.8
1.2
3.9
2.2
4.2
2.6
1.8
5.3
3.0
5.1
5.5
1.3
3.2
3.4

4.1
3.3
2.7
3.4
5.7
5.4
2.7
1.5
2.9
3.8
3.4
1.8
4.3
3.0
3.0
..
2.1
1.7
5.4
1.3
2.8
1.6
12.9
5.1
6.0

2000
5.0
4.9
4.4
..
..
6.0
..
..
3.8
3.3
..
..
..
2.2
1.9
5.2
4.4
..
..
4.2
3.8
..
3.9
7.9
3.1
4.0
5.0
2.8
7.1
1.3
2.6
3.5
..
..
6.2

4.9
5.0
1.9
5.9
4.0
..
..
..
5.4
..
..
3.8
2.5
5.5
5.6
..
5.3
..
4.5
3.3
..
..
6.7
8.5
..

2005–2010b

3.8
5.3
6.3
..
..
5.8
5.0
2.5
..
3.1
..
3.7
3.6
3.2
1.8
4.5
4.7
2.7
..
5.3
3.1
..
3.2
4.9
4.3
5.7
6.1
3.2
4.4
..
2.9
4.8
2.1
4.3
6.3

..
6.1
2.2
4.5
5.3
..
..
..
3.8
8.7
..
..
3.2
6.3
5.4
..
4.0
3.8
9.1
2.7
..
4.9
..
3.7
7.8

2000
0.0
0.6
0.0
..
3.1
1.6
5.5
..
..
0.8
1.2
1.5
..
0.6
5.4
..
3.7
1.8
1.9
3.6
0.2
..
2.3
..
10.8
1.8
0.5
3.6
..
1.6
3.7
3.0
5.0
3.4
1.8

..
0.9
1.0
1.9
..
6.3
1.9
..
1.5
..
..
1.8
1.3
2.1
2.1
..
1.1
3.2
0.4
1.6
1.2
5.5
..
1.5
3.3

2010
0.0
0.5
0.0
..
1.2 e
1.6
2.2
..
..
1.1
1.6
0.9
..
3.9
4.2
..
1.8 e
1.3
1.4
2.7
0.1
1.2
2.9
..
8.5
1.6
0.8
4.2
..
3.6
2.4
3.6
3.0
3.6
1.4

..
1.1
0.7
1.6
..
5.0
2.1
..
1.5
..
..
0.9
1.1
1.7
1.1
..
0.9
2.0
0.3
1.2
..
4.1
..
2.1
2.4

2000
7.6
10.1
4.1
2.8
..
6.9
2.0
..
..
18.4
0.8
5.4
3.3
3.9
8.6
5.1
2.9
4.8
3.9
11.7
9.9
5.8
2.5
3.3
..
10.1
7.8
2.4
4.2
11.8
7.8
5.1
4.8
8.2
8.9

2.4
9.2
2.2
1.5
2.2
8.7
2.2
16.1
11.4
3.2
..
6.9
2.8
7.6
3.4
..
5.0
1.8
11.6
8.7
6.4
2.5
..
9.7
1.2

2009
4.0
3.0
3.0
3.3
..
5.6
11.2
..
..
32.3
3.9
1.5
3.3
7.0
10.9
6.7
..
4.4
7.3
22.1
1.3
8.2
0.8
4.7
..
2.1
8.5
10.3
3.6
3.2
8.0
3.4
2.9
0.4
5.3

1.4
7.2
2.6
0.7
1.8
2.5
1.0
0.8
3.5
9.8
..
3.4
5.0
3.3
2.8
..
2.5
1.4
6.7
6.5
1.5
1.1
..
1.4
0.5

taBlE 6  Command over resources    |    163

Human Development RepoRt 2013The Rise of the South Human progress in a Diverse WorldECoNoMy

pubLIC SpENDING

GDp per 
capita

Gross fixed capital 

formation 

Consumer 
price Index

General government final 
consumption expenditure 

Health

Education

Militarya

total debt service

(2005 PPP $)

(% of GDP)

(2005 = 100)

(% of GDP)

(% of GDP)

(% of GDP)

(% of GDP)

(% of GDP)

2011
3,566
4,094
2,220
9,678
4,062
2,126
2,052
3,013
5,986
2,579
4,373
3,412
3,616
4,351
1,393
1,652
32,026
3,203
2,080
2,464
5,096
5,349

3,885
2,581
1,805
1,507
1,568
2,424
5,201
..
2,090
853
1,334
2,221
1,737
2,255
2,363
1,102
1,504
914
2,060
1,034
1,188
1,423
2,087 d
1,873
1,428
1,097
1,581
980
805
1,878
..
979
506
1,083 c
1,097
769
533
990

2011
22.2
32.4
..
18.9
..
24.8
18.7
31.9
26.5
29.7
30.6
..
36.5
14.6
..
21.8
60.1 d
29.5
16.2 c
27.4
41.3 d
10.4

23.4
..
..
24.3
24.7
11.8
10.7
..
..
33.0 d
28.1
..
30.7
25.9
14.8
21.2
34.9
19.4
11.7 c
..
24.4
21.3
..
17.5
27.4
21.0 c
16.4
12.4 d
20.8
24.7
6.5
19.0
33.3
16.3 c
..
14.9
18.4
20.0 c

2010
139
146
..
140
119
167
170
167
141
159
111
171
121
134
134
189
129
152
148
127
134
144

130
152
260
180
145
181
186
225
117
159
151
161
115
133
130
155
141
116
167
150
150
167
129
123
119
155
114
118
156
166
..
223
162
141
119
163
163
237

2000
13.4
6.5
..
18.1
20.8
20.0
8.3
6.4
23.5
12.2
18.4
..
30.7
7.0
35.2
10.2
4.6
12.6
5.2
6.7
20.4
18.2

11.6
25.2
..
15.1
4.6
8.6
..
..
9.5
9.0
11.7
..
12.8
20.2
16.6
8.9
41.7
10.5
13.6
7.8
14.5
9.5
29.7
11.2
11.6
11.0
7.2
11.7
14.6
7.6
24.3
17.9
7.5
..
14.0
14.3
15.5
6.8

2011
17.1
4.5
..
21.5
..
19.1
28.9
5.7
21.6
10.1
15.4
..
20.7
10.5
..
8.5
3.9 d
11.7
6.3 c
9.8
21.4 d
19.4

9.7
..
..
13.3
5.5
8.2
17.7
..
..
11.6 d
18.2
..
8.8
12.3
8.4
9.6
32.6
..
11.8 c
..
11.3
11.6
..
9.9
..
15.5 c
9.1
15.3 d
15.7
17.7
18.3
9.0
20.2
10.7 c
..
11.1
26.3
7.5 c

2010
3.0
0.7
7.5
3.4
2.7
2.1
0.9
1.6
4.2
3.7
1.2
0.4
3.4
2.2
6.3
3.0
1.0
1.3
1.3
1.0
5.3
3.3

1.2
4.8
3.6
1.9
1.1
0.6
1.9
0.3
1.0
2.5
1.6
1.5
1.6
3.1
3.3
1.3
3.4
1.4
2.4
1.7
1.8
2.9
3.9
1.9
1.9
1.7
1.3
1.5
2.8
0.9
0.0
2.3
1.3
2.3
1.0
1.1
2.1
0.7

2010
4.4
1.3
9.3
3.9
4.8
3.5
1.6
2.6
4.0
4.9
2.0
6.8
3.1
2.5
5.1
3.1
3.4
1.2
2.1
1.5
4.5
4.2

1.1
8.0
2.7
2.1
1.2
0.8
2.4
0.2
1.5
2.3
4.0
1.9
3.1
2.3
2.6
1.8
8.5
3.4
1.3
1.5
2.0
3.6
4.7
2.9
2.0
5.2
1.1
3.0
4.0
1.9
..
2.6
3.9
0.9
0.9
1.5
4.4
0.6

2000
..
..
11.0
5.6
7.0
3.5
2.3
..
7.9
3.9
5.8
..
..
..
..
..
0.7
4.4
1.7
1.5
5.8
5.5

..
..
..
5.2
2.4
1.8
2.6
0.6
1.9
2.9
..
..
3.2
..
..
3.0
11.8
4.4
9.7
..
2.5
2.0
9.7
2.7
3.3
4.1
3.8
..
5.2
..
..
3.9
..
..
..
4.9
3.2
2.5

2005–2010b

..
3.0
..
6.0
5.2
6.2
4.0
5.3
8.1
..
5.4
..
5.6
3.2
14.0
5.5
..
3.1
2.6
3.3
4.0
7.4

6.2
6.1
..
6.7
2.2
2.4
3.4
..
3.5
3.2
6.2
..
5.6
4.3
..
4.7
13.0
4.5
5.2
..
3.2
1.3
8.4
5.0
4.5
4.7
4.6
7.6
5.7
..
2.5
4.7
2.8
..
..
4.3
9.2
2.4

2000
0.7
..
..
1.5
..
2.9
1.2
..
2.7
0.8
2.3
..
1.3
0.8
..
0.7
..
3.1
2.2
0.8
..
1.5

..
..
..
1.3
1.3
3.7
6.4
2.3
1.3
1.2
1.5
0.8
1.3
3.5
0.9
0.8
4.0
..
4.4
0.0
2.5
..
5.1
1.0
0.6
3.5
..
..
0.7
4.5
4.7
7.5
..
..
4.4
3.7
6.0
1.5

2010
1.1
0.7
..
1.3
..
4.4
..
2.5
3.9
0.7
3.5
2.4
0.5
0.4
4.9
0.4
..
2.7
1.6
0.3
..
3.0

1.1
..
..
1.9
1.1
2.8
4.2
..
1.6
0.7
1.2
1.0
1.6
3.8
0.4
1.4
3.1
1.7
3.9 e
0.0
1.6
1.7
3.7 e
0.6
1.0 e
1.3
1.6
..
1.1
3.4
1.3
0.9
0.9
3.8
..
1.2
3.8 e
..

2000
5.5
10.1
..
2.9
0.7
12.6
7.3
4.2
..
7.3
7.3
..
3.0
2.0
..
7.8
..
2.3
0.9
2.3
1.6
2.0

1.4
2.1
..
4.7
1.6
3.9
18.7
..
5.5
3.0
1.6
4.0
4.8
6.4
8.6
1.9
8.2
2.3
2.5
..
1.2
5.7
2.4
2.7
3.3
2.1
9.8
1.6
3.6
2.0
6.3
1.7
0.1
..
2.4
7.3
2.6
5.0

2009
3.4
4.1
..
1.4
0.9
11.6
12.1
1.3
..
7.9
3.6
..
2.2
3.8
..
1.0
..
1.2
0.6
4.3
5.6
1.1

1.6
3.0
0.8
1.2
1.0
2.5
2.8
..
0.9
0.6
0.9
0.2
2.3
3.0
8.6
1.2
1.6
1.1
0.8
2.0
0.4
0.9
..
1.9
0.6
0.3
1.7
0.8
0.4
0.7
1.5
0.6
0.6
0.1
2.1
0.6
0.2
1.8

GDp

(2005 PPP 
$ billions)

2011
27.7
992.1
0.2
489.6
1.0
11.7
14.3
264.6
13.9
15.1
143.5
112.5
1.8
64.2
1.6
41.3
23.1
3,976.5
29.8
15.5
3.8
5.7

16.1
1.4
0.3
62.7
236.0
428.4
102.0
..
41.9
18.2
59.8
360.8
22.2
8.0
16.6
33.6
3.3
5.6
51.1
10.5
41.0
19.2
..
3.3
13.0
12.0
31.9
0.7
12.4
83.8
..
83.0
2.1
37.2 c
1.7
4.6
4.6
10.1

HDI rank
120 Honduras
121 Indonesia
121 Kiribati
121 South africa
124 vanuatu
125 Kyrgyzstan
125 tajikistan
127 viet nam
128 namibia
129 nicaragua
130 Morocco
131 Iraq
132 Cape verde
133 Guatemala
134 timor-leste
135 Ghana
136 Equatorial Guinea
136 India
138 Cambodia
138 lao People’s Democratic Republic
140 Bhutan
141 Swaziland
Low HuMaN DEVELopMENt
142 Congo
143 Solomon Islands
144 Sao tome and Principe
145 Kenya
146 Bangladesh
146 Pakistan
148 angola
149 Myanmar
150 Cameroon
151 Madagascar
152 tanzania, united Republic of
153 nigeria
154 Senegal
155 Mauritania
156 Papua new Guinea
157 nepal
158 lesotho
159 togo
160 Yemen
161 Haiti
161 uganda
163 Zambia
164 Djibouti
165 Gambia
166 Benin
167 Rwanda
168 Côte d’Ivoire
169 Comoros
170 Malawi
171 Sudan
172 Zimbabwe
173 Ethiopia
174 liberia
175 afghanistan
176 Guinea-Bissau
177 Sierra leone
178 Burundi
178 Guinea

164    |    HuMan DEvEloPMEnt REPoRt 2013

table 6 Command over resourCesECoNoMy

pubLIC SpENDING

GDp per 
capita

Gross fixed capital 

formation 

Consumer 
price Index

General government final 
consumption expenditure 

Health

Education

Militarya

total debt service

(2005 PPP $)

(% of GDP)

(2005 = 100)

(% of GDP)

(% of GDP)

(% of GDP)

(% of GDP)

(% of GDP)

2011
716
516
964
1,149
1,343
861
329
642

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

32,931
11,572
5,203
1,623

8,104
6,616
12,458
10,429
3,241
2,094
1,346
5,340
10,103

2011
10.8 d
..
..
..
31.8 c
24.3
28.7 d
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

18.4
21.4
38.4
18.4

24.3
..
22.5
20.1
27.6
20.8
..
..
22.3

2010
124
..
116
115
117
157
..
117

..
..
..
..
114
..
..
..

—
—
—
—

—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—

2000
14.0
63.8
8.6
20.8
7.7
9.0
7.5
13.0

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

16.7
15.5
13.9
10.1

19.2
..
15.7
14.7
11.8
15.9
9.7
17.3
16.3

2011
4.5 d
..
..
..
13.2 c
12.3
7.6 d
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

19.4
15.8
12.4
11.1

15.4
..
15.4
16.1
10.9
16.9
..
..
17.5

2010
1.6
2.5
2.1
2.0
2.7
4.2
0.1
1.8

..
19.8
2.8
..
6.5
..
..
12.3

6.0
2.9
1.8
1.4

2.4
1.7
3.7
3.2
1.3
2.5
1.7
3.6
5.3

2010
1.4
1.3
2.3
3.4
1.1
3.7
3.4
2.6

..
15.0
3.8
..
6.1
..
..
14.2

8.2
3.6
2.4
1.8

2.6
2.5
4.3
3.8
1.2
3.0
2.2
3.0
6.5

2000
1.5
3.2
3.6
..
2.6
..
..
3.2

..
14.6
1.3
..
..
..
..
..

4.5
..
..
..

..
..
..
4.3
4.0
..
..
..
..

2005–2010b

1.2
2.1
4.5
4.0
2.8
5.0
2.5
3.8

..
..
1.2
..
..
..
..
..

5.1
4.7
3.6
3.5

3.9
..
4.1
5.3
3.2
5.2
3.7
..
4.9

2000
..
32.7
2.2
1.2
1.9
1.3
1.0
1.2

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

2.2
2.8
2.2
2.5

6.8
..
2.8
1.4
3.2
1.9
..
..
2.3

2010
2.6
..
1.9
1.3
2.7
0.9 d
1.3
0.9

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

2.7
2.7
2.0
2.0

5.5
..
2.7
1.4
2.5
1.5
2.2
..
2.6

2000
1.5
0.5
3.8
1.8
1.8
2.3
0.6
1.4

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
8.1
3.7
3.9

..
..
6.8
8.9
2.6
4.1
3.1
..
..

2009
0.1
1.1
0.6
0.6
0.9
1.0
2.0
0.5

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
4.7
1.6
1.3

..
..
8.3
2.8
1.3
1.2
1.3
..
..

GDp

(2005 PPP 
$ billions)

2011
3.2
2.8
15.3
19.5
15.5
20.6
22.3
10.3

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

37,231.3
11,740.8
18,095.7
1,948.5

2,808.0
12,580.2
5,946.1
6,046.4
5,586.1
1,691.4
1,065.9
223.2
69,016.4

HDI rank
180 Central african Republic
181 Eritrea
182 Mali
183 Burkina Faso
184 Chad
185 Mozambique
186 Congo, Democratic Republic of the
186 niger
otHER CouNtRIES oR tERRItoRIES
Korea, Democratic People’s Rep. of
Marshall Islands
Monaco
nauru
San Marino
Somalia
South Sudan
tuvalu

Human Development Index groups

very high human development
High human development
Medium human development
low human development

Regions

arab States
East asia and the Pacific
Europe and Central asia
latin america and the Caribbean
South asia
Sub-Saharan africa

Least developed countries
Small island developing states
world

NotES
a  For country-specific footnotes, see the Stockholm 
International Peace Research Institute’s Military 
Expenditure database at www.sipri.org/research/
armaments/milex/milex_database.

b  Data refer to the most recent year available 

during the period specified.

c  Refers to 2010.
d  Refers to 2009.
e  Refers to 2008.

DEFINItIoNS

Gross domestic product (GDp): Sum of gross 
value added by all resident producers in the 
economy plus any product taxes and minus any 
subsidies not included in the value of the products, 
expressed in 2005 international dollars using 
purchasing power parity rates.

 

GDp per capita: Sum of gross value added by all 
resident producers in the economy plus any product 
taxes and minus any subsidies not included in the 
value of the products, expressed in international 
dollars using purchasing power parity rates and 
divided by total population during the same period.

for purchases of goods and services (including 
compensation of employees and most expenditures 
on national defense and security but excluding 
government military expenditures that are part 
of government capital formation), expressed as a 
percentage of GDP.

Gross fixed capital formation: value of acquisitions 
of new or existing fixed assets by the business 
sector, governments and households (excluding 
their unincorporated enterprises) less disposals of 
fixed assets, expressed as a percentage of GDP. no 
adjustment is made for depreciation of fixed assets.

Consumer price Index: an index that reflects 
changes in the cost to the average consumer of 
acquiring a basket of goods and services that may be 
fixed or changed at specified intervals, such as yearly.

public spending on health: Current and 
capital spending from government (central and 
local) budgets, external borrowings and grants 
(including donations from international agencies 
and nongovernmental organizations), and social (or 
compulsory) health insurance funds, expressed as a 
percentage of GDP.

public spending on education: total public 
expenditure (current and capital) on education, 
expressed as a percentage of GDP.

General government final consumption 
expenditure: all government current expenditures 

public spending on the military: all expenditures 
of the defense ministry and other ministries on 

recruiting and training military personnel and on the 
construction and purchase of military supplies and 
equipment, expressed as a percentage of GDP.

total debt service: Sum of principal repayments 
and interest actually paid in foreign currency, 
goods, or services on long-term debt, interest paid 
on short-term debt, and repayments (repurchases 
and charges) to the International Monetary Fund, 
expressed as a percentage of GDP.

MaIN Data SouRCES

Columns 1–10: World Bank (2012a).

Columns 11 and 12: SIPRI (2012).

Columns 13 and 14: HDRo calculations based on 
data on total debt service as a percentage of GnI 
from World Bank (2012a).

taBlE 6  Command over resources    |    165

Human Development RepoRt 2013The Rise of the South Human progress in a Diverse WorldE7

l
b
a
T

Health

HDI rank
VERy HIGH HuMaN DEVELopMENt

1 norway
2 australia
3 united States
4 netherlands
5 Germany
6 new Zealand
7 Ireland
7 Sweden
9 Switzerland
10 Japan
11 Canada
12 Korea, Republic of
13 Hong Kong, China (SaR)
13 Iceland
15 Denmark
16 Israel
17 Belgium
18 austria
18 Singapore
20 France
21 Finland
21 Slovenia
23 Spain
24 liechtenstein
25 Italy
26 luxembourg
26 united Kingdom
28 Czech Republic
29 Greece
30 Brunei Darussalam
31 Cyprus
32 Malta
33 andorra
33 Estonia
35 Slovakia
36 Qatar
37 Hungary
38 Barbados
39 Poland
40 Chile
41 lithuania
41 united arab Emirates
43 Portugal
44 latvia
45 argentina
46 Seychelles
47 Croatia
HIGH HuMaN DEVELopMENt
48 Bahrain
49 Bahamas
50 Belarus
51 uruguay
52 Montenegro
52 Palau
54 Kuwait
55 Russian Federation
56 Romania

IMMuNIZatIoN 

CoVERaGE 

HIV pREVaLENCE, 

youtH

MoRtaLIty RatES

HEaLtH CaRE QuaLIty

underweight 

children 
(moderate 
and severe)

Dtp Measles 

Female Male

Infant 

under-
five 

Female Male

Due to 
malaria 

Due to 
cholera

Due to cardiovascular 
diseases and diabetesa

physicians

adult

Cause-specific

Satisfaction 
with health 
care quality

(% of one-
year-olds)

(% of children 
under age 5)

(% ages 15–24)

(deaths per 

1,000 live births)

(per 1,000 adults)

(per 100,000 
people per 

year)

(number)

(per 1,000 people)

(per 1,000 
people)

(% satisfied)

2010

2010

2006–2010b

2009

2009

2010

2010

2009

2009

2008

2005–2010b

2008

2005–2010b

2007–2009b

99
97
99
99
97
95
98
99
98
99
92
96
..
98
93
96
99
93
98
99
99
98
99
..
98
99
98
99
99
98
99
97
99
96
99
98
99
95
99
93
98
94
99
97
98
99
98

99
99
99
98
97
99
98
99
99

93
94
92
96
96
91
90
96
90
94
93
98
..
93
85
98
94
76
95
90
98
95
95
..
90
96
93
98
99
94
87
73
99
95
98
99
99
85
98
93
96
94
96
93
99
99
95

99
94
99
95
90
75
98
98
95

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
2.3 c
..
..

..
..
1.3
5.4
1.7
..
..
..
3.5

0.1
0.1
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
..
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
..
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
..
..
0.1
..
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.1
1.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
..
0.2
0.1
0.2
..
0.1

..
3.1
0.1
0.2
..
..
..
0.3
0.1

0.1
0.1
0.3
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.1
..
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.3
0.1
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.2
..
0.1
0.1
0.2
0.1
0.1
..
..
0.1
..
0.3
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.9
0.1
0.2
0.1
..
0.3
0.2
0.3
..
0.1

..
1.4
0.1
0.3
..
..
..
0.2
0.1

3
4
7
4
3
5
3
2
4
2
5
4
..
2
3
4
4
4
2
3
2
2
4
2
3
2
5
3
3
6
3
5
3
4
7
7
5
17
5
8
5
6
3
8
12
12
5

9
14
4
9
7
15
10
9
11

3
5
8
4
4
6
4
3
5
3
6
5
..
2
4
5
4
4
3
4
3
3
5
2
4
3
5
4
4
7
4
6
4
5
8
8
6
20
6
9
7
7
4
10
14
14
6

10
16
6
11
8
19
11
12
14

50
45
78
56
53
57
57
47
43
42
53
46
..
43
65
45
59
50
42
54
56
54
43
..
41
57
58
63
44
82
41
44
44
77
74
48
99
80
76
59
95
66
54
105
88
108
60

87
126
117
84
85
110
50
144
90

83
79
134
75
99
86
97
74
74
86
87
109
..
65
107
78
105
102
76
117
124
131
94
..
77
95
95
138
106
105
81
76
94
234
184
69
229
136
197
116
274
84
123
284
160
227
153

127
202
324
156
161
229
66
391
219

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
..
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
..
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0
0
0
0
0
0
..
0
0
0
0
0
..
..
0
..
0
0
..
0
0
0
0
..
0
..
0
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
0
..
..
0
..
..
..
..
..
..
0
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
0
..

124
112
156
122
170
138
141
141
114
91
121
141
..
121
143
116
131
155
140
98
157
168
113
..
128
150
133
258
186
284
188
175
..
342
343
195
324
233
283
156
375
277
154
420
207
..
294

339
239
525
211
419
..
274
580
398

4.1
3.0
2.7
3.9
3.5
2.4
3.2
3.6
4.1
2.1
1.9
2.0
..
3.9
3.4
3.6
3.0
4.7
1.8
3.5
2.7
2.5
3.7
..
4.2
2.9
2.7
3.6
6.0
1.4
2.3
3.1
3.7
3.4
3.0
2.8
3.1
1.8
2.1
1.1
3.7
1.9
3.8
3.0
3.2
1.5
2.6

1.4
..
4.9
3.7
..
1.3
1.8
4.3
1.9

68
60
56
77
47
64
47
81
81
54
73
60
67
87
82
70
88
89
86
84
85
68
84
..
59
90
81
63
45
..
60
81
..
47
..
..
50
..
45
45
29
..
69
42
66
..
..

..
..
45
77
..
..
..
35
44

166    |    HuMan DEvEloPMEnt REPoRt 2013

IMMuNIZatIoN 

CoVERaGE 

HIV pREVaLENCE, 

youtH

MoRtaLIty RatES

HEaLtH CaRE QuaLIty

underweight 

children 
(moderate 
and severe)

Dtp Measles 

Female Male

Infant 

under-
five 

Female Male

Due to 
malaria 

Due to 
cholera

Due to cardiovascular 
diseases and diabetesa

physicians

adult

Cause-specific

Satisfaction 
with health 
care quality

(% of one-
year-olds)

(% of children 
under age 5)

(% ages 15–24)

(deaths per 

1,000 live births)

(per 1,000 adults)

(per 100,000 
people per 

year)

(number)

(per 1,000 people)

HDI rank
57 Bulgaria
57 Saudi arabia
59 Cuba
59 Panama
61 Mexico
62 Costa Rica
63 Grenada
64 libya
64 Malaysia
64 Serbia
67 antigua and Barbuda
67 trinidad and tobago
69 Kazakhstan
70 albania
71 venezuela, Bolivarian Republic of
72 Dominica
72 Georgia
72 lebanon
72 Saint Kitts and nevis
76 Iran, Islamic Republic of
77 Peru
78 the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
78 ukraine
80 Mauritius
81 Bosnia and Herzegovina
82 azerbaijan
83 Saint vincent and the Grenadines
84 oman
85 Brazil
85 Jamaica
87 armenia
88 Saint lucia
89 Ecuador
90 turkey
91 Colombia
92 Sri lanka
93 algeria
94 tunisia
MEDIuM HuMaN DEVELopMENt
95 tonga
96 Belize
96 Dominican Republic
96 Fiji
96 Samoa
100 Jordan
101 China
102 turkmenistan
103 thailand
104 Maldives
105 Suriname
106 Gabon
107 El Salvador
108 Bolivia, Plurinational State of
108 Mongolia
110 Palestine, State of
111 Paraguay
112 Egypt
113 Moldova, Republic of

2010
96
98
98
98
96
96
99
98
98
97
99
96
99
99
90
99
99
83
98
99
97
98
96
99
95
80
99
99
99
99
98
98
99
97
96
99
99
98

99
99
96
99
97
98
99
99
99
97
99
69
97
87
98
..
96
97
93

2010
97
98
99
95
95
83
95
98
96
95
98
92
99
99
79
99
94
53
99
99
94
98
94
99
93
67
99
97
99
88
97
95
98
97
88
99
95
97

99
98
79
94
61
98
99
99
98
97
89
55
92
79
97
..
94
96
97

2006–2010b

..
..
..
3.9
3.4
1.1
..
..
12.9
1.4
..
..
3.9
5.2
3.7
..
1.1
..
..
..
4.2
1.5
..
..
1.4
7.7
..
8.6
1.7
2.0
4.7
..
6.2
1.7
3.4
21.1
3.2
3.3

..
4.3
7.1
..
..
1.9
3.8 c
8.2
7.0
17.3
7.2
..
5.5
4.3
5.0
..
3.4
6.0
3.2

2009
0.1
..
0.1
0.3
0.1
0.1
..
..
0.1
0.1
..
0.7
0.2
..
..
..
0.1
0.1
..
0.1
0.1
..
0.3
0.2
..
0.1
..
0.1
..
0.7
0.1
..
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1

..
1.8
0.7
0.1
..
..
..
..
..
0.1
0.4
3.5
0.3
0.1
0.1
..
0.1
0.1
0.1

2009
0.1
..
0.1
0.4
0.2
0.2
..
..
0.1
0.1
..
1.0
0.1
..
..
..
0.1
0.1
..
0.1
0.2
..
0.2
0.3
..
0.1
..
0.1
..
1.0
0.1
..
0.2
0.1
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.1

..
0.7
0.3
0.1
..
..
..
..
..
0.1
0.6
1.4
0.4
0.1
0.1
..
0.2
0.1
0.1

2010
11
15
5
17
14
9
9
13
5
6
7
24
29
16
16
11
20
19
7
22
15
10
11
13
8
39
19
8
17
20
18
14
18
14
17
14
31
14

13
14
22
15
17
18
16
47
11
14
27
54
14
42
26
20
21
19
16

2010
13
18
6
20
17
10
11
17
6
7
8
27
33
18
18
12
22
22
8
26
19
12
13
15
8
46
21
9
19
24
20
16
20
18
19
17
36
16

16
17
27
17
20
22
18
56
13
15
31
74
16
54
32
22
25
22
19

2009
86
102
78
82
88
69
143
101
95
90
158
120
185
88
92
103
97
85
90
90
96
79
148
99
67
134
110
85
102
131
103
90
96
73
80
82
105
70

233
129
149
157
167
111
87
212
139
70
124
262
128
132
141
..
98
130
134

2009
205
186
120
145
157
115
248
175
175
184
197
225
432
126
196
192
235
166
185
144
123
144
395
219
145
221
204
157
205
224
246
188
173
134
166
275
135
129

135
202
172
263
198
195
142
380
270
97
217
321
281
203
305
..
168
215
309

2008
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.3
0.0
0.0
0.1

0.8
0.0
0.1
0.0
0.9
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.4
0.9
2.5
31.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
..
0.0
0.2
0.0

2005–2010b

..
..
..
..
0
..
..
..
2
..
..
..
0
..
..
..
..
0
..
11
..
..
0
0
..
..
..
..
0
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
0
..

..
..
0
..
..
..
4
..
0
..
..
0
..
..
0
..
0
..
..

2008
464
456
215
174
237
159
299
396
278
422
..
427
696
443
237
..
505
332
..
385
135
465
593
444
398
619
340
455
264
248
537
278
167
362
186
312
277
257

396
256
320
457
427
468
287
773
311
351
351
370
203
290
379
..
249
406
525

(per 1,000 
people)

(% satisfied)

2005–2010b

2007–2009b

3.6
0.9
6.4
..
2.9
..
..
1.9
0.9
2.0
..
1.2
3.9
1.1
..
..
4.5
3.5
..
0.9
0.9
2.5
3.1
1.1
1.4
3.8
..
1.9
1.7
0.9
3.7
0.5
..
1.5
1.4
0.5
1.2
1.2

0.3
0.8
..
0.5
0.3
2.5
1.4
2.4
0.3
1.6
..
0.3
1.6
..
2.8
..
1.1
2.8
2.7

..
69
..
54
69
75
..
..
89
..
..
32
49
..
75
..
61
50
..
73
48
..
23
..
..
53
..
..
44
..
61
..
64
67
63
83
52
80

..
50
58
..
..
66
..
..
85
..
..
..
59
59
52
50
66
53
41

taBlE 7  Health    |    167

Human Development RepoRt 2013The Rise of the South Human progress in a Diverse WorldIMMuNIZatIoN 

CoVERaGE 

HIV pREVaLENCE, 

youtH

MoRtaLIty RatES

HEaLtH CaRE QuaLIty

underweight 

children 
(moderate 
and severe)

Dtp Measles 

Female Male

Infant 

under-
five 

Female Male

Due to 
malaria 

Due to 
cholera

Due to cardiovascular 
diseases and diabetesa

physicians

adult

Cause-specific

Satisfaction 
with health 
care quality

(% of one-
year-olds)

(% of children 
under age 5)

(% ages 15–24)

(deaths per 

1,000 live births)

(per 1,000 adults)

(per 100,000 
people per 

year)

(number)

(per 1,000 people)

2010
89
99
89
90
99
98
99
94
97
73
78
99
95
93
87
99
99
81
99
96
75
96
65
83
93
81
94
95

90
85
98
93
98
90
97
93
92
78
98
77
80
82
80
85
93
97
94
83
83
99
90
99
94
92
95
81
97

2010
88
98
82
80
95
94
99
89
89
65
52
99
94
98
75
99
98
73
96
93
66
93
51
74
93
64
95
94

76
68
92
86
94
86
93
88
79
67
92
71
60
67
55
86
85
84
73
59
55
91
85
97
69
82
70
72
93

2006–2010b

21.6 c
4.0
10.1
..
10.5
11.2
8.1
18.4
..
8.7 c
..
2.2
15.0
20.2
16.6
5.5
8.6
6.4
..
13.0 c
44.7
13.9
..
42.5
28.3
31.1
12.7
5.8

11.4
11.8
13.1
16.1
41.0
31.3
15.6 c
22.6
16.0
..
15.8
23.1
13.7
14.7 c
18.4
38.6
13.2
16.6
43.1
17.7
15.9
14.6
22.9
18.1
18.4
11.4
15.9
..
12.8

2009
0.1
0.1
..
..
0.8
11.8
0.2
0.1
..
13.6
..
0.1
0.1
0.1
5.8
0.1
0.1
..
..
0.3
..
1.3
5.0
0.1
0.1
0.2
0.1
15.6

2.6
..
..
4.1
0.1
0.1
1.6
0.3
3.9
0.1
3.9
2.9
0.7
0.3
0.8
0.1
14.2
2.2
..
1.3
4.8
8.9
1.9
2.4
0.7
1.9
1.5
0.1
6.8

2009
0.1
0.1
..
..
0.6
5.2
0.3
0.1
..
4.5
..
0.1
0.1
0.1
2.3
0.1
0.1
..
..
0.5
..
0.5
1.9
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
6.5

1.2
..
..
1.8
0.1
0.1
0.6
0.3
1.6
0.1
1.7
1.2
0.3
0.4
0.3
0.2
5.4
0.9
..
0.6
2.3
4.2
0.8
0.9
0.3
1.3
0.7
0.1
3.1

2010
23
44
14
34
25
36
20
27
39
41
12
33
52
19
29
23
30
31
29
25
46
50
81
48
43
42
44
55

61
23
53
55
38
70
98
50
84
43
50
88
50
75
47
41
65
66
57
70
63
69
73
57
73
59
86
63
58

2010
29
52
16
42
30
48
24
35
49
57
14
38
63
23
40
27
36
39
36
32
55
74
121
63
51
54
56
78

93
27
80
85
48
87
161
66
136
62
76
143
75
111
61
50
85
103
77
165
99
111
91
98
115
91
123
86
92

2009
130
139
95
161
224
324
134
143
173
479
159
162
160
107
357
122
87
145
111
151
154
253
355
169
190
251
194
560

320
119
104
282
222
189
353
188
409
198
311
365
218
262
221
159
573
278
180
227
348
477
271
246
246
258
456
229
496

2009
240
220
159
183
286
372
237
234
325
521
200
327
183
173
540
210
126
292
272
280
233
402
373
250
350
289
256
674

409
170
161
358
246
225
377
275
420
273
456
377
266
315
274
234
676
338
237
278
539
580
326
296
385
304
528
284
691

2008
0.2
0.0
0.0
0.3
5.0
1.0
0.1
3.2
2.6
0.2
8.5
0.0
0.0
0.1
29.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.2
0.1
83.0
48.0
98.0
1.9
3.7
2.9
0.2
0.3

121.0
30.0
9.2
12.0
1.8
0.6
89.0
34.0
121.0
8.5
87.0
146.0
76.0
36.0
45.0
0.0
0.1
65.0
4.9
5.7
103.0
104.0
1.2
93.0
105.0
15.0
116.0
58.0
87.0

2005–2010b

2
..
..
0
..
0
..
19
..
28
..
..
..
0
0
..
..
24
0
..
..
51
33
6
0
3
..
0

0
..
33
21
..
0
0
1
110
0
94
174
458
70
0
0
0
15
3
3,990
98
7
27
13
11
0
6
0
11

2008
345
641
400
412
452
346
376
350
..
321
399
605
523
339
495
234
355
424
300
190
318
386
484
336
408
430
425
499

463
367
308
363
418
422
483
369
498
376
427
456
373
422
428
350
452
403
494
411
473
518
490
417
454
408
536
450
587

(per 1,000 
people)

(% satisfied)

2005–2010b

2007–2009b

1.2
2.6
1.5
0.6
..
0.3
..
0.3
0.3
0.8
0.1
2.3
2.0
1.2
0.4
0.4
0.6
0.7
0.6
..
0.1
0.1
0.3
0.6
0.2
0.3
0.0
0.2

0.1
0.2
0.5
0.1
0.3
0.8
0.1
0.5
0.2
0.2
0.0
0.4
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.3
..
0.1
0.1
0.2
0.0
0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.0

81
..
56
..
63
72
68
79
..
63
..
57
64
74
68
66
..
44
..
60
..
74
..
67
75
69
..
..

34
..
..
62
69
41
62
..
54
82
30
55
57
31
..
80
..
22
..
35
48
53
56
..
52
78
..
..
66

HDI rank
114 Philippines
114 uzbekistan
116 Syrian arab Republic
117 Micronesia, Federated States of
118 Guyana
119 Botswana
120 Honduras
121 Indonesia
121 Kiribati
121 South africa
124 vanuatu
125 Kyrgyzstan
125 tajikistan
127 viet nam
128 namibia
129 nicaragua
130 Morocco
131 Iraq
132 Cape verde
133 Guatemala
134 timor-leste
135 Ghana
136 Equatorial Guinea
136 India
138 Cambodia
138 lao People’s Democratic Republic
140 Bhutan
141 Swaziland
Low HuMaN DEVELopMENt
142 Congo
143 Solomon Islands
144 Sao tome and Principe
145 Kenya
146 Bangladesh
146 Pakistan
148 angola
149 Myanmar
150 Cameroon
151 Madagascar
152 tanzania, united Republic of
153 nigeria
154 Senegal
155 Mauritania
156 Papua new Guinea
157 nepal
158 lesotho
159 togo
160 Yemen
161 Haiti
161 uganda
163 Zambia
164 Djibouti
165 Gambia
166 Benin
167 Rwanda
168 Côte d’Ivoire
169 Comoros
170 Malawi

168    |    HuMan DEvEloPMEnt REPoRt 2013

table 7 HealtHIMMuNIZatIoN 

CoVERaGE 

HIV pREVaLENCE, 

youtH

MoRtaLIty RatES

HEaLtH CaRE QuaLIty

underweight 

children 
(moderate 
and severe)

Dtp Measles 

Female Male

Infant 

under-
five 

Female Male

Due to 
malaria 

Due to 
cholera

Due to cardiovascular 
diseases and diabetesa

physicians

adult

Cause-specific

Satisfaction 
with health 
care quality

(% of one-
year-olds)

(% of children 
under age 5)

(% ages 15–24)

(deaths per 

1,000 live births)

(per 1,000 adults)

(per 100,000 
people per 

year)

(number)

(per 1,000 people)

HDI rank
171 Sudan
172 Zimbabwe
173 Ethiopia
174 liberia
175 afghanistan
176 Guinea-Bissau
177 Sierra leone
178 Burundi
178 Guinea
180 Central african Republic
181 Eritrea
182 Mali
183 Burkina Faso
184 Chad
185 Mozambique
186 Congo, Democratic Republic of the
186 niger
otHER CouNtRIES oR tERRItoRIES
Korea, Democratic People’s Rep. of
Marshall Islands
Monaco
nauru
San Marino
Somalia
South Sudan
tuvalu

Human Development Index groups

very high human development
High human development
Medium human development
low human development

Regions

arab States
East asia and the Pacific
Europe and Central asia
latin america and the Caribbean
South asia
Sub-Saharan africa

Least developed countries
Small island developing states
world

2010
99
94
90
75
86
92
96
99
75
64
99
90
98
71
77
67
80

94
99
99
99
95
55
..
99

98
97
90
87

93
97
98
96
86
84
88
89
91

2010
90
84
81
64
62
61
82
92
51
62
99
63
94
46
70
68
71

99
97
99
99
93
46
..
85

94
95
85
78

87
95
96
93
78
75
78
72
85

2006–2010b

27.0
9.7
33.2
14.9 c
32.9
18.1
21.1
28.8
20.8
24.4
34.5
26.7
25.7
30.3
18.3
24.2
40.2 c

18.8
..
..
4.8
..
31.6
..
1.6

..
..
22.7
26.1

..
9.7
..
4.0
40.2
21.2
27.3
..
..

2009
1.3
6.9
..
0.7
..
2.0
1.5
2.1
0.9
2.2
0.4
0.5
0.8
2.5
8.6
..
0.5

..
..
..
..
..
0.6
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

2009
0.5
3.3
..
0.3
..
0.8
0.6
1.0
0.4
1.0
0.2
0.2
0.5
1.0
3.1
..
0.2

..
..
..
..
..
0.4
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

2010
66
51
68
74
103
92
114
88
81
106
42
99
93
99
92
112
73

26
22
3
32
2
108
..
27

5
16
33
73

36
20
17
18
50
76
71
41
40

2010
103
80
106
103
149
150
174
142
130
159
61
178
176
173
135
170
143

33
26
4
40
2
180
..
33

6
18
42
110

48
24
21
23
65
120
108
70
55

2009
275
574
379
337
352
369
363
407
337
470
179
218
262
384
434
331
224

126
386
51
303
48
350
..
280

60
105
132
287

139
103
118
99
173
355
282
155
137

2009
291
672
445
389
440
431
414
424
474
461
249
357
443
412
557
442
229

207
429
112
448
57
382
..
255

114
221
204
346

198
168
281
181
245
430
357
207
211

2008
23.0
40.0
10.0
98.0
0.3
203.0
239.0
39.0
165.0
192.0
0.7
131.0
221.0
235.0
171.0
193.0
184.0

0.0
1.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
28.0
..
0.0

0.0
0.0
1.3
65.4

3.5
1.5
0.0
0.2
1.6
98.1
62.1
15.6
12.2

2005–2010b

1,011
26
0
18
0
399
0
18
107
0
0
76
16
14
24
244
55

..
..
..
..
..
1,182
..
..

..
..
..
138

..
..
..
..
..
86
190
..
..

2008
548
324
508
437
675
513
440
464
520
498
383
406
463
500
512
477
381

303
..
..
..
..
572
..
..

150
357
324
450

409
305
492
236
360
447
459
342
323

(per 1,000 
people)

(% satisfied)

2005–2010b

2007–2009b

0.3
0.2
0.0
0.0
0.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.0
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.0

3.3
0.6
..
0.7
..
0.0
..
0.6

2.9
2.3
1.0
0.3

1.4
1.2
3.1
..
0.6
0.2
0.2
2.6
1.4

48
27
19
38
46
..
46
47
31
..
..
44
50
42
69
..
46

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

62
..
..
50

..
..
45
57
65
..
..
..
..

NotES
a  Estimates are age-standardized and based on 
a combination of country life tables, cause of 
death models, regional cause of death patterns, 
and World Health organization and Joint united 
nations Programme on HIv/aIDS estimates for 
some major causes (not including chronic diseases).
b  Data are for the most recent year available during 

the period specified.

c  Data differ from standard definition or refer to 

only part of the country.

DEFINItIoNS

Immunization coverage for Dtp: Percentage of 
one-year-olds who have received three doses of the 

combined diphtheria, tetanus toxoid and pertussis 
(DtP) vaccine.

Immunization coverage for measles: Percentage 
of one-year-olds who have received at least one 
dose of a measles vaccine.

underweight children: Percentage of children 
under age 5 falling two standard deviations or more 
below the median weight-for-age of the reference 
population.

HIV prevalence: Percentage of the population ages 
15–24 who are infected with HIv.

Infant mortality rate: Probability of dying between 
birth and exactly age 1, expressed per 1,000 live 
births.

under-five mortality rate: Probability of dying 
between birth and exactly age 5, expressed per 
1,000 live births.

adult mortality rate: Probability that a 15-year-old 
person will die before reaching age 60, expressed 
per 1,000 adults.

Cause-specific deaths: Deaths attributable to a 
certain disease or cause.

physicians: number of physicians (both generalists 
and specialists), expressed per 1,000 people.

Satisfaction with heath care quality: Percentage 
of respondents who answered “yes” to the Gallup 
World Poll question, “In this country, do you have 
confidence in the healthcare or medical systems?”

MaIN Data SouRCES

Columns 1, 2, 8 and 9: WHo (2012a).

Columns 3–5: unICEF (2012).

Columns 6, 10, 11 and 13: WHo (2012b).

Column 7: Inter-agency Group for Child Mortality 
Estimation (2012).

Column 12: HDRo calculations based on data 
on female deaths and male deaths due to 
cardiovascular diseases and diabetes from WHo 
(2012b) and population data from unDESa (2011).

Column 14: Gallup (2012).

 

taBlE 7  Health    |    169

Human Development RepoRt 2013The Rise of the South Human progress in a Diverse WorldPopulation 

with at 
least 

secondary 
education Primary Secondary Tertiary

Primary 
school 
teachers 
trained 
to teach

EDUCATION QUALITY

Performance of 15-year-old students

Mean score

Deviation from mean

Satisfaction 

with 

education 

quality

Primary 
school 
dropout 

rate

(% of 
primary 
school 
cohort)

E8

l
b
a
T

Education

EDUCATIONAL 
ATTAINMENT

GROSS ENROLMENT RATIO

Adult 
literacy 

rate

(% ages 
15 and 
older)

(% ages 25 
and older)

(%)

(%)

Readinga Mathematicsb

Sciencec

Reading Mathematics

Science

(% satisfied)

HDI rank
VERY HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT

2005–2010d

2010

2002–2011d 2002–2011d 2002–2011d 2005–2011d

2009

2009

2009

2009

2009

2009

2011

2002–2011d

1 Norway
2 Australia
3 United States
4 Netherlands
5 Germany
6 New Zealand
7 Ireland
7 Sweden
9 Switzerland
10 Japan
11 Canada
12 Korea, Republic of
13 Hong Kong, China (SAR)
13 Iceland
15 Denmark
16 Israel
17 Belgium
18 Austria
18 Singapore
20 France
21 Finland
21 Slovenia
23 Spain
24 Liechtenstein
25 Italy
26 Luxembourg
26 United Kingdom
28 Czech Republic
29 Greece
30 Brunei Darussalam
31 Cyprus
32 Malta
33 Andorra
33 Estonia
35 Slovakia
36 Qatar
37 Hungary
38 Barbados
39 Poland
40 Chile
41 Lithuania
41 United Arab Emirates
43 Portugal
44 Latvia
45 Argentina
46 Seychelles
47 Croatia
HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
48 Bahrain
49 Bahamas
50 Belarus
51 Uruguay
52 Montenegro
52 Palau
54 Kuwait
55 Russian Federation
56 Romania

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
96.1 g
..
..
99.7 h
97.7
..
98.9 h
..
..
..
97.2 h
95.2 h
98.3 h
92.4
..
99.8 h
..
96.3
99.0 i
..
99.5 i
98.6
99.7 h
90.0
95.2 i
99.8 h
97.8 h
91.8
98.8 h

91.9 h
..
99.6
98.1
98.4 h
..
93.9
99.6 h
97.7 h

95.2
92.2
94.5
88.9
96.5
83.7
73.9
85.0
95.8
81.1 f
100.0
85.4 f
72.3
91.3
99.4
84.1
79.4
100.0
75.0
78.4
100.0
95.6
66.4
..
72.8
77.9
99.7
99.8
62.0
63.8 f
74.5
62.5
49.4
94.5 f
98.8
63.4
94.8 f
88.6 f
80.0
74.0
90.2
64.3 f
40.4
98.4
56.0 f
66.8
64.4 f

78.0 f
89.6
..
49.8
98.2
..
48.9
94.7 f
86.8

99.0
104.0
102.0
108.0
102.0
101.0
108.0
100.0
102.0
103.0
99.0
104.0
102.0
99.0
99.0
113.0
105.0
100.0
101.8
111.0
99.0
98.0
107.0
106.0
103.0
100.0
106.0
106.0
100.0
108.0
105.0
95.0
84.0
99.0
102.0
103.0
102.0
120.0
97.0
106.0
97.0
104.0
114.0
101.0
118.0
117.0
93.0

107.0
114.0
100.0
113.0
107.0
101.0
106.0
99.0
96.0

110.0
129.0
96.0
120.0
103.0
119.0
117.0
100.0
95.0
102.0
101.0
97.0
83.0
107.0
117.0
91.0
111.0
100.0
106.9
113.0
108.0
97.0
119.0
70.0
99.0
98.0
102.0
90.0
101.0
110.0
98.0
105.0
87.0
104.0
89.0
94.0
98.0
101.0
97.0
88.0
98.0
92.0
107.0
95.0
89.0
119.0
95.0

103.0
96.0
96.0
90.0
104.0
96.0
101.0
89.0
95.0

73.8
75.9
94.8
62.7
..
82.6
61.0
70.8
51.5
59.0
60.0
103.9
59.7
74.1
74.4
62.5
67.5
60.2
71.0
54.5
91.6
86.9
73.2
34.4
66.0
10.5
58.5
60.7
89.4
17.2
52.0
33.4
11.2
62.7
54.2
10.0
61.7
65.9
70.5
59.2
77.4
22.5
62.2
60.1
71.2
..
49.2

..
..
83.0
63.3
47.6
37.9
21.9
75.9
63.8

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
95.6
..
..
..
..
..
94.3
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
87.1
..
..
100.0
..
..
42.9
..
58.5
..
..
..
100.0
..
..
..
99.4
..

..
91.5
99.8
..
..
..
100.0
..
..

503
515
500
508
497
521
496
497
501
520
524
542
533
500
495
474
506
470
526
496
536
483
481
499
486
472
494
478
483
..
..
..
..
501
477
372
494
..
500
449
468
459 j
489
484
398
..
476

..
..
..
426
408
..
..
459
424

498
514
487
526
513
519
487
494
534
529
527
546
555
507
503
447
515
496
562
497
541
501
483
536
483
489
492
493
466
..
..
..
..
512
497
368
490
..
495
421
477
453 j
487
482
388
..
460

..
..
..
427
403
..
..
468
427

500
527
502
522
520
532
508
495
517
539
529
538
549
496
499
455
507
494
542
498
554
512
488
520
489
484
514
500
470
..
..
..
..
528
490
379
503
..
508
447
491
466 j
493
494
401
..
486

..
..
..
427
401
..
..
478
428

91
99
97
89
95
103
95
99
93
100
90
79
84
96
84
112
102
100
97
106
86
91
88
83
96
104
95
92
95
..
..
..
..
83
90
115
90
..
89
83
86
107 j
87
80
108
..
88

..
..
..
99
93
..
..
90
90

85
94
91
89
98
96
86
94
99
94
88
89
95
91
87
104
104
96
104
101
82
95
91
88
93
98
87
93
89
..
..
..
..
81
96
98
92
..
88
80
88
99 j
91
79
93
..
88

..
..
..
91
85
..
..
85
79

90
101
98
96
101
107
97
100
96
100
90
82
87
95
92
107
105
102
104
103
89
94
87
87
97
104
99
97
92
..
..
..
..
84
95
104
86
..
87
81
85
106 j
83
78
102
..
85

..
..
..
97
87
..
..
90
79

..
67.3
62.8
60.3
65.6 e
69.9
83.6
61.6
..
54.6
75.4
50.5
49.6
..
64.5
64.0
62.1
63.7
91.8
58.5
81.9
72.6
59.0
..
46.7
64.8
76.9 e
71.4
47.9
..
65.6
58.5
..
49.5
58.4
69.9
56.4
..
60.8
44.0
51.1
80.6 e
64.9
51.0
62.6
..
63.7

80.5 e
..
55.4
55.8
62.1
..
61.2 e
38.0
45.3

0.5
..
6.9
..
4.4
..
..
1.0
..
0.0
..
1.2
0.5
2.5
0.5
1.1
6.6
2.3
0.9
..
0.5
0.5
0.5
18.2
0.3
..
..
0.4
2.6
3.9
4.7
20.3
..
1.6
2.3
6.4
2.3
4.2
2.4
2.6
1.6
3.3
..
5.4
6.2
15.1
1.0

1.8
10.5
0.3
4.8
..
..
4.0
3.9
4.9

170    |    HUMAN DEvELoPMENt REPoRt 2013

EDUCATIONAL 
ATTAINMENT

GROSS ENROLMENT RATIO

Primary 
school 
teachers 
trained 
to teach

EDUCATION QUALITY

Performance of 15-year-old students

Mean score

Deviation from mean

Satisfaction 

with 

education 

quality

(% ages 25 
and older)

(%)

(%)

Readinga Mathematicsb

Sciencec

Reading Mathematics

Science

(% satisfied)

Population 

with at 
least 

secondary 
education Primary Secondary Tertiary

Adult 
literacy 

rate

(% ages 
15 and 
older)

HDI rank
2005–2010d
98.4
57 Bulgaria
86.6 h
57 Saudi Arabia
99.8 h
59 Cuba
94.1
59 Panama
93.1
61 Mexico
96.2 h
62 Costa Rica
..
63 Grenada
89.2 i
64 Libya
93.1
64 Malaysia
99.3 h
64 Serbia
99.0
67 Antigua and Barbuda
98.8 h
67 trinidad and tobago
99.7 h
69 Kazakhstan
95.9
70 Albania
71 venezuela, Bolivarian Republic of
95.5
..
72 Dominica
99.7 h
72 Georgia
89.6
72 Lebanon
..
72 Saint Kitts and Nevis
85.0
76 Iran, Islamic Republic of
89.6
77 Peru
78 the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia 97.3 h
99.7 h
78 Ukraine
88.5 h
80 Mauritius
97.9 h
81 Bosnia and Herzegovina
82 Azerbaijan
99.8
83 Saint vincent and the Grenadines
..
86.6
84 oman
90.3
85 Brazil
86.6 i
85 Jamaica
99.6 h
87 Armenia
..
88 Saint Lucia
91.9
89 Ecuador
90 turkey
90.8
93.4
91 Colombia
92 Sri Lanka
91.2
72.6
93 Algeria
94 tunisia
77.6
MEDIUM HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
95 tonga
96 Belize
96 Dominican Republic
96 Fiji
96 Samoa
100 Jordan
101 China
102 turkmenistan
103 thailand
104 Maldives
105 Suriname
106 Gabon
107 El Salvador
108 Bolivia, Plurinational State of
108 Mongolia
110 Palestine, State of
111 Paraguay
112 Egypt
113 Moldova, Republic of

99.0
..
89.5
..
98.8 h
92.6
94.3 h
99.6 h
93.5
98.4
94.7
88.4 i
84.5
91.2
97.4 h
94.9
93.9
72.0
98.5 h

2010
92.6
54.6 f
77.1 f
62.1 f
53.9
53.6 f
..
49.6 f
69.4 f
85.1
..
59.3
99.3
81.7
52.4
26.5
91.0
54.2
..
66.0
52.9
78.6
93.5 f
49.0 f
..
92.7
..
53.9
49.5
72.6 f
94.4 f
..
36.6
34.5
43.1
73.9
24.1
37.0

74.0 f
34.0 f
42.5
57.8
62.1
73.3
62.7 f
..
32.2
25.4
43.7
44.4 f
37.5
44.5
82.4 f
52.1
36.9
51.2 f
93.3

2002–2011d 2002–2011d 2002–2011d 2005–2011d

103.0
106.0
103.0
108.0
115.0
110.0
103.0
114.0
96.0
96.0
102.0
105.0
111.0
87.0
103.0
112.0
109.0
105.0
93.0
108.0
109.0
89.0
99.0
99.0
88.0
94.0
105.0
105.0
127.0
89.0
103.0
94.0
114.0
102.0
115.0
99.0
110.0
109.0

110.0
121.0
108.0
105.0
108.0
97.0
111.0
..
91.0
109.0
113.0
182.0
114.0
105.0
100.0
91.0
100.0
106.0
94.0

88.0
101.0
89.0
74.0
87.0
100.0
108.0
110.0
68.0
91.0
105.0
90.0
100.0
89.0
83.0
98.0
86.0
81.0
97.0
84.0
92.0
83.0
96.0
89.0
90.0
85.0
107.0
100.0
101.0
93.0
92.0
96.0
80.0
78.0
96.0
87.0
95.0
90.0

101.0
75.0
76.0
86.0
85.0
91.0
81.0
..
79.0
71.0
75.0
53.0
65.0
80.0
93.0
86.0
67.0
85.0
88.0

53.0
36.8
95.2
44.6
27.0
25.6
52.8
54.4
40.2
49.1
16.4
11.5
40.8
18.4
78.1
3.6
28.2
54.0
18.2
42.8
35.0
40.4
79.5
24.9
35.9
19.3
..
24.5
36.1
29.0
51.5
11.3
39.8
45.8
39.1
15.5
30.8
34.4

6.5
21.5
34.0
16.1
7.5
41.8
25.9
..
47.7
..
12.1
..
23.4
38.6
53.3
50.2
36.6
30.4
38.1

..
91.5
100.0
91.6
95.6
89.5
65.3
..
..
94.2
54.8
88.0
..
..
88.4
60.8
94.6
..
61.6
98.4
..
..
99.9
100.0
..
100.0
84.1
100.0
..
..
77.5
86.8
82.6
..
100.0
..
99.3
..

..
45.2
84.9
97.8
..
..
..
..
..
77.0
100.0
..
92.7
..
97.6
100.0
..
..
..

2009
429
..
..
371
425
..
..
..
..
442
..
416
390
385
..
..
..
..
..
..
370
..
..
..
..
362
..
..
412
..
..
..
..
464
413
..
..
404

..
..
..
..
..
405
556 k
..
421
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

2009
428
..
..
360
419
..
..
..
..
442
..
414
405
377
..
..
..
..
..
..
365
..
..
..
..
431
..
..
386
..
..
..
..
445
381
..
..
371

..
..
..
..
..
387
600 k
..
419
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

2009
439
..
..
376
416
..
..
..
..
443
..
410
400
391
..
..
..
..
..
..
369
..
..
..
..
373
..
..
405
..
..
..
..
454
402
..
..
401

..
..
..
..
..
415
575 k
..
425
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

2009
113
..
..
99
85
..
..
..
..
84
..
113
91
100
..
..
..
..
..
..
98
..
..
..
..
76
..
..
94
..
..
..
..
82
87
..
..
85

..
..
..
..
..
91
80 k
..
72
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

2009
99
..
..
81
79
..
..
..
..
91
..
99
83
91
..
..
..
..
..
..
90
..
..
..
..
64
..
..
81
..
..
..
..
93
75
..
..
78

..
..
..
..
..
83
103 k
..
79
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

2009
106
..
..
90
77
..
..
..
..
84
..
108
87
89
..
..
..
..
..
..
89
..
..
..
..
74
..
..
84
..
..
..
..
81
81
..
..
81

..
..
..
..
..
89
82 k
..
80
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

2011
35.4
61.8 e
..
73.2
64.5
80.0
..
..
91.4
58.0
..
83.3
49.9
54.7
81.2
..
65.7
67.6 e
..
67.9
49.1
61.6
50.1
83.5
67.9
53.0
..
70.0 e
53.7
73.7
45.7
..
74.5
54.3
71.7
77.9
67.1 e
54.8 e

..
..
68.9
..
..
63.3 e
62.6
74.3
88.7
..
..
46.5
72.7
68.2
57.9
63.5 e
66.9
42.6 e
53.7

Primary 
school 
dropout 

rate

(% of 
primary 
school 
cohort)

2002–2011d

6.2
6.7
3.8
6.2
6.0
11.2
..
..
2.3
1.4
..
10.6
0.2
4.8
7.9
11.9
3.8
8.2
26.5
5.7
..
2.5
2.3
2.2
26.8
3.6
..
2.7
24.3
4.8
2.3
7.9
19.4
8.2
15.5
1.4
5.0
5.3

9.6
9.7
..
9.1
..
6.6
..
..
..
..
9.7
..
13.5
16.3
5.9
1.5
21.9
..
4.8

tABLE 8  Education    |    171

Human Development RepoRt 2013The Rise of the South Human progress in a Diverse WorldEDUCATIONAL 
ATTAINMENT

GROSS ENROLMENT RATIO

Primary 
school 
teachers 
trained 
to teach

EDUCATION QUALITY

Performance of 15-year-old students

Mean score

Deviation from mean

Satisfaction 

with 

education 

quality

Adult 
literacy 

rate

(% ages 
15 and 
older)

2005–2010d
95.4
99.4 h
83.4 h
..
..
84.5
84.8
92.6
..
88.7
82.6
99.2
99.7 h
93.2
88.8 h
78.0
56.1
78.2 h
84.3 h
75.2 h
58.3
67.3 h
93.9 h
62.8
77.6
72.7
52.8
87.4 h

..
..
89.2 h
87.4 h
56.8 h
54.9
70.1 h
92.3 h
70.7
64.5
73.2 h
61.3 h
49.7
58.0 h
60.6 h
60.3 h
89.6 h
57.1
63.9
48.7
73.2
71.2
..
50.0 h
42.4 h
71.1 h
56.2 h
74.9 h
74.8 h

HDI rank
114 Philippines
114 Uzbekistan
116 Syrian Arab Republic
117 Micronesia, Federated States of
118 Guyana
119 Botswana
120 Honduras
121 Indonesia
121 Kiribati
121 South Africa
124 vanuatu
125 Kyrgyzstan
125 tajikistan
127 viet Nam
128 Namibia
129 Nicaragua
130 Morocco
131 Iraq
132 Cape verde
133 Guatemala
134 timor-Leste
135 Ghana
136 Equatorial Guinea
136 India
138 Cambodia
138 Lao People’s Democratic Republic
140 Bhutan
141 Swaziland
LOw HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
142 Congo
143 Solomon Islands
144 Sao tome and Principe
145 Kenya
146 Bangladesh
146 Pakistan
148 Angola
149 Myanmar
150 Cameroon
151 Madagascar
152 tanzania, United Republic of
153 Nigeria
154 Senegal
155 Mauritania
156 Papua New Guinea
157 Nepal
158 Lesotho
159 togo
160 Yemen
161 Haiti
161 Uganda
163 Zambia
164 Djibouti
165 Gambia
166 Benin
167 Rwanda
168 Côte d’Ivoire
169 Comoros
170 Malawi

172    |    HUMAN DEvELoPMENt REPoRt 2013

Population 

with at 
least 

secondary 
education Primary Secondary Tertiary

(% ages 25 
and older)

(%)

(%)

Readinga Mathematicsb

Sciencec

Reading Mathematics

Science

(% satisfied)

2010
64.8 f
..
32.8
..
55.6 f
75.5 f
19.8
41.4
..
70.4
..
81.1 f
89.7 f
26.3 f
33.5 f
37.6 f
28.0 f
32.4 f
..
14.8
..
53.8 f
..
38.7 f
15.7 f
29.7 f
34.4
48.1 f

46.2 f
..
..
41.9
35.1 f
31.2
..
17.8 f
27.9 f
..
7.4 f
..
7.5 f
14.2 f
10.5 f
28.3 f
20.9
29.8 f
16.0 f
29.1 f
23.4
35.0 f
..
24.0 f
18.4 f
7.7 f
22.1 f
..
15.3 f

2002–2011d 2002–2011d 2002–2011d 2005–2011d

106.0
95.0
118.0
110.0
85.0
108.0
116.0
118.0
113.0
102.0
117.0
100.0
102.0
106.0
107.0
118.0
114.0
105.0
110.0
116.0
117.0
107.0
87.0
118.0
127.0
121.0
111.0
116.0

115.0
109.0
134.0
113.0
..
95.0
124.0
126.0
120.0
149.0
102.0
83.0
87.0
102.0
60.0
115.0
103.0
140.0
87.0
..
121.0
115.0
59.0
83.0
126.0
143.0
88.0
104.0
135.0

85.0
106.0
72.0
83.0
91.0
80.0
73.0
77.0
86.0
94.0
55.0
84.0
87.0
77.0
64.0
69.0
56.0
53.0
88.0
59.0
56.0
58.0
27.0
60.0
46.0
45.0
70.0
58.0

45.0
36.0
59.0
60.0
..
34.0
31.0
54.0
42.0
31.0
..
44.0
37.0
24.0
..
44.0
46.0
46.0
44.0
..
28.0
..
36.0
54.0
37.0
32.0
27.0
46.0
32.0

28.9
8.9
..
14.2
11.9
7.4
18.8
23.1
..
..
4.7
48.8
19.7
22.3
9.0
18.0
13.2
16.4
17.8
17.8
16.7
8.8
3.3
16.2
7.8
13.4
8.8
4.4

5.5
..
4.5
4.0
10.6
5.4
3.7
11.0
11.5
3.7
2.1
10.3
7.9
4.4
..
5.6
3.5
5.9
10.2
..
4.2
2.4
4.9
4.1
6.0
5.5
8.9
7.9
0.7

..
100.0
..
..
66.1
97.4
36.4
..
85.4
87.4
100.0
68.4
92.9
98.3
95.6
74.9
100.0
..
90.0
..
..
50.6
45.3
..
99.1
96.9
91.5
73.1

86.8
..
40.5
96.8
58.4
84.2
..
99.9
57.1
90.4
94.5
66.1
47.9
100.0
..
80.7
63.4
76.7
..
..
89.4
..
100.0
..
42.6
91.5
100.0
57.4
95.9

2009
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
402
..
..
..
314
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

2009
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
371
..
..
..
331
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

2009
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
383
..
..
..
330
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

2009
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
66
..
..
..
99
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

2009
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
70
..
..
..
81
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

2009
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
69
..
..
..
91
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

2011
79.2
85.0
59.1 e
..
..
66.4
63.6
80.1
..
69.3
..
47.7
76.4
80.4
..
81.0
41.6 e
38.0
..
71.8
..
57.2
..
74.8
94.1
78.9
..
77.8

46.6
..
..
59.6
81.6
60.5
42.0
..
62.1
45.8
44.8
47.4
38.0
39.2 e
..
73.0
43.2
45.4
37.2 e
39.9
48.8
68.0
66.6
..
60.7
83.9
..
46.0 e
65.2

Primary 
school 
dropout 

rate

(% of 
primary 
school 
cohort)

2002–2011d

24.2
1.9
5.4
..
16.5
13.2
23.8
20.0
21.1
23.0
28.5
2.4
1.1
7.9
17.4
51.6
9.5
33.3
14.3
35.2
33.4
27.8
38.1
34.2
45.5
33.0
9.0
16.1

29.7
..
32.0
27.2
33.8
38.5
68.1
25.2
33.8
65.4
18.6
20.1
40.4
29.3
..
38.3
30.7
40.6
40.5
..
68.2
46.9
35.7
38.9
35.7
63.0
39.2
25.9
47.2

table 8 educationEDUCATIONAL 
ATTAINMENT

GROSS ENROLMENT RATIO

Primary 
school 
teachers 
trained 
to teach

EDUCATION QUALITY

Performance of 15-year-old students

Mean score

Deviation from mean

Satisfaction 

with 

education 

quality

Population 

with at 
least 

secondary 
education Primary Secondary Tertiary

Adult 
literacy 

rate

(% ages 
15 and 
older)

2005–2010d
71.1 h
92.2 h
39.0
60.8 i
..
54.2 h
42.1
67.2 h
41.0 h
56.0 h
67.8 h
31.1
28.7
34.5 h
56.1 h
66.8 h
28.7

100.0
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
92.7
82.3
60.8

74.5
93.8
98.1
91.3
62.8
63.0
60.7
..
81.3

HDI rank
171 Sudan
172 Zimbabwe
173 Ethiopia
174 Liberia
175 Afghanistan
176 Guinea-Bissau
177 Sierra Leone
178 Burundi
178 Guinea
180 Central African Republic
181 Eritrea
182 Mali
183 Burkina Faso
184 Chad
185 Mozambique
186 Congo, Democratic Republic of the
186 Niger
OTHER COUNTRIES OR TERRITORIES

Korea, Democratic People’s Rep. of
Marshall Islands
Monaco
Nauru
San Marino
Somalia
South Sudan
tuvalu

Human Development Index groups

very high human development
High human development
Medium human development
Low human development

Regions

Arab States
East Asia and the Pacific
Europe and Central Asia
Latin America and the Caribbean
South Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa

Least developed countries
Small island developing states
world

(% ages 25 
and older)

(%)

(%)

Readinga Mathematicsb

Sciencec

Reading Mathematics

Science

(% satisfied)

2010
15.5 f
55.4 f
..
27.3 f
20.3 f
..
14.8
7.1 f
..
17.9 f
..
10.3
2.0
..
3.6 f
23.2 f
5.1 f

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

85.9
64.2
50.5
25.2

38.4
..
83.5
50.4
39.2
29.7
..
..
57.7

2002–2011d 2002–2011d 2002–2011d 2005–2011d

73.0
..
102.0
96.0
97.0
123.0
125.0
156.0
94.0
93.0
45.0
82.0
79.0
90.0
115.0
94.0
71.0

..
102.0
..
93.0
94.0
32.0
..
100.0

104.2
110.5
113.4
98.2

97.7
111.0
99.9
115.9
113.6
100.3
101.8
97.0
107.9

39.0
..
36.0
..
46.0
36.0
..
25.0
38.0
13.0
32.0
39.0
23.0
26.0
25.0
38.0
13.0

..
99.0
..
63.0
97.0
8.0
..
..

100.4
91.0
70.7
37.4

71.1
78.8
91.2
90.9
57.6
40.3
36.0
77.0
71.2

6.1
6.2
5.5
19.1
3.3
2.7
2.1
3.2
9.5
2.6
2.0
5.8
3.3
2.2
1.5
6.2
1.5

..
16.2
..
..
..
..
..
..

75.8
48.7
22.1
6.8

24.1
26.1
57.5
42.5
15.7
6.2
6.6
45.2
28.7

59.7
..
39.4
40.2
..
38.9
48.0
91.2
65.2
..
93.8
50.0
85.7
45.3
75.9
91.7
96.4

..
..
..
74.2
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
73.8

..
..
..
92.3
77.2
73.9
71.9
89.4
..

2009
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

539
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

—
—
—
—

—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—

2009
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

—
—
—
—

—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—

2009
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

—
—
—
—

—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—

2009
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

—
—
—
—

—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—

2009
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

—
—
—
—

—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—

2009
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

—
—
—
—

—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—

2011
43.0
66.4
..
49.6
58.5
..
35.3
70.9
39.0
40.7
..
34.6
53.0
60.1
63.2
39.3
55.3

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

61.3
58.0
69.2
56.5

50.0
..
51.8
..
73.3
52.0
58.2
..
64.2

Primary 
school 
dropout 

rate

(% of 
primary 
school 
cohort)

2002–2011d

9.1
..
52.5
54.4
..
..
..
43.8
34.3
53.1
31.0
24.5
36.4
76.7
64.6
45.2
30.7

..
16.5
..
..
..
..
..
..

3.8
7.3
18.8
41.7

9.9
..
4.2
14.3
21.4
37.8
40.9
..
18.0

NOTES
a  Average score in reading for organisation for 

Economic Co-operation and Development (oECD) 
countries is 493.

b  Average score in mathematics for oECD countries 

is 495.

c  Average score in science for oECD countries is 501.
d  Data refer to the most recent year available 

during the period specified.

e  Average of two or more surveys during the period.
f  Barro and Lee (2011) estimates for 2010.
g  Refers to 2011.
h  United Nations Educational, Scientific and 

Cultural organization Institute for Statistics (UIS) 
estimate derived from its Global Age-specific 
Literacy Projections Model, which is based on 
national data since 2000.

 

i  UIS estimate derived from its Global Age-specific 

Literacy Projections Model, which is based on 
national data from before 2000.

j  Refers to Dubai only.
k  Refers to Shanghai only.

DEFINITIONS

Adult literacy rate: Percentage of the population 
ages 15 and older who can, with understanding, both 
read and write a short simple statement on their 
everyday life.

Population with at least secondary education: 
Percentage of the population ages 25 and older that 
reached at least secondary education.

Gross enrolment ratio: total enrolment in a given 
level of education (primary, secondary or tertiary), 

regardless of age, expressed as a percentage of the 
official school-age population for the same level of 
education.

School teachers trained to teach: Percentage 
of primary school teachers that have received the 
minimum organized teacher training (pre-service or 
in-service) required for teaching at the primary level.

Performance in reading, mathematics and 
science: Score obtained in testing of skills and 
knowledge of 15-year-old students in these subjects 
essential for participation in society.

Deviation from mean: Spread of scores in reading, 
mathematics and science relative to the average 
scores.

Satisfaction with education quality: Percentage 
of respondents who answered “satisfied” to the 

Gallup World Poll question, “Are you satisfied or 
dissatisfied with the education system?”

Primary school dropout rate: Percentage of 
students from a given cohort that have enrolled in 
primary school but that drop out before reaching 
the last grade of primary education. It is calculated 
as 100 minus the survival rate to the last grade of 
primary education and assumes that observed flow 
rates remain unchanged throughout the cohort life 
and that dropouts do not re-enter school.

MAIN DATA SOURCES

Columns 1, 2–6 and 14: UNESCo Institute for 
Statistics (2012).

Columns 7–12: oECD (2010).

Column 13: Gallup (2012).

tABLE 8  Education    |    173

Human Development RepoRt 2013The Rise of the South Human progress in a Diverse WorldE9

l
b
a
T

Social integration

EMPLOYMENT, VULNERABILITY AND EQUITY

PERCEPTIONS OF INDIVIDUAL 

wELL-BEING

PERCEPTIONS OF SOCIETY

HUMAN SAFETY

Satisfaction 

with 

freedom 
of choice

Satisfaction 

with job

Trust in 
people

Satisfaction 

with 

communitya

Trust in 
national 
government

Perception 
of safety

Homicide 

rate

Suicide rate 
(per 100,000 

people)

(per 

100,000 
people)

Female Male

2004–
2011b

2001–
2010b

2001–
2010b

0.6
1.0
4.2
1.1
0.8
0.9
1.2
1.0
0.7
0.4
1.6
2.6
0.2
0.3
0.9
2.1
1.7
0.6
0.3
1.1
2.2
0.7
0.8
2.8
0.9
2.5
1.2
1.7
1.5
0.5
1.7
1.0
1.3
5.2
1.5
0.9
1.3
11.3
1.1
3.2
6.6
0.8
1.2
3.1
3.4
8.3
1.4

0.6
27.4
4.9
5.9
3.5
0.0
2.2
10.2

6.5
3.6
4.5
5.5
6.0
5.5
4.7
6.8
11.4
13.2
5.4
22.1
10.7
7.0
6.4
1.5
10.3
7.1
7.7
8.5
10.0
9.4
3.4
..
2.8
3.2
3.0
4.4
1.0
..
1.7
1.0
..
7.3
3.4
..
10.6
0.0
4.1
4.2
10.4
..
4.0
8.2
3.0
0.0
7.5

3.5
0.6
8.8
6.3
..
..
1.7
9.5

17.3
12.8
17.7
13.1
17.9
18.1
19.0
18.7
24.8
36.2
17.3
39.9
19.0
16.5
17.5
7.0
28.8
23.8
12.9
24.7
29.0
34.6
11.9
..
10.0
16.1
10.9
23.9
6.0
..
7.4
5.9
..
30.6
22.3
..
40.0
7.3
26.4
18.2
61.3
..
15.6
40.0
12.6
8.9
28.9

4.0
1.9
48.7
26.0
..
..
1.9
53.9

Employment 
to population 

ratio

Youth 

unemployment

Child 
labour

Overall loss 
in Human 

Development 
Index due to 
inequality

(% ages 25 
and older)

(% ages  
15–24)

(% ages 
5–14)

(%)

Overall life 
satisfaction

(0, least 
satisfied, 
10, most 
satisfied)

(% satisfied)

(% answering “yes”)

(% 

answering 

“yes”)

HDI rank
VERY HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT

2011

2005–2011b

2001–
2010b

2012

2007–2011b 2007–2011b 2007–2011b

2011

2007–2011b 2007–2011b 2007–2011b

1 Norway
2 Australia
3 United States
4 Netherlands
5 Germany
6 New Zealand
7 Ireland
7 Sweden
9 Switzerland
10 Japan
11 Canada
12 Korea, Republic of
13 Hong Kong, China (SAR)
13 Iceland
15 Denmark
16 Israel
17 Belgium
18 Austria
18 Singapore
20 France
21 Finland
21 Slovenia
23 Spain
24 Liechtenstein
25 Italy
26 Luxembourg
26 United Kingdom
28 Czech Republic
29 Greece
30 Brunei Darussalam
31 Cyprus
32 Malta
33 Andorra
33 Estonia
35 Slovakia
36 Qatar
37 Hungary
38 Barbados
39 Poland
40 Chile
41 Lithuania
41 United Arab Emirates
43 Portugal
44 Latvia
45 Argentina
46 Seychelles
47 Croatia
HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
48 Bahrain
49 Bahamas
50 Belarus
51 Uruguay
52 Montenegro
52 Palau
54 Kuwait
55 Russian Federation

65.9
62.4
61.2
61.5
57.2
66.2
55.8
62.5
65.5
59.7
62.7
64.8
61.2
71.9
59.8
60.9
54.0
58.6
69.2
54.4
57.8
57.2
49.5
..
47.5
59.9
58.8
59.7
49.1
69.3
66.2
48.3
..
58.4
57.5
89.9
49.6
66.9
55.1
62.9
55.6
83.4
58.0
55.1
62.6
..
49.1

72.2
71.9
54.4
65.9
..
..
75.5
62.8

9.3
11.9
18.7
7.8
9.1
18.2
35.3
23.8
7.9
8.9
15.9
12.1
11.0
18.4
15.7
11.8
18.7
8.8
6.7
23.2
19.3
16.8
48.2
..
32.0
20.8
22.0
18.1
51.5
..
23.1
14.0
..
23.8
33.6
8.9
27.2
..
28.9
21.1
34.6
21.8
31.7
29.6
22.2
..
36.8

..
21.7
..
21.7
40.0
..
11.8
15.7

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
3.0
..
..
3.0
..
7.0
..
..

5.0
..
5.0
8.0
10.0
..
..
..

6.4
7.9
12.4
6.9
6.9
..
7.2
6.2
7.0
..
8.7
16.5
..
6.4
6.2
12.3
8.0
6.6
..
9.0
6.0
5.8
10.1
..
11.9
7.2
8.3
5.4
11.5
..
11.5
8.2
..
9.0
6.3
..
7.4
..
9.9
19.0
11.0
..
10.8
10.9
19.5
..
15.1

..
..
8.3
16.4
7.4
..
..
..

7.6
7.4
7.1
7.6
6.7
7.2
7.0
7.5
7.5
6.1
7.4
6.9
5.5
6.9
7.8
7.4
6.9
7.5
6.5
7.0
7.4
6.0
6.5
..
6.1
7.1
6.9
6.3
5.4
..
6.7
6.2
..
5.5
5.9
6.6
4.9
..
5.6
6.6
5.4
7.2
5.2
5.0
6.4
..
5.6

4.5
..
5.2
6.1
5.5
..
6.6
5.4

93.0
94.0
85.0
91.0
89.0
93.0
95.0
93.0
88.0
78.0
94.0
66.0
89.0
86.0
93.0
52.0
86.0
92.0
82.0
90.0
93.0
90.0
80.0
..
55.0
95.0
90.0
73.0
52.0
..
73.0
86.0
..
69.0
68.0
90.0
61.0
..
80.0
77.0
52.0
87.0
79.0
54.0
79.0
..
46.0

73.0
..
57.0
78.0
50.0
..
75.0
54.0

..
87.4
87.4
94.5
89.0
89.0
89.1
91.8
..
76.2
91.5
71.1
84.4
..
94.0
84.0
90.3
94.1
86.5
87.4
87.7
85.0
85.7
..
81.0
93.5
88.3
79.9
70.3
..
87.1
86.0
..
81.1
78.6
86.0
80.5
..
77.0
78.2
78.2
88.7
88.7
80.6
80.7
..
..

79.3
..
65.7
78.0
..
..
84.9
67.9

..
..
37.0
46.0
31.0
..
30.0
55.0
44.0
33.0
42.0
26.0
29.0
..
60.0
26.0
30.0
29.0
33.0
20.0
58.0
15.0
22.0
..
20.0
26.0
35.0
24.0
16.0
..
11.0
16.0
..
33.0
21.0
23.0
13.0
..
25.0
15.0
25.0
18.0
27.0
13.0
23.0
..
16.0

11.0
..
34.0
27.0
21.0
..
11.0
24.0

92.8
91.9
83.8
94.5
93.9
88.1
93.6
92.5
93.5
84.6
91.7
78.5
84.1
81.8
93.4
82.3
91.2
94.4
92.9
89.4
91.2
90.6
87.8
..
75.7
94.7
86.6
88.1
74.2
..
88.7
84.1
..
86.3
86.6
90.4
74.2
..
88.2
78.4
84.2
93.8
90.1
84.8
89.0
..
66.0

88.2
..
76.6
83.8
68.3
..
81.5
69.4

54.0
53.0
38.0
60.0
43.0
64.0
53.0
64.0
58.0
23.0
55.0
28.0
58.0
24.0
47.0
45.0
29.0
41.0
83.0
38.0
57.0
18.0
31.0
..
26.0
77.0
49.0
21.0
18.0
..
40.0
49.0
..
42.0
28.0
89.0
36.0
..
27.0
48.0
18.0
..
21.0
11.0
61.0
..
..

..
..
59.0
73.0
..
..
..
48.0

81.0
64.0
75.0
79.0
78.0
67.0
70.0
78.0
76.0
69.0
79.0
54.0
88.0
77.0
79.0
59.0
64.0
82.0
89.0
63.0
78.0
84.0
68.0
..
52.0
77.0
70.0
59.0
53.0
..
70.0
64.0
..
56.0
59.0
87.0
57.0
..
59.0
46.0
39.0
90.0
63.0
48.0
50.0
..
64.0

60.0
..
60.0
48.0
78.0
..
..
40.0

174    |    HUMAN DEvELoPMENt REPoRt 2013

EMPLOYMENT, VULNERABILITY AND EQUITY

PERCEPTIONS OF INDIVIDUAL 

wELL-BEING

PERCEPTIONS OF SOCIETY

HUMAN SAFETY

Employment 
to population 

ratio

Youth 

unemployment

Child 
labour

Overall loss 
in Human 

Development 
Index due to 
inequality

(% ages 25 
and older)

(% ages  
15–24)

(% ages 
5–14)

HDI rank
56 Romania
57 Bulgaria
57 Saudi Arabia
59 Cuba
59 Panama
61 Mexico
62 Costa Rica
63 Grenada
64 Libya
64 Malaysia
64 Serbia
67 Antigua and Barbuda
67 trinidad and tobago
69 Kazakhstan
70 Albania
71 venezuela, Bolivarian Republic of
72 Dominica
72 Georgia
72 Lebanon
72 Saint Kitts and Nevis
76 Iran, Islamic Republic of
77 Peru
78 the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
78 Ukraine
80 Mauritius
81 Bosnia and Herzegovina
82 Azerbaijan
83 Saint vincent and the Grenadines
84 oman
85 Brazil
85 Jamaica
87 Armenia
88 Saint Lucia
89 Ecuador
90 turkey
91 Colombia
92 Sri Lanka
93 Algeria
94 tunisia
MEDIUM HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
95 tonga
96 Belize
96 Dominican Republic
96 Fiji
96 Samoa
100 Jordan
101 China
102 turkmenistan
103 thailand
104 Maldives
105 Suriname
106 Gabon
107 El Salvador
108 Bolivia, Plurinational State of
108 Mongolia
110 Palestine, State of
111 Paraguay

2011
57.3
52.0
59.7
58.7
68.3
63.9
65.6
..
53.6
66.6
..
..
66.6
75.0
56.5
68.1
..
62.8
47.6
..
46.1
77.4
43.4
58.3
60.8
37.2
70.8
..
65.7
68.2
65.9
47.3
..
71.5
48.8
68.3
58.2
43.9
46.3

..
66.3
62.4
62.7
..
44.9
74.6
62.6
76.9
64.7
56.4
68.2
64.5
77.4
67.9
41.2
73.4

2005–2011b

23.8
27.6
45.8
3.5
14.6
10.4
21.6
..
..
11.3
46.1
..
12.9
5.0
28.3
22.0
..
35.6
22.3
..
33.9
16.2
55.7
18.7
28.0
60.0
15.2
..
..
23.1
37.9
54.7
..
18.1
20.7
29.9
24.7
37.5
31.4

..
28.8
44.5
..
..
46.8
..
..
3.0
30.5
..
..
13.0
..
..
49.6
17.8

2001–
2010b
1.0
..
..
..
7.0
5.0
5.0
..
..
..
4.0
..
1.0
2.0
12.0
8.0
..
18.0
7.0
..
..
34.0
6.0
7.0
..
5.0
7.0
..
..
3.0
6.0
4.0
..
8.0
3.0
9.0
..
5.0
..

..
40.0
10.0
..
..
..
..
..
8.0
..
6.0
..
5.0
26.0
18.0
..
15.0

(%)

2012
12.6
9.9
..
..
24.6
23.4
21.5
..
..
..
9.5
..
15.3
13.6
13.9
26.6
..
15.3
22.8
..
..
24.3
14.7
9.2
13.3
11.5
11.4
..
..
27.2
19.1
10.9
..
25.8
22.5
27.8
15.1
..
..

..
..
27.3
..
..
19.0
22.4
..
21.3
25.2
23.0
19.5
26.6
34.2
15.9
..
..

Satisfaction 

with 

freedom 
of choice

Satisfaction 

with job

Trust in 
people

Satisfaction 

with 

communitya

Trust in 
national 
government

Perception 
of safety

Homicide 

rate

Suicide rate 
(per 100,000 

people)

Overall life 
satisfaction

(0, least 
satisfied, 
10, most 
satisfied)

(% satisfied)

(% answering “yes”)

(% 

answering 

“yes”)

2007–2011b 2007–2011b 2007–2011b

5.0
3.9
6.7
..
7.3
6.8
7.3
..
4.9
5.8
4.5
..
6.7
5.5
5.3
7.5
..
4.2
5.2
..
4.8
5.6
4.2
5.1
5.5
4.7
4.7
..
6.9
6.8
..
4.4
..
5.8
5.3
6.4
4.2
5.2
4.7

..
6.5
4.7
..
..
5.7
5.0
5.8
6.7
..
..
..
6.7
5.8
5.0
4.8
5.8

60.0
60.0
57.0
..
80.0
80.0
92.0
..
41.0
79.0
41.0
..
81.0
76.0
46.0
75.0
..
58.0
65.0
..
57.0
72.0
56.0
53.0
83.0
33.0
49.0
..
91.0
80.0
..
41.0
..
78.0
44.0
81.0
81.0
53.0
58.0

..
62.0
82.0
..
..
72.0
77.0
..
92.0
..
..
77.0
74.0
67.0
64.0
51.0
71.0

69.5
73.3
81.8
..
88.5
74.4
87.4
..
64.3
85.6
..
..
89.9
77.9
..
85.1
..
55.0
70.8
..
65.0
74.1
..
61.4
84.6
..
57.8
..
85.3
81.3
68.3
45.4
..
79.8
71.2
81.5
84.7
58.7
59.4

..
..
76.3
..
..
74.9
69.9
93.6
96.3
..
..
53.7
77.3
83.9
82.1
70.8
85.6

2011
15.0
20.0
36.0
..
21.0
29.0
14.0
..
..
14.0
17.0
..
..
33.0
7.0
13.0
..
16.0
7.0
..
..
12.0
11.0
29.0
..
18.0
27.0
..
..
15.0
..
15.0
..
9.0
8.0
14.0
17.0
16.0
15.0

..
..
15.0
..
..
9.0
57.0
27.0
27.0
..
..
..
18.0
10.0
14.0
9.0
12.0

2007–2011b 2007–2011b 2007–2011b

78.1
74.0
85.9
..
86.6
73.7
82.5
..
68.7
87.3
60.0
..
87.3
79.7
67.7
79.0
..
78.3
74.1
..
76.3
75.3
66.7
71.4
90.5
61.7
73.4
..
89.9
78.5
72.2
52.7
..
86.0
78.9
82.9
89.7
73.9
66.0

..
67.1
79.2
..
..
75.6
77.1
97.5
95.2
..
..
54.8
81.9
84.8
80.6
71.5
85.5

12.0
27.0
..
..
46.0
38.0
32.0
..
..
79.0
..
..
29.0
72.0
..
59.0
..
66.0
37.0
..
56.0
19.0
..
24.0
67.0
..
74.0
..
..
51.0
..
34.0
..
59.0
60.0
55.0
86.0
53.0
47.0

..
26.0
45.0
..
..
77.0
..
..
54.0
..
..
53.0
49.0
38.0
29.0
49.0
48.0

55.0
52.0
77.0
..
47.0
42.0
41.0
..
91.0
46.0
68.0
..
42.0
56.0
67.0
31.0
..
91.0
69.0
..
55.0
46.0
63.0
48.0
55.0
67.0
74.0
..
..
40.0
..
75.0
..
49.0
51.0
43.0
77.0
49.0
47.0

..
43.0
38.0
..
..
81.0
80.0
83.0
74.0
..
..
39.0
42.0
44.0
47.0
59.0
38.0

(per 

100,000 
people)

Female Male

2004–
2011b
2.0
2.0
1.0
5.0
21.6
22.7
11.3
11.5
2.9
2.3
1.2
6.8
35.2
8.8
4.0
45.1
22.1
4.3
2.2
38.2
3.0
10.3
1.9
5.2
2.5
1.5
2.2
22.9
0.7
21.0
52.2
1.4
25.2
18.2
3.3
33.4
3.6
1.5
1.1

1.0
41.4
25.0
2.8
1.1
1.8
1.1
4.2
4.8
1.6
4.6
13.8
69.2
8.9
8.7
4.1
11.5

2001–
2010b
3.5
6.2
..
5.5
1.9
1.5
1.9
0.0
..
..
10.0
..
3.8
9.4
3.3
1.2
..
1.7
..
..
..
1.0
4.0
7.0
1.9
..
0.3
1.9
..
2.0
..
1.1
0.0
3.6
..
2.0
..
..
..

..
0.7
0.7
..
..
0.0
..
..
3.8
0.0
4.8
..
3.6
..
..
..
2.0

2001–
2010b
21.0
18.8
..
19.0
9.0
7.0
10.2
0.0
..
..
28.1
..
17.9
43.0
4.7
5.3
..
7.1
..
..
..
1.9
9.5
37.8
11.8
..
1.0
5.4
..
7.7
..
2.8
4.9
10.5
..
7.9
..
..
..

..
6.6
3.9
..
..
0.2
..
..
12.0
0.7
23.9
..
12.9
..
..
..
5.1

tABLE 9  Social integration    |    175

Human Development RepoRt 2013The Rise of the South Human progress in a Diverse WorldEMPLOYMENT, VULNERABILITY AND EQUITY

PERCEPTIONS OF INDIVIDUAL 

wELL-BEING

PERCEPTIONS OF SOCIETY

HUMAN SAFETY

Employment 
to population 

ratio

Youth 

unemployment

Child 
labour

Overall loss 
in Human 

Development 
Index due to 
inequality

(% ages 25 
and older)

(% ages  
15–24)

(% ages 
5–14)

2011
51.3
43.9
68.8
62.8
45.8
..
61.0
73.8
67.3
70.1
..
49.6
..
70.4
70.3
81.3
57.4
66.3
50.9
41.9
66.7
69.7
62.8
81.3
86.5
61.0
86.7
85.1
80.3
55.9

78.8
73.8
..
75.9
74.0
55.4
75.8
83.4
80.3
90.5
84.2
61.7
76.3
44.7
78.0
86.4
59.7
84.1
50.9
74.6
86.9
76.6
..
81.1
80.6
92.3
72.8

2005–2011b

54.1
15.8
19.3
..
40.2
..
50.0
..
11.2
23.0
..
55.0
..
16.2
..
..
63.8
9.7
18.1
..
..
7.1
..
..
..
11.5
3.5
..
10.9
..

..
..
..
..
13.6
10.5
..
..
..
2.8
10.1
..
20.1
..
..
..
41.9
..
..
..
5.4
23.4
..
..
..
..
..

2001–
2010b
7.0
16.0
..
..
4.0
..
16.0
9.0
16.0
7.0
..
..
..
4.0
10.0
16.0
..
15.0
8.0
11.0
3.0
21.0
4.0
34.0
28.0
12.0
39.0
11.0
18.0
9.0

25.0
..
8.0
26.0
13.0
..
24.0
..
31.0
28.0
21.0
29.0
22.0
16.0
..
34.0
23.0
47.0
23.0
21.0
25.0
41.0
8.0
25.0
46.0
35.0
35.0

(%)

2012
24.1
11.6
19.9
15.8
20.4
..
19.1
..
27.5
18.3
..
..
..
17.1
18.4
14.0
43.5
27.5
29.7
..
..
33.1
33.0
32.2
..
29.3
25.9
24.7
20.0
35.4

31.1
..
31.7
33.6
27.4
30.9
43.9
..
33.4
30.7
27.3
41.4
33.0
34.4
..
34.2
35.9
33.5
32.3
40.2
33.6
36.7
36.0
..
35.8
33.9
38.6

HDI rank
112 Egypt
113 Moldova, Republic of
114 Philippines
114 Uzbekistan
116 Syrian Arab Republic
117 Micronesia, Federated States of
118 Guyana
119 Botswana
120 Honduras
121 Indonesia
121 Kiribati
121 South Africa
124 vanuatu
125 Kyrgyzstan
125 tajikistan
127 viet Nam
128 Namibia
129 Nicaragua
130 Morocco
131 Iraq
132 Cape verde
133 Guatemala
134 timor-Leste
135 Ghana
136 Equatorial Guinea
136 India
138 Cambodia
138 Lao People’s Democratic Republic
140 Bhutan
141 Swaziland
LOw HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
142 Congo
143 Solomon Islands
144 Sao tome and Principe
145 Kenya
146 Bangladesh
146 Pakistan
148 Angola
149 Myanmar
150 Cameroon
151 Madagascar
152 tanzania, United Republic of
153 Nigeria
154 Senegal
155 Mauritania
156 Papua New Guinea
157 Nepal
158 Lesotho
159 togo
160 Yemen
161 Haiti
161 Uganda
163 Zambia
164 Djibouti
165 Gambia
166 Benin
167 Rwanda
168 Côte d’Ivoire

176    |    HUMAN DEvELoPMENt REPoRt 2013

Satisfaction 

with 

freedom 
of choice

Satisfaction 

with job

Trust in 
people

Satisfaction 

with 

communitya

Trust in 
national 
government

Perception 
of safety

Homicide 

rate

Suicide rate 
(per 100,000 

people)

Overall life 
satisfaction

(0, least 
satisfied, 
10, most 
satisfied)

(% satisfied)

(% answering “yes”)

(% 

answering 

“yes”)

2007–2011b 2007–2011b 2007–2011b

4.1
5.8
5.0
5.1
4.1
..
6.0
3.6
5.9
5.2
..
4.7
..
4.9
4.3
5.8
4.9
5.7
5.1
5.0
..
6.3
..
5.6
..
4.6
4.2
5.0
..
..

4.5
..
..
4.4
5.0
5.3
4.2
..
4.4
4.4
4.1
4.8
3.8
5.0
..
3.8
..
2.8
3.7
3.8
4.2
5.0
4.4
..
3.7
4.0
4.2

57.0
58.0
88.0
90.0
47.0
..
66.0
82.0
77.0
86.0
..
84.0
..
71.0
70.0
61.0
76.0
75.0
54.0
30.0
..
74.0
..
85.0
..
80.0
92.0
87.0
..
..

76.0
..
..
71.0
78.0
34.0
69.0
..
82.0
54.0
74.0
77.0
64.0
56.0
..
43.0
..
56.0
59.0
37.0
73.0
65.0
74.0
..
76.0
82.0
76.0

64.7
66.1
81.1
87.3
55.5
..
..
45.9
79.4
74.1
..
56.5
..
75.2
82.7
71.8
..
79.8
65.4
64.2
..
79.8
..
63.8
..
71.2
77.6
87.9
..
55.1

56.4
..
..
50.0
76.4
73.2
65.2
..
62.2
38.0
63.0
58.6
42.2
55.3
..
87.3
46.9
42.4
54.3
43.4
50.1
47.3
70.0
..
46.7
58.6
..

2011
22.0
12.0
14.0
26.0
9.0
..
..
9.0
13.0
21.0
..
17.0
..
34.0
31.0
26.0
..
11.0
58.0
15.0
..
15.0
..
19.0
..
20.0
9.0
..
..
..

..
..
..
10.0
15.0
20.0
..
..
13.0
..
26.0
13.0
28.0
30.0
..
17.0
..
..
27.0
30.0
17.0
31.0
55.0
..
..
30.0
13.0

2007–2011b 2007–2011b 2007–2011b

61.0
70.6
85.6
93.8
44.8
..
74.8
56.5
82.8
92.3
..
62.0
..
84.8
89.9
70.1
76.5
86.0
69.4
66.7
..
85.7
..
68.9
..
82.6
90.2
94.3
..
62.3

67.1
..
..
69.3
91.3
83.6
49.8
80.4
69.4
72.0
67.4
67.4
52.1
62.2
..
86.7
52.4
57.7
51.9
57.9
69.7
62.6
75.3
..
66.8
74.3
40.6

63.0
24.0
72.0
..
..
..
46.0
74.0
29.0
74.0
..
63.0
..
44.0
89.0
77.0
82.0
54.0
60.0
37.0
..
36.0
..
68.0
..
58.0
90.0
98.0
..
..

48.0
..
..
46.0
79.0
28.0
61.0
..
65.0
65.0
56.0
55.0
30.0
43.0
..
33.0
..
51.0
39.0
46.0
52.0
40.0
68.0
..
78.0
95.0
42.0

58.0
50.0
62.0
80.0
65.0
..
47.0
31.0
45.0
88.0
..
38.0
..
62.0
85.0
67.0
33.0
51.0
67.0
41.0
..
41.0
..
78.0
..
70.0
68.0
84.0
..
..

58.0
..
..
50.0
80.0
46.0
53.0
..
56.0
53.0
61.0
69.0
55.0
62.0
..
61.0
..
52.0
67.0
42.0
42.0
54.0
72.0
..
58.0
92.0
47.0

(per 

100,000 
people)

Female Male

2004–
2011b
1.2
7.5
5.4
3.1
2.3
0.9
18.6
14.5
91.6
8.1
7.3
31.8
0.9
20.1
2.1
1.6
17.2
13.6
1.4
2.0
11.6
38.5
6.9
15.7
20.7
3.4
3.4
4.6
1.0
12.9

30.8
3.7
1.9
20.1
2.7
7.8
19.0
10.2
19.7
8.1
24.5
12.2
8.7
14.7
13.0
2.8
35.2
10.9
4.2
6.9
36.3
38.0
3.4
10.8
15.1
17.1
56.9

2001–
2010b
0.0
5.6
..
2.3
..
..
13.4
..
..
..
..
0.4
..
3.6
2.3
..
..
2.6
..
..
..
1.7
..
..
..
7.8
..
..
..
..

2001–
2010b
0.1
30.1
..
7.0
..
..
39.0
..
..
..
..
1.4
..
14.1
2.9
..
..
9.0
..
..
..
5.6
..
..
..
13.0
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
0.0
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
0.0
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

table 9 Social integrationEMPLOYMENT, VULNERABILITY AND EQUITY

PERCEPTIONS OF INDIVIDUAL 

wELL-BEING

PERCEPTIONS OF SOCIETY

HUMAN SAFETY

Employment 
to population 

ratio

Youth 

unemployment

Child 
labour

Overall loss 
in Human 

Development 
Index due to 
inequality

(% ages 25 
and older)

(% ages  
15–24)

(% ages 
5–14)

2011
62.7
92.0
59.4
89.0
89.0
84.0
72.1
53.8
78.1
77.4
88.5
79.1
82.8
84.1
56.0
86.0
77.0
90.1
82.8
66.2

78.7
..
..
..
..
59.9
..
..

58.8
61.2
68.4
72.2

52.6
74.5
58.4
67.2
61.2
74.5
77.4
65.9
65.8

2005–2011b

..
..
..
..
29.4
6.6
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
4.6
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

19.5
22.4
..
..

..
..
20.9
19.6
12.9
..
..
..
..

2001–
2010b
27.0
26.0
..
..
53.0
21.0
13.0
57.0
48.0
19.0
25.0
47.0
..
36.0
38.0
48.0
22.0
42.0
43.0

..
..
..
..
..
49.0
..
..

..
..
..
29.7

..
..
..
8.5
..
33.5
30.2
..
..

(%)

2012
..
31.4
..
28.5
31.9
35.3
..
41.4
41.6
..
38.8
40.5
..
..
34.2
40.1
32.7
39.9
34.2

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

10.8
20.6
24.2
33.5

25.4
21.3
12.9
25.7
29.1
35.0
32.5
29.2
23.3

HDI rank
169 Comoros
170 Malawi
171 Sudan
172 Zimbabwe
173 Ethiopia
174 Liberia
175 Afghanistan
176 Guinea-Bissau
177 Sierra Leone
178 Burundi
178 Guinea
180 Central African Republic
181 Eritrea
182 Mali
183 Burkina Faso
184 Chad
185 Mozambique
186 Congo, Democratic Republic of the
186 Niger
OTHER COUNTRIES OR TERRITORIES

Korea, Democratic People’s Rep. of
Marshall Islands
Monaco
Nauru
San Marino
Somalia
South Sudan
tuvalu

Human Development Index groups

very high human development
High human development
Medium human development
Low human development

Regions

Arab States
East Asia and the Pacific
Europe and Central Asia
Latin America and the Caribbean
South Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa

Least developed countries
Small island developing states
world

Satisfaction 

with 

freedom 
of choice

Satisfaction 

with job

Trust in 
people

Satisfaction 

with 

communitya

Trust in 
national 
government

Perception 
of safety

Homicide 

rate

Suicide rate 
(per 100,000 

people)

Overall life 
satisfaction

(0, least 
satisfied, 
10, most 
satisfied)

(% satisfied)

(% answering “yes”)

(% 

answering 

“yes”)

2007–2011b 2007–2011b 2007–2011b

3.9
5.1
4.4
4.8
4.4
4.2
3.8
..
4.1
3.8
4.0
3.6
..
3.8
4.0
3.7
5.0
4.0
4.1

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

6.7
5.9
4.9
4.5

4.8
..
5.3
6.5
4.7
4.4
4.3
..
5.3

50.0
88.0
56.0
63.0
39.0
82.0
47.0
..
77.0
49.0
79.0
68.0
..
75.0
58.0
54.0
64.0
62.0
82.0

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

81.5
66.3
77.8
61.8

54.6
..
58.5
77.9
72.9
69.1
64.2
..
73.9

49.8
50.9
48.8
58.6
..
63.0
82.0
..
61.3
64.7
58.9
66.5
..
54.9
60.1
72.0
63.1
45.6
69.7

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

84.3
73.4
71.4
63.4

63.9
..
71.0
..
72.1
56.2
63.2
..
73.1

2011
35.0
33.0
31.0
15.0
..
12.0
25.0
..
16.0
38.0
..
37.0
..
45.0
26.0
21.0
..
39.0
40.0

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

30.9
19.3
..
..

24.9
..
21.5
..
19.5
..
..
..
29.8

2007–2011b 2007–2011b 2007–2011b

77.2
80.8
72.7
68.4
52.1
63.4
71.7
..
52.3
76.0
75.3
75.8
..
63.9
78.2
70.1
83.1
60.2
85.2

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

85.9
76.4
79.9
72.2

67.6
..
76.5
79.0
83.2
65.2
72.3
..
79.0

44.0
83.0
54.0
43.0
32.0
54.0
31.0
..
58.0
85.0
77.0
75.0
..
71.0
55.0
39.0
63.0
35.0
78.0

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

38.1
..
..
50.8

..
..
43.9
47.1
56.1
53.6
56.4
..
52.0

78.0
55.0
75.0
39.0
49.0
38.0
29.0
..
50.0
65.0
62.0
62.0
..
80.0
62.0
30.0
42.0
38.0
81.0

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

68.4
47.6
73.4
57.7

62.9
..
53.5
42.0
66.9
55.3
59.5
..
66.0

(per 

100,000 
people)

Female Male

2004–
2011b
12.2
36.0
24.2
14.3
25.5
10.1
2.4
20.2
14.9
21.7
22.5
29.3
17.8
8.0
18.0
15.8
8.8
21.7
3.8

15.2
..
0.0
9.8
..
1.5
..
..

2.1
13.0
3.9
14.6

4.5
2.8
5.5
22.2
3.7
20.4
14.6
14.6
6.9

2001–
2010b
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

6.6
..
..
..

..
..
6.9
2.1
..
..
..
..
..

2001–
2010b
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

20.6
..
..
..

..
..
35.4
8.1
..
..
..
..
..

NOTES
a  Based on the Gallup survey question on overall 

satisfaction with city.

b  Data refer to the most recent year available during the 

period specified.

DEFINITIONS
Employment to population ratio: Percentage of the 
population ages 25 years or older that is employed.
Youth unemployment: Percentage of the labour force 
population ages 15–24 that is not in paid employment 
or self-employed but is available for work and has taken 
steps to seek paid employment or self-employment.
Child labour: Percentage of children ages 5–11 who, 
during the reference week, did at least one hour of 
economic activity or at least 28 hours of household 
chores, or children ages 12–14 who, during the reference 
week, did at least 14 hours of economic activity or at 
least 28 hours of household chores.

 

Overall loss in Human Development Index (HDI) 
due to inequality: Loss in potential human development 
due to inequality, calculated as the percentage difference 
between the HDI and Inequality-adjusted HDI. See 
Technical note 2 for details on how the Inequality-
adjusted HDI is calculated.
Overall life satisfaction: Average response to the 
Gallup World Poll Question: Please imagine a ladder, with 
steps numbered from zero at the bottom to ten at the top. 
Suppose we say that the top of the ladder represents the 
best possible life for you, and the bottom of the ladder 
represents the worst possible life for you. on which 
step of the ladder would you say you personally feel you 
stand at this time, assuming that the higher the step the 
better you feel about your life, and the lower the step the 
worse you feel about it? Which step comes closest to the 
way you feel?
Satisfaction with freedom of choice: Percentage of 
respondents answering “yes” to the Gallup World Poll 
question, “In this country, are you satisfied or dissatisfied 
with your freedom to choose what you do with your life?”

Satisfaction with job: Percentage of respondents 
answering “satisfied” to the Gallup World Poll question, 
“Are you satisfied or dissatisfied with your job?”
Trust in people: Percentage of respondents answering 
“yes” to the Gallup World Poll question, “Generally 
speaking, would you say that most people can be trusted 
or that you have to be careful in dealing with people?”
Satisfaction with community: Percentage of 
respondents answering “yes” to the Gallup World 
Poll question, “Right now, do you think that economic 
conditions in the city or area where you live, as a whole, 
are getting better or getting worse?”
Trust in national government: Percentage of 
respondents answering “yes” to the Gallup World Poll 
question, “In this country, do you have confidence in the 
national government?”
Perception of safety: Percentage of respondents 
answering “yes” to the Gallup World Poll question, “Do 
you feel safe walking alone at night in the city or area 
where you live?”

Homicide rate: Number of intentional homicides—that 
is, unlawful deaths purposefully inflicted on a person by 
another person—expressed per 100,000 people.
Suicide rate: Estimated total number of deaths from 
purposely self-inflicted injuries, in the total population or 
of a given sex or age, divided by the total number of the 
reference population, expressed per 100,000 people.

MAIN DATA SOURCES
Columns 1 and 2: ILo (2012).
Column 3: UNICEF (2012).
Column 4: Calculated based on HDI and Inequality-
adjusted HDI values from tables 1 and 3.
Columns 5–11: Gallup (2012).
Column 12: UNoDC (2012).
Columns 13 and 14: WHo (2012c).

tABLE 9  Social integration    |    177

Human Development RepoRt 2013The Rise of the South Human progress in a Diverse WorldE10

l
b
a
T

International trade flows of 
goods and services

TRADE OF GOODSa

TRADE OF SERVICES

COMPOSITION OF MERCHANDISE GOODS

Exports of 

merchandise 

goods

Imports of 

merchandise 

goods

Exports of 
services

Imports of 
services

Share of merchandise exports 

(%)

Share of merchandise imports 

(%)

Parts and componentsb

($ 

billions)

(% of 
GDP)c

($ 

billions)

(% of 
GDP)c

($ 

billions)

(% of 
GDP)c

($ 

billions)

(% of 
GDP)c

Agricultural 

exports

Manufactured 

exports

Agricultural 

imports

Manufactured 

imports

manufactured 

manufactured 

(% of 

exports)

(% of 

imports)

HDI rank
VERY HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT

2010

2010

2010

2010

2010

2010

2010

2010

2010

2010

2010

2010

2010

2010

1 Norway
2 Australia
3 United States
4 Netherlands
5 Germany
6 New Zealand
7 Ireland
7 Sweden
9 Switzerland
10 Japan
11 Canada
12 Korea, Republic of
13 Hong Kong, China (SAR)
13 Iceland
15 Denmark
16 Israel
17 Belgium
18 Austria
18 Singapore
20 France
21 Finland
21 Slovenia
23 Spain
24 Liechtenstein
25 Italy
26 Luxembourg
26 United Kingdom
28 Czech Republic
29 Greece
30 Brunei Darussalam
31 Cyprus
32 Malta
33 Andorra
33 Estonia
35 Slovakia
36 Qatar
37 Hungary
38 Barbados
39 Poland
40 Chile
41 Lithuania
41 United Arab Emirates
43 Portugal
44 Latvia
45 Argentina
46 Seychelles
47 Croatia
HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
48 Bahrain
49 Bahamas
50 Belarus
51 Uruguay
52 Montenegro
52 Palau
54 Kuwait
55 Russian Federation
56 Romania
57 Bulgaria
57 Saudi Arabia

33.0
130.7
20.1
206.7
7.9
1,121.8
62.9
492.6
38.8
1,271.1
22.9
29.7
55.3
118.3
36.5
158.4
38.3
195.6
14.6
769.8
24.8
362.1
50.6
466.4
6.8
14.8
37.3
4.6
31.0
96.5
28.4
58.4
87.5
411.1
38.2
144.9
351.9 180.9
19.8
511.7
29.5
70.1
50.9
24.4
246.3
17.3
..
..
21.5
446.8
26.4
13.8
18.4
405.9
132.1
67.1
7.0
21.7
..
..
3.2
0.8
45.7
3.7
..
..
67.3
12.8
73.4
64.0
43.0
48.3
74.0
94.7
0.2
6.1
34.9
157.1
36.5
70.9
56.9
20.8
..
..
21.2
48.7
35.5
8.9
20.2
68.2
..
..
19.0
11.8

73.3
15.5
3.9
0.3
25.2
48.3
5.4 d 15.4
..
..
43.8
29.5
30.6
42.8
59.4

..
..
50.3
400.1
49.4
20.6
245.9

19.5
77.3
18.3
187.9
13.9
1,966.5
56.2
440.0
32.5
1,066.8
23.3
30.2
28.3
60.5
34.3
148.8
34.5
176.3
13.2
692.6
26.6
388.3
425.2
46.1
441.4 203.9
31.9
3.9
27.1
84.5
28.7
59.2
82.9
389.5
39.7
150.6
310.8 159.8
22.9
592.1
28.9
68.8
55.2
26.5
315.5
22.2
..
..
23.5
487.0
38.8
20.3
25.3
559.3
125.7
63.8
20.6
63.9
..
..
37.0
8.6
70.5
5.7
..
..
69.4
13.2
73.5
64.0
..
..
68.3
87.4
1.2
31.1
38.7
174.1
30.5
59.4
63.9
23.4
..
..
75.6
32.8
44.7
11.1
16.8
56.8
..
..
20.1
32.3

75.7
16.0
37.0
2.9
34.9
66.7
6.9 d 19.8
..
..
..
18.4
38.4
52.7
25.8

..
..
..
248.7
62.0
25.4
106.9

39.7
48.5
544.4
95.4
237.6
8.7
97.1
64.4
83.6
141.5
69.2
..
..
2.5
59.9
24.7
83.3
54.5
112.3
143.7
24.6
5.8
124.1
..
98.3
67.5
237.9
21.7
37.5
1.1 d
11.5
4.0
..
4.5
..
2.3
19.1
1.5
32.5
10.8
4.1
11.7
23.3
3.7
13.2
0.4
11.0

4.0
..
4.5
2.5
1.0
..
7.7
44.3
8.6
7.0
10.7

10.0
4.7
3.9
12.2
7.2
6.7
45.4
14.8
16.4
2.7
4.7
..
..
20.0
19.2
12.0
17.7
14.4
57.7
5.6
10.3
12.0
8.7
..
4.7
128.6
10.8
11.0
12.1
7.9
49.5
49.0
..
23.7
..
2.0
14.9
38.1
7.2
5.6
11.3
4.1
10.1
14.7
3.9
47.7
17.7

19.2
..
8.6
7.1
24.0
..
6.7
3.3
5.3
14.5
2.6

10.8
42.8
5.0
51.5
2.8
402.0
10.9
85.2
8.0
263.2
7.1
9.1
50.7
108.4
11.2
48.5
7.8
39.6
3.0
157.6
6.3
91.3
..
..
..
..
17.7
2.2
16.3
50.7
8.8
18.1
16.7
78.5
9.7
36.9
49.6
96.5
5.0
129.8
9.1
21.7
9.1
4.4
6.1
87.1
..
..
5.3
110.1
71.2
37.3
7.6
168.8
9.2
18.2
20.2
6.5
1.4 d 12.4
17.9
4.2
31.6
2.6
..
..
14.6
2.8
..
..
5.5
6.2
12.4
15.9
0.8
19.6
6.4
29.0
6.1
11.8
7.7
2.8
14.7
41.7
14.4
6.2
8.8
2.2
4.2
14.1
36.8
0.3
3.5
5.6

1.9
..
2.9
1.4
0.4
..
13.6
73.5
9.4
4.5
76.8

9.0
..
5.5
4.1
9.7
..
11.8
5.4
5.8
9.3
18.5

7.8
13.1
12.3
16.2
6.0
65.6
9.7
8.8
4.1
1.3
14.2
2.0
5.7
41.9
21.3
4.0
10.3
8.7
2.2
12.9
8.5
6.0
16.2
..
8.6
11.3
7.0
5.3
27.5
..
36.1
5.3
..
15.2
5.6
0.1
8.1
33.5
12.0
22.2
19.7
..
13.9
30.0
50.8
..
15.0

1.9
25.6
14.7
73.5
..
..
0.4
4.1
10.1
17.5
1.2

18.6
12.8
65.2
56.5
81.8
20.3
84.2
74.5
87.6
88.3
46.7
88.3
46.3
14.6
60.4
65.4
70.7
79.5
72.1
78.2
76.5
84.8
71.9
..
81.7
79.3
68.2
86.4
49.1
..
50.2
67.6
..
62.2
86.3
6.8
81.7
63.9
79.1
12.0
54.0
..
73.1
57.6
32.2
..
68.0

5.6
63.4
52.9
23.7
..
..
6.2
14.1
78.5
49.3
11.0

9.4
5.9
5.9
11.4
8.6
11.2
13.0
10.2
6.8
11.2
8.2
6.3
4.7
12.2
16.0
8.5
9.8
9.5
3.5
9.9
9.6
11.2
11.8
..
11.3
12.3
10.9
6.7
13.4
..
15.6
11.3
..
13.6
7.7
..
5.8
26.7
9.4
7.7
14.2
..
15.1
16.3
3.7
..
11.5

8.1
19.3
9.4
12.2
..
..
..
14.0
9.1
10.6
16.5

75.1
72.4
68.8
56.5
67.4
70.0
66.4
69.2
79.6
50.0
74.7
56.4
84.7
58.8
72.7
57.4
66.9
72.5
64.7
73.1
60.5
69.1
65.3
..
63.0
63.3
67.1
76.9
59.2
..
61.6
62.6
..
63.8
75.5
..
71.8
70.0
74.2
68.7
49.9
..
66.7
59.1
84.4
..
67.2

38.8
52.9
47.5
62.5
..
..
..
68.6
75.3
54.9
76.1

37.0
24.2
30.3
26.0
28.1
16.0
13.5
28.6
15.9
36.0
22.7
36.8
18.1
8.9
22.1
28.7
13.5
30.2
64.5
26.5
23.1
25.6
21.3
..
24.2
19.0
26.0
40.6
14.7
..
34.2
60.4
..
24.9
26.6
0.9
50.1
15.7
30.6
9.7
13.4
..
24.8
13.7
13.1
..
24.6

1.4
0.0
10.7
10.5
..
..
3.4
9.7
37.0
22.1
2.7

21.5
21.6
28.8
28.9
32.0
18.6
22.6
31.1
16.9
31.8
29.5
35.3
56.9
29.0
22.8
24.1
17.6
27.0
61.4
25.8
26.2
26.4
26.7
..
23.0
17.7
26.1
43.2
12.5
..
14.6
37.1
..
27.1
43.9
..
51.6
16.7
29.2
19.3
16.4
..
22.1
16.0
29.1
..
17.2

25.1
14.1
20.2
15.6
..
..
..
21.7
32.6
20.4
23.0

178    |    HUMAN DEvELoPMENt REPoRt 2013

TRADE OF GOODSa

TRADE OF SERVICES

COMPOSITION OF MERCHANDISE GOODS

Exports of 

merchandise 

goods

Imports of 

merchandise 

goods

Exports of 
services

Imports of 
services

Share of merchandise exports 

(%)

Share of merchandise imports 

(%)

Parts and componentsb

($ 

billions)

(% of 
GDP)c

($ 

billions)

(% of 
GDP)c

($ 

billions)

(% of 
GDP)c

($ 

billions)

(% of 
GDP)c

Agricultural 

exports

Manufactured 

exports

Agricultural 

imports

Manufactured 

imports

manufactured 

manufactured 

(% of 

exports)

(% of 

imports)

HDI rank
59 Cuba
59 Panama
61 Mexico
62 Costa Rica
63 Grenada
64 Libya
64 Malaysia
64 Serbia
67 Antigua and Barbuda
67 trinidad and tobago
69 Kazakhstan
70 Albania
71 venezuela, Bolivarian Republic of
72 Dominica
72 Georgia
72 Lebanon
72 Saint Kitts and Nevis
76 Iran, Islamic Republic of
77 Peru
78 the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
78 Ukraine
80 Mauritius
81 Bosnia and Herzegovina
82 Azerbaijan
83 Saint vincent and the Grenadines
84 oman
85 Brazil
85 Jamaica
87 Armenia
88 Saint Lucia
89 Ecuador
90 turkey
91 Colombia
92 Sri Lanka
93 Algeria
94 tunisia
MEDIUM HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
95 tonga
96 Belize
96 Dominican Republic
96 Fiji
96 Samoa
100 Jordan
101 China
102 turkmenistan
103 thailand
104 Maldives
105 Suriname
106 Gabon
107 El Salvador
108 Bolivia, Plurinational State of
108 Mongolia
110 Palestine, State of
111 Paraguay
112 Egypt
113 Moldova, Republic of
114 Philippines
114 Uzbekistan
116 Syrian Arab Republic
117 Micronesia, Federated States of

2010
2010
..
..
2.8
0.7
31.0
298.3
27.6
9.0
..
..
..
..
92.3
198.8
..
..
0.2
0.0
49.1
10.0
..
..
12.9
1.5
18.5
67.0
5.9
0.0
11.5
1.3
11.5
4.3
3.9
0.0
25.3
83.8
25.1
35.2
2.7 d 29.2
40.7
51.4
16.1
1.5
28.5
4.8
21.3
43.8
5.2
0.0
60.4
31.6
10.5
197.4
9.5
1.2
0.9
9.6
..
..
31.8
17.5
16.9
114.0
15.0
39.5
8.3
18.1
38.0
57.1
16.4
37.4

2010
2010
..
..
65.8
16.7
31.4
301.5
42.4
13.9
0.3 d 36.2
..
..
76.3
164.5
..
..
42.3
0.5
31.9
6.5
..
..
38.4
4.6
9.0
32.3
47.1
0.2
45.5
5.1
48.6
18.0
39.6
0.3
16.5
54.7
21.4
30.0
5.0 d 54.7
48.0
60.7
47.5
4.4
54.7
9.2
6.6
13.6
56.3
0.4
37.8
19.8
9.6
179.7
39.7
5.2
3.7
41.5
..
..
37.4
20.6
27.6
185.5
15.4
40.5
12.4
27.0
27.3
41.0
22.2
50.6

2.4
0.0
20.5
0.3
9.7
4.8
18.6
0.6
10.6
0.1
23.6
5.9
28.9
1,577.8
..
..
67.0
195.3
3.7
0.1
2.0
49.2
5.4 d 44.4
21.4
4.5
37.7
7.0
..
..
0.4 d
..
4.5
27.8
12.9
26.3
16.6
0.9
28.0
51.5
..
..
11.4
20.1
..
..

47.0
0.2
50.9
0.7
30.8
15.1
60.2
1.8
55.3
0.3
60.8
15.3
23.6
1,289.1
..
..
61.8
180.1
54.5
1.1
1.4
33.9
2.5 d 20.7
40.3
8.5
30.3
5.6
..
..
4.0 d
..
61.6
10.0
26.0
53.0
68.5
3.9
31.8
58.5
..
..
31.1
17.6
..
..

2010

8.0 d
6.1
15.4
4.2
0.1
..
34.0
3.5
0.5
0.9
4.2
2.2
..
0.1
1.6
15.3
..
..
4.0
..
17.1
2.7
1.3
2.1
..
1.8
31.8
2.6
0.8
..
1.4
34.4
4.4
2.5
3.6
5.8

0.0
0.4
5.1
0.7 d
0.2
5.2
171.2
..
34.0
0.8
0.2
0.4
1.0
..
0.5
..
1.5
..
..
13.2
1.1
5.2
..

2010
..
24.0
1.6
12.7
17.7
..
15.8
9.0
43.2
4.2
3.2
18.7
..
24.7
14.3
41.3
..
..
2.8
..
13.5
29.1
7.6
4.3
..
3.4
1.7
20.0
8.5
..
2.5
5.1
1.7
5.4
2.4
13.2

12.2
25.7
10.3
23.3
28.3
20.5
3.1
..
11.7
38.3
5.9
3.3
4.6
..
9.0
..
9.2
..
..
7.2
3.1
8.5
..

2010

1.4 d
2.8
25.6
1.8
0.1
..
33.7
3.5
0.2
0.4
11.3
2.0
..
0.1
1.1
13.0
..
..
6.0
..
12.2
2.0
0.6
3.8
..
6.5
62.6
1.8
1.0
..
3.0
19.7
8.0
3.1
11.9
3.3

2010
..
10.9
2.7
5.4
13.0
..
15.6
9.0
18.8
2.1
8.6
16.8
..
13.2
9.7
35.2
..
..
4.3
..
9.7
21.4
3.5
7.8
..
12.5
3.3
13.9
11.1
..
5.4
2.9
3.0
6.8
7.9
7.6

13.5
0.0
11.8
0.2
2.1
4.4
0.5 d 14.9
15.5
0.1
17.0
4.3
193.3
3.5
..
..
15.7
45.9
15.3
0.3
6.3
0.3
1.9
15.9
5.1
1.1
..
..
14.5
0.8
..
..
0.7
4.4
..
..
..
..
6.1
11.3
1.7
0.6
..
..
..
..

2010
..
67.6
6.3
37.3
..
..
14.5
..
50.7
2.6
..
6.9
0.2
27.1
21.5
12.6
12.7
6.5
16.9
25.4
20.4
39.5
13.2
2.8
82.4
2.6
34.8
24.8
17.3
..
34.1
10.9
14.6
30.8
0.6
8.2

90.6
62.3
28.5
62.2
21.5
16.5
3.3
..
18.0
96.2
2.9
9.6
21.9
16.1
..
17.2
88.5
19.5
73.0
8.0
..
22.7
..

2010
..
11.9
74.5
60.7
..
..
67.0
..
47.6
31.0
..
62.0
4.0
66.0
46.3
54.6
87.2
15.6
10.9
69.0
63.7
56.3
54.7
2.5
15.7
10.5
35.8
7.9
21.2
..
9.6
77.7
21.0
61.2
0.8
76.0

7.6
1.3
67.6
22.1
78.2
72.0
93.4
..
71.6
0.1
1.9
4.2
71.5
6.3
..
66.9
10.7
41.7
22.6
85.1
..
24.7
..

2010
..
8.2
7.8
10.1
25.8
..
9.8
..
22.5
11.9
..
19.0
16.7
25.1
18.9
16.7
21.6
17.6
12.0
17.4
10.3
23.1
19.7
20.2
24.0
12.7
6.0
18.7
18.6
..
9.4
6.9
11.1
16.7
17.9
11.5

31.3
17.4
14.6
18.7
26.9
17.6
8.4
..
6.6
24.6
15.3
17.6
18.5
8.4
..
22.9
8.1
22.4
16.2
11.7
..
23.4
..

2010
..
89.7
79.5
73.0
58.8
..
73.2
..
48.3
49.9
..
63.6
80.8
57.1
60.2
54.8
73.7
70.0
72.5
74.8
52.9
54.6
57.8
76.3
53.3
73.3
73.9
48.7
52.5
..
67.8
62.5
80.9
61.8
78.4
72.3

44.8
60.9
59.4
48.1
54.0
56.3
60.9
..
66.2
50.2
63.7
74.1
63.8
78.1
..
43.8
79.4
59.9
62.4
66.8
..
54.1
..

2010
..
0.1
40.3
43.9
..
..
54.5
..
0.0
1.0
..
5.7
7.2
0.9
6.0
18.4
87.8
4.3
4.5
7.0
13.9
1.6
27.6
6.0
0.2
8.6
22.8
1.5
10.4
..
12.9
14.8
8.4
5.5
2.9
28.9

0.2
0.3
10.4
5.7
97.8
5.4
28.7
..
38.1
0.0
27.8
30.3
7.8
2.6
..
1.5
7.4
8.4
8.2
72.8
..
6.6
..

2010
..
11.8
46.2
31.8
14.1
..
54.5
..
23.1
20.0
..
12.5
25.0
16.2
13.3
11.7
17.5
21.3
17.9
11.8
16.9
15.6
15.6
23.1
15.1
21.9
30.7
14.5
17.1
..
17.4
21.3
17.3
13.7
20.5
26.8

16.3
12.3
18.7
19.1
17.4
18.4
44.8
..
40.9
21.1
18.3
26.1
14.1
12.3
..
10.1
20.1
18.1
15.6
58.4
..
16.0
..

tABLE 10 

International trade flows of goods and services    |    179

Human Development RepoRt 2013The Rise of the South Human progress in a Diverse WorldTRADE OF GOODSa

TRADE OF SERVICES

COMPOSITION OF MERCHANDISE GOODS

Exports of 

merchandise 

goods

Imports of 

merchandise 

goods

Exports of 
services

Imports of 
services

Share of merchandise exports 

(%)

Share of merchandise imports 

(%)

Parts and componentsb

($ 

billions)

(% of 
GDP)c

($ 

billions)

(% of 
GDP)c

($ 

billions)

(% of 
GDP)c

($ 

billions)

(% of 
GDP)c

Agricultural 

exports

Manufactured 

exports

Agricultural 

imports

Manufactured 

imports

manufactured 

manufactured 

(% of 

exports)

(% of 

imports)

HDI rank
118 Guyana
119 Botswana
120 Honduras
121 Indonesia
121 Kiribati
121 South Africa
124 vanuatu
125 Kyrgyzstan
125 tajikistan
127 viet Nam
128 Namibia
129 Nicaragua
130 Morocco
131 Iraq
132 Cape verde
133 Guatemala
134 timor-Leste
135 Ghana
136 Equatorial Guinea
136 India
138 Cambodia
138 Lao People’s Democratic Republic
140 Bhutan
141 Swaziland
LOw HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
142 Congo
143 Solomon Islands
144 Sao tome and Principe
145 Kenya
146 Bangladesh
146 Pakistan
148 Angola
149 Myanmar
150 Cameroon
151 Madagascar
152 tanzania, United Republic of
153 Nigeria
154 Senegal
155 Mauritania
156 Papua New Guinea
157 Nepal
158 Lesotho
159 togo
160 Yemen
161 Haiti
161 Uganda
163 Zambia
164 Djibouti
165 Gambia
166 Benin
167 Rwanda
168 Côte d’Ivoire
169 Comoros
170 Malawi
171 Sudan
172 Zimbabwe
173 Ethiopia
174 Liberia
175 Afghanistan
176 Guinea-Bissau

157.8
0.0
71.5
..
1.3
..

2010
2010
43.2
0.9
4.7
35.5
2.6 d 17.8
25.3
2.8
22.1
..
27.4
..
72.2 d 71.1
58.3
5.8
28.9
1.8
19.6
17.8
..
..
2.9
0.0
21.4
8.5
..
..
18.0
5.2
..
..
14.5
220.4
51.7
5.6
..
..
29.7
0.4
..
..

64.1
6.9
32.9
0.2
3.2
0.0
16.5
5.2
..
..
12.4
21.0
..
..
..
7.6
17.4
3.9
11.0
0.9
17.7
3.9
47.3
86.6
16.9
2.2
21.9
0.7
..
..
5.8
0.8
32.3
0.6
0.4
13.9
6.2 d 22.1
..
..
7.0
1.2
7.2
49.7
0.2 d 15.0
0.0
3.4
6.6
0.4
0.2 d
4.4
44.8
10.3
..
..
1.1
21.8
9.0 d 14.9
48.1
3.2
7.4
2.3
..
..
2.5
0.4
..
..

135.5
0.1
79.9
..
3.2
..

2010
2010
67.6
1.4
5.7
42.8
6.0 d 40.4
21.7
52.4
24.7
..
68.0
..
84.8 d 83.5
59.6
6.0
65.5
4.2
38.9
35.4
..
..
44.8
0.7
35.0
13.8
..
..
27.7
8.1
..
..
23.0
350.0
45.3
4.9
..
..
61.4
0.9
..
..

40.5
4.4
65.6
0.4
56.4
0.1
38.5
12.1
..
..
22.1
37.5
..
..
..
4.2
22.9
5.1
29.6
2.5
36.2
8.0
24.2
44.2
37.3
4.8
52.0
1.7
..
..
35.5
5.1
69.7
1.4
1.0
31.3
9.3 d 33.0
..
..
28.3
4.7
5.3
36.7
0.6 d 61.7
0.3
28.0
1.5
22.7
1.1 d 20.5
34.2
7.8
..
..
2.2
44.4
8.6 d 14.1
9.1 136.0
27.9
8.6
..
..
5.2
32.8
..
..

2010
0.3
0.8
1.0
16.8
..
14.0
0.2 d
..
0.2
..
0.9
0.5
12.5
..
0.5
2.2
..
1.5
0.1
123.8
1.8
..
0.1 d
0.2

..
0.1
0.0 d
3.7
2.4
6.4
0.6
0.3
1.2
1.0 d
..
3.1
1.1
0.2
0.2
0.7
0.0
0.3
..
0.4
1.3
0.3
0.3 d
..
0.3
0.4
..
0.1
0.1
0.3
0.2
2.4
0.2
..
..

2010
12.7
6.1
6.9
2.7
..
4.3
38.2
..
3.9
..
8.5
7.4
13.8
..
31.3
5.6
..
5.1
0.5
8.1
17.0
..
4.2
7.2

..
14.7
5.3 d
11.7
2.6
3.8
0.8
..
5.2
9.9
..
1.7
8.9
4.8
2.4
4.7
2.5
8.6
..
5.8
7.9
2.2
30.7
..
5.3
6.9
..
11.3
1.7
0.4
3.6
7.6
16.9
..
..

2010
2010
16.3
0.3
9.3
1.2
9.0
1.3
4.2
26.1
..
..
18.5
5.7
0.1 d 16.8
..
7.4
..
7.0
10.8
8.2
..
23.2
6.0
..
10.3
16.7
7.7
10.8
..
5.3
17.6

..
0.4
..
0.7
0.7
7.4
..
0.4
2.4
..
3.0
2.2
116.8
1.2
..
0.1 d
0.6

..
..
0.2
28.8
0.0 d
9.6 d
2.0
6.4
4.4
4.6
7.1
4.2
17.3
22.0
0.7
..
1.7
7.8
1.2 d 14.2
..
..
12.2
22.3
8.9
1.1
23.2
0.8
32.7
2.8
6.0
0.9
26.5
0.5
11.0
0.3
..
..
13.6
0.9
11.1
1.8
0.9
6.5
0.1 d 12.2
..
..
6.6
0.4
11.0
0.6
..
..
17.9
0.1
7.7
0.4
4.8
2.9
6.6
0.4
2.5
8.2
1.1 115.7
..
..

..
..

2010
49.0
5.2
53.1
22.8
68.3
11.0
..
17.1
..
23.3
25.5
78.7
20.6
..
81.6
46.3
..
24.2
..
10.5
3.7
..
7.4
..

2.1
29.2
95.3
57.6
..
18.8
..
30.2
39.2
29.9
29.6
5.0
27.2
38.4
..
23.0
12.9
18.8
6.8
..
74.0
6.8
0.5
79.0
84.4
52.9
58.1
..
79.8
6.2
24.7
82.7
..
50.8
..

2010
3.8
10.5
33.8
37.0
27.6
43.2
..
18.6
..
64.0
23.3
6.3
63.4
..
17.5
42.6
..
7.3
..
52.4
96.1
..
69.5
..

30.2
0.1
4.7
33.9
..
74.0
..
5.5
6.9
46.7
17.2
6.7
36.4
0.0
..
72.3
84.7
70.2
1.1
..
22.8
8.7
92.7
10.5
14.7
20.8
16.1
..
9.0
0.4
29.5
8.2
..
19.6
..

2010
15.3
13.2
20.1
11.5
41.7
6.8
..
18.1
..
12.1
15.5
17.1
13.6
..
29.1
14.6
..
16.4
..
5.1
8.6
..
13.7
..

7.4
18.7
30.6
13.6
..
18.0
..
8.7
19.3
14.6
10.8
11.0
23.9
19.9
..
13.4
30.4
17.0
31.6
..
13.5
5.3
30.1
35.9
35.5
14.9
20.1
..
14.8
16.1
20.7
11.5
..
13.7
..

2010
54.8
57.2
59.9
63.4
32.0
64.1
..
53.9
..
71.9
69.6
60.8
59.9
..
57.8
66.0
..
81.3
..
36.9
79.4
..
60.8
..

86.7
20.1
52.0
62.8
..
48.4
..
67.9
51.3
69.6
60.5
86.5
44.4
52.8
..
56.5
57.8
67.2
46.7
..
65.3
61.7
62.7
42.9
43.1
75.8
54.9
..
74.1
78.9
49.2
68.8
..
19.1
..

2010
2.1
16.3
18.3
18.8
0.1
15.0
..
14.6
..
19.0
6.7
5.7
28.2
..
0.0
3.0
..
8.9
..
14.5
0.2
..
0.0
..

2.5
14.5
20.1
6.3
..
0.6
..
2.3
18.6
1.5
8.0
8.0
3.2
0.0
..
3.0
8.4
0.3
5.3
..
2.7
14.0
47.0
5.7
4.8
3.0
5.8
..
11.6
4.4
1.9
17.7
..
0.0
..

2010
15.5
21.8
15.0
32.9
18.3
27.3
..
12.8
..
23.6
16.4
14.5
21.5
..
18.2
15.7
..
19.0
..
29.8
7.3
..
19.1
..

9.1
21.6
13.5
16.1
..
17.1
..
14.3
17.5
22.5
15.0
24.0
15.9
30.7
..
15.5
16.2
12.1
13.7
..
18.0
18.5
19.0
22.2
8.0
17.5
11.7
..
10.1
16.8
11.3
18.8
..
27.1
..

180    |    HUMAN DEvELoPMENt REPoRt 2013

table 10 InternatIonal trade flows of goods and servIcesTRADE OF GOODSa

TRADE OF SERVICES

COMPOSITION OF MERCHANDISE GOODS

Exports of 

merchandise 

goods

Imports of 

merchandise 

goods

Exports of 
services

Imports of 
services

Share of merchandise exports 

(%)

Share of merchandise imports 

(%)

Parts and componentsb

($ 

billions)

(% of 
GDP)c

($ 

billions)

(% of 
GDP)c

($ 

billions)

(% of 
GDP)c

($ 

billions)

(% of 
GDP)c

Agricultural 

exports

Manufactured 

exports

Agricultural 

imports

Manufactured 

imports

manufactured 

manufactured 

(% of 

exports)

(% of 

imports)

2010
..
0.4
..

2010
..
21.0
..
0.2 d 10.6
..
51.2
23.9
..
37.7
..
43.0

..
4.7
2.0
..
3.6
..
2.3

2010
..
0.1
..
0.1 d
..
1.9
1.3
..
2.2
..
0.5

2010
..
6.2
..
4.5
..
21.0
15.0
..
23.3
..
9.1

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

24.2
23.2
26.2
27.9

..
..
33.1
18.5
23.3
29.1
..
..
24.5

8,889.2
2,088.2
2,475.3
188.8

21.6
26.8
27.0
24.9

9,960.0
1,769.7
2,409.2
210.0

546.6
..
1,226.6
857.8
335.2
237.5
..
..
13,641.6

38.9
..
33.5
18.9
14.2
28.3
..
..

367.5
..
1,218.4
842.6
466.8
246.3
..
..
23.2 14,348.9

2010
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
..
0.4
0.1
0.2
0.6
..
0.1

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

2,682.8
302.6
418.1
29.1

86.4
..
251.7
120.0
136.6
39.6
16.8
..
3,432.6

2010
3.2
4.1
1.4
3.3
..
3.8
1.4
2.0
6.9
..
2.5

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

6.6
4.0
4.7
3.3

5.8
..
6.6
2.7
7.4
4.3
3.5
..
5.9

2010
0.1
0.2
0.4
0.2
..
0.9
0.6
2.4
1.1
..
1.1

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

2,333.0
426.9
446.8
82.6

..
..
232.3
151.8
132.7
93.5
49.9
..
3,289.3

2010
7.6
8.8
8.9
8.7
..
9.8
7.1
30.4
12.1
..
19.8

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

5.8
5.9
5.1
9.8

..
..
6.2
3.6
7.2
10.3
11.0
..
5.7

2010
..
76.8
..
37.4
..
14.2
28.0
..
20.1
..
20.7

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

9.4
10.5
7.9
18.0

4.4
..
8.5
21.0
10.6
15.7
..
..
9.4

2010
..
5.3
..
3.1
..
3.7
2.9
..
2.0
..
11.9

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

70.1
37.4
79.9
19.4

17.8
..
54.9
42.0
44.8
21.5
..
..
66.5

2010
..
15.1
..
30.2
..
12.1
15.9
..
12.6
..
17.3

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

8.5
11.3
8.7
14.1

16.7
..
10.3
8.5
8.7
11.4
..
..
9.0

2010
..
81.7
..
67.2
..
61.3
61.3
..
49.6
..
69.3

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

67.4
71.6
59.0
66.9

70.5
..
68.3
76.3
44.2
69.1
..
..
66.6

2010
..
16.1
..
13.2
..
11.0
13.3
..
20.9
..
2.6

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

29.5
30.0
28.5
3.8

12.5
..
28.7
31.5
11.8
12.4
..
..
29.2

2010
..
13.9
..
18.4
..
21.3
15.7
..
17.4
..
18.3

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

30.6
30.4
38.8
18.9

21.0
..
29.1
32.3
26.1
22.2
..
..
31.6

HDI rank
177 Sierra Leone
178 Burundi
178 Guinea
180 Central African Republic
181 Eritrea
182 Mali
183 Burkina Faso
184 Chad
185 Mozambique
186 Congo, Democratic Republic of the
186 Niger
OTHER COUNTRIES OR TERRITORIES

Korea, Democratic People’s Rep. of
Marshall Islands
Monaco
Nauru
San Marino
Somalia
South Sudan
tuvalu

Human Development Index groups

very high human development
High human development
Medium human development
Low human development

Regions

Arab States
East Asia and the Pacific
Europe and Central Asia
Latin America and the Caribbean
South Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa

Least developed countries
Small island developing states
world

NOTES
a  All data on merchandise trade are extracted at 

the six-digit level of the 1996 Harmonized System 
nomenclature; for definitional purposes, they are 
concorded with the Standard International trade 
Classification using concordance tables.

b  For methodology of classification of parts and 

components, see Athukorala (2012) and its 
discussion paper version cited therein.

c  GDP in current dollars is averaged for 2009 and 

2010.

d  Refers to 2009.

 

DEFINITIONS

Exports of merchandise goods: Goods that 
subtract from the stock of material resources of a 
country by leaving its economic territory.

Imports of merchandise goods: Goods that add 
to the stock of material resources of a country by 
entering its economic territory.

Exports of services: Exports of a heterogeneous 
range of intangible products and activities that 
changes the conditions of the consuming units or 
facilitates the exchange of products or financial 
assets.

Imports of services: Imports of a heterogeneous 
range of intangible products and activities that 
changes the conditions of the consuming units or 
facilitates the exchange of products or financial 
assets.

Agricultural or manufacured goods as share of 
merchandise exports: Exports of agricultural or 
manufactured goods, expressed as a percentage of 
total merchandise exports.

Agricultural or manufacured goods as share of 
merchandise imports: Imports of agricultural or 
manufactured goods, expressed as a percentage of 
total merchandise imports.

Parts and components: Intermediate goods used 
as an input in the production of manufactures for 
final consumption, expressed as a percentage of 
manufactured exports or imports.

MAIN DATA SOURCES

Columns 1, 3, and 9–14: UNSD (2012b).

Columns 2 and 4: HDRo calculations based on 
UNSD (2012b) and World Bank (2012a).

Columns 5 and 7: UNCtAD (2012).

Columns 6 and 8: HDRo calculations based on 
UNCtAD (2012) and World Bank (2012a).

tABLE 10 

International trade flows of goods and services    |    181

Human Development RepoRt 2013The Rise of the South Human progress in a Diverse WorldE11

l
b
a
T

International capital flows and migration

FINANCIAL FLOwS

HUMAN MOBILITY

Foreign 
direct 

investment, 
net inflows 

Net official 
development 
assistance 
receiveda

Private 

capital flows

Remittances 
(% of GDP)

Total reserves 

minus gold

Stock of 
emigrantsb

Stock of 

immigrants 

Net migration 

rate

Migration

International 

inbound 
tourism

International 

telephone traffic 
(minutes per person)

(% of GDP)

(% of GNI)

(% of GDP)

Inflows 

outflows

(% of GDP)

(% of population)

(per 1,000 
people)

(thousands)

Incoming 

outgoing

2007–2011c

2010

2007–2011c

2010

2010

2007–2011c

2010

2010

2005/2010d

2010

2005–2010c

2005–2010c

2.8
2.7
1.5
1.9
1.1
0.5
6.4
2.3
0.4
0.0
2.4
0.4
34.1
7.2
4.6
4.7
18.0
3.3
18.1
1.5
0.0
2.2
1.7
..
1.5
542.9
2.2
2.5
0.6
4.0
1.0
12.2
..
0.8
0.6
4.3
17.1
16.3
2.8
7.0
2.9
1.3
4.3
5.5
1.6
17.4
2.3

0.7
7.6
7.2
4.1
18.5
1.4
0.1
2.8
1.5
3.4
2.8

–1.1
–0.3
–0.2
–0.8
–0.4
–0.3
–0.5
–1.0
–0.4
–0.2
–0.3
–0.1
..
–0.3
–0.9
..
–0.6
–0.3
..
–0.5
–0.6
..
..
..
–0.2
–1.1
–0.6
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
0.3 e
..
0.1
..
..
–0.3
..
0.0
6.3
0.3

..
..
0.3
0.1
2.0
19.5
..
..
..
..
..

–4.9
6.5
–0.2
1.1
1.2
1.7
25.3
2.2
–9.0
0.7
4.1
–0.5
–0.8
–55.2
–1.6
–0.2
–0.2
0.6
–1.4
10.8
2.9
6.8
–3.2
..
–3.4
214.8
–4.9
2.1
–7.8
4.3
35.1
–42.2
..
15.0
1.4
..
6.5
10.4
4.9
–0.3
6.1
..
–3.8
2.9
0.9
19.3
3.8

19.9
7.1
8.7
9.0
..
..
–7.8
–1.7
3.0
2.2
–0.5

0.16
0.43
0.04
0.50
0.35
0.59 e
0.29
0.15
0.49
0.03
..
0.86
0.15
0.20
0.20
0.65
2.18
0.86
..
0.61
0.35
0.66
0.76
..
0.33
2.99
0.33
0.57
0.50
..
0.63
0.58
..
1.71
1.83
..
1.76
2.99
1.62
0.00
4.34
..
1.56
2.56
0.17
1.13
2.16

..
..
0.68
0.26
7.32
..
..
0.35
2.40
2.91
0.05

0.97
0.33
0.36
1.67
0.49
0.82 e
0.85
0.15
4.09
0.08
..
1.12
0.19
0.10
1.02
1.72
0.87
0.92
..
0.21
0.18
0.34
0.88
..
0.60
19.69
0.16
0.92
0.65
3.60
1.75
0.56
..
0.50
0.08
..
0.98
0.97
0.34
0.00
1.48
..
0.62
0.18
0.27
2.72
0.27

7.16 e
1.18
0.19
0.02
0.67
..
9.47 e
1.26
0.22
0.05
6.00

10.2
3.1
0.9
2.4
1.9
11.7
0.6
8.2
44.0
21.4
3.8
27.3
117.1
60.1
24.6
30.8
3.5
2.6
99.1
1.8
3.0
1.7
2.2
..
2.2
1.5
3.3
18.4
0.4
12.6
2.0
5.6
..
0.9
0.9
9.4
34.8
22.1
18.0
16.9
18.5
10.3
0.8
21.2
9.7
25.1
22.7

22.2
13.7
10.9
22.0
8.6
..
14.6
24.4
23.9
28.5
93.7

3.8
2.1
0.8
6.0
4.3
14.5
16.1
3.4
5.4
0.6
3.5
4.3
10.2
13.0
4.7
14.0
4.2
7.1
6.1
2.8
6.2
6.5
3.0
17.1
5.8
11.8
7.5
3.6
10.8
6.0
17.0
26.2
10.7
12.6
9.6
0.7
4.6
41.0
8.3
3.7
13.2
1.2
20.8
12.3
2.4
14.6
17.1

3.7
12.8
18.4
10.5
0.0
38.8
8.5
7.9
13.1
16.0
0.7

10.0
25.7
13.5
10.5
13.1
22.4
19.6
14.1
23.2
1.7
21.3
1.1
38.8
11.3
8.8
40.4
13.7
15.6
40.7
10.7
4.2
8.1
15.2
34.6
7.4
35.2
11.2
4.4
10.1
36.4
17.5
3.8
64.4
13.6
2.4
86.5
3.7
10.9
2.2
1.9
4.0
70.0
8.6
15.0
3.6
12.8
15.9

39.1
9.7
11.4
2.4
6.8
28.1
68.8
8.7
0.6
1.4
27.8

7.2
10.5
3.3
0.6
1.3
3.1
4.6
5.8
4.8
0.4
6.6
–0.1
5.1
6.8
3.3
7.8
3.8
3.8
30.9
1.6
2.7
2.2
10.1
..
6.7
17.6
3.3
4.6
2.7
1.8
8.3
2.4
..
0.0
1.3
132.9
1.5
0.0
0.3
0.4
–2.1
106.3
2.8
–0.9
–1.0
..
0.5

90.2
3.9
–1.0
–3.0
–0.8
..
22.2
1.6
–0.9
–1.3
8.2

4,767
5,885
59,791
10,883
26,875
2,492
7,189
4,951
8,628
8,611
16,097
8,798
20,085
1,213
8,744
2,803
7,186
22,004
9,161
77,148
3,670
1,869 f
52,677
52
43,626
849
28,295
8,185
15,007 g
157 f
2,173
1,332
1,830
2,120
1,298 h
1,866
9,510
532
12,470
2,766
1,507
7,126
6,756 f
1,373
5,325
175
9,111

4,935
1,370
119
2,353
1,088
84
207
22,281
7,575
6,047
10,850

..
..
82.5
..
..
..
..
..
..
13.8
..
22.2
524.3
233.1
183.9
..
..
..
447.5
182.1
..
88.2
..
..
..
810.6
..
120.1
96.1
..
314.7
..
638.6
102.9
137.2
422.7
116.2
..
..
26.2
75.1
..
173.9
..
..
64.7
224.1

..
..
69.6
76.2
..
179.9
..
..
105.4
107.1
..

241.9
..
237.1
96.5
182.5
173.3
441.8
160.5
409.3
..
..
47.7
1,446.9
148.0
190.6
..
255.0
171.6
1,525.2
192.1
..
112.0
118.9
..
152.0
822.5
147.5
50.5
201.3
..
555.4
144.0
708.3
80.8
140.6
484.8
48.2
..
24.9
12.2
34.4
643.1
111.2
94.1
18.4
111.3
90.9

..
..
52.2
46.3
..
205.1
..
..
..
47.4
..

HDI rank
VERY HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT

1 Norway
2 Australia
3 United States
4 Netherlands
5 Germany
6 New Zealand
7 Ireland
7 Sweden
9 Switzerland
10 Japan
11 Canada
12 Korea, Republic of
13 Hong Kong, China (SAR)
13 Iceland
15 Denmark
16 Israel
17 Belgium
18 Austria
18 Singapore
20 France
21 Finland
21 Slovenia
23 Spain
24 Liechtenstein
25 Italy
26 Luxembourg
26 United Kingdom
28 Czech Republic
29 Greece
30 Brunei Darussalam
31 Cyprus
32 Malta
33 Andorra
33 Estonia
35 Slovakia
36 Qatar
37 Hungary
38 Barbados
39 Poland
40 Chile
41 Lithuania
41 United Arab Emirates
43 Portugal
44 Latvia
45 Argentina
46 Seychelles
47 Croatia
HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
48 Bahrain
49 Bahamas
50 Belarus
51 Uruguay
52 Montenegro
52 Palau
54 Kuwait
55 Russian Federation
56 Romania
57 Bulgaria
57 Saudi Arabia

182    |    HUMAN DEvELoPMENt REPoRt 2013

FINANCIAL FLOwS

HUMAN MOBILITY

Foreign 
direct 

investment, 
net inflows 

Net official 
development 
assistance 
receiveda

Private 

capital flows

Remittances 
(% of GDP)

Total reserves 

minus gold

Stock of 
emigrantsb

Stock of 

immigrants 

Net migration 

rate

Migration

(% of GDP)

(% of GNI)

(% of GDP)

Inflows 

outflows

(% of GDP)

(% of population)

HDI rank
59 Cuba
59 Panama
61 Mexico
62 Costa Rica
63 Grenada
64 Libya
64 Malaysia
64 Serbia
67 Antigua and Barbuda
67 trinidad and tobago
69 Kazakhstan
70 Albania
71 venezuela, Bolivarian Republic of
72 Dominica
72 Georgia
72 Lebanon
72 Saint Kitts and Nevis
76 Iran, Islamic Republic of
77 Peru
78 the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
78 Ukraine
80 Mauritius
81 Bosnia and Herzegovina
82 Azerbaijan
83 Saint vincent and the Grenadines
84 oman
85 Brazil
85 Jamaica
87 Armenia
88 Saint Lucia
89 Ecuador
90 turkey
91 Colombia
92 Sri Lanka
93 Algeria
94 tunisia
MEDIUM HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
95 tonga
96 Belize
96 Dominican Republic
96 Fiji
96 Samoa
100 Jordan
101 China
102 turkmenistan
103 thailand
104 Maldives
105 Suriname
106 Gabon
107 El Salvador
108 Bolivia, Plurinational State of
108 Mongolia
110 Palestine, State of
111 Paraguay
112 Egypt
113 Moldova, Republic of
114 Philippines
114 Uzbekistan
116 Syrian Arab Republic
117 Micronesia, Federated States of

2007–2011c

0.0
8.8
1.7
5.1
7.7
2.2
3.9
6.0
8.4
2.6
6.9
9.4
1.7
5.2
6.8
11.0
17.9
0.9
4.8
4.0
4.4
4.4
2.4
2.3
15.3
1.1
2.7
1.6
6.5
9.2
0.3
2.1
4.0
1.0
1.4
3.2

4.5
6.2
3.2
6.2
0.1
6.4
3.1
10.4
3.0
7.9
–5.9
1.3
1.5
3.2
23.5
..
2.1
2.9
3.9
0.6
2.1
2.5
3.4

2010
0.2
0.5
0.0
0.3
4.6
0.1 e
0.0
1.8
1.7
0.0
0.2
2.9
0.0
7.0
5.5
1.2
1.8
0.0
–0.2
2.1
0.5
1.3
3.0
0.3
2.6
–0.1
0.0
1.1
3.5
3.6
0.3
0.1
0.3
1.2
0.1
1.3

19.5
2.0
0.4
2.5
25.5
3.6
0.0
0.2
0.0
5.6
2.4
0.9
1.4
3.6
5.4
..
0.6
0.3
7.5
0.3
0.6
0.2
40.2

2007–2011c

..
7.5
4.5
5.8
6.0
–5.0
–1.4
10.6
5.2
2.6
–2.7
6.7
2.4
6.6
6.7
2.1
14.4
..
7.8
3.4
5.2
19.9
2.4
1.0
15.5
–0.8
4.1
–1.5
4.3
9.7
0.9
4.6
3.7
3.3
1.1
3.0

0.0
5.2
5.6
6.0
1.8
6.0
2.6
..
4.2
7.9
–6.2
..
2.1
4.2
54.9
..
2.0
7.2
3.7
3.0
..
2.2
..

2010
..
0.86
2.13
1.52
6.96
0.03 e
0.55
8.72
2.15
0.57
0.20
9.75
0.04
5.56
6.93
19.38
6.52
0.32 e
1.65
4.25
4.11
2.33
11.44
2.71
4.54
0.07 e
0.19
14.50
10.63
2.62
4.43
0.12
1.41
8.38
1.26
4.45

23.65
5.68
6.53
5.78
24.11
13.78
0.89
..
0.55
0.20
0.10 e
..
16.10
5.54
4.46
..
3.67
3.53
23.57
10.73
..
2.78
..

2010
..
0.93
..
0.75
0.47
..
2.75
0.18
0.19
..
2.04
0.20
0.20
0.04
0.43
9.58
0.85
..
0.08
0.25
0.02
0.14
0.33
1.82
1.05
9.86 e
0.06
2.26
1.67
0.37
0.14
0.02
0.04
1.10
0.03
0.03

2.60
1.65
0.06
0.69
1.21
1.87
0.03
..
..
5.31
0.03 e
..
0.11
0.53
2.73
..
..
0.12
2.01
0.03
..
0.36
..

2007–2011c

8.1
7.5
12.5
11.6
14.8
..
47.3
33.0
13.1
46.3
13.5
18.5
3.1
16.8
19.6
80.0
34.5
16.3
26.7
22.9
18.4
22.8
22.9
16.2
13.0
20.0
14.1
15.1
18.9
17.3
2.5
10.1
9.5
10.6
96.9
21.4

32.9
16.1
7.4
21.8
25.7
39.8
43.8
..
48.4
17.0
13.8
12.7
9.3
40.6
26.6
..
20.7
6.5
28.1
29.9
..
32.9
23.6

2010
10.9
4.0
10.7
2.7
65.5
1.7
5.3
2.0
47.6
26.7
23.6
45.4
1.8
104.8
25.1
15.6
61.1
1.7
3.7
21.9
14.4
10.9
38.9
16.0
37.7
0.5
0.7
36.1
28.2
23.3
8.3
5.6
4.6
9.1
3.4
6.3

45.4
16.1
10.1
21.3
67.3
11.3
0.6
5.0
1.2
0.6
39.0
1.7
20.5
6.8
1.2
68.4
7.9
4.4
21.5
4.6
7.0
4.2
19.7

2010
0.1
3.4
0.7
10.5
12.1
10.4
8.4
5.3
23.6
2.6
19.5
2.8
3.5
8.3
4.0
17.8
9.6
2.8
0.1
6.3
11.6
3.3
0.7
3.0
7.9
28.4
0.4
1.1
10.5
5.9
2.9
1.9
0.2
1.7
0.7
0.3

0.8
15.0
4.2
2.2
5.0
45.9
0.1
4.0
1.7
1.0
7.5
18.9
0.7
1.5
0.4
43.6
2.5
0.3
11.4
0.5
4.2
9.8
2.4

(per 1,000 
people)

2005/2010d

–3.4
0.7
–3.3
3.4
–9.7
–0.7
0.6
0.0
..
–3.0
0.1
–3.0
0.3
..
–6.8
–0.6
..
–0.5
–5.1
0.2
–0.2
0.0
–0.5
1.2
–9.2
11.7
–0.5
–7.4
–4.9
–1.2
–1.7
–0.1
–0.5
–2.5
–0.8
–0.4

–16.0
–0.7
–2.9
–6.8
–17.3
7.0
–0.3
–2.2
1.5
0.0
–2.0
0.7
–9.5
–3.5
–1.1
–4.7
–1.3
–0.9
–9.4
–2.8
–3.9
–0.6
–16.3

International 

inbound 
tourism

International 

telephone traffic 
(minutes per person)

(thousands)

Incoming 

outgoing

2010
2,507
1,324
22,260
2,100
114
34 h
24,577 e
683
230
413
3,393
2,417
615
77
2,033
2,168
92
2,034
2,299
262
21,203
935
365
1,280
72
1,048 e
5,161
1,922
575
306
1,047
27,000
2,147
654
1,912
6,903

45
239
4,125
632
130
4,557
55,664
8
15,936
792
205
358
1,150
807
457
522
465
14,051
8
3,520
975
8,546
26

2005–2010c

2005–2010c

32.7
54.4
..
85.7
488.1
..
..
104.4
487.3
243.7
40.1
224.3
..
140.8
125.6
318.4
820.6
3.5
92.7
..
..
140.8
213.8
74.8
..
223.1
..
252.4
174.9
292.7
62.7
57.8
..
28.6
36.5
58.0

..
135.8
309.4
..
..
95.8
9.2
..
20.5
..
..
..
223.3
85.6
35.2
..
37.6
55.4
198.1
..
..
..
..

2.5
75.5
..
43.1
315.8
..
..
32.1
247.8
200.6
38.9
23.6
20.1
172.6
36.4
87.3
629.7
10.9
19.6
23.3
..
108.5
49.6
17.5
..
206.9
2.3
828.6
243.8
203.6
11.7
43.4
..
..
17.1
16.1

..
178.5
52.2
..
..
6.8
2.9
..
..
428.6
..
..
175.7
11.4
17.2
..
19.4
7.8
59.8
..
..
23.4
..

tABLE 11 

International capital flows and migration    |    183

Human Development RepoRt 2013The Rise of the South Human progress in a Diverse WorldFINANCIAL FLOwS

HUMAN MOBILITY

Foreign 
direct 

investment, 
net inflows 

Net official 
development 
assistance 
receiveda

Private 

capital flows

Remittances 
(% of GDP)

Total reserves 

minus gold

Stock of 
emigrantsb

Stock of 

immigrants 

Net migration 

rate

Migration

(% of GDP)

(% of GNI)

(% of GDP)

Inflows 

outflows

(% of GDP)

(% of population)

2007–2011c

11.9
1.8
5.9
2.1
2.4
1.4
5.6
6.6
0.3
7.5
7.1
13.3
2.5
1.8
6.7
2.2
32.0
7.9
4.8
1.4
7.0
3.9
1.3
3.7

23.5
35.1
12.3
0.6
0.7
1.1
–3.9
..
0.0
9.9
1.9
3.1
1.8
0.4
0.3
0.5
5.4
1.3
0.2
2.3
4.7
10.3
9.2
3.2
1.7
0.8
1.8
1.7
2.8
3.1
1.4
1.0
45.8
0.4
1.1

2010
6.7
1.1
3.9
0.2
10.5
0.3
16.2
8.5
7.8
2.9
2.4
9.8
1.1
2.8
20.7
1.0
9.2
5.3
0.9
0.2
6.9
6.2
9.2
2.6

14.5
61.4
24.2
5.1
1.3
1.6
0.3
..
2.4
5.4
13.0
1.2
7.3
10.6
5.5
5.1
9.5
13.3
2.3
45.5
10.2
6.4
14.9 e
11.9
10.5
18.5
3.9
12.5
20.8
3.4
10.1
11.9
175.5
42.4
16.7

2007–2011c

11.8
4.6
5.8
1.7
..
1.6
7.1
3.9
0.4
6.4
4.5
13.3
2.0
–1.1
4.8
1.5
..
9.8
..
3.0
6.5
4.6
..
5.0

..
34.3
12.2
0.8
0.8
0.6
–5.9
..
0.5
..
4.6
4.9
3.1
..
–0.8
0.5
5.5
–0.6
–1.8
2.3
6.3
4.6
9.2
3.2
1.1
1.1
1.4
..
1.4
3.1
..
2.0
45.8
..
1.4

2010
13.65
0.67
17.27
0.98
..
0.31
0.93
26.60
39.96
7.76
0.13
12.48
7.07
0.09
8.36
10.23
..
0.42
..
3.21
3.29
0.57
0.32
2.95

0.12
0.43
0.99
5.52
10.81
5.48
0.10 h
..
0.87
..
0.11
5.10
10.47
..
0.16
21.66
34.23
10.49
3.99
22.59
5.32
0.27
3.09 e
11.02
3.78
1.63
0.78
..
..
2.95
..
0.76
2.71
..
5.76

2010
3.41
0.68
0.08
0.40
..
0.38
0.38
6.19
15.17
..
0.14
..
0.07
0.04
0.71
0.05
..
..
..
0.23
1.91
0.11
5.41
0.30

0.85
0.65
0.27
0.19
0.01
0.01
0.87
..
0.24
..
0.55
0.02
1.12
..
3.41
0.20
0.88
2.27
1.09
2.03
3.50
0.42
..
5.53
1.34
1.27
3.29
..
..
0.00
..
0.09
0.10
..
2.03

2007–2011c

34.6
45.8
15.9
12.6
..
10.4
21.2
28.8
4.4
10.9
14.5
25.9
19.5
52.6
17.8
12.4
43.8
14.0
15.4
14.7
26.8
9.8
46.8
15.1

38.3
49.2
20.7
12.7
7.7
6.9
28.5
..
12.6
12.9
15.7
14.9
13.6
11.9
32.9
19.2
..
21.5
13.2
16.3
15.6
12.1
..
20.1
12.2
16.5
17.9
25.4
3.5
0.3
..
..
..
25.9
22.6

2010
56.9
3.2
7.5
1.1
6.5
1.7
1.6
11.2
11.2
2.5
0.7
12.5
9.3
4.9
37.6
6.1
1.4
3.4
14.9
0.9
2.3
5.7
6.3
13.4

5.6
1.0
21.9
1.1
3.3
2.5
2.8
1.0
1.4
0.4
0.7
0.6
5.0
3.5
0.9
3.3
20.5
5.4
4.7
9.9
2.2
1.4
1.5
3.7
5.8
2.6
5.4
5.6
1.4
2.2
9.9
0.7
10.5
8.1
6.8

2010
1.5
5.8
0.3
0.1
2.0
3.7
0.3
4.0
4.0
0.1
6.3
0.7
0.2
0.3
2.4
0.4
1.2
7.6
1.1
0.4
2.2
0.3
5.7
3.4

3.8
1.3
3.2
2.0
0.7
2.3
0.3
0.2
1.0
0.2
1.5
0.7
1.6
2.9
0.4
3.2
0.3
2.7
2.1
0.3
1.9
1.8
13.0
16.6
2.5
4.5
11.2
2.0
1.8
1.7
2.9
0.6
2.3
0.3
1.2

(per 1,000 
people)

2005/2010d
–10.7
1.9
–2.8
–1.1
..
2.9
0.0
–5.1
–8.9
–1.0
–0.1
–7.1
–4.3
–1.0
–7.1
–3.0
–9.4
–0.4
6.1
–0.5
–3.7
–2.5
4.9
–1.0

2.6
0.0
–8.2
–1.0
–4.0
–2.4
0.9
–2.1
–0.2
–0.1
–1.4
–0.4
–2.3
0.6
0.0
–0.7
–1.9
–0.2
–1.2
–5.0
–0.9
–1.4
0.0
–1.7
1.2
0.3
–3.8
–2.9
–0.3
0.7
–14.3
–0.8
16.7
–2.6
–1.4

International 

inbound 
tourism

International 

telephone traffic 
(minutes per person)

(thousands)

Incoming 

outgoing

2010
150
2,145
896
7,003
5 f
8,074
97
1,316
325
3,747
984
1,011
9,288
1,518
382
1,876
40
803
..
5,776
2,399
1,670
27
868

85
21
8
1,469
267
855
425
311
298
196
783
1,414
875
..
114 h
603
414
150
536
423
946
815
53
91 h
199 h
666
..
15
746
420
2,239
330
..
..
30

2005–2010c

2005–2010c

103.4
..
96.0
..
..
..
..
23.6
..
..
..
..
114.1
..
110.4
119.6
6.9
45.3
..
20.1
..
..
..
38.2

..
..
40.7
16.5
..
24.8
..
2.9
23.2
5.5
3.8
18.7
86.5
39.9
..
12.9
..
34.9
76.6
..
..
..
41.1
..
40.8
9.2
..
..
..
10.4
16.0
5.7
24.5
4.9
..

26.8
26.3
139.9
..
..
..
..
50.0
..
..
..
..
14.5
..
28.5
50.0
11.4
24.5
..
7.5
..
..
..
3.7

..
..
14.6
7.6
..
13.1
..
0.2
5.4
2.1
3.2
11.8
26.9
15.8
..
..
..
10.2
4.6
..
4.9
..
209.2
..
23.9
3.0
..
..
0.9
16.0
21.8
0.4
28.0
2.5
..

HDI rank
118 Guyana
119 Botswana
120 Honduras
121 Indonesia
121 Kiribati
121 South Africa
124 vanuatu
125 Kyrgyzstan
125 tajikistan
127 viet Nam
128 Namibia
129 Nicaragua
130 Morocco
131 Iraq
132 Cape verde
133 Guatemala
134 timor-Leste
135 Ghana
136 Equatorial Guinea
136 India
138 Cambodia
138 Lao People’s Democratic Republic
140 Bhutan
141 Swaziland
LOw HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
142 Congo
143 Solomon Islands
144 Sao tome and Principe
145 Kenya
146 Bangladesh
146 Pakistan
148 Angola
149 Myanmar
150 Cameroon
151 Madagascar
152 tanzania, United Republic of
153 Nigeria
154 Senegal
155 Mauritania
156 Papua New Guinea
157 Nepal
158 Lesotho
159 togo
160 Yemen
161 Haiti
161 Uganda
163 Zambia
164 Djibouti
165 Gambia
166 Benin
167 Rwanda
168 Côte d’Ivoire
169 Comoros
170 Malawi
171 Sudan
172 Zimbabwe
173 Ethiopia
174 Liberia
175 Afghanistan
176 Guinea-Bissau

184    |    HUMAN DEvELoPMENt REPoRt 2013

table 11 InternatIonal capItal flows and mIgratIonFINANCIAL FLOwS

HUMAN MOBILITY

Foreign 
direct 

investment, 
net inflows 

Net official 
development 
assistance 
receiveda

Private 

capital flows

Remittances 
(% of GDP)

Total reserves 

minus gold

Stock of 
emigrantsb

Stock of 

immigrants 

Net migration 

rate

Migration

(% of GDP)

(% of GNI)

(% of GDP)

Inflows 

outflows

(% of GDP)

(% of population)

2007–2011c

4.5
0.0
2.1
3.6
2.6
1.6
0.4
9.1
8.6
22.4
17.5

..
5.3
..
..
..
..
..
4.8

2.7
2.7
2.8
2.3

2.4
3.1
3.4
2.7
1.3
2.7
2.4
2.7
2.7

2010
24.4
31.0
5.1
13.2
7.7
12.1
12.0
6.2
21.4
29.0
13.8

..
45.9
..
..
..
..
..
26.2

..
0.2
0.2
5.5

..
0.1
..
0.2
0.7
3.8
8.3
3.4
0.0

2007–2011c

36.9
0.1
22.7
..
..
–0.6
0.4
..
16.1
..
13.4

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

0.9
2.2
2.8
1.9

0.5
..
1.8
3.7
2.6
2.8
1.5
5.0
1.4

2010
3.01
1.39
1.28
..
..
4.63
1.08
..
1.43
..
1.63

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

0.31
0.99
1.81
4.91

2.29
..
1.22
1.15
3.60
1.99
5.09
6.13
0.76

2010
0.31
0.06
0.92
..
..
1.77
1.13
..
0.87
..
0.41

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

0.50
1.25
0.13
0.46

3.76
..
0.81
0.12
0.23
0.52
..
1.05
0.53

2007–2011c

19.6
12.6
..
7.1
4.4
13.0
9.4
10.0
19.3
8.1
11.2

..
..
..
..
1.2
20.7
..
..

7.8
23.2
33.8
13.6

43.7
40.3
19.4
13.1
14.0
15.0
14.8
16.7
14.7

2010
4.6
4.2
5.2
2.9
18.0
7.6
9.7
2.1
5.0
1.3
2.4

1.3
16.6
56.3
..
9.9
8.7
..
..

3.6
6.7
1.6
2.8

5.4
1.1
10.3
5.3
1.6
2.5
3.3
12.5
2.9

2010
1.8
0.7
3.8
1.8
0.3
1.2
6.4
3.4
1.9
0.7
1.3

0.2
2.7
71.6
..
37.0
0.2
..
..

11.3
4.5
0.7
1.6

8.0
0.3
6.5
1.1
0.8
2.1
1.4
1.8
3.1

(per 1,000 
people)

2005/2010d

2.2
9.5
–6.3
0.2
2.3
–1.4
–1.6
–1.4
–0.2
–0.1
–0.4

0.0
..
..
..
..
–6.8
..
..

4.0
–0.3
–0.6
–1.5

3.3
–0.5
–0.1
–1.8
–1.1
–0.5
–1.4
–3.5
0.0

International 

inbound 
tourism

International 

telephone traffic 
(minutes per person)

(thousands)

Incoming 

outgoing

2010
39
201
30 i
52
84
169
274
31
2,224
53
66

..
5
279
..
120
..
..
2

534,968
199,071
163,618
19,020

76,540
116,484
149,901
66,379
11,008
30,141
16,915
15,782
917,082

2005–2010c

2005–2010c

..
..
..
5.5
22.9
8.8
..
..
5.9
3.9
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
62.5
..
..

..
..
90.3
101.7
19.5
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
6.6
1.7
14.1
..
..
2.6
3.1
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

189.8
24.9
..
..

..
..
49.2
23.9
..
..
..
..
..

HDI rank
177 Sierra Leone
178 Burundi
178 Guinea
180 Central African Republic
181 Eritrea
182 Mali
183 Burkina Faso
184 Chad
185 Mozambique
186 Congo, Democratic Republic of the
186 Niger
OTHER COUNTRIES OR TERRITORIES

Korea, Democratic People’s Rep. of
Marshall Islands
Monaco
Nauru
San Marino
Somalia
South Sudan
tuvalu

Human Development Index groups

very high human development
High human development
Medium human development
Low human development

Regions

Arab States
East Asia and the Pacific
Europe and Central Asia
Latin America and the Caribbean
South Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa

Least developed countries
Small island developing states
world

NOTES
a  A negative value refers to net official development 

assistance disbursed by donor countries.

b  Some values may exceed 100% (see Definitions).
c  Data refer to the most recent year available 

during the period specified.

d  Data are average annual estimates for 2005–2010.
e  Refers to 2009.
f  Refers to 2007.
g  Refers to 2006.
h  Refers to 2008.

DEFINITIONS

Foreign direct investment, net inflows: Sum 
of equity capital, reinvestment of earnings, other 
long-term capital and short-term capital, expressed 
as a percentage of GDP.

Net official development assistance received: 
Disbursements of loans made on concessional 
terms (net of repayments of principal) and grants by 
official agencies to promote economic development 
and welfare in countries and territories in part I 
of the Development Assistance Committee list of 
aid recipients, expressed as a percentage of the 
recipient country’s GNI.

 

Private capital flows: Net foreign direct 
investment and portfolio investment, expressed as a 
percentage of GDP.

Remittances, inflows: Earnings and material 
resources transferred by international migrants or 
refugees to recipients in their country of origin or 
countries where they formerly resided.

Remittances, outflows: Current transfers by 
migrant workers and wages and salaries earned 
by nonresident workers. Remittances are classified 
as current private transfers from migrant workers 
resident in the host country for more than a year, 
irrespective of their immigration status, to recipients 
in their country of origin. Migrants’ transfers are 
defined as the net worth of migrants who are 
expected to remain in the host country for more 
than one year that is transferred from one country to 
another at the time of migration. Compensation of 
employees is the income of migrants who have lived 
in the host country for less than a year. Data are 
expressed as a share of GDP.

Total reserves minus gold: Sum of special 
drawing rights, reserves of International Monetary 
Fund (IMF) members held by the IMF and holdings 
of foreign exchange under the control of monetary 
authorities, excluding gold holdings, expressed as a 
percentage of GDP.

Stock of emigrants: Ratio of the stock of 
emigrants from a country to the population (not to 
the sum of population and emigrants), expressed 
as a percentage of the country’s population. the 
definition of emigrant varies across countries but 
generally refers to residents that left the country 
with the intention to remain abroad for more than 
a year.

Stock of immigrants: Ratio of the stock of 
immigrants into a country, expressed as a 
percentage of the country’s population. the 
definition of immigrant varies across countries 
but generally includes the stock of foreign-born 
people or the stock of foreign people (according to 
citizenship) or the combination of the two.

Net migration rate: Ratio of the difference 
between the number of in-migrants and out-
migrants from a country during a specified period to 
the average population during the period, expressed 
per 1,000 people.

International inbound tourism: Arrivals of 
nonresident visitors (overnight visitors, tourists, 
same-day visitors, excursionists) at national borders.

International telephone traffic, incoming: 
Effective (completed) telephone calls (fixed and 
mobile) originating outside a given country with a 

destination inside the country, expressed in minutes 
of traffic per person.

International telephone traffic, outgoing: 
Effective (completed) telephone calls (fixed and 
mobile) originating in a given country with a 
destination outside the country, expressed in 
minutes of traffic per person.

MAIN DATA SOURCES

Columns 1 and 3–6: World Bank (2012a).

Column 2: World Bank (2012a) and oECD–DAC 
(2012).

Column 7: HDRo calculations based on data from 
World Bank (2011) and UNDESA (2011).

Column 8: HDRo calculations based on data from 
World Bank (2011) and population data from World 
Bank (2012a).

Column 9: UNDESA (2011).

Column 10: UN Wto (2012).

Columns 11 and 12: HDRo calculations based on 
incoming and outgoing total telephone traffic data 
from ItU (2012).

tABLE 11 

International capital flows and migration    |    185

Human Development RepoRt 2013The Rise of the South Human progress in a Diverse WorldE12

l
b
a
T

Innovation and technology

RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT

INNOVATION

TECHNOLOGY ADOPTION

 Expenditure  Researchers 

Graduates in 
science and 
engineeringa

Patents granted 
to residents and 

nonresidents 

Royalty and 
licence fees 

receipts

Electrification 

rate

Personal 
computers 

Internet users

Fixed broadband 

Internet 

subscriptions

HDI rank
VERY HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT

(% of  
GDP)

(per million 

people)

(% of  
total)

(per million people)

($ per capita)

(% of population)

(per 100 people)

2005–2010b

2002–2010b

2002–2011b

2005–2010b

2005–2011b

2009

2002–2009b

2010

2010

1 Norway
2 Australia
3 United States
4 Netherlands
5 Germany
6 New Zealand
7 Ireland
7 Sweden
9 Switzerland
10 Japan
11 Canada
12 Korea, Republic of
13 Hong Kong, China (SAR)
13 Iceland
15 Denmark
16 Israel
17 Belgium
18 Austria
18 Singapore
20 France
21 Finland
21 Slovenia
23 Spain
24 Liechtenstein
25 Italy
26 Luxembourg
26 United Kingdom
28 Czech Republic
29 Greece
30 Brunei Darussalam
31 Cyprus
32 Malta
33 Andorra
33 Estonia
35 Slovakia
36 Qatar
37 Hungary
38 Barbados
39 Poland
40 Chile
41 Lithuania
41 United Arab Emirates
43 Portugal
44 Latvia
45 Argentina
46 Seychelles
47 Croatia
HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
48 Bahrain
49 Bahamas
50 Belarus
51 Uruguay
52 Montenegro
52 Palau
54 Kuwait
55 Russian Federation
56 Romania
57 Bulgaria
57 Saudi Arabia

1.8
2.3
2.8
1.8
2.8
1.2
1.8
3.6
3.0
3.4
2.0
3.4
0.8
2.6
3.0
4.3
2.0
2.7
2.7
2.2
3.8
1.9
1.4
..
1.3
1.7
1.8
1.5
0.6
..
0.5
0.6
..
1.4
0.5
..
1.1
..
0.7
0.4
0.8
..
1.7
0.5
0.5
0.3
0.8

..
..
0.6
0.7
1.1
..
0.1
1.3
0.5
0.5
0.1

5,503.7
4,258.5
4,673.2
2,817.6
3,780.1
4,323.7
3,372.5
5,017.6
3,319.8
5,189.3
4,334.7
4,946.9
2,759.5
7,428.1
6,390.3
..
3,490.7
4,122.1
5,834.0
3,689.8
7,647.4
3,678.8
2,931.8
..
1,690.0
4,824.8
3,794.2
2,754.8
1,849.5
286.3
752.0
1,168.1
..
3,210.3
2,437.7
..
2,005.9
..
1,597.5
354.8
2,541.1
..
4,307.8
1,601.2
1,045.5
155.7
1,571.3

..
..
..
346.1
..
..
151.9
3,091.4
894.8
1,586.7
..

15.3
18.1
15.5
14.0
28.6
20.5
21.6
25.0
21.6
20.6
21.1
31.5
34.7
14.5
19.6
..
16.3
28.8
..
26.2
29.4
18.2
25.3
19.8
20.5
32.5
21.7
23.8
24.9
21.9
13.7
15.0
..
19.4
20.6
24.0
15.1
8.7
15.7
20.4
21.0
27.3
33.8
14.3
14.3
..
24.4

..
..
26.6
13.6
..
..
..
28.1
21.7
18.8
35.8

334.0
653.7
707.6
117.6
166.2
995.2
54.4
147.1
96.7
1,759.9
562.1
1,428.8
758.9
434.2
27.9
502.0
49.7
134.6
873.3
157.7
172.1
123.2
60.2
..
303.4
171.4
90.2
86.8
42.2
107.2
17.2
9.6
..
89.5
68.8
..
6.5
..
78.5
59.6
25.3
..
13.1
81.7
30.6
..
18.6

..
..
127.4
8.6
418.1
..
..
212.1
20.8
33.5
7.1

101.9
32.7
387.1
320.8
174.9
53.5
574.2
619.4
..
226.8
114.4
86.8
56.6
0.1
..
137.3
232.1
92.6
367.7
240.0
556.5
42.7
23.0
..
59.8
890.0
226.3
10.2
6.1
..
2.1
81.0
..
16.9
0.7
..
102.8
12.6
7.1
3.7
0.2
..
5.7
4.5
4.7
21.6
5.3

..
..
2.1
0.1
..
..
..
6.1
13.7
2.5
..

99.7 c
99.7 c
99.7 c
99.7 c
99.7 c
99.7 c
99.7 c
99.7 c
99.7 c
99.7 c
99.7 c
99.7 c
99.7 c
99.7 c
99.7 c
99.7
99.7 c
99.7 c
100.0
99.7 c
99.7 c
99.7 c
99.7 c
99.7 c
99.7 c
99.7 c
99.7 c
99.7 c
99.7 c
99.7 c
99.7 c
..
99.7 c
99.7 c
99.7 c
98.7
99.7 c
99.7 c
99.7 c
98.5
99.7 c
100.0
99.7 c
99.7 c
97.2
99.7 c
99.7 c

99.4
..
..
98.3
..
..
100.0
..
..
..
99.0

62.9
60.3
80.6
91.2
65.6
52.6
58.2
88.1
96.2
40.7
94.5
57.6
69.3
52.7
54.9
24.2
37.7
60.7
74.3
63.1
50.0
42.5
39.3
..
36.7
67.3
80.2
27.4
9.4
9.1
30.9
..
..
25.5
58.1
16.0
25.6
14.8
16.9
14.1
24.2
30.0
18.2
32.7
9.0
21.2
18.0

55.0
12.5
..
13.6
..
..
26.5
13.3
19.2
11.0
65.7

93.3
75.9
74.2
90.7
82.5
83.0
69.8
90.0
82.2
77.6
81.3
82.5
71.8
95.6
88.8
65.4
73.7
72.7
71.1
77.5
86.9
69.3
65.8
80.0
53.7
90.1
84.7
68.6
44.6
50.0
53.0
63.1
81.0
74.2
79.9
81.6
65.2
70.0
62.5
45.0
62.8
78.0
51.3
71.5
36.0
40.8
60.1

55.0
43.0
32.1
47.9
52.0
..
38.3
43.4
40.0
46.0
41.0

35.3
24.2
27.6
38.1
31.7
24.9
21.1
31.8
37.9
26.9
29.8
35.7
29.9
34.1
37.7
25.1
31.5
23.9
24.9
34.0
28.6
24.2
22.9
63.8
21.9
33.2
31.6
14.5
19.9
5.4
17.6
28.0
28.9
25.1
12.7
8.2
19.6
20.6
13.0
10.5
20.6
10.5
19.2
19.3
9.6
7.3
18.3

5.4
7.2
17.4
10.9
8.3
1.2
1.7
11.0
13.9
14.5
5.5

186    |    HUMAN DEvELoPMENt REPoRt 2013

Fixed and mobile 

telephone 
subscribers

2010

149.3
139.7
139.0
158.9
183.7
157.7
151.5
168.6
177.7
126.4
120.3
162.3
256.9
168.1
172.2
172.5
154.1
184.6
184.8
151.8
179.7
148.0
155.9
152.9
185.3
197.1
184.0
159.7
154.6
129.1
131.2
169.2
122.2
159.3
129.4
149.4
149.9
177.9
143.0
136.2
171.1
165.1
185.0
126.8
166.5
160.5
186.2

142.2
162.6
152.5
160.8
211.9
105.0
181.5
199.4
135.9
164.9
203.0

RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT

INNOVATION

TECHNOLOGY ADOPTION

 Expenditure  Researchers 

Graduates in 
science and 
engineeringa

Patents granted 
to residents and 

nonresidents 

Royalty and 
licence fees 

receipts

Electrification 

rate

Personal 
computers 

Internet users

Fixed broadband 

Internet 

subscriptions

(% of  
GDP)

(per million 

people)

(% of  
total)

(per million people)

($ per capita)

(% of population)

(per 100 people)

HDI rank
59 Cuba
59 Panama
61 Mexico
62 Costa Rica
63 Grenada
64 Libya
64 Malaysia
64 Serbia
67 Antigua and Barbuda
67 trinidad and tobago
69 Kazakhstan
70 Albania
71 venezuela, Bolivarian Republic of
72 Dominica
72 Georgia
72 Lebanon
72 Saint Kitts and Nevis
76 Iran, Islamic Republic of
77 Peru
78 the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
78 Ukraine
80 Mauritius
81 Bosnia and Herzegovina
82 Azerbaijan
83 Saint vincent and the Grenadines
84 oman
85 Brazil
85 Jamaica
87 Armenia
88 Saint Lucia
89 Ecuador
90 turkey
91 Colombia
92 Sri Lanka
93 Algeria
94 tunisia
MEDIUM HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
95 tonga
96 Belize
96 Dominican Republic
96 Fiji
96 Samoa
100 Jordan
101 China
102 turkmenistan
103 thailand
104 Maldives
105 Suriname
106 Gabon
107 El Salvador
108 Bolivia, Plurinational State of
108 Mongolia
110 Palestine, State of
111 Paraguay
112 Egypt
113 Moldova, Republic of
114 Philippines
114 Uzbekistan
116 Syrian Arab Republic
117 Micronesia, Federated States of

2005–2010b

2002–2010b

2002–2011b

2005–2010b

2005–2011b

0.5
0.2
0.4
0.4
..
..
0.6
0.9
..
0.0
0.2
0.2
..
..
0.2
..
..
0.8
..
0.2
0.9
0.4
0.0
0.3
..
..
1.1
..
0.3
..
0.3
0.8
0.2
0.1
0.1
1.1

..
..
..
..
..
0.4
1.5
..
0.2
..
..
0.6
0.1
..
0.2
..
0.1
0.2
0.5
0.1
..
..
..

..
111.3
347.3
257.4
..
..
364.6
1,060.1
..
..
..
146.8
182.6
..
..
..
..
750.7
..
471.6
1,353.1
..
197.2
..
..
..
695.7
..
..
..
106.1
803.9
157.2
96.3
170.1
1,862.5

..
..
..
..
..
..
1,198.9
..
315.5
..
..
..
..
120.3
..
144.3
74.8
420.4
794.1
78.5
..
..
..

3.3
19.2
25.6
11.9
..
..
37.7
23.7
..
30.4
..
6.1
..
..
8.2
25.0
..
44.4
..
21.4
26.3
..
..
16.6
..
38.9
12.2
..
15.9
..
12.8
20.9
23.2
..
28.0
..

..
..
..
..
..
25.1
..
..
..
..
..
..
26.4
..
17.1
16.5
..
..
..
23.8
21.1
..
..

12.4
107.5
82.9
9.7
..
..
76.7
43.3
104.7
67.6
10.9
108.9
..
..
59.3
..
..
63.9
12.6
163.7
85.2
6.2
46.0
22.9
..
..
16.7
15.9
40.1
203.6
1.9
9.0
13.8
24.2
6.3
..

..
24.4
..
..
60.7
10.3
100.7
..
11.2
..
..
..
..
..
34.8
..
..
4.0
36.9
3.8
7.0
2.4
..

..
..
..
0.9
0.7
..
9.5
7.8
..
..
0.0
4.1
..
0.2
1.0
1.7
..
..
0.1
4.7
2.3
1.7
3.4
0.0
..
..
3.0
1.8
..
..
..
..
1.3
..
0.1
2.4

..
7.0
..
0.6
..
..
0.6
..
2.2
26.5
1.3
..
0.0
0.7
0.8
1.4
45.2
1.6
1.5
0.1
..
0.1
..

2009
97.0
88.1
..
99.3
..
99.8
99.4
..
..
99.0
..
..
99.0
..
..
99.9
..
98.4
85.7
..
..
99.4
..
..
..
98.0
98.3
92.0
..
..
92.2
..
93.6
76.6
99.3
99.5

..
..
95.9
..
..
99.9
99.4
..
99.3
..
..
36.7
86.4
77.5
67.0
..
96.7
99.6
..
89.7
..
92.7
..

2002–2009b

5.6
6.3
13.9
23.2
15.6
2.3
22.7
17.6
20.6
13.2
..
4.6
9.3
18.8
5.4
10.3
22.7
10.5
10.2
36.6
4.5
17.6
6.4
8.0
15.2
18.0
16.1
6.8
9.7
16.0
12.5
6.4
11.2
3.7
1.1
9.7

5.9
14.4
2.2
6.1
2.3
7.6
5.7
7.3
6.6
20.0
4.0
3.4
5.8
2.4
25.8
5.5
7.8
4.1
11.8
7.2
3.1
9.4
5.5

2010
15.9
42.7
31.1
36.5
33.6
14.0
56.3
43.1
80.6
48.5
33.4
45.0
35.9
47.3
26.3
31.0
76.6
13.0
34.3
51.9
44.6
28.7
52.0
46.7
..
62.0
40.7
26.5
44.0
40.1
29.0
39.8
36.5
12.0
12.5
36.6

12.0
12.6
39.5
14.8
7.0
38.9
34.4
2.2
21.2
28.3
31.6
7.2
15.9
20.0
12.9
36.4
19.8
26.7
40.1
25.0
19.4
20.7
20.0

2010
0.0
7.8
10.0
6.2
13.8
1.1
7.3
11.2
8.0
10.8
8.9
3.3
5.4
13.9
5.8
4.7
27.9
0.7
3.1
12.5
6.5
6.1
8.2
5.0
11.4
1.6
6.8
4.3
2.8
11.6
1.4
9.7
5.6
1.1
2.5
4.6

1.0
2.9
3.6
2.7
0.1
3.2
9.4
0.0
4.6
4.8
3.0
0.3
2.8
1.0
2.6
..
0.4
1.8
7.5
1.8
0.3
0.3
0.9

Fixed and mobile 

telephone 
subscribers

2010
19.2
200.4
98.1
96.9
144.5
190.8
135.3
178.7
232.2
163.1
143.7
152.3
121.3
178.0
114.2
89.0
191.9
127.5
111.0
124.6
145.8
123.2
109.3
117.1
140.8
175.6
125.7
127.5
144.2
135.9
116.6
107.2
111.6
100.4
100.7
117.6

82.0
65.1
99.8
96.3
110.2
117.5
86.2
73.7
113.6
171.6
185.7
109.0
140.5
80.8
98.1
..
97.3
99.0
121.5
92.9
80.8
77.6
32.4

tABLE 12 

Innovation and technology    |    187

Human Development RepoRt 2013The Rise of the South Human progress in a Diverse WorldRESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT

INNOVATION

TECHNOLOGY ADOPTION

 Expenditure  Researchers 

Graduates in 
science and 
engineeringa

Patents granted 
to residents and 

nonresidents 

Royalty and 
licence fees 

receipts

Electrification 

rate

Personal 
computers 

Internet users

Fixed broadband 

Internet 

subscriptions

HDI rank
118 Guyana
119 Botswana
120 Honduras
121 Indonesia
121 Kiribati
121 South Africa
124 vanuatu
125 Kyrgyzstan
125 tajikistan
127 viet Nam
128 Namibia
129 Nicaragua
130 Morocco
131 Iraq
132 Cape verde
133 Guatemala
134 timor-Leste
135 Ghana
136 Equatorial Guinea
136 India
138 Cambodia
138 Lao People’s Democratic Republic
140 Bhutan
141 Swaziland
LOw HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
142 Congo
143 Solomon Islands
144 Sao tome and Principe
145 Kenya
146 Bangladesh
146 Pakistan
148 Angola
149 Myanmar
150 Cameroon
151 Madagascar
152 tanzania, United Republic of
153 Nigeria
154 Senegal
155 Mauritania
156 Papua New Guinea
157 Nepal
158 Lesotho
159 togo
160 Yemen
161 Haiti
161 Uganda
163 Zambia
164 Djibouti
165 Gambia
166 Benin
167 Rwanda
168 Côte d’Ivoire
169 Comoros
170 Malawi
171 Sudan
172 Zimbabwe
173 Ethiopia
174 Liberia
175 Afghanistan
176 Guinea-Bissau
177 Sierra Leone

(% of  
GDP)

(per million 

people)

(% of  
total)

(per million people)

($ per capita)

(% of population)

(per 100 people)

2005–2010b

2002–2010b

2002–2011b

2005–2010b

2005–2011b

..
0.5
..
0.1
..
0.9
..
0.2
0.1
..
..
..
0.6
..
..
0.1
..
0.2
..
0.8
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
0.4
..
0.5
..
..
..
0.1
0.4
0.2
0.4
..
..
..
0.0
..
..
..
0.4
0.3
..
0.0
..
..
..
..
..
0.3
..
0.2
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
89.6
..
395.6
..
..
..
115.9
..
..
661.0
49.5
132.5
39.4
..
17.3
..
135.8
17.4
15.8
..
..

..
..
..
56.2
..
161.9
..
18.4
..
46.2
..
38.6
384.1
..
..
58.7
21.3
38.2
..
..
..
43.3
..
..
..
11.9
70.4
..
29.9
..
..
20.8
..
..
..
..

14.4
13.0
6.8
22.8
..
..
..
15.2
26.0
..
2.6
..
34.9
29.4
..
16.8
..
16.7
..
..
12.5
12.8
..
2.7

..
..
..
..
10.6
..
11.9
..
21.0
18.2
21.1
..
..
..
..
23.2
..
..
..
..
9.5
..
46.5
..
..
..
..
12.0
..
..
24.8
20.9
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
106.3
..
20.4
0.4
9.4
..
..
25.3
..
..
7.2
..
..
..
5.1
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
0.5
0.6
1.0
..
..
..
2.7
..
..
..
..
0.2
0.0
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
4.4
..
2.1
..
..
..
4.4
..
0.2
..
..
..
..

62.2
0.1
..
0.3
..
1.3
0.7
0.3
0.1
..
0.0
..
0.2
43.5
0.0
1.0
..
..
..
0.1
0.0
..
..
0.2

..
0.0
..
1.3
0.0
0.0
0.7
..
0.0
0.1
0.0
..
0.1
..
..
..
..
0.0
1.4
..
0.8
..
..
..
0.0
0.0
0.0
..
..
0.1
..
0.0
..
..
..
0.2

2009
..
45.4
70.3
64.5
..
75.0
..
..
..
97.6
34.0
72.1
97.0
86.0
..
80.5
22.0
60.5
..
75.0
24.0
55.0
..
..

37.1
..
..
16.1
41.0
62.4
26.2
13.0
48.7
19.0
13.9
50.6
42.0
..
..
43.6
16.0
20.0
39.6
38.5
9.0
18.8
..
..
24.8
..
47.3
..
9.0
35.9
41.5
17.0
..
15.5
..
..

2002–2009b

3.6
6.1
2.5
2.0
1.1
8.4
1.4
1.9
1.3
9.7
23.2
4.1
5.7
0.8
14.3
2.1
..
1.1
1.5
3.2
0.4
1.7
1.9
4.1

0.5
4.7
3.9
1.4
2.5
0.5
0.7
1.0
1.1
0.6
0.9
0.9
2.3
4.4
6.4
0.5
0.2
3.4
2.8
5.2
1.7
1.1
4.2
3.6
0.7
0.3
1.8
0.8
0.2
10.8
7.6
0.7
..
0.3
0.2
..

2010
29.9
6.0
11.1
9.9
9.0
12.3
8.0
19.6
11.5
27.9
6.5
10.0
49.0
2.5
30.0
10.5
0.2
9.5
6.0
7.5
1.3
7.0
13.6
9.0

5.0
5.0
18.8
25.9
3.7
16.8
10.0
..
4.0
1.7
11.0
28.4
16.0
3.0
1.3
7.9
3.9
5.4
12.3
8.4
12.5
10.1
6.5
9.2
3.1
13.0
2.6
5.1
2.3
..
11.5
0.7
7.0
3.7
2.5
..

2010
1.5
0.6
1.0
0.8
0.9
1.5
0.2
0.3
0.1
4.1
0.4
0.8
1.6
0.0
3.2
1.8
0.0
0.2
0.2
0.9
0.3
0.2
1.2
0.1

0.0
0.4
0.4
0.0
0.0
0.3
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.6
0.2
0.1
0.2
0.0
0.1
0.3
..
0.2
0.1
0.9
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.4
0.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
..
..

188    |    HUMAN DEvELoPMENt REPoRt 2013

Fixed and mobile 

telephone 
subscribers

2010
93.4
124.6
133.9
107.5
14.1
109.2
121.0
105.8
91.7
196.0
73.9
69.6
111.8
79.9
89.5
136.0
53.7
72.6
59.0
64.3
60.2
66.2
57.9
73.6

94.2
7.1
66.8
62.6
46.8
59.1
48.3
2.5
46.8
37.9
47.2
55.8
69.9
81.4
29.6
33.5
47.3
44.2
50.4
40.5
39.4
42.8
20.7
88.3
81.5
33.8
77.6
25.3
21.5
41.4
64.3
9.4
39.5
38.2
39.5
34.3

table 12 InnovatIon and technologyRESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT

INNOVATION

TECHNOLOGY ADOPTION

 Expenditure  Researchers 

Graduates in 
science and 
engineeringa

Patents granted 
to residents and 

nonresidents 

Royalty and 
licence fees 

receipts

Electrification 

rate

Personal 
computers 

Internet users

Fixed broadband 

Internet 

subscriptions

(% of  
GDP)

(per million 

people)

(% of  
total)

(per million people)

($ per capita)

(% of population)

(per 100 people)

HDI rank
178 Burundi
178 Guinea
180 Central African Republic
181 Eritrea
182 Mali
183 Burkina Faso
184 Chad
185 Mozambique
186 Congo, Democratic Republic of the
186 Niger
OTHER COUNTRIES OR TERRITORIES

Korea, Democratic People’s Rep. of
Marshall Islands
Monaco
Nauru
San Marino
Somalia
South Sudan
tuvalu

Human Development Index groups

very high human development
High human development
Medium human development
Low human development

Regions

Arab States
East Asia and the Pacific 
Europe and Central Asia 
Latin America and the Caribbean 
South Asia 
Sub-Saharan Africa 

Least developed countries
Small island developing states
world

2005–2010b

2002–2010b

2002–2011b

2005–2010b

2005–2011b

..
..
..
..
0.2
0.2
..
0.2
0.5
..

..
..
0.0
..
..
..
..
..

2.5
0.8
..
..

..
..
1.0
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
37.7
45.1
..
15.8
..
7.8

..
..
308.1
..
..
..
..
..

3,854.0
..
..
..

..
..
1,948.2
..
..
..
..
..
..

9.6
..
..
7.9
..
23.3
..
12.1
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

20.3
..
..
..

..
..
23.9
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
1.8
..
..

258.4
..
141.2
..
..
..
..
..

566.2
63.4
..
..

..
..
93.8
..
7.0
..
..
..
..

0.0
0.0
..
..
0.0
0.0
..
0.0
..
0.0

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

210.9
..
..
..

..
..
8.2
..
..
..
..
..
..

2009
..
..
..
32.0
..
14.6
..
11.7
11.1
..

26.0
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

99.6
..
..
..

86.7
..
..
93.4
70.1
..
..
..
..

2002–2009b

0.9
0.5
0.3
1.0
0.7
0.6
0.2
1.4
0.0
0.1

..
9.6
..
..
78.9
0.9
..
8.7

58.3
13.6
4.6
1.5

10.8
5.6
12.3
12.2
3.0
1.6
1.7
5.6
14.1

2010
2.1
1.0
2.3
5.4
2.7
1.4
1.7
4.2
0.7
0.8

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
25.0

72.8
35.8
20.8
10.7

27.2
29.8
43.4
34.1
8.4
11.3
4.8
18.7
30.0

2010
0.0
0.0
..
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.0
0.1
0.0
0.0

..
..
..
3.9
32.0
..
..
3.3

26.5
7.1
4.4
0.1

2.0
7.2
10.0
6.6
0.7
0.2
0.1
2.2
7.7

Fixed and mobile 

telephone 
subscribers

2010
14.1
40.3
22.4
4.6
49.2
35.5
24.3
31.3
18.0
25.1

6.6
15.2
..
..
144.9
8.0
..
41.9

153.2
133.5
84.5
42.7

99.6
92.2
150.0
116.7
64.4
47.1
34.5
62.7
95.2

NOTES
a  Includes graduates in manufacturing and 

construction.

b  Data refer to the most recent year available 

during the period specified.

c  In the absence of data on electrification rate, 

99.7% is assumed.

DEFINITIONS

Research and development expenditure: 
Current and capital expenditures (both public and 
private) on creative work undertaken systematically 
to increase knowledge and the use of knowledge for 
new applications. It covers basic research, applied 
research and experimental development.

Researchers in research and development: 
Professionals engaged in the conception or creation 
of new knowledge, products, processes, methods 
or systems and in the management of the projects 

 

concerned. Postgraduate doctoral students (ISCED97 
level 6) engaged in research and development are 
included.

Graduates in science and engineering: People 
who have successfully completed the final year 
of a level or sublevel of education in science and 
engineering.

Patents granted to residents and nonresidents: 
Number of exclusive rights granted for an invention, 
which is a product or a process that provides a new 
way of doing something or offers a new technical 
solution to a problem, expressed per 1 million people.

Royalty and licence fee receipts: Payments 
and receipts between residents and nonresidents 
for the authorized use of intangible, nonproduced, 
nonfinancial assets and proprietary rights (such as 
patents, copyrights, trademarks, industrial processes 
and franchises) and for the use, through licensing 
agreements, of produced originals of prototypes 
(such as films and manuscripts).

Electrification rate: Number of people with access 
to electricity, expressed as a percentage of total 
population. It includes electricity sold commercially 
(both on-grid and off-grid) and self-generated 
electricity but not unauthorized connections.

Personal computers: Number of self-contained 
computers designed for use by a single individual, 
expressed per 100 people.

Internet users: People with access to the 
worldwide network, expressed per 100 people.

Fixed broadband Internet subscriptions: 
Broadband high-speed access to the public Internet 
(a tCP/IP connection), at speeds equal to or 
greater than 256 kilobits per second, in one or both 
directions, expressed per 100 people

Fixed and mobile telephone subscribers: 
Sum of telephone lines and mobile subscribers, 
expressed per 100 people.

MAIN DATA SOURCES

Columns 1 and 2: World Bank (2012a).

Column 3: UNESCo Institute for Statistics (2012).

Column 4: HDRo calculation based on data from 
WIPo (2012) and population data from UNDESA 
(2011).

Column 5: HDRo calculations based on data on 
royalty and licence fee receipts from World Bank 
(2012b).

Column 6: IEA (2012).

Column 7: World Bank (2012c).

Columns 8 and 9: ItU (2012).

Column 10: HDRo calculations based on data on 
cellular subscribers and telephone lines from ItU 
(2012) and population data from UNDESA (2011).

tABLE 12 

Innovation and technology    |    189

Human Development RepoRt 2013The Rise of the South Human progress in a Diverse WorldE13

l
b
a
T

Environment

PRIMARY 

ENERGY SUPPLY

EMISSIONS

NATURAL RESOURCES

Fossil 
fuels Renewables 

Carbon dioxide

Greenhouse 

gas

Total

Per capita

Per capita

Natural 
resource 
depletion

Forest area

Fresh water 
withdrawals

Endangered 

species

Agricultural 

land 

IMPACTS

Number of 
deaths due 
to natural 
disasters

Population 
living on 
degraded 

land

HDI rank
VERY HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT

(% of total)

(megatonnes)

(tonnes)

(average 
annual % 
growth)

(tonnes 
of carbon 
dioxide 
equivalent)

(% of GNI)

(% of 

land area)

(% change)

(% of total 
renewable 

water 
resources)

(% of all 
species)

(% of land 

area)

(annual 
average 
per million 
people)

2009

2009

2008

2008

1970/2008

2005

2010

2010

1990/2010

2003–2012a

2011

2009

2005/2011

1 Norway
2 Australia
3 United States
4 Netherlands
5 Germany
6 New Zealand
7 Ireland
7 Sweden
9 Switzerland
10 Japan
11 Canada
12 Korea, Republic of
13 Hong Kong, China (SAR)
13 Iceland
15 Denmark
16 Israel
17 Belgium
18 Austria
18 Singapore
20 France
21 Finland
21 Slovenia
23 Spain
24 Liechtenstein
25 Italy
26 Luxembourg
26 United Kingdom
28 Czech Republic
29 Greece
30 Brunei Darussalam
31 Cyprus
32 Malta
33 Andorra
33 Estonia
35 Slovakia
36 Qatar
37 Hungary
38 Barbados
39 Poland
40 Chile
41 Lithuania
41 United Arab Emirates
43 Portugal
44 Latvia
45 Argentina
46 Seychelles
47 Croatia
HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
48 Bahrain
49 Bahamas
50 Belarus
51 Uruguay
52 Montenegro
52 Palau
54 Kuwait
55 Russian Federation
56 Romania
57 Bulgaria

58.8
94.4
84.1
93.1
79.5
63.7
95.0
32.7
53.3
81.0
74.9
..
95.1
15.7
80.4
96.5
73.6
70.2
99.8
51.0
54.0
69.3
79.9
..
87.5
88.8
87.3
79.6
92.4
100.0
95.7
99.9
..
84.8
69.5
100.0
74.2
..
92.8
74.5
55.8
100.0
78.0
59.5
89.4
..
83.4

99.9
..
92.5
60.3
..
..
100.0
90.2
76.3
73.1

43.3
5.6
5.4
4.0
8.7
36.1
4.5
34.8
17.7
3.3
16.9
..
0.4
84.2
17.4
5.0
3.9
27.8
0.1
7.7
23.8
12.7
9.6
..
9.7
3.1
3.2
5.8
6.4
0.0
3.9
0.1
..
15.1
7.3
0.0
7.4
..
6.7
25.1
10.4
0.0
19.7
37.1
7.0
..
10.9

0.0
..
5.0
37.1
..
..
0.0
2.8
15.3
6.2

50
399
5,461
174
787
33
44
49
40
1,208
544
509
39
2
46
38
105
68
32
377
57
17
329
..
445
11
523
117
98
11
9
3
1
18
38
68
55
1
316
73
15
155
56
8
192
1
23

22
2
63
8
2
0
77
1,709
95
51

10.5
18.6
18.0
10.6
9.6
7.8
9.9
5.3
5.3
9.5
16.3
10.5
5.5
7.0
8.4
5.2
9.8
8.1
6.7
5.9
10.6
8.5
7.2
..
7.4
21.5
8.5
11.2
8.7
27.5
7.9
6.2
6.5
13.6
6.9
49.1
5.4
5.0
8.3
4.4
4.5
25.0
5.3
3.3
4.8
7.8
5.3

21.4
6.5
6.5
2.5
3.1
10.5
30.1
12.0
4.4
6.6

1.0
1.2
–0.4
–0.1
..
1.1
1.1
–2.0
–0.6
0.7
0.1
4.9
2.6
0.1
–1.1
–0.2
–0.7
0.5
–0.7
–1.0
0.5
..
2.0
..
0.8
–1.7
–0.8
..
3.1
–2.3
2.8
2.8
..
..
..
–0.9
–0.6
2.7
–0.3
1.4
..
–2.5
2.9
..
0.9
7.3
..

1.5
–2.2
..
0.5
..
–0.3
–0.3
..
–0.8
–0.2

5.8
9.6
3.7
2.4
1.9
10.0
5.8
2.1
1.2
1.0
4.7
1.2
0.5
3.3
2.9
1.1
1.8
1.9
1.4
2.3
3.4
2.6
1.7
..
1.4
3.5
1.8
2.1
1.4
17.9
1.3
0.9
..
2.3
1.4
18.0
1.6
..
2.7
1.6
2.5
6.2
1.8
2.3
3.9
..
1.5

4.3
..
2.4
8.1
..
..
6.3
4.9
1.7
2.0

10.2
6.5
0.9
0.8
0.1
..
0.2
0.4
0.0
0.0
2.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.7
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.3
0.0
..
0.1
0.0
1.3
0.5
0.3
..
0.0
..
..
1.6
0.4
..
0.5
..
1.4
12.4
0.6
..
0.1
0.5
4.9
0.0
0.9

..
..
1.0
0.6
..
..
..
14.3
1.6
2.0

33.1
19.4
33.2
10.8
31.8
30.9
10.7
68.7
31.0
68.5
34.1
63.0
..
0.3
12.8
7.1
22.4
47.1
3.3
29.0
72.9
62.2
36.4
43.1
31.1
33.5
11.9
34.4
30.3
72.1
18.7
1.1
35.6
52.3
40.2
0.0
22.6
19.4
30.5
21.7
34.5
3.8
38.1
53.8
10.7
88.5
34.3

0.7
51.5
41.6
10.0
40.4
87.6
0.4
49.4
28.6
36.1

10.2
–3.4
2.6
5.8
3.1
7.1
58.9
3.4
7.7
0.1
0.0
–2.3
..
243.7
22.3
16.7
0.1
2.9
0.0
9.8
1.2
5.5
31.5
6.2
20.5
1.1
10.3
1.1
18.3
–8.0
7.5
0.0
0.0
6.1
0.6
0.0
12.7
0.0
5.1
6.3
11.1
29.5
3.9
5.7
–15.5
0.0
3.8

143.5
0.0
10.9
89.6
0.0
5.6
81.2
0.0
3.2
18.0

0.8
4.6
15.6
11.7
21.0
1.5
1.5
1.5
4.9
20.9
1.6
36.5
..
0.1
10.8
101.9
34.0
4.7
31.7
15.0
1.5
3.0
29.0
..
23.7
1.9
8.8
14.8
12.7
1.1
19.3
71.3
..
14.0
1.4
455.2
5.4
76.1
19.4
1.2
9.6
2,032.0
12.3
1.2
4.0
..
0.6

219.8
..
7.5
2.6
..
..
2,465.0
1.5
3.2
28.7

6.9
18.5
19.9
5.4
10.5
20.4
7.3
4.9
6.6
13.7
7.2
9.5
8.3
8.4
6.3
11.2
5.5
11.6
13.7
12.8
4.4
11.8
17.7
1.1
13.5
2.8
10.1
5.0
16.3
8.4
7.7
6.8
3.7
3.5
5.2
7.3
8.0
8.7
5.7
9.9
4.1
7.7
17.0
4.6
9.0
16.1
14.3

7.2
10.0
4.2
10.8
10.5
11.4
7.4
10.2
9.4
9.3

3.3
53.2
44.1
56.8
48.4
43.6
60.8
7.5
38.1
12.6
7.4
19.1
..
22.8
62.1
24.1
45.0
38.4
1.0
53.4
7.6
23.2
55.5
40.6
47.3
50.6
71.6
54.9
63.6
2.2
13.5
29.1
38.3
22.0
40.1
5.6
63.9
44.2
53.0
21.2
42.9
6.8
40.3
29.5
51.3
6.5
23.2

10.3
1.4
44.0
84.6
38.2
10.9
8.5
13.2
58.8
46.3

0
3
1
12
12
0
0
0
14
1
0
1
0
..
0
1
20
4
..
33
0
15
33
..
33
33
1
5
1
..
0
..
..
0
2
..
7
0
3
1
1
..
26
4
0
0
18

..
3
0
1
0
..
..
40
3
1

(%)

2010

..
9.0
1.0
5.0
8.0
5.0
..
..
..
..
3.0
3.0
..
..
9.0
13.0
10.0
3.0
..
4.0
..
8.0
1.0
..
2.0
..
3.0
4.0
1.0
..
11.0
..
..
5.0
9.0
..
17.0
..
13.0
1.0
5.0
2.0
2.0
2.0
2.0
..
18.0

..
..
5.0
6.0
8.0
..
1.0
3.0
13.0
8.0

190    |    HUMAN DEvELoPMENt REPoRt 2013

PRIMARY 

ENERGY SUPPLY

EMISSIONS

NATURAL RESOURCES

Fossil 
fuels Renewables 

Carbon dioxide

Greenhouse 

gas

Total

Per capita

Per capita

Natural 
resource 
depletion

Forest area

Fresh water 
withdrawals

Endangered 

species

Agricultural 

land 

IMPACTS

Number of 
deaths due 
to natural 
disasters

Population 
living on 
degraded 

land

(% of total)

(megatonnes)

(tonnes)

HDI rank
2009
100.0
57 Saudi Arabia
84.1
59 Cuba
78.6
59 Panama
88.9
61 Mexico
44.7
62 Costa Rica
..
63 Grenada
99.2
64 Libya
94.7
64 Malaysia
92.4
64 Serbia
..
67 Antigua and Barbuda
99.9
67 trinidad and tobago
99.0
69 Kazakhstan
54.0
70 Albania
87.7
71 venezuela, Bolivarian Republic of
..
72 Dominica
68.0
72 Georgia
95.9
72 Lebanon
..
72 Saint Kitts and Nevis
99.5
76 Iran, Islamic Republic of
77 Peru
73.5
78 the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia 84.3
78 Ukraine
80.0
..
80 Mauritius
92.2
81 Bosnia and Herzegovina
98.2
82 Azerbaijan
83 Saint vincent and the Grenadines
..
100.0
84 oman
85 Brazil
51.3
83.7
85 Jamaica
68.4
87 Armenia
..
88 Saint Lucia
86.7
89 Ecuador
90 turkey
89.9
75.2
91 Colombia
45.3
92 Sri Lanka
99.8
93 Algeria
94 tunisia
85.7
MEDIUM HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
95 tonga
96 Belize
96 Dominican Republic
96 Fiji
96 Samoa
100 Jordan
101 China
102 turkmenistan
103 thailand
104 Maldives
105 Suriname
106 Gabon
107 El Salvador
108 Bolivia, Plurinational State of
108 Mongolia
110 Palestine, State of
111 Paraguay
112 Egypt
113 Moldova, Republic of
114 Philippines
114 Uzbekistan

..
..
76.6
..
..
98.0
87.4
100.7
79.4
..
..
33.9
37.8
79.1
96.4
..
28.5
96.3
91.3
57.0
98.4

2009
0.0
15.9
21.5
9.6
55.3
..
0.8
5.3
8.1
..
0.1
1.1
38.8
12.4
..
33.3
2.6
..
0.5
26.5
11.3
1.6
..
12.1
1.7
..
0.0
45.8
16.3
6.7
..
12.4
10.2
25.1
54.7
0.2
14.2

..
..
23.4
..
..
1.8
11.9
0.0
20.5
..
..
66.1
62.0
20.9
3.2
..
153.2
3.8
3.1
43.0
1.6

2008
434
31
7
476
8
0
58
208
50
0
50
237
4
170
0
5
17
0
538
41
12
324
4
31
47
0
46
393
12
6
0
27
284
68
12
111
25

0
0
22
1
0
21
7,032
48
286
1
2
2
6
13
11
2
4
210
5
83
125

2008
16.6
2.8
2.0
4.3
1.8
2.4
9.5
7.6
6.8
5.1
37.4
15.1
1.3
6.1
1.9
1.2
4.1
4.9
7.4
1.4
5.8
7.0
3.1
8.3
5.4
1.8
17.3
2.1
4.5
1.8
2.3
1.9
4.0
1.5
0.6
3.2
2.4

1.7
1.3
2.2
1.5
0.9
3.7
5.3
9.7
4.2
3.0
4.7
1.7
1.0
1.3
4.1
0.5
0.7
2.7
1.3
0.9
4.6

(average 
annual % 
growth)

1970/2008

2.0
0.7
0.9
1.8
2.5
4.4
–1.4
4.7
..
–0.8
3.7
..
–0.8
–0.4
4.4
..
2.5
..
2.2
0.1
..
..
4.4
..
..
4.7
11.1
2.0
1.4
..
3.4
2.6
3.2
0.3
1.8
2.9
3.2

4.6
0.7
3.1
1.0
3.9
3.4
4.7
..
6.3
..
0.2
–2.2
2.6
2.2
1.6
..
2.1
4.0
..
0.7
..

(tonnes 
of carbon 
dioxide 
equivalent)

(% of GNI)

(% of 

land area)

(% change)

(% of total 
renewable 

water 
resources)

(% of all 
species)

(% of land 

area)

2005
2.5
1.4
1.4
1.7
0.9
..
2.7
2.4
2.3
..
7.8
4.3
1.1
3.0
..
1.4
0.4
..
2.1
0.9
1.0
2.1
..
1.2
4.7
..
7.1
4.0
0.7
1.3
..
1.7
1.4
1.8
0.6
1.8
1.0

..
..
0.9
..
..
0.5
1.5
6.7
1.6
..
..
6.4
0.8
4.9
3.7
..
4.1
0.9
1.1
0.8
1.9

2010
..
..
0.0
5.7
0.1
..
..
6.9
..
..
32.0
23.4
2.5
12.4
0.0
0.6
0.0
..
..
8.1
5.9
3.7
0.0
..
34.5
0.0
..
3.4
0.6
1.0
..
12.9
0.4
7.8
0.3
18.1
5.1

0.0
0.0
0.2
0.0
0.3
1.0
5.1
..
2.4
0.0
..
33.1
0.4
12.3
32.3
..
0.0
7.1
0.2
2.1
19.2

2010
0.5
26.1
43.7
33.3
51.0
50.0
0.1
62.3
31.0
22.3
44.1
1.2
28.3
52.5
59.5
39.5
13.4
42.3
6.8
53.1
39.2
16.8
17.3
42.7
11.3
68.5
0.0
62.4
31.1
9.3
77.0
35.6
14.7
54.5
28.8
0.6
6.5

12.5
61.1
40.8
55.5
60.4
1.1
21.9
8.8
37.1
3.0
94.6
85.4
13.9
52.7
7.0
1.5
44.3
0.1
11.7
25.7
7.7

1990/2010

2003–2012a

0.0
39.5
–14.3
–7.8
1.6
0.0
0.0
–8.6
17.3
–4.9
–5.9
–3.3
–1.6
–11.1
–10.7
–1.3
4.5
0.0
0.0
–3.1
9.4
4.7
–9.8
–1.1
0.0
5.5
0.0
–9.6
–2.2
–24.5
7.3
–28.6
17.1
–3.2
–20.9
–10.5
56.5

0.0
–12.2
0.0
6.4
31.5
0.0
31.6
0.0
–3.0
0.0
–0.1
0.0
–23.9
–8.9
–13.1
1.0
–16.9
59.1
21.0
16.7
7.6

943.3
19.8
0.3
17.5
2.4
..
718.0
2.3
..
3.3
6.0
28.9
4.4
0.7
..
2.6
28.1
..
67.7
1.0
16.1
27.6
26.4
0.9
35.2
..
86.6
0.7
6.2
36.4
..
3.6
18.8
0.6
24.5
52.7
61.7

..
0.8
16.6
0.3
..
99.4
19.5
100.8
13.1
15.7
0.5
0.1
5.5
0.3
1.4
49.9
0.1
119.0
16.4
17.0
118.3

2011
8.8
18.1
7.2
17.3
8.0
10.5
8.7
15.4
7.2
8.3
6.8
8.4
12.7
8.3
8.6
9.3
10.0
8.6
8.8
8.4
13.3
8.2
15.2
9.8
8.2
9.0
8.5
10.0
15.2
7.9
9.4
12.7
15.3
11.5
17.8
12.2
11.2

8.5
6.4
16.1
13.1
10.8
9.1
12.1
8.4
12.5
9.1
3.5
5.9
3.8
4.7
6.4
6.2
3.9
8.9
6.7
16.8
7.9

2009
80.7
62.5
30.0
52.9
35.3
36.8
8.8
24.0
57.8
29.5
10.5
77.2
44.0
24.3
32.7
36.1
67.3
21.2
29.8
16.8
40.2
71.2
48.3
41.7
57.6
25.6
5.9
31.3
41.5
61.6
18.0
30.3
50.6
38.3
41.6
17.4
63.0

43.1
6.7
51.1
22.9
23.7
11.5
56.2
69.4
38.7
26.7
0.5
19.9
74.5
34.1
74.5
61.0
52.6
3.7
75.2
40.1
62.6

(annual 
average 
per million 
people)

2005/2011

1
0
2
1
2
38
..
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
15
0
0
..
1
6
1
2
1
0
0
0
5
1
3
0
6
1
0
4
2
4
0

0
13
9
8
5
0
1
..
2
0
2
0
7
5
4
0
0
0
1
9
0

(%)

2010
4.0
17.0
4.0
4.0
1.0
..
8.0
1.0
19.0
..
..
24.0
6.0
2.0
..
2.0
1.0
..
25.0
1.0
7.0
6.0
..
6.0
4.0
..
6.0
8.0
3.0
10.0
..
2.0
5.0
2.0
21.0
29.0
37.0

..
1.0
7.0
..
..
22.0
9.0
11.0
17.0
..
..
..
6.0
2.0
31.0
..
1.0
25.0
22.0
2.0
27.0

tABLE 13  Environment    |    191

Human Development RepoRt 2013The Rise of the South Human progress in a Diverse WorldPRIMARY 

ENERGY SUPPLY

EMISSIONS

NATURAL RESOURCES

Fossil 
fuels Renewables 

Carbon dioxide

Greenhouse 

gas

Total

Per capita

Per capita

Natural 
resource 
depletion

Forest area

Fresh water 
withdrawals

Endangered 

species

Agricultural 

land 

IMPACTS

Number of 
deaths due 
to natural 
disasters

Population 
living on 
degraded 

land

(% of total)

(megatonnes)

(tonnes)

2009
99.3
..
..
64.3
50.3
65.6
..
87.8
..
72.5
41.2
56.2
70.5
44.7
92.5
97.6
..
46.1
..
24.3
..
73.0
27.8
..
..
..

44.2
..
..
16.8
69.8
61.8
37.6
27.7
30.9
..
11.1
14.7
57.8
..
..
11.1
..
14.4
98.7
28.1
..
7.6
..
..
40.4
..
23.5
..
..
30.2
25.7
7.1
..

2009
0.7
..
..
23.6
49.8
34.4
..
10.0
..
28.4
58.6
43.3
19.2
55.3
4.9
0.9
..
53.9
..
76.2
..
26.1
70.8
..
..
..

53.1
..
..
83.2
30.2
37.4
62.4
72.3
69.1
..
88.9
85.3
41.8
..
..
88.5
..
83.4
1.3
71.9
..
92.2
..
..
57.4
..
76.9
..
..
69.8
69.4
92.9
..

2008
72
0
2
5
9
406
0
436
0
6
3
127
4
4
48
103
0
12
0
9
5
1,743
5
2
1
1

2
0
0
10
47
163
24
13
5
2
6
96
5
2
2
4
..
1
23
2
4
2
1
0
4
1
7
0
1
14
9
7
1

2008
3.6
0.6
2.0
2.5
1.2
1.7
0.3
8.9
0.4
1.2
0.5
1.5
1.8
0.8
1.5
3.4
0.6
0.9
0.2
0.4
7.3
1.5
0.3
0.3
1.0
1.1

0.5
0.4
0.8
0.3
0.3
1.0
1.4
0.3
0.3
0.1
0.2
0.6
0.4
0.6
0.3
0.1
..
0.2
1.0
0.3
0.1
0.2
0.6
0.3
0.5
0.1
0.4
0.2
0.1
0.3
0.7
0.1
0.2

(average 
annual % 
growth)

1970/2008

3.3
..
–0.2
..
2.2
4.7
–1.0
0.7
–0.4
..
..
2.2
..
0.7
3.1
0.9
4.2
1.9
..
0.5
11.3
3.8
1.8
0.5
12.4
0.7

0.4
1.1
3.7
0.0
..
2.3
2.1
1.1
3.0
–1.1
0.4
1.4
0.7
1.2
0.3
5.0
..
1.7
2.5
3.0
–0.6
–4.6
–0.9
2.3
4.3
4.0
–0.5
1.0
–0.4
0.1
–2.0
1.2
–4.6

(tonnes 
of carbon 
dioxide 
equivalent)

(% of GNI)

(% of 

land area)

(% change)

(% of total 
renewable 

water 
resources)

(% of all 
species)

(% of land 

area)

2005
0.9
..
..
4.1
1.2
1.5
..
1.9
..
1.0
0.9
1.3
4.4
1.7
0.5
0.7
..
1.1
..
0.6
..
0.7
1.9
..
..
..

2.7
..
..
0.9
0.7
1.1
5.1
2.2
1.6
..
1.4
1.1
1.0
..
..
1.0
..
0.8
0.5
0.6
..
3.8
..
..
0.9
..
1.0
..
..
3.0
1.3
1.1
..

2010
11.9
..
6.0
3.4
0.5
6.6
..
6.1
0.0
6.9
0.8
9.4
0.7
1.6
1.6
45.7
0.1
1.7
..
8.0
49.4
4.4
0.1
8.3
3.6
0.1

59.6
15.6
0.8
1.1
2.3
2.8
35.1
..
4.8
1.0
3.2
22.0
0.8
34.3
22.2
2.5
1.0
3.4
14.5
..
4.5
18.9
..
0.8
0.3
3.1
3.9
1.1
1.8
12.9
2.7
4.2
6.4

2010
2.7
91.7
77.2
20.0
46.4
52.1
15.0
7.6
36.1
5.0
2.9
44.5
8.9
25.7
11.5
1.9
21.1
33.7
49.9
21.7
58.0
23.0
57.2
68.2
69.1
32.7

65.6
79.1
28.1
6.1
11.1
2.2
46.9
48.3
42.1
21.6
37.7
9.9
44.0
0.2
63.4
25.4
1.4
5.3
1.0
3.7
15.2
66.5
0.2
48.0
41.2
17.6
32.7
1.6
34.4
29.4
40.4
11.2
44.9

1990/2010

2003–2012a

32.0
0.9
0.0
–17.3
–36.2
–20.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
14.0
0.5
47.4
–16.8
–31.0
1.6
2.6
47.3
–23.0
–23.2
–33.7
–12.6
7.0
–22.0
–9.0
7.1
19.3

–1.4
–4.8
0.0
–6.5
–3.5
–33.2
–4.1
–19.0
–18.1
–8.3
–19.4
–47.5
–9.4
–41.7
–8.9
–24.5
10.0
–58.1
0.0
–12.9
–37.1
–6.3
0.0
8.6
–20.8
36.8
1.8
–75.0
–16.9
–8.4
–29.5
–18.6
–12.2

99.8
..
0.7
1.6
1.2
5.6
..
25.0
..
43.7
74.8
9.3
1.7
0.7
43.4
87.3
6.8
2.6
..
1.8
0.1
39.8
0.5
1.3
0.4
23.1

0.0
..
0.3
8.9
2.9
79.5
0.4
2.8
0.3
4.4
5.4
3.6
5.7
14.0
0.0
4.7
1.7
1.2
168.6
8.6
0.5
1.7
6.3
0.9
0.5
1.6
1.7
0.8
5.6
57.6
21.0
4.6
0.1

2011
10.9
13.7
3.8
2.0
8.3
14.3
12.4
14.1
12.0
5.9
6.4
12.1
5.6
4.8
15.2
8.2
12.5
9.3
5.2
5.7
6.4
14.0
12.1
10.5
6.8
2.7

4.4
14.8
14.9
8.4
8.6
8.6
4.6
7.9
10.9
21.0
12.3
6.6
6.9
8.1
11.4
6.1
3.0
4.2
9.3
19.4
7.6
3.3
8.2
4.9
4.5
5.7
6.7
11.7
8.6
4.8
3.3
6.7
8.4

2009
75.7
31.4
8.5
45.6
28.5
29.6
42.0
81.7
15.3
55.4
33.9
33.1
47.1
42.8
67.3
20.1
21.8
41.0
25.2
68.1
10.9
60.5
31.5
10.2
13.2
71.0

30.9
3.0
58.3
48.1
70.3
34.1
46.8
19.0
19.8
70.2
40.1
81.8
49.4
38.5
2.5
29.6
77.0
62.1
44.4
66.8
69.9
31.5
73.4
66.5
29.8
81.1
63.8
83.3
59.1
57.5
42.4
35.0
27.1

(annual 
average 
per million 
people)

2005/2011

1
45
4
0
4
2
0
1
0
2
3
3
7
7
1
0
0
14
1
1
..
2
1
0
1
0

0
4
..
2
6
3
2
287
0
5
0
0
0
1
4
6
0
1
2
65
2
1
6
1
1
1
0
0
4
1
0
2
0

(%)

2010
33.0
..
..
22.0
15.0
3.0
..
17.0
..
10.0
10.0
8.0
28.0
14.0
39.0
5.0
..
9.0
..
1.0
..
10.0
39.0
4.0
..
..

..
..
..
31.0
11.0
4.0
3.0
19.0
15.0
..
25.0
12.0
16.0
24.0
..
2.0
64.0
5.0
32.0
15.0
23.0
5.0
8.0
18.0
2.0
10.0
1.0
..
19.0
40.0
29.0
72.0
..

HDI rank
116 Syrian Arab Republic
117 Micronesia, Federated States of
118 Guyana
119 Botswana
120 Honduras
121 Indonesia
121 Kiribati
121 South Africa
124 vanuatu
125 Kyrgyzstan
125 tajikistan
127 viet Nam
128 Namibia
129 Nicaragua
130 Morocco
131 Iraq
132 Cape verde
133 Guatemala
134 timor-Leste
135 Ghana
136 Equatorial Guinea
136 India
138 Cambodia
138 Lao People’s Democratic Republic
140 Bhutan
141 Swaziland
LOw HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
142 Congo
143 Solomon Islands
144 Sao tome and Principe
145 Kenya
146 Bangladesh
146 Pakistan
148 Angola
149 Myanmar
150 Cameroon
151 Madagascar
152 tanzania, United Republic of
153 Nigeria
154 Senegal
155 Mauritania
156 Papua New Guinea
157 Nepal
158 Lesotho
159 togo
160 Yemen
161 Haiti
161 Uganda
163 Zambia
164 Djibouti
165 Gambia
166 Benin
167 Rwanda
168 Côte d’Ivoire
169 Comoros
170 Malawi
171 Sudan
172 Zimbabwe
173 Ethiopia
174 Liberia

192    |    HUMAN DEvELoPMENt REPoRt 2013

table 13 environmentPRIMARY 

ENERGY SUPPLY

EMISSIONS

NATURAL RESOURCES

Fossil 
fuels Renewables 

Carbon dioxide

Greenhouse 

gas

Total

Per capita

Per capita

Natural 
resource 
depletion

Forest area

Fresh water 
withdrawals

Endangered 

species

Agricultural 

land 

IMPACTS

Number of 
deaths due 
to natural 
disasters

Population 
living on 
degraded 

land

(% of total)

(megatonnes)

(tonnes)

2009
..
..
..
..
..
..
22.6
..
..
..
7.7
3.7
..

81.7
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

81.0
86.7
..
..

96.7
..
88.3
72.6
76.7
..
..
..
80.7

2009
..
..
..
..
..
..
77.4
..
..
..
96.7
96.6
..

0.7
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

7.5
9.5
..
..

3.1
..
4.7
26.3
22.6
..
..
..
13.1

2008
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
1
2
0
2

3
1

78
0
..
..
..
1
..
..

12,643
5,765
10,877
473

1,509
8,255
3,723
1,637
2,509
670
191
137
29,837

2008
0.0
0.2
0.2
0.0
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.0
0.1
0.0
0.1
0.0
0.1

3.2
1.9
..
3.9
..
0.1
..
..

11.4
5.8
3.2
0.4

4.6
4.3
7.9
2.9
1.5
0.9
0.2
2.7
4.5

(average 
annual % 
growth)

1970/2008

–4.4
1.4
–0.9
0.6
–0.7
–1.6
..
0.5
4.2
0.8
–2.9
–2.8
0.5

..
..
..
..
..
0.5
..
..

–0.2
1.0
3.8
0.5

1.1
4.5
..
1.2
3.2
0.4
–0.5
1.4
0.4

(tonnes 
of carbon 
dioxide 
equivalent)

(% of GNI)

(% of 

land area)

(% change)

(% of total 
renewable 

water 
resources)

(% of all 
species)

(% of land 

area)

2005
..
..
..
..
..
..
0.8
..
..
..
1.1
1.9
..

1.0
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

2.7
2.8
..
..

1.5
..
3.0
2.7
0.8
..
..
..
1.7

2010
2.6
0.5
2.1
12.7
14.3
0.0
0.0
9.8
4.3
29.0
3.3
13.7
2.4

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

0.9
..
5.3
9.5

..
..
7.3
5.7
4.0
11.6
9.0
..
3.3

2010
2.1
71.9
38.1
6.7
26.6
36.3
15.2
10.2
20.6
9.2
49.6
68.0
1.0

47.1
70.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
10.8
..
33.3

29.1
38.0
24.6
28.8

7.1
29.4
38.5
47.2
14.5
28.4
29.6
63.1
31.1

1990/2010

2003–2012a

0.0
–8.8
–12.6
–40.5
–9.9
–2.6
–5.5
–11.2
–17.5
–12.1
–10.0
–3.9
–38.1

–30.9
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
–18.5
..
0.0

1.1
–4.1
1.3
–10.6

–7.8
2.1
0.7
–8.9
2.4
–10.2
–9.4
–3.5
–3.3

35.6
0.6
0.3
2.3
0.7
0.0
9.2
6.5
7.9
0.9
0.3
0.0
7.0

11.2
..
..
..
..
22.4
..
..

8.2
2.8
16.4
4.4

87.4
..
5.8
1.5
28.6
1.6
2.8
..
7.3

2011
5.8
5.7
6.5
4.5
7.3
1.6
7.4
2.8
2.7
3.7
7.0
6.4
3.6

8.6
11.0
6.8
12.1
0.0
6.8
..
13.0

13.6
11.4
12.8
7.6

9.4
12.5
9.6
11.5
12.5
7.5
7.6
14.9
11.7

2009
58.1
58.0
47.7
83.7
58.0
8.4
75.2
33.7
43.7
39.2
62.7
9.9
34.6

24.1
72.2
..
20.0
16.7
70.2
..
60.0

42.6
26.5
60.9
45.8

63.1
44.9
20.5
37.5
33.9
54.7
47.1
3.3
38.6

(annual 
average 
per million 
people)

2005/2011

11
1
3
2
0
0
0
0
0
2
1
0
0

5
0
..
..
..
2
..
..

8
7
2
14

1
9
13
3
2
1
20
16
6

(%)

2010
11.0
1.0
..
19.0
1.0
..
59.0
60.0
73.0
45.0
2.0
..
25.0

3.0
..
..
..
..
26.0
..
..

..
8.4
..
20.2

24.9
..
8.5
5.4
10.1
25.0
26.0
..
10.6

HDI rank
175 Afghanistan
176 Guinea-Bissau
177 Sierra Leone
178 Burundi
178 Guinea
180 Central African Republic
181 Eritrea
182 Mali
183 Burkina Faso
184 Chad
185 Mozambique
186 Congo, Democratic Republic of the
186 Niger
OTHER COUNTRIES OR TERRITORIES

Korea, Democratic People’s Rep. of
Marshall Islands
Monaco
Nauru
San Marino
Somalia
South Sudan
tuvalu

Human Development Index groups

very high human development
High human development
Medium human development
Low human development

Regions

Arab States
East Asia and the Pacific
Europe and Central Asia
Latin America and the Caribbean
South Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa

Least developed countries
Small island developing states
world

NOTE
a  Data refer to the most recent year available 

during the period specified.

DEFINITIONS

Fossil fuels: Percentage of total energy supply that 
comes from natural resources formed from biomass in 
the geological past (such as coal, oil and natural gas).

Renewables: Percentage of total energy supply 
that comes from constantly replenished natural 
processes, including solar, wind, biomass, 
geothermal, hydropower and ocean resources and 
some waste. Nuclear energy is not included.

Carbon dioxide emissions: Human-originated 
carbon dioxide emissions stemming from the burning 
of fossil fuels, gas flaring and the production of 
cement, including carbon dioxide emitted by forest 
biomass through depletion of forest areas.

Carbon dioxide emissions per capita: Carbon 
dioxide emissions divided by midyear population.

Greenhouse gas emissions per capita: 
Emissions from methane, nitrous oxide and other 
greenhouse gases, including hydrofluorocarbons, 
 

per fluorocarbons and sulfur hexafluoride, divided by 
midyear population. Carbon dioxide emissions are 
not included.

Natural resource depletion: Monetary expression 
of energy, mineral and forest depletion, expressed 
as a percentage of total gross national income (GNI).

Forest area: Land spanning more than 0.5 hectare 
with trees taller than 5 metres and a canopy cover 
of more than 10%, or trees able to reach these 
thresholds in situ. It excludes land predominantly 
under agricultural or urban land use, tree stands in 
agricultural production systems (for example, in fruit 
plantations and agroforestry systems) and trees in 
urban parks and gardens. Areas under reforestation 
that have not yet reached but are expected to reach 
a canopy cover of 10% and a tree height of 5 meters 
are included, as are temporarily unstocked areas, 
resulting from human intervention or natural causes, 
which are expected to regenerate.

Fresh water withdrawals: total fresh water 
withdrawn in a given year, expressed as a 
percentage of total renewable water resources.

Endangered species: Percentage of animal 
species (including mammals, birds, reptiles, 

amphibians, fish and invertebrates) classified as 
critically endangered, endangered or vulnerable 
by the International Union for the Conservation of 
Nature.

Agricultural land: the sum of areas under 
arable land (land under temporary agricultural 
crops; multiple-cropped areas are counted only 
once), temporary meadows for mowing or pasture, 
land under market and kitchen gardens and land 
temporarily fallow (less than five years), expressed 
as a percentage of total land. Abandoned land 
resulting from shifting cultivation is excluded.

Number of deaths due to natural disasters: 
Number of people confirmed as dead and missing 
and presumed dead as a result of a natural disaster. 
Natural disasters are classified as climatological, 
hydrological and meteorological disasters, which 
include drought, extreme temperature, flood, mass 
movement, wet storm and wildfire.

Population living on degraded land: Percentage 
of the population living on severely or very severely 
degraded land. Land degradation estimates consider 
biomass, soil health, water quantity and biodiversity 
and range in severity.

MAIN DATA SOURCES

Columns 1 and 2: HDRo calculations based on data 
on total primary energy supply from IEA (2012).

Columns 3 and 4: World Bank (2012a).

Columns 5 and 7: HDRo calculations based on data 
from World Bank (2012a).

Column 6: HDRo calculations based on data from 
World Bank (2012a) and UNDESA (2011).

Columns 8 and 9: HDRo calculations based on data 
on forest and total land area from FAo (2012).

Column 10: FAo (2011).

Column 11: IUCN (2012).

Column 12: HDRo calculations based on data from 
FAo (2012).

Column 13: CRED EM-DAt (2012) and UNDESA 
(2011).

Column 14: FAo (2012).

tABLE 13  Environment    |    193

Human Development RepoRt 2013The Rise of the South Human progress in a Diverse WorldE14

l
b
a
T

Population trends

Population

Totala

Annual growth

Urban

Median age

Total dependency ratio

Total fertility rate

Sex ratio at birthb

(millions)

(%)

(% of total)

(years)

(per 100 people 
ages 15–64)

(births  
per woman)

(male to female births)

2012

2030

2000/2005

2010/2015a,c

2000

2012

2000

2010

2000

2012

2000

2012a,c

2000d

2012c

HDI rank
VERY HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT

1 Norway
2 Australia
3 United States
4 Netherlands
5 Germany
6 New Zealand
7 Ireland
7 Sweden
9 Switzerland
10 Japan
11 Canada
12 Korea, Republic of
13 Hong Kong, China (SAR)
13 Iceland
15 Denmark
16 Israel
17 Belgium
18 Austria
18 Singapore
20 France
21 Finland
21 Slovenia
23 Spain
24 Liechtenstein
25 Italy
26 Luxembourg
26 United Kingdom
28 Czech Republic
29 Greece
30 Brunei Darussalam
31 Cyprus
32 Malta
33 Andorra
33 Estonia
35 Slovakia
36 Qatar
37 Hungary
38 Barbados
39 Poland
40 Chile
41 Lithuania
41 United Arab Emirates
43 Portugal
44 Latvia
45 Argentina
46 Seychelles
47 Croatia
HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
48 Bahrain
49 Bahamas
50 Belarus
51 Uruguay
52 Montenegro
52 Palau
54 Kuwait
55 Russian Federation
56 Romania
57 Bulgaria
57 Saudi Arabia
59 Cuba
59 Panama

5.0 e
22.9 f
315.8
16.7
82.0
4.5
4.6
9.5
7.7
126.4
34.7
48.6
7.2
0.3
5.6
7.7
10.8
8.4
5.3
63.5
5.4
2.0
46.8 g
0.0
61.0
0.5
62.8
10.6
11.4
0.4
1.1
0.4
0.1
1.3
5.5
1.9
9.9
0.3
38.3
17.4
3.3
8.1
10.7
2.2
41.1
0.1
4.4

1.4
0.4
9.5
3.4
0.6
0.0
2.9
142.7
21.4
7.4
28.7
11.2
3.6

5.6 e
27.8 f
361.7
17.3
79.5
5.2
5.4
10.4
8.1
120.2
39.8
50.3
8.5
0.4
5.9
9.8
11.2
8.6
6.0
68.5
5.6
2.1
50.0 g
0.0
60.9
0.6
69.3
10.8
11.6
0.5
1.3
0.4
0.1
1.3
5.5
2.4
9.6
0.3
37.8
19.5
3.1
10.5
10.3
2.1
46.8
0.1
4.2

1.7
0.4
8.9
3.6
0.6
0.0
4.0
136.4
20.3
6.5
38.5
11.0
4.5

0.6 e
1.3 f
1.0
0.6
0.0
1.4
1.8
0.4
0.7
0.1
1.0
0.5
0.1
1.1
0.3
1.9
0.5
0.6
1.7
0.6
0.3
0.2
1.5 g
1.1
0.6
1.0
0.4
0.0
0.4
2.1
1.8
0.6
3.7
–0.4
0.0
6.6
–0.2
0.2
–0.1
1.1
–0.5
5.9
0.4
–0.7
0.9
1.2
–0.3

2.5
1.4
–0.5
0.0
–0.2
0.8
3.1
–0.4
–0.4
–0.7
3.6
0.3
1.8

0.7 e
1.3 f
0.9
0.3
–0.2
1.0
1.1
0.6
0.4
–0.1
0.9
0.4
1.0
1.2
0.3
1.7
0.3
0.2
1.1
0.5
0.3
0.2
0.6 g
0.8
0.2
1.4
0.6
0.3
0.2
1.7
1.1
0.3
1.5
–0.1
0.2
2.9
–0.2
0.2
0.0
0.9
–0.4
2.2
0.0
–0.4
0.9
0.3
–0.2

2.1
1.1
–0.3
0.3
0.1
0.8
2.4
–0.1
–0.2
–0.7
2.1
0.0
1.5

76.1
87.2
79.1
76.8
73.1
85.7
59.1
84.0
73.3
78.6
79.5
79.6
100.0
92.4
85.1
91.2
97.1
65.8
100.0
76.9
82.2
50.8
76.3
15.1
67.2
83.8
78.7
74.0
59.7
71.2
68.6
92.4
92.4
69.4
56.2
96.3
64.6
38.3
61.7
85.9
67.0
80.2
54.4
68.1
90.1
50.4
55.6

88.4
82.0
70.0
91.3
58.5
70.0
98.1
73.4
53.0
68.9
79.8
75.6
65.8

79.7
89.4
82.6
83.6
74.1
86.3
62.5
85.4
73.8
91.9
80.8
83.5
100.0
93.8
87.1
91.9
97.5
67.9
100.0
86.4
83.8
49.8
77.6
14.3
68.5
85.7
79.7
73.4
61.7
76.4
70.7
95.0
86.7
69.5
54.7
98.9
69.9
44.9
60.8
89.4
67.2
84.7
61.6
67.7
92.7
54.0
58.1

88.7
84.5
75.5
92.6
63.5
85.1
98.3
74.0
52.8
73.7
82.5
75.1
75.9

36.9
35.4
35.3
37.3
39.9
34.3
32.5
39.4
38.6
41.3
36.8
32.1
36.5
32.8
38.4
28.0
39.1
38.2
34.1
37.7
39.3
38.0
37.6
..
40.2
37.3
37.7
37.4
38.3
25.8
31.8
36.1
..
37.9
33.6
30.3
38.5
33.6
35.3
28.8
35.9
28.1
37.7
38.1
27.9
..
39.1

27.4
27.0
36.3
31.6
33.5
..
28.3
36.5
34.7
39.7
20.9
32.8
24.8

38.7
36.9
36.9
40.7
44.3
36.6
34.7
40.7
41.4
44.7
39.9
37.9
41.8
34.8
40.6
30.1
41.2
41.8
37.6
39.9
42.0
41.7
40.1
..
43.2
38.9
39.8
39.4
41.4
28.9
34.2
39.5
..
39.7
36.9
31.6
39.8
37.5
38.0
32.1
39.3
30.1
41.0
40.2
30.4
..
41.5

30.1
30.9
38.3
33.7
35.9
..
28.2
37.9
38.5
41.6
25.9
38.4
27.3

54.2
49.6
51.0
47.3
47.0
52.7
49.2
55.3
48.7
46.6
46.3
39.5
39.3
53.5
50.0
61.6
51.6
48.0
40.5
53.6
49.3
42.7
46.3
..
48.3
49.1
53.4
43.7
47.1
49.8
48.4
46.6
..
49.8
45.4
38.4
46.8
50.3
46.3
54.0
51.2
36.3
47.8
49.9
60.7
..
48.4

44.1
52.9
47.5
60.2
47.1
..
42.3
44.1
46.7
47.7
72.5
45.8
59.6

51.5
49.3
50.7
50.6
51.7
51.4
50.8
55.5
47.9
59.6
45.1
38.0
32.3
49.6
54.1
61.6
53.3
48.1
35.4
55.7
53.5
45.0
48.4
..
53.8
46.1
52.7
42.9
50.6
41.6
41.4
42.1
..
50.0
37.9
18.3
46.2
40.0
40.5
45.2
44.9
20.9
50.0
47.3
54.4
..
47.9

29.2
40.9
40.5
56.2
46.5
..
41.1
39.8
43.6
47.3
49.0
41.8
54.3

1.8
1.7
2.0
1.7
1.3
1.9
1.9
1.6
1.4
1.3
1.5
1.3
0.8
2.0
1.8
2.9
1.6
1.4
1.4
1.8
1.7
1.2
1.2
..
1.2
1.7
1.7
1.1
1.3
2.4
1.7
1.6
..
1.3
1.3
3.1
1.3
1.6
1.3
2.1
1.3
2.6
1.5
1.2
2.5
..
1.4

2.7
2.1
1.2
2.2
1.8
..
2.6
1.2
1.3
1.2
4.0
1.6
2.7

2.0
2.0
2.1
1.8
1.4
2.1
2.1
1.9
1.5
1.4
1.7
1.4
1.1
2.1
1.9
2.9
1.8
1.3
1.3
2.0
1.9
1.5
1.5
..
1.5
1.7
1.9
1.5
1.5
2.0
1.5
1.3
..
1.7
1.4
2.2
1.4
1.6
1.4
1.8
1.5
1.7
1.3
1.5
2.2
..
1.5

2.5
1.9
1.5
2.0
1.6
..
2.3
1.5
1.4
1.5
2.7
1.4
2.4

1.05
1.06
1.05
1.06
1.06
1.05
1.07
1.06
1.05
1.06
1.05
1.10
1.07
1.04
1.06
1.05
1.05
1.06
1.07
1.05
1.05
1.05
1.06
..
1.06
1.06
1.05
1.06
1.07
1.06
1.07
1.06
..
1.06
1.05
1.05
1.06
1.04
1.06
1.04
1.06
1.05
1.06
1.05
1.04
..
1.06

1.05
1.06
1.06
1.05
1.08
..
1.03
1.06
1.06
1.06
1.03
1.06
1.05

1.06
1.06
1.05
1.06
1.06
1.06
1.07
1.06
1.05
1.06
1.06
1.10
1.07
1.05
1.06
1.05
1.05
1.06
1.07
1.05
1.05
1.05
1.06
..
1.06
1.06
1.05
1.06
1.07
1.06
1.07
1.06
..
1.06
1.05
1.04
1.06
1.04
1.06
1.04
1.05
1.05
1.06
1.06
1.04
..
1.06

1.05
1.06
1.06
1.05
1.08
..
1.03
1.06
1.06
1.06
1.03
1.06
1.05

194    |    HUMAN DEvELoPMENt REPoRt 2013

Population

Totala

Annual growth

Urban

Median age

Total dependency ratio

Total fertility rate

Sex ratio at birthb

(millions)

(%)

(% of total)

(years)

(per 100 people 
ages 15–64)

(births  
per woman)

(male to female births)

HDI rank
61 Mexico
62 Costa Rica
63 Grenada
64 Libya
64 Malaysia
64 Serbia
67 Antigua and Barbuda
67 trinidad and tobago
69 Kazakhstan
70 Albania
71 venezuela, Bolivarian Republic of
72 Dominica
72 Georgia
72 Lebanon
72 Saint Kitts and Nevis
76 Iran, Islamic Republic of
77 Peru
78 the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
78 Ukraine
80 Mauritius
81 Bosnia and Herzegovina
82 Azerbaijan
83 Saint vincent and the Grenadines
84 oman
85 Brazil
85 Jamaica
87 Armenia
88 Saint Lucia
89 Ecuador
90 turkey
91 Colombia
92 Sri Lanka
93 Algeria
94 tunisia
MEDIUM HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
95 tonga
96 Belize
96 Dominican Republic
96 Fiji
96 Samoa
100 Jordan
101 China
102 turkmenistan
103 thailand
104 Maldives
105 Suriname
106 Gabon
107 El Salvador
108 Bolivia, Plurinational State of
108 Mongolia
110 Palestine, State of
111 Paraguay
112 Egypt
113 Moldova, Republic of
114 Philippines
114 Uzbekistan
116 Syrian Arab Republic
117 Micronesia, Federated States of
118 Guyana
119 Botswana
120 Honduras
121 Indonesia

2012
116.1
4.8
0.1
6.5
29.3
9.8 h
0.1
1.4
16.4
3.2
29.9
0.1
4.3
4.3
0.1
75.6
29.7
2.1
44.9
1.3
3.7
9.4
0.1
2.9
198.4
2.8
3.1
0.2
14.9
74.5
47.6
21.2
36.5
10.7

0.1
0.3
10.2
0.9
0.2
6.5

2030
135.4
5.7
0.1
7.8
37.3
9.5 h
0.1
1.4
18.9
3.3
37.0
0.1
3.8
4.7
0.1
84.4
35.5
2.0
40.5
1.4
3.5
10.8
0.1
3.6
220.5
2.8
3.1
0.2
17.9
86.7
56.9
23.1
43.5
12.2

0.1
0.4
12.1
1.0
0.2
8.4

1,353.6 i,j 1,393.1 i,j
6.2
73.3
0.4
0.6
2.1
7.1
13.4
3.5
6.8
8.7
106.5
3.1
126.3
33.4
27.9
0.1
0.8
2.3
10.7
279.7

5.2
69.9
0.3
0.5
1.6
6.3
10.2
2.8
4.3
6.7
84.0
3.5
96.5
28.1
21.1
0.1
0.8
2.1
7.9
244.8

2000/2005

2010/2015a,c

1.3
1.9
0.2
2.0
2.2
–0.6 h
1.6
0.4
0.3
0.5
1.8
–0.2
–1.2
1.6
1.3
1.3
1.3
0.3
–0.8
1.0
0.5
1.1
0.2
1.4
1.3
0.8
–0.1
1.0
1.7
1.4
1.6
1.1
1.5
0.9

0.6
2.3
1.5
0.3
0.4
2.0
0.6 i,j
1.1
1.1
1.5
1.3
2.1
0.4
1.9
1.1
2.1
2.0
1.9
–1.7
2.0
0.9
2.9
0.4
0.4
1.3
2.0
1.3

1.1
1.4
0.4
0.8
1.6
–0.1 h
1.0
0.3
1.0
0.3
1.5
0.0
–0.6
0.7
1.2
1.0
1.1
0.1
–0.5
0.5
–0.2
1.2
0.0
1.9
0.8
0.4
0.3
1.0
1.3
1.1
1.3
0.8
1.4
1.0

0.4
2.0
1.2
0.8
0.5
1.9
0.4 i,j
1.2
0.5
1.3
0.9
1.9
0.6
1.6
1.5
2.8
1.7
1.7
–0.7
1.7
1.1
1.7
0.5
0.2
1.1
2.0
1.0

2000
74.7
59.0
35.9
76.3
62.0
53.0
32.1
10.8
55.7
41.7
89.9
67.2
52.6
86.0
32.8
64.0
73.0
59.4
67.1
42.7
43.0
51.4
45.2
71.6
81.2
51.8
64.7
28.0
60.3
64.7
72.1
15.7
60.8
63.4

23.0
47.7
61.7
47.9
22.0
79.8
35.9 j
45.9
31.1
27.7
64.9
80.1
58.9
61.8
57.1
72.0
55.3
42.8
44.6
48.0
37.4
51.9
22.3
28.7
53.2
45.5
42.0

2012
78.4
65.1
39.5
77.9
73.5
56.7
29.8
14.0
53.5
54.5
93.7
67.2
52.9
87.4
32.0
69.2
77.6
59.4
69.1
41.8
48.8
53.9
49.7
73.7
84.9
52.1
64.1
16.8
68.0
72.5
75.6
15.2
73.8
66.5

23.5
44.5
70.3
52.6
19.6
83.0
51.9
49.0
34.4
42.3
70.1
86.5
65.3
67.2
69.5
74.6
62.5
43.6
48.4
49.1
36.2
56.5
22.7
28.4
62.3
52.7
51.5

2000
23.4
24.8
21.8
21.9
23.8
35.7
..
26.9
27.7
27.4
23.3
..
34.4
25.6
..
20.8
23.0
32.5
37.7
28.6
35.1
25.6
24.2
21.0
25.4
24.5
30.3
24.0
22.6
24.5
23.8
27.8
21.7
24.7

19.9
18.8
22.7
22.1
19.7
19.4
29.7
21.6
30.2
18.8
25.7
19.3
20.7
20.0
21.8
16.2
20.4
21.4
32.3
20.4
20.9
19.1
18.9
23.0
20.0
18.4
24.4

2010
26.6
28.4
25.0
25.9
26.0
37.6
..
30.8
29.0
30.0
26.1
..
37.3
29.1
..
27.1
25.6
35.9
39.3
32.4
39.4
29.5
27.9
25.3
29.1
27.0
32.1
27.4
25.5
28.3
26.8
30.7
26.2
28.9

21.3
21.8
25.1
26.4
20.9
20.7
34.5
24.5
34.2
24.6
27.6
21.6
23.2
21.7
25.4
18.1
23.1
24.4
35.2
22.2
24.2
21.1
20.8
23.8
22.9
21.0
27.8

2000
62.5
58.5
74.9
55.6
59.1
50.5
..
47.3
52.6
59.6
62.0
..
52.5
59.4
..
65.2
63.8
47.7
46.0
48.0
44.5
58.1
62.3
64.5
54.0
67.0
55.9
66.5
65.1
56.0
60.1
48.9
62.2
57.2

78.9
83.4
67.1
62.6
81.6
75.8
48.1
68.4
44.7
79.2
57.1
84.2
78.2
78.1
63.9
98.7
74.0
67.9
50.8
71.5
71.4
77.7
78.2
66.7
69.5
86.0
54.7

2012
53.5
44.5
51.9
55.0
52.8
46.7
..
38.6
47.2
46.1
53.3
..
44.8
45.1
..
38.7
54.9
41.2
42.8
39.6
40.5
38.3
48.3
42.8
46.8
55.9
45.3
46.9
56.3
46.8
51.5
50.6
45.6
43.2

76.1
60.8
58.3
51.7
72.7
66.9
37.6
48.4
41.1
43.6
52.3
64.0
60.6
66.9
46.8
79.5
61.4
57.2
38.8
62.4
48.7
65.2
65.1
55.8
56.7
66.9
47.3

2000
2.6
2.4
2.6
3.1
3.1
1.7
..
1.6
1.9
2.2
2.8
..
1.6
2.4
..
2.2
2.9
1.7
1.1
2.0
1.4
2.0
2.4
3.6
2.4
2.6
1.7
2.3
3.0
2.4
2.6
2.2
2.6
2.1

4.3
3.6
2.9
3.1
4.6
3.9
1.7
2.8
1.7
2.9
2.7
4.1
2.9
4.1
2.2
5.4
3.7
3.3
1.6
3.8
2.7
3.6
4.3
2.5
3.4
4.0
2.5

2012a,c
2.2
1.8
2.2
2.4
2.6
1.6
..
1.6
2.5
1.5
2.4
..
1.5
1.8
..
1.6
2.4
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.1
2.2
2.0
2.2
1.8
2.3
1.7
1.9
2.4
2.0
2.3
2.3
2.2
1.9

3.8
2.7
2.5
2.6
3.8
2.9
1.6
2.3
1.5
1.7
2.3
3.2
2.2
3.2
2.5
4.3
2.9
2.7
1.5
3.1
2.3
2.8
3.3
2.2
2.6
3.0
2.1

2000d
1.05
1.05
1.05
1.06
1.06
1.08
..
1.04
1.07
1.07
1.05
..
1.11
1.05
..
1.05
1.05
1.08
1.06
1.04
1.07
1.17
1.03
1.05
1.05
1.05
1.18
1.03
1.05
1.05
1.05
1.04
1.05
1.05

1.05
1.03
1.05
1.06
1.08
1.05
1.21
1.05
1.06
1.06
1.08
1.03
1.05
1.05
1.03
1.05
1.05
1.05
1.06
1.06
1.05
1.05
1.07
1.05
1.03
1.05
1.05

2012c
1.05
1.05
1.05
1.06
1.06
1.08
..
1.04
1.07
1.07
1.05
..
1.11
1.05
..
1.05
1.05
1.08
1.06
1.04
1.07
1.15
1.03
1.05
1.05
1.05
1.14
1.03
1.05
1.05
1.05
1.04
1.05
1.05

1.05
1.03
1.05
1.06
1.08
1.05
1.18
1.05
1.06
1.06
1.08
1.03
1.05
1.05
1.03
1.05
1.05
1.05
1.06
1.06
1.05
1.05
1.07
1.05
1.03
1.05
1.05

tABLE 14  Population trends    |    195

Human Development RepoRt 2013The Rise of the South Human progress in a Diverse WorldPopulation

Totala

Annual growth

Urban

Median age

Total dependency ratio

Total fertility rate

Sex ratio at birthb

(millions)

(%)

(% of total)

(years)

(per 100 people 
ages 15–64)

(births  
per woman)

(male to female births)

2012
0.1
50.7
0.3
5.4
7.1
89.7
2.4
6.0
32.6
33.7
0.5
15.1
1.2
25.5
0.7
1,258.4
14.5
6.4
0.8
1.2

2030
0.1
54.7
0.4
6.7
9.0
101.5
3.0
7.2
37.5
55.3
0.6
22.7
2.0
36.5
1.1
1,523.5
17.4
7.8
0.9
1.5

4.2
0.6
0.2
42.7
152.4
180.0
20.2
48.7
20.5
21.9
47.7
166.6
13.1
3.6
7.2
31.0
2.2
6.3
25.6
10.3
35.6
13.9
0.9
1.8
9.4
11.3
20.6
0.8
15.9
35.0
13.0
86.5
4.2
33.4
1.6
6.1
8.7
10.5
4.6
5.6
16.3

6.2
0.8
0.2
65.9
181.9
234.4
30.8
54.3
28.8
35.3
81.9
257.8
20.0
5.2
10.2
39.9
2.6
8.7
41.3
12.5
59.8
24.5
1.3
2.8
14.6
17.6
29.8
1.2
28.2
50.8
17.6
118.5
6.5
53.3
2.3
8.5
11.4
15.9
6.4
8.4
26.8

2000/2005

2010/2015a,c

1.8
1.3
2.6
0.4
0.9
1.1
1.9
1.3
1.1
2.7
1.6
2.5
3.9
2.4
3.1
1.6
1.4
1.6
2.9
0.8

2.4
2.8
1.6
2.6
1.6
1.9
3.4
0.6
2.3
3.0
2.6
2.5
2.7
2.8
2.5
2.2
1.0
2.4
3.1
1.6
3.2
2.3
2.0
3.0
3.2
2.6
1.7
2.7
2.7
2.3
0.1
2.5
2.2
3.8
2.0
4.4
2.6
1.6
1.6
4.0
3.1

1.5
0.5
2.4
1.1
1.5
1.0
1.7
1.4
1.0
3.1
0.9
2.5
2.9
2.3
2.7
1.3
1.2
1.3
1.5
1.4

2.2
2.5
2.0
2.7
1.3
1.8
2.7
0.8
2.1
2.8
3.1
2.5
2.6
2.2
2.2
1.7
1.0
2.0
3.0
1.3
3.1
3.0
1.9
2.7
2.7
2.9
2.2
2.5
3.2
2.4
2.2
2.1
2.6
3.1
2.1
2.1
1.9
2.5
2.0
2.9
3.0

2000
43.0
56.9
21.7
35.3
26.5
24.4
32.4
54.7
53.3
67.8
53.4
45.1
24.3
44.0
38.8
27.7
18.6
22.0
25.4
22.6

58.7
15.8
53.4
19.9
23.6
33.1
49.0
27.2
45.5
27.1
22.3
42.4
40.3
40.0
13.2
13.4
20.0
32.9
26.3
35.6
12.1
34.8
76.5
48.8
38.3
13.8
43.5
28.1
14.6
32.5
33.8
14.7
44.3
20.6
35.9
35.8
8.2
31.0
37.6
17.6
28.1

2012
44.0
62.4
25.2
35.4
26.5
31.7
39.0
57.8
57.4
66.4
63.4
50.2
28.7
52.6
39.6
31.6
20.1
35.4
36.4
21.2

64.1
20.9
63.4
24.4
28.9
36.5
60.0
33.2
52.7
33.2
27.2
50.3
42.8
41.7
12.5
17.3
28.3
38.5
32.9
54.8
16.0
39.6
77.1
57.9
45.6
19.4
52.0
28.1
15.8
33.3
39.1
17.2
48.5
23.8
44.6
39.6
11.2
35.9
39.3
21.8
35.6

2000
..
22.9
18.9
22.5
18.5
23.8
19.5
18.9
22.6
18.0
18.5
17.7
15.3
19.1
19.5
22.7
18.1
18.6
19.4
17.2

18.9
18.8
17.8
17.4
20.8
19.0
16.1
24.7
18.2
17.4
17.4
18.1
17.0
18.4
19.6
19.2
18.6
18.0
15.5
19.1
15.6
17.1
18.9
16.9
17.1
16.9
18.7
18.5
17.0
18.6 k
18.2
17.0
17.9
15.9
18.2
18.5
16.7
17.7
18.7
17.1
16.3

2010
..
24.9
20.6
23.8
20.4
28.2
21.2
22.1
26.3
18.3
22.8
18.9
16.6
20.5
20.3
25.1
22.9
21.5
24.6
19.5

19.6
19.9
19.3
18.5
24.2
21.7
16.6
28.2
19.3
18.2
17.5
18.5
17.8
19.8
20.4
21.4
20.3
19.7
17.4
21.5
15.7
16.7
21.4
17.8
17.9
18.7
19.2
18.9
16.9
19.7 k
19.3
18.7
18.2
16.6
19.0
18.4
20.2
18.3
19.4
19.0
16.3

2000
..
59.6
81.3
67.9
84.9
60.5
77.6
80.4
62.0
89.5
88.9
92.4
106.8
79.9
85.9
63.8
80.5
85.0
79.2
90.8

82.7
80.6
88.3
89.0
70.4
82.8
100.5
55.2
86.3
93.8
91.0
86.4
92.1
83.0
74.7
80.5
84.1
86.4
105.6
79.2
106.0
93.2
78.8
92.1
94.5
92.4
81.6
79.2
95.6
83.7 k
82.3
95.7
85.9
101.3
86.7
80.2
96.5
90.7
85.1
89.7
98.8

2012
..
52.9
70.0
51.9
65.3
40.9
64.8
61.2
49.2
84.3
55.8
82.4
93.0
73.0
72.0
53.8
53.2
58.4
49.7
69.4

79.3
74.1
75.8
82.1
53.0
63.4
93.9
43.0
78.3
83.7
92.6
86.1
84.3
73.1
70.3
64.1
69.1
73.6
86.4
65.5
103.1
99.0
62.8
83.8
86.9
84.2
79.3
82.8
96.3
76.0 k
71.6
77.3
86.0
92.6
79.7
80.8
67.7
85.0
78.0
78.9
97.3

2000
..
2.9
4.4
2.7
4.0
2.0
4.0
3.3
2.7
5.3
3.7
4.8
7.1
4.7
5.8
3.1
3.8
4.2
3.7
4.2

4.9
4.7
4.6
5.0
3.1
4.5
6.8
2.4
5.0
5.5
5.7
5.9
5.5
5.2
4.5
4.1
4.1
5.1
6.5
4.3
6.9
6.1
4.8
5.6
6.0
5.8
5.2
5.3
6.1
5.5 k
3.9
6.1
5.8
7.7
5.8
5.7
5.8
6.0
5.4
5.4
6.8

2012a,c
..
2.4
3.8
2.6
3.2
1.8
3.1
2.5
2.2
4.6
2.3
3.9
6.0
4.0
5.0
2.6
2.4
2.6
2.3
3.2

4.5
4.1
3.5
4.6
2.2
3.2
5.2
2.0
4.3
4.5
5.5
5.5
4.7
4.4
3.8
2.6
3.1
3.9
5.0
3.2
6.0
6.3
3.6
4.7
5.1
5.3
4.3
4.8
6.0
..
3.1
3.9
5.1
6.0
4.9
4.8
4.1
5.1
4.5
4.3
6.2

2000d
..
1.03
1.07
1.05
1.05
1.05
1.03
1.05
1.06
1.07
1.03
1.05
1.05
1.06
1.03
1.08
1.05
1.05
1.04
1.03

1.03
1.09
1.03
1.03
1.05
1.05
1.03
1.03
1.03
1.02
1.03
1.06
1.03
1.05
1.08
1.05
1.03
1.02
1.05
1.05
1.03
1.03
1.04
1.03
1.04
1.01
1.02
1.05
1.03
1.05 k
1.02
1.03
1.06
1.06
1.03
1.02
1.03
1.06
1.03
1.03
1.05

2012c
..
1.03
1.07
1.06
1.05
1.05
1.03
1.05
1.06
1.07
1.03
1.05
1.05
1.06
1.03
1.08
1.05
1.05
1.04
1.03

1.03
1.09
1.03
1.03
1.05
1.05
1.03
1.03
1.03
1.03
1.03
1.06
1.03
1.05
1.08
1.05
1.03
1.02
1.05
1.05
1.03
1.03
1.04
1.03
1.04
1.01
1.02
1.05
1.03
1.05 k
1.02
1.03
1.06
1.06
1.03
1.02
1.03
1.06
1.03
1.03
1.05

HDI rank
121 Kiribati
121 South Africa
124 vanuatu
125 Kyrgyzstan
125 tajikistan
127 viet Nam
128 Namibia
129 Nicaragua
130 Morocco
131 Iraq
132 Cape verde
133 Guatemala
134 timor-Leste
135 Ghana
136 Equatorial Guinea
136 India
138 Cambodia
138 Lao People’s Democratic Republic
140 Bhutan
141 Swaziland
LOw HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
142 Congo
143 Solomon Islands
144 Sao tome and Principe
145 Kenya
146 Bangladesh
146 Pakistan
148 Angola
149 Myanmar
150 Cameroon
151 Madagascar
152 tanzania, United Republic of
153 Nigeria
154 Senegal
155 Mauritania
156 Papua New Guinea
157 Nepal
158 Lesotho
159 togo
160 Yemen
161 Haiti
161 Uganda
163 Zambia
164 Djibouti
165 Gambia
166 Benin
167 Rwanda
168 Côte d’Ivoire
169 Comoros
170 Malawi
171 Sudan
172 Zimbabwe
173 Ethiopia
174 Liberia
175 Afghanistan
176 Guinea-Bissau
177 Sierra Leone
178 Burundi
178 Guinea
180 Central African Republic
181 Eritrea
182 Mali

196    |    HUMAN DEvELoPMENt REPoRt 2013

table 14 PoPulation trendsPopulation

Totala

Annual growth

Urban

Median age

Total dependency ratio

Total fertility rate

Sex ratio at birthb

(millions)

(%)

(% of total)

(years)

(per 100 people 
ages 15–64)

(births  
per woman)

(male to female births)

2012
17.5
11.8
24.5
69.6
16.6

24.6
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
9.8
10.7
0.0

2030
29.1
18.4
35.9
106.0
30.8

26.2
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
16.4
16.1
0.0

1,134.3
1,039.2
3,520.5
1,280.7

1,216.9
1,150.1
4,017.4
1,845.3

357.3
1,991.4
481.6
597.7
1,753.0
852.5
870.4 t
53.8
7,052.1 T

480.8
2,135.3
491.3
696.0
2,141.8
1,284.0
1,256.8 t
63.8
8,321.3 T

2000/2005

2010/2015a,c

2.9
3.5
2.6
2.9
3.5

0.7
0.0
0.1
0.1
2.3
2.4
2.8 l
0.6

0.7
0.9
1.2
2.3

2.2
0.8
0.0
1.3
1.6
2.5
2.2 t
1.3
1.2 T

3.0
2.6
2.2
2.6
3.5

0.4
1.6
0.0
0.6
0.6
2.6
3.2 l
0.2

0.5
0.8
1.0
2.2

2.0
0.6
0.2
1.1
1.4
2.5
2.2 t
1.1
1.2 T

2000
17.8
21.5
29.1
29.3
16.2

59.4
68.4
100.0
100.0
93.4
33.2
16.5
46.0

77.0
70.1
34.8
28.6

2012
27.4
21.9
31.4
34.8
18.1

60.4
72.2
100.0
100.0
94.1
38.2
18.2
51.0

81.2
74.1
43.7
33.6

53.2
36.7
63.2
75.3
29.0
32.0
24.3 t
48.2
46.7 T

57.2
49.7
64.8
79.3
32.9
37.0
28.9 t
52.6
52.6 T

2000
16.5
16.9
17.9
16.0
15.8

29.9
..
..
..
..
18.0
..
..

36.8
27.6
25.6
18.4

20.6
28.1
32.9
24.4
22.0
17.8
18.3 t
24.0
26.7 T

2010
17.1
17.1
17.8
16.7
15.5

32.9
..
..
..
..
17.5
..
..

39.3
30.4
28.9
19.8

23.3
32.3
34.9
27.5
24.6
18.5
19.7 t
26.6
29.2 T

2000
95.3
96.2
88.8
102.6
102.3

49.5
..
..
..
..
88.3
..
..

49.1
54.7
56.8
85.2

72.3
50.8
49.5
60.3
66.7
88.6
85.5 t
64.6
59.0 T

2012
90.5
92.6
89.1
94.0
104.8

47.0
..
..
..
..
91.0
..
..

50.3
46.4
47.0
75.5

59.7
40.9
43.4
52.1
54.6
83.4
75.5 t
57.3
52.0 T

2000
6.3
6.6
5.7
6.9
7.5

2.1
..
..
..
..
6.5
..
..

1.6
2.2
2.5
5.1

3.9
2.0
1.6
2.6
3.3
5.6
5.1 t
3.1
2.7 T

2012a,c
5.8
5.8
4.8
5.5
7.0

2.0
..
..
..
..
6.3
..
..

1.8
1.9
2.1
4.2

3.0
1.8
1.7
2.2
2.6
4.8
4.1 t
2.7
2.5 T

2000d
1.05
1.03
1.03
1.03
1.05

1.05
..
..
..
..
1.03
..
..

1.05
1.05
1.10
1.04

1.05
1.14
1.06
1.05
1.07
1.04
1.04 t
1.06
1.07 T

2012c
1.05
1.03
1.03
1.03
1.05

1.05
..
..
..
..
1.03
..
..

1.06
1.05
1.10
1.04

1.05
1.12
1.06
1.05
1.07
1.04
1.04 t
1.06
1.07 T

i 

Includes taiwan, China, and excludes Hong Kong 
Special Administrative Region and Macao Special 
Administrative Region.

j  Excludes Hong Kong Special Administrative 

Region and Macao Special Administrative Region.

k  Estimates are for Sudan only and do not include 

South Sudan.

l  HDRo calculations based on population data from 

UNDESA (2012b).

T  Aggregate from original data source.

DEFINITIONS

Annual population growth rate: Average annual 
exponential growth rate for the period specified.

Urban population: De facto population living in 
areas classified as urban according to the criteria 
used by each area or country as of 1 July.

Median age: Age that divides the population 
distribution into two equal parts—that is, 50% of the 
population is above that age and 50% is below it.

Total dependency ratio: Ratio of the sum of the 
population ages 0–14 and ages 65 and older to the 
population ages 15–64.

Population: De facto population in a country, area 
or region as of 1 July.

Total fertility rate: Number of children that would 
be born to each woman if she were to live to the 

end of her child-bearing years and bear children at 
each age in accordance with prevailing age-specific 
fertility rates.

Sex ratio at birth: Number of male births per 
female birth.

MAIN DATA SOURCES

Columns 1, 2, 13 and 14: UNDESA (2012b).

Columns 3, 4 and 7–12: UNDESA (2011).

Columns 5 and 6: UNDESA (2012a).

HDI rank
183 Burkina Faso
184 Chad
185 Mozambique
186 Congo, Democratic Republic of the
186 Niger
OTHER COUNTRIES OR TERRITORIES

Korea, Democratic People’s Rep. of
Marshall Islands
Monaco
Nauru
San Marino
Somalia
South Sudan
tuvalu

Human Development Index groups

very high human development
High human development
Medium human development
Low human development

Regions

Arab States
East Asia and the Pacific
Europe and Central Asia
Latin America and the Caribbean
South Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa

Least developed countries
Small island developing states
world

NOTES
a  Projections based on medium-fertility variant.
b  the natural sex ratio at birth is commonly 

assumed and empirically confirmed to be 105 
male births to 100 female births.

c  Data are annual average of projected values for 

2010–2015.

d  Data are average annual estimates for 

2000–2005.

e  Includes Svalbard and Jan Mayen Islands.
f 

Includes Christmas Island, Cocos (Keeling) Islands 
and Norfolk Island.

g  Includes Canary Islands, Ceuta and Melilla.
h  Includes Kosovo.

 

tABLE 14  Population trends    |    197

Human Development RepoRt 2013The Rise of the South Human progress in a Diverse WorldRegions

Arab States (20 countries or territories)
Algeria, Bahrain, Djibouti, Egypt, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Morocco, oman, State of Palestine, Qatar, Saudi 
Arabia, Somalia, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, tunisia, United Arab Emirates, Yemen

East Asia and the Pacific (24 countries)
Cambodia, China, Fiji, Indonesia, Kiribati, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Malaysia, 
Marshall  Islands,  Federated  States  of  Micronesia,  Mongolia,  Myanmar,  Nauru,  Palau,  Papua  New  Guinea,  Philippines, 
Samoa, Solomon Islands, thailand, timor-Leste, tonga, tuvalu, vanuatu, viet Nam

Europe and Central Asia1 (31 countries)
Albania, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Estonia, Georgia, 
Hungary, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Republic of Moldova, Montenegro, Poland, Romania, Russian 
Federation,  Serbia,  Slovakia,  Slovenia,  tajikistan,  the  former  Yugoslav  Republic  of  Macedonia,  turkey,  turkmenistan, 
Ukraine, Uzbekistan

Latin America and the Caribbean (33 countries)
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Plurinational State of Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa 
Rica, Cuba, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Grenada, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Jamaica, 
Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint vincent and the Grenadines, Suriname, 
trinidad and tobago, Uruguay, Bolivarian Republic of venezuela

South Asia (9 countries)
Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Islamic Republic of Iran, Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan, Sri Lanka

Sub-Saharan Africa (46 countries)
Angola, Benin, Botswana, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Cape verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Comoros, Congo, 
Democratic  Republic  of  the  Congo,  Côte  d’Ivoire,  Equatorial  Guinea,  Eritrea,  Ethiopia,  Gabon,  Gambia,  Ghana,  Guinea, 
Guinea-Bissau, Kenya, Lesotho, Liberia, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mozambique, Namibia, Niger, 
Nigeria, Rwanda, Sao tome and Principe, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, South Africa, South Sudan, Swaziland, United 
Republic of tanzania, togo, Uganda, Zambia, Zimbabwe

Note: Countries included in aggregates for Least Developed Countries and Small Island Developing States follow UN classifications, which are available at www.unohrlls.org.
1. the former socialist countries of Europe and Central Asia that have undergone a political and economic transformation since 1989–1991 as well as Cyprus, Malta and turkey.

198    |    HUMAN DEvELoPMENt REPoRt 2013

Statistical references

ADB (Asian Development Bank). 2012. Asian Develop-

ment Outlook 2012: Confronting Rising Inequality in Asia. 
www.adb.org/sites/default/files/pub/2012/ado2012.pdf. 
Accessed 30 April 2012.

Aguna, C., and M. Kovacevic 2011. “Uncertainty and Sensi-
tivity Analysis of the Human Development Index.” Human 
Development Research Paper 2010/11. UNDP–HDRo, 
New York. http://hdr.undp.org/en/reports/global/hdr2010/
papers/HDRP_2010_47.pdf. 

Alkire, S., A. Conconi, and J.M. Roche. 2012. “Multi-

dimensional Poverty Index 2012: Brief Methodological 
Note and Results.” University of oxford, Department of 
International Development, oxford Poverty and Human 
Development Initiative, oxford, UK.

Alkire, S., J.M. Roche, M.E. Santos, and S. Seth. 2011. 

“Multidimensional Poverty Index 2011: Brief Methodologi-
cal Note.” University of oxford, Department of Internation-
al Development, oxford Poverty and Human Development 
Initiative, oxford, UK. www.ophi.org.uk/multidimensional 
-poverty-index-2011-brief- methodological-note/. Accessed 
15 February 2012.

Alkire, S., and J. Foster. 2010. “Designing the Inequality- 

Adjusted Human Development Index (HDI).” Human Devel-
opment Research Paper 2010/28. UNDP–HDRo, New York. 
http://hdr.undp.org/en/reports/global/hdr2010/papers/
HDRP_2010_28.pdf.

Anand, S., and A. Sen. 2000. “the Income Component of the 

Human Development Index.” Journal of Human Develop-
ment and Capabilities 1(1): 83–106.

Athukorala, Prema-chandra. 2012. “Asian trade Flows: 
trends, Patterns and Prospects.” Japan and the World 
Economy 24: 150–62.

Barro, R. J., and J. w. Lee. 2010. A New Data Set of Edu-
cational Attainment in the World, 1950–2010. Working 
Paper 15902. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Eco-
nomic Research. www.nber.org/papers/w15902. Accessed 
15 April 2012.

———. 2011. Dataset of educational attainment. www.

barrolee.com. Accessed 15 April 2012. 

CRED EM-DAT (Centre for Research on the Epidemiology 
of Disasters). 2012. the International Disaster Database. 
www.emdat.be. Accessed 30 March 2012.

ECLAC (Economic Commission for Latin America and 

the Caribbean). 2012. Preliminary Overview of the 
Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean. Santia-
go. www.eclac.org/cgi-bin/getProd.asp?xml=/ 
publicaciones/xml/4/41974/P41974.xml&xsl=/. 
Accessed 30 April 2012.

Eurostat. 2012. “European Union Statistics on Income and 

Living Conditions (EUSILC).” Brussels. http://epp.eurostat.
ec.europa.eu/portal/page/portal/microdata/eu_silc. 
Accessed 15 April 2012.

FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization). 2011. 

AQUAStAt database. www.fao.org/nr/water/aquastat/
data. Accessed 15 April 2012.

———. 2012. Statistics Division Database. www.fao.org/

corp/statistics/en/. Accessed 15 April 2012.

Gallup. 2012. Gallup World Poll database. https://worldview.

gallup.com. Accessed 30 April 2012.

Høyland, B., K. Moene, and F. willumsen. 2011. “the tyr-
anny of International Rankings.” Journal of Development 
Economics 97(1): 1–14.

ICF Macro. 2012. Measure DHS (Demographic and Health 

Survey). www.measuredhs.com.

IEA (International Energy Agency). 2012. World Energy 
Outlook 2011. Paris. www.iea.org/weo/electricity.asp. 
Accessed 30 March 2012.

ILO (International Labour Organization). 2012. Key Indica-
tors of the Labour Market. 7th edition. Geneva. www.ilo.
org/empelm/what/WCMS_114240/lang--en/index.htm. 
Accessed 15 october 2012.

IMF (International Monetary Fund). 2012. World Economic 
outlook database, october 2012. www.imf.org/external/
pubs/ft/weo/2012/01/weodata/index.aspx. Accessed 
15 october 2012.

Inter-agency Group for Child Mortality Estimation. 2012. 
Database on child mortality. www.childinfo.org/mortality_ 
igme.html. Accessed 15 october 2012.

IPU (Inter-Parliamentary Union). 2012. PARLINE database. 
www.ipu.org/wmn-e/classif.htm. Accessed 15 May 2012.

ITU (International Telecommunication Union). 2012. 

World telecommunication/ICt Indicators database. www.
itu.int/ItU-D/ict/statistics/. Accessed 15 october 2012.

IUCN (International Union for Conservation of Nature and 

Natural Resources). 2012. IUCN Red List of threatened 
Species. version 2011.2. www.iucnredlist.org. Accessed 
15 April 2012.

LIS (Luxembourg Income Study). 2012. “Luxembourg 

Income Study Project.” www.lisproject.org/techdoc.htm. 
Accessed 15 May 2012.

OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 

Development). 2010. Programme for International Student 
Assessment. www.oecd.org/edu/pisa/2009. Accessed 
30 March 2012.

OECD-DAC (Organisation for Economic Co-operation 

and Development–Development Assistance Commit-
tee).  2012. Aid statistics database. www.oecd.org/dac/
aidstatistics/. Accessed 15 october 2012.

SIPRI (Stockholm International Peace Research Insti-
tute). 2012. SIPRI Military Expenditure Database. www.
sipri.org. Accessed 30 March 2012.

UNCTAD (United Nations Conference on Trade and 

Development). 2012. Statistics. http://unctadstat.unctad.
org/ReportFolders/reportFolders.aspx?sCS_referer=&sCS_
ChosenLang=en. Accessed 1 May 2012.

UNDESA (United Nations Department of Economic and 
Social Affairs). 2011. World Population Prospects: The 
2010 Revision. New York. http://esa.un.org/unpd/wpp/
index.htm. Accessed 15 April 2012.

———. 2012a. World Urbanization Prospects: The 2011 
Revision. New York. http://esa.un.org/unpd/wup/index.
htm. Accessed 30 April 2012.

———. 2012b. Population Division Database. Detailed 

Indicators. http://esa.un.org/undp/wpp/unpp/. Accessed 
1 May 2012.

———. 2012c. World Economic Situation and Pros-

pects: Mid-2012 Update. New York. www.un.org/en/
development/desa/policy/wesp/. Accessed 30 April 2012.

UNESCO (United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cul-

tural Organization) Institute for Statistics. 2012. Data 
Centre. http://stats.uis.unesco.org. Accessed 15 october 
2012.

UNESCwA (United Nations Economic and Social Com-

mission for western Asia). 2012. “Summary of the 
Survey of Economic and Social Developments in West-
ern Asia, 2011–2012.” Beirut. www.escwa.un.org/
information/publications/edit/upload/E_ESCWA_EDGD_ 
12_1_e.pdf. Accessed 30 April 2012.

UNICEF (United Nations Children’s Fund). 2012. The State 
of the World’s Children 2012. New York. www.unicef.org/
sowc2012/. Accessed 30 March 2012.

———. Various years. Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveys. 
New York. www.unicef.org/statistics/index_24302.html. 
Accessed 15 october 2012.

UNODC (United Nations Office on Drug and Crime). 2012. 

2011 Global Study on Homicide: Trends, Contexts, Data. 
www.unodc.org/documents/data-and-analysis/statistics/
Homicide/Globa_study_on_homicide_2011_web.pdf. 
Accessed 30 May 2012.

UNSD (United Nations Statistics Division). 2012a. Nation-

al Accounts Main Aggregate Database. http://unstats.
un.org/unsd/snaama. Accessed 1 May 2012.

———. 2012b. International Merchandise trade Statistics. 
Comtrade Database. http://comtrade.un.org/. Accessed 
15 october 2012.

UN wTO (world Tourism Organization). 2012. Compendi-
um of tourism Statistics database. http://statistics.unwto.
org/en/content/compendium-tourism-statistics. Accessed 
30 April 2012.

wHO (world Health Organization). 2012a. World Health 
Statistics 2011. Geneva. www.who.int/gho/publications/
world_health_statistics/EN_WHS2011_Full.pdf. Accessed 
30 March 2012.

———. 2012b. Global Health observatory. www.apps.who.

int/ghodata. Accessed 30 March 2012.

———. 2012c. Mental Health. www.who.int/mental_

health/en. Accessed 30 April 2012.

wHO (world Health Organization), UNICEF (United 

Nations Children’s Fund), UNFPA (United Nations Pop-
ulation Fund) and world Bank. 2012. “trends in Esti-
mates of Maternal Mortality Ratio.” www.childinfo.org/
maternal_mortality_ratio.php. Accessed 15 May 2012.

wIPO (world Intellectual Property Organization). 2012. 

Intellectual Property Statistics. www.wipo.int/ipstats/en/. 
Accessed 22 March 2012.

world Bank. 2011. Migration and Remittances Factbook. 

2nd Edition. Washington, DC. http://siteresources.world-
bank.org/INtLAC/Resources/Factbook2011-Ebook.pdf. 
Accessed 15 April 2012.

———. 2012a. World Development Indicators 2012. Wash-
ington, DC. http://data.worldbank.org. Accessed 15 octo-
ber 2012.

———. 2012b. International Income Distribution Database. 

[Not publicly available]. 15 April 2012.

———. 2012c. Correspondence on personal computers 

data. 15 April 2012.

Statistical references    |    199

Technical appendix:  
explanatory note for projections exercise

This technical appendix summarizes the two projection models 
discussed in chapter 4.

Lutz and KC (2013) Model for demography, 
education and human development

The Lutz and KC (2013) Model is used to project demographic 
trends through to 2050. It is based on the premise that trends in 
population growth are affected by improvements in education 
quality and quantity. This Report employs a dataset covering 
120 countries, with their populations disaggregated by age, sex 
and education level.

Lutz and KC’s multistate population modelling approach 
was  developed  in  the  1970s  at  the  International  Institute 
for Applied Systems Analysis in Austria and is well accepted 
among technical demographers. The idea behind the projection 
is straightforward: with a baseline year of 2000 (the latest year 
for which internationally comparable data are available for 
most countries) and assuming that education level remains 
invariant after a certain age, the proportion of women ages 
50–54 without any formal education in 2005 can be derived 
directly from the proportion of women ages 45–49 without any 
formal education in 2000.

Given that the size of a birth cohort as it ages over time can 
change only through mortality and migration, these propor-
tions would be constant only if no individual moved up to the 
primary education category after age 15 and if mortality and 
migration did not differ by education level. However, strong 
links  exist  between  education  level  and  mortality,  fertility 
and migration behaviour, so the approach must be adjusted 
to correct for these effects. The size of a birth cohort depends 
on the education level of women of childbearing age, where a 
negative relationship is traditionally observed. In projecting 
these cohorts forward, differential survival rates, based on a 
comprehensive literature review and modelling exercises using 
past data, are applied to the education groups.

In reality, the likelihood of an individual transitioning from 
one education level to the next highest strongly depends on 
the education level of his or her parents. But this educational 
inheritance mechanism is not explicitly modelled here. Instead, 
assumptions regarding transition rates and their future devel-
opment are statistically derived from the aggregate behaviour 
of education systems in the past. Since this expansion is partly 
the result of the inheritance mechanism—the fact that many 
parents desire that their children reach an education level at 
least as high as their own—inheritance is implicitly reflected 
in the projection, even though it is not formally part of the 
model. Such an approach appears preferable because data on 

200    |    HUMAN DEvELoPMENt REPoRt 2013

the aggregate growth patterns of education systems, on which 
assumptions for the future can be based, are much more readily 
available than robust data on the microprocess of educational 
inheritance.

The  procedure  for  each  country  can  be  summarized  as 

follows: 
•  A baseline population distribution by five-year age group 

cohorts, sex and education level is derived for 2000.

•  For each five-year time step, cohorts move to the next five-

year age group.

•  Mortality rates specific to each age cohort, sex and education 

group and to each period are applied.

•  Age- and sex-specific education transition rates are applied.
•  Age-, sex- and education-specific net migrants are added to or 
removed from the population. In the projections presented 
here the migration assumptions correspond to those used in 
the UN population projections.

•  Fertility rates, specific to each age, sex and education group 
and to each period, are applied to determine the size of the 
new 0–5 age group.

•  The new population distribution by age, sex and education 
level is noted, and the above steps are repeated for the next 
five-year time step.
The projection aims to yield a dataset with the population 
distributed by five-year age groups (from ages 15–20 to ages 100 
and older), by sex, and by four education levels over 50 years 
from 2000 (the base year) to 2050 in five-year intervals.

Pardee Center for International Futures 
(2013) Model for prospects of human 
development and policy scenarios 

This Report uses the International Futures Model for long-term 
human development projections based on closely interacting 
policy-related issues, including income, health, education, pov-
erty, gender, social change (instability and risk) and environ-
mental sustainability. For more detailed information on how 
the model was developed, see Pardee Center for International 
Futures (2013) and the University of Denver Korbel School 
website (www.ifs.du.edu/introduction). 

The International Futures Model is a large-scale, long-term, 
integrated global modelling system that incorporates demo-
graphic,  economic,  education,  health,  energy,  agricultural, 
sociopolitical, infrastructural, technological and environmental 
submodels for 183 countries interacting in the global system.

The model was used in the 2011 Human Development Report 
to project long-term environmental trend scenarios and evalu-
ate their impact on human development.

analysis include:
•  A production function that sets parameters of productivity 
in four major categories: human resources, social capital, 
physical capital and knowledge. 

•  A population model containing 22 age-sex cohorts in a struc-
ture representing changes in fertility rates, with an extensive 
health model to compute mortality (and morbidity) across 
13 cause categories. 

•  An equilibrium-seeking economic model across six sectors. It 
does not assume that exact equilibrium will exist in any given 
year; rather, it uses inventories as buffer stocks and to provide 
price signals so that the model converges to equilibrium over 
time. 

Core features of the model pertinent to human development 

•  An education model representing formal education across 
primary, secondary (separating lower and upper secondary 
levels) and tertiary levels. 

•  A health model drawing on both the World Health Organi-
zation’s Global Burden of Disease project for major causes of 
death and disability and the Comparative Risk Assessment 
approach on relative risk to represent key drivers of health 
such as malnutrition, obesity and smoking. 

•  A sociopolitical model representing fiscal policy through tax-
ing and spending decisions and other governance variables, 
including corruption levels and regime types. 
There are also models for international politics (focusing 
on trade, foreign investment, intergovernmental transfers and 
technology upgrade), infrastructure (focusing on level of access 
to major infrastructure systems) and the environment (focusing 
on resource use, such as water and land, and carbon produc-
tion). The agricultural and energy models are partial equilibri-
um systems at the physical level, and their dynamics shape the 
financial sector representations in the economic model. 

The projection identifies aggressive but reasonable policy inter-
ventions to construct an accelerated progress scenario, which 
combines interventions in a dozen clusters of policy initiatives 
(see table A1) and analyses their impact relative to the forecasts 
under the base case scenario. The cost of inaction is the differ-
ence in outcomes between the two scenarios. The definition of 
“aggressive but reasonable” builds on the analysis of the Pardee 
Center for International Futures series Patterns of Potential 
Human Progress and relies on cross-sectional functions relating 
the target variable to development level and using the function 
itself or some number of standard deviations above it. 

TablE a1

Twelve clusters of policy intervention levers for comparative analysis

Primarily domestic levers

1. Demographics
Fertility rates
Female labour force participation rates

2. Savings and investment
Savings and investment rates

3. Domestic transfers
transfers to unskilled households

4. Human capital
Education participation targets and education spending
Health spending targets and targets on selected health risk factors

5. Infrastructure capital
Infrastructure access

6. Knowledge capital
Research and development

Source: Adapted from Pardee Center for International Futures (2013).

Primarily international levers

7. Social capital and governance
Probability of internal conflict
Government revenues and corruption
Democracy and inclusion

8. Trade
trade barriers
Export promotion

9. Foreign investment
Foreign direct investment
Portfolio flows

10. Household transfers
Remittances

11. Intergovernmental transfers
Foreign aid
Flows from international financial institutions

12. Technology
technology upgrade

technical appendix    |    201

The base case scenario

The accelerated progress scenario

The  base  case  scenario  implies  continuity  with  historical 
patterns (including development policies pursued in recent 
decades). However, the model’s complex dynamics—including 
a wide range of nonlinear relationships—provide a structure 
that can also generate nonlinear future patterns that differ 
considerably from historical trajectories. 

Under the accelerated progress scenario, resources and policy 
ambition increase substantially compared with the base case. 
Table A2 lists choices and targets for appropriate (aggressive but 
reasonable) magnitudes of intervention in poverty reduction, 
infrastructure and governance, among others. Changes are 
relative to the underlying values for each country in the base 
case scenario and therefore take into account different national 
starting points and patterns. 

TablE a2

Targets for appropriate magnitudes of intervention, relative to the base case scenario

Policy area

Global level

Over 10 years

Over 20 years

Over 30 years

Over 40 years

Poverty reduction

•  Doubling of lending by international 

•  30% increase in foreign direct 

financial institutions

investment

•  Foreign aid donations from developed 
countries increased to at least 0.5% 
of GDP

•  50% increase in portfolio investment 

flows

•  20% increase in expenditure on 

research and development
•  50% increase in migration

Infrastructurea

Governanceb

Regional and 
domestic levelsc

•  Rural population living more than 2 
kilometres from an all-season road 
reduced by half or to below 10% 
(whichever comes first)

•  Universal access to electricity
•  Elimination of solid fuels as the 
primary source for heating and 
cooking in the home

•  20% improvement in 

infrastructure

•  Universal access to an improved 

source of water and sanitation 
(after having been halved from 
1990 levels by 2015)

•  Universal access to mobile 

telephone and broadband service

•  50% increase in 

renewable energy 
production

•  Probability of internal conflict 

reduced to 0

•  10% increase (about 3 percentage 

points of GDP) in government revenue 
in non–organisation for Economic Co-
operation and Development countries

•  30% decrease in corruption on the 

transparency International scale

•  Corruption reduced and governance 
effectiveness and regulatory quality 
increased globally to one standard error 
above typical values for each country’s 
GDP per capita

•  Measures of democracy and gender 

empowerment increased to one 
standard error above typical values for 
each country’s GDP per capita

•  For developing countries: 20% increase 
in health spending, 20% improvement in 
governance effectiveness on the World 
Bank scale, 20% increase in economic 
freedom on Fraser Institute scale, and 
0.2% increase in technologically based 
productivity growth

a. Includes transportation, energy, water and sanitation, and information and communication technology. the global targets are a combination of normative targets (such as aspirational targets from the 
Millennium Development Goals) and, considering the possibility of goal fulfilment by all countries, 97.5% level of truly universal goals.
b. Governance is conceptualized in three dimensions—security, capacity and inclusion. the security dimension is operationalized with two generally complementary measures of the probability of domestic 
conflict and of the vulnerability to conflict. the capacity dimension is operationalized as the governments’ ability to mobilize revenue (up to 30% of GDP) and to use it effectively (looking especially to lower 
levels of corruption). the inclusion dimension is operationalized as the democratic character of institutions and also as broader inclusiveness, as represented by the Human Development Report’s Gender 
Empowerment Measure.
c. Regional specific targets are available in Pardee Center for International Futures (2013).

202    |    HUMAN DEvELoPMENt REPoRt 2013

Countries and HDI ranks in 2012 and change in rank from 2011 to 2012

Afghanistan
Albania
Algeria
Andorra
Angola
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina
Armenia
Australia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Bahamas
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Barbados
Belarus
Belgium
Belize
Benin
Bhutan
Bolivia, Plurinational State of
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Botswana
Brazil
Brunei Darussalam
Bulgaria
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cambodia
Cameroon
Canada
Cape Verde
Central African Republic
Chad
Chile
China
Colombia
Comoros
Congo
Congo, Democratic Republic of the
Costa Rica
Côte d'Ivoire
Croatia
Cuba
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Djibouti
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt
El Salvador
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Estonia
Ethiopia
Fiji
Finland
France
Gabon
Gambia

–1
–1
–1

–1
–1
–1

–1

1

1

1

–1
–1

–1

–1
–1
–1

–1

1
–1

2

–1

1
1
–1
2

175
70
93
33
148
67
45
87
2
18
82
49
48
146
38
50
17
96
166
140
108
81
119
85
30
57
183
178
138
150
11
132
180
184
40
101
91
169
142
186
62
168
47
59
31
28
15
164
72
96
89
112
107
136
181
33
173
96
21
20
106
165

Georgia
Germany
Ghana
Greece
Grenada
Guatemala
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Hong Kong, China (SAR)
Hungary
Iceland
India
Indonesia
Iran, Islamic Republic of
Iraq
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Jamaica
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kenya
Kiribati
Korea, Republic of
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Lao People's Democratic Republic
Latvia
Lebanon
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Maldives
Mali
Malta
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mexico
Micronesia, Federated States of
Moldova, Republic of
Mongolia
Montenegro
Morocco
Mozambique
Myanmar
Namibia
Nepal
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria

72
5
135
29
63
133
178
176
118
161
120
13
37
13
136
121
76
131
7
16
25
85
10
100
69
145
121
12
54
125
138
44
72
158
174
64
24
41
26
151
170
64
104
182
32
155
80
61
117
113
108
52
130
185
149
128
157
4
6
129
186
153

3

–1

–1

1
1

1

3
–2
1

–2

–1

–1

1

1

23

2

1
1
–1
–1
1

–1

2
–2

1
1

Norway
Oman
Pakistan
Palau
Palestine, State of
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Qatar
Romania
Russian Federation
Rwanda
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Samoa
Sao Tome and Principe
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Serbia
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Slovakia
Slovenia
Solomon Islands
South Africa
Spain
Sri Lanka
Sudan
Suriname
Swaziland
Sweden
Switzerland
Syrian Arab Republic
Tajikistan
Tanzania, United Republic of
Thailand
The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
Timor-Leste
Togo
Tonga
Trinidad and Tobago
Tunisia
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Uganda
Ukraine
United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom
United States
Uruguay
Uzbekistan
Vanuatu
Venezuela, Bolivarian Republic of
Viet Nam
Yemen
Zambia
Zimbabwe

1
84
146
52
110
59
156
111
77
114
39
43
36
56
55
167
72
88
83
96
144
57
154
64
46
177
18
35
21
143
121
23
92
171
105
141
7
9
116
125
152
103
78
134
159
95
67
94
90
102
161
78
41
26
3
51
114
124
71
127
160
163
172

–1

2
1
1

–2
–1

–3

–1

–1

–2

–2

2

1

–1

–1

1
1
1
–2

1

–1

–1

–1

1
–2
–1

–2

1

Note: Positive or negative values in the rightmost column indicate the number of positions upward or downward in the country’s ranking over 2011–2012 using consistent data and methodology; 
a blank indicates no change.

 

United Nations Development Programme
One United Nations Plaza
New York, NY 10017

 

USD 30
ISBN 978-92-1-126340-4

www.undp.org

Empowered lives. 
Resilient nations. 

The 21st century is witnessing a profound shift in global 
dynamics, driven by the fast-rising new powers of the 
developing world. China has overtaken Japan as the 
world’s second biggest economy, lifting hundreds of 
millions of people out of poverty in the process. India is 
reshaping its future with new entrepreneurial creativity 
and social policy innovation. Brazil is raising its living 
standards by expanding international relationships and 
antipoverty programmes that are emulated worldwide.
But the “Rise of the South” is a much larger phe-
nomenon. Indonesia, Mexico, South Africa, Thailand, 
Turkey and other developing countries are becoming 
leading  actors  on  the  world  stage.  The  2013 Human 
Development Report identifies more than 40 developing 
countries that have done better than expected in human 
development  in  recent  decades,  with  their  progress 
accelerating markedly over the past 10 years.

Each of these countries has its own unique history 
and has chosen its own distinct development pathway. 

Yet  they  share  important  characteristics  and  face 
many of the same challenges. They are also becoming 
more interconnected and interdependent. And people 
throughout  the  developing  world  are  increasingly 
demanding to be heard, as they share ideas through new 
communications channels and seek greater accountability 
from governments and international institutions.

The 2013 Human Development Report analyses the 
causes and consequences of the continuing “Rise of 
the South” and identifies policies rooted in this new 
reality that could promote greater progress throughout 
the world for decades to come. The Report calls for far 
better representation of the South in global governance 
systems  and  points  to  potential  new  sources  of 
financing within the South for essential public goods. 
With fresh analytical insights and clear proposals for 
policy reforms, the Report charts a course for people 
in  all  regions  to  face  shared  human  development 
challenges together, fairly and effectively.

“The Report refreshes our understanding of the current state of global development, and demonstrates how much can be 
learned from the experiences of fast development progress in so many countries in the South.” 
 
—UNDP Administrator Helen Clark, from the Foreword 
 

“The human development approach is a major advance in the difficult exercise of understanding the successes and 
deprivations of human lives, and in appreciating the importance of reflection and dialogue, and through that advancing 
fairness and justice in the world.”  
—Nobel Laureate Amartya Sen, from chapter 1

“No one has a monopoly on good ideas, which is why New York will continue to learn from the best practices of other cities 
and countries.” 
—New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg, from chapter 3

“A close look at the diverse pathways that successful developing countries have pursued enriches the menu of policy 
options for all countries and regions.”  
—Report lead author Khalid Malik, from the Introduction

