Making Development Sustainable:
Making Development Sustainable:
Making Development Sustainable:
The Future of Disaster Risk Management
The Future of Disaster Risk Management
The Future of Disaster Risk Management

ISBN 978-92-1-132042-8

UNISDR is grateful to the organizations whose logos are shown below for their contributions to the pro-
duction of the 2015 Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction. In addition, financial resourc-
es were also generously made available by the European Commission (Directorate-General for Humani-
tarian Aid and Civil Protection, and Directorate-General for Development and Cooperation), the United 
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and by the Government of the United States of America.

GAR15 products

• The Pocket GAR summarizes the main evidence and messages of the report in a concise, easy-
to-read format.
• The main report contains further enhanced content links which provide access to dynamic 
maps, videos, photos, and case studies for users with smartphones and tablets. 
• Tablet computer and smartphone users can also enjoy the free GAR for Tangible Earth (GfT) 
application. The GfT (or “gift”) is a fully interactive stand-alone application which features a 
3D globe interface with decades of dynamic earth science data sets, including disaster events 
from all GARs. These data sets are illustrated with interactive risk scenarios, maps and photos, 
and can be searched by time (including real-time), place, risk driver, hazard, disaster event, and 
more. 
• GAR15 is also available as a web version, with much of the functionality available in products 
such as: 

Interactive main report in English
Main report in Arabic, Chinese, French, Russian and Spanish
The Pocket GAR in Arabic, Chinese, French, Japanese, Russian and Spanish
Appendices
Background papers
Interim national progress reports on the implementation of the Hyogo 
Framework for Action
Access to disaster loss and risk databases
All GAR15 products can be accessed via:

www.preventionweb.net/gar/

Making Development Sustainable:
The Future of Disaster Risk Management

The Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction (GAR) 2015 includes enhanced content. 
Augmented reality (AR) icons link the report to its companion application, GAR for Tangible Earth (GfT), 
and provide the reader with additional information and multimedia content. 

To use these features, first point the camera on your GfT-installed tablet or smartphone at the desired 
icon, then press the AR button when it appears. A variety of dynamic information functions designed to 
enrich the reading experience will then play on your device.

The Earth Icon: Links the user to a dynamic 3D globe, enabling geospatial 
data relevant to the subject in the text. 

The Researcher Icon: Links to data about the researchers behind the 
article being read, their reports, web links, and videos.

The Tablet Icon: Opens dynamic animations and additional information 
on the static print charts in GAR. 

The Video Icon: Links to videos of UNISDR and partners relevant to the 
subject in the text.

The Web Link Icon: Links  to  external  websites  that  provide  details 
relevant to the subject in the text.

Download the full report:
To download the application, use the QR code provided at the end of this document or visit 
www.preventionweb.net/gar.
To share your comments and news on the GAR on Twitter and Facebook, please use #GAR15.

ISBN 978-92-1-132042-8
© United Nations 2015. All rights reserved.

Disclaimer
The views expressed in this publication do not necessarily reflect the views of the United Nations Secretariat. The designations employed 
and the presentation of the material do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the United Nations Secretariat 
concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area, or of its authorities, or concerning the delineation of its frontiers or 
boundaries.

This publication may be freely quoted but acknowledgement of the source is requested.
Citation: UNISDR (2015). Making Development Sustainable: The Future of Disaster Risk Management. Global Assessment Report on Disas-
ter Risk Reduction. Geneva, Switzerland: United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction (UNISDR).

Design and layout: AXIS and ELP, Tokyo, Japan. Takae Ooka, New York, U.S.A.
Editing: Christopher J. Anderson, Vienna, Austria
Printing: Imprimerie Gonnet, Belley, France

This paper contains 60% post-consumer recycled fibre and 40% FSC certified virgin fibre sourced from well-managed forests.

ii

Foreword

The fourth edition of the United Nations Global 
Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction is 
being issued at a pivotal moment for the future 
of development.

In 2015, the global community is aiming to adopt 
an  ambitious  set  of  sustainable  development 
goals and a meaningful, universal agreement on 
climate change.  Disaster risk reduction can play 
an important role in advancing these agendas 
through its close links with poverty reduction, 
sustainable growth and shared prosperity.  

As we prepare for the third World Conference on 
Disaster Risk Reduction in Sendai, Japan, it is cru-
cial to understand and act upon the messages 
of this report.  Many countries continue to face 
large potential losses from disasters – especially 

those which can least afford to invest in future 
resilience.  Global models suggest that the risk of 
economic losses is rising as a result of the rapidly 
increasing value of the assets that are exposed to 
major hazards. In addition, a large proportion of 
losses continue to be associated with small and 
recurring disaster events that severely damage 
critical public infrastructure, housing and pro-
duction – key pillars of growth and development 
in low and middle-income countries.

Governments, civil society and the private sec-
tor have the opportunity and obligation to work 
together  to  commit  to  a  safer  future.    A  more 
inclusive and ambitious framework for disaster 
risk reduction is crucial to our efforts to build a 
better world for all.  Together, let us ensure that 
development is resilient and sustainable.

Ban Ki-moon
Secretary-General of the United Nations

iii

Most disasters that could happen have not 
happened yet.

Economic losses from disasters such as earthquakes, tsunamis, cyclones and flooding are 
now reaching an average of US$250 billion to US$300 billion each year. Future losses 
(expected annual losses) are now estimated at US$314 billion in the built environment 
alone. This is the amount that countries should set aside each year to cover future 
disaster losses.  ( → Chapter 3 )

The mortality and economic loss associated with extensive risks (minor but recurrent 
disaster risks) in low and middle-income countries are trending up. In the last decade, 
losses due to extensive risk in 85 countries and territories were equivalent to a total of 
US$94 billion.  ( → Chapter 4 )
Extensive risks are responsible for most disaster morbidity and displacement, and 
represent an ongoing erosion of development assets, such as houses, schools, health 
facilities,  roads  and  local  infrastructure.  However,  the  cost  of  extensive  risk  is  not 
visible and tends to be underestimated, as it is usually absorbed by low-income 
households and communities and small businesses.

For  small  island  developing  states  (SIDS),  future  disaster  losses  represent  an 
existential threat.  For example, compared to Europe and Central Asia, SIDS are 
expected to lose on average 20 times more of their capital stock each year in disasters. 
The expected annual losses in SIDS are equivalent to almost 20 per cent of their total 
social expenditure, compared to only 1.19 per cent in North America and less than 1 per 
cent in Europe and Central Asia.  ( → Chapter 3 )

Countries face a financing gap if they do not have the resources to buffer against 
infrequent but severe disaster losses. Many countries, including Algeria, Chile, Indonesia, 
Iran, Madagascar, Pakistan, Peru and many SIDS, would not pass a stress test of their 
fiscal resilience to a 1-in-100-year loss.  Their limited ability to recover quickly may 
increase indirect disaster losses significantly.  ( → Chapter 5 )

iv

Between 1980 and 2012, 42 million life years were lost in internationally reported 
disasters each year. (The concept of “human life years” provides a better representation of 
disaster impact, as it provides a metric describing the time required to produce economic 
development and social progress.) 
Over 80 per cent of the total life years lost in disasters are spread across low and 
middle-income countries, representing a serious setback to social and economic 
development comparable to diseases such as tuberculosis.  ( → Part I )

If this risk were shared equally amongst the world’s population, it would be equivalent 
to an annual loss of almost US$70 for each individual person of working age, or 
two months’ income for people living below the poverty line: an existential risk 
for people already struggling for survival on a daily basis.
It  also  represents  a  significant  opportunity  cost  for  development,  as  these 
resources could be used to make investments in infrastructure, social protection, 
public health and public education.  ( → Chapter 3 )

Expressed as a proportion of social expenditure, expected annual losses in low-income 
countries are five times higher than in high-income countries. The countries with the 
greatest need to invest in social development are those most challenged by 
disaster risk.  ( → Chapter 3 )

This is a problem not only for low-income countries, but for middle-income countries 
like Jamaica and the Philippines and for high-income countries like Greece. Although 
countries like Jamaica and Greece have far lower relative risk compared to the Philippines, 
the overall impact on future development will be very similar. While economic 
growth will be mainly undermined in Greece, the challenge facing the Philippines is one 
of social development.  ( → Chapter 5 )

GAR at a Glance
Sustainable  development  cannot  be 
achieved unless disaster risk is reduced.

v

Climate change will increase expected future 
losses. 

Through changing temperatures, precipitation and sea levels, amongst other factors, 
global climate change is already modifying hazard levels and exacerbating 
disaster risks. 
By 2050, it is estimated that 40 per cent of the global population will be living in 
river basins that experience severe water stress, particularly in Africa and Asia. 
In the Caribbean basin, climate change will contribute an additional US$1.4bn to the 
expected annual losses from cyclone wind damage alone.  ( → Chapter 3 )

The ecological footprint from the unsustainable overconsumption of energy and 
natural capital now exceeds the planet’s biocapacity by nearly 50 per cent. Coastal 
wetlands declined by 52 per cent between the 1980s and early 2000s. Other critical 
regulatory ecosystems such as mangrove forests and coral reefs are also degrading at a 
rapid pace.  ( → Chapter 12 )

The effects of climate change are not evenly distributed, however. It will affect 
different countries in different ways. For example, the risk from wind damage would 
double in Anguilla and increase fivefold in Trinidad and Tobago. In contrast, Mexico would 
actually see a reduction in its risk.
Although “climate change is very likely to have an overall negative effect on yields of 
major cereal crops across Africa” (IPCC), strong regional variability in the degree of yield 
reduction is anticipated. 
Losses in maize production from a 1-in-25-year drought in Malawi could be 23 per cent 
higher in the years 2016 to 2035 than they were from 1981 to 2010. Given that agriculture 
contributes 30 per cent to Malawi’s GDP, this could push the country over a resilience 
threshold in terms of the national economy as well as poverty. However, in the 
Rift Valley in Kenya and in Niger, where agriculture generates 30 and 38 per cent of GDP 
(respectively), the losses would actually decline in the same climate change scenario.
( → Chapter 3 )

vi

Growing global inequality, increasing hazard exposure, rapid urbanization and the 
overconsumption of energy and natural capital now threaten to drive risk to dangerous 
and unpredictable levels with systemic global impacts. 

The richest 2 per cent of the world’s adult population now own over 50 per cent of global 
wealth, whereas the bottom 50 per cent own less than 1 per cent of global wealth.  An 
increasing  concentration  of  wealth,  accompanied  by  depressed  real  wages  and  cuts 
in spending on social welfare and safety nets, is expected to lead to growing risk 
inequality across territories and social groups.  ( → Chapter 9 )

Sectors  and  territories  without  comparative  advantages  for  economic  development 
face increasing risks due to low levels of investment in risk-reducing 
infrastructure, an absence of social and environmental protection, and rural and 
urban  poverty.  In  many  low  and  middle-income  countries,  urban  development  is 
characterized by highly unequal access to urban space, infrastructure, services and 
security.  ( → Chapter 11 )

Socially segregated urban development in turn generates new patterns of 
disaster risk. Low-income households are often forced to occupy hazard-exposed areas 
with low land values, deficient or non-existent infrastructure and social protection, and 
high levels of environmental degradation.

Growing risk inequality

vii

The continuous “mispricing of risk” threatens 
our future

As the economy becomes more global, investment tends to flow to locations that 
offer comparative advantages, including low labour costs, access to export markets, 
infrastructure and stability. Investment decisions rarely take into account the 
level of hazard in those locations, and opportunities for short-term profits 
continue to outweigh concerns about future sustainability. 
As a consequence, large volumes of capital continue to flow into hazard-prone 
areas, leading to significant increases in the value of exposed economic assets.
( → Chapter 10 )

Over the last 10 years, there has been significant progress in strengthening disaster 
preparedness, response and early warning capacities and in reducing specific risks, 
according to the HFA Monitor. However, progress has been limited in most 
countries when it comes to managing the underlying risks.  ( → Part II )

The continuous mispricing of risk means that consequences are rarely attributed to 
the decisions that generate the risks. This lack of attribution and accountability creates 
perverse incentives for continued risk-generating behaviour, as those who gain 
from risk rarely bear the costs. 
As such, new risks have been generated and accumulated faster than existing 
risks have been reduced.  ( → Chapter 10 )

An enormous volume of capital is expected to flow into urban development in the coming 
decades, particularly in South Asia and sub-Saharan Africa. Some 60 per cent of the 
area expected to be urbanized by 2030 remains to be built. Much of the growth will 
occur in countries with weak capacities to ensure risk-sensitive urban development.    
( → Chapter 11 )

viii

Managing risk, rather than managing disasters as indicators of unmanaged 
risk,  now  has  to  become  inherent  to  the  art  of  development;  not  an  add-on  to 
development, but a set of practices embedded in its very DNA. Managing the risks inherent 
in social and economic activity requires a combination of three approaches:  (→ Chapter 13 )

1.  prospective risk management, which aims to avoid the accumulation of new risks; 
2.  corrective risk management, which seeks to reduce existing risks; 
3. compensatory risk management to  support the resilience of individuals and 
societies in the face of residual risk that cannot be effectively reduced.

Global average annual loss is estimated to increase up to US$415 billion by 2030 
due to investment requirements in urban infrastructure alone. However, this growth in 
expected losses is not inevitable, as annual investments of US$6 billion in appropriate 
disaster risk management strategies could generate benefits in terms of risk reduction of 
US$360 billion. This is equivalent to an annual reduction of new and additional expected 
losses by more than 20 per cent.

Such an annual investment in disaster risk reduction represents only 0.1 per cent 
of the US$6 trillion per year that will have to be invested in infrastructure over the 
next 15 years. But for many countries, that small additional investment could make 
a crucial difference in achieving the national and international goals of ending 
poverty, improving health and education, and ensuring sustainable and equitable growth.  
( → Chapter 13 )

Managing risks rather than managing 
disasters — Disaster risk reduction
needs to be reinterpreted.

ix

Contents

Foreword

(cid:10)(cid:4)(cid:21) at a (cid:10)(cid:567)a(cid:43)(cid:32)e

Pre(cid:35)a(cid:32)e

(cid:38)(cid:38)(cid:38)

(cid:38)(cid:51)

(cid:53)(cid:38)(cid:38)(cid:38)

Chapter 1

I(cid:43)tr(cid:44)(cid:33)(cid:50)(cid:32)t(cid:38)(cid:44)(cid:43)(cid:1145) (cid:4) h(cid:38)(cid:48)t(cid:44)r(cid:54) (cid:44)(cid:35) (cid:51)(cid:38)(cid:44)(cid:567)e(cid:43)(cid:32)e

023

Part I

(cid:24)(cid:43)(cid:35)(cid:38)(cid:43)(cid:38)(cid:48)he(cid:33) (cid:31)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:38)(cid:43)e(cid:48)(cid:48)

Chapter 2              Reducing disaster losses: A partial success 

 

Chapter 3              The global riskscape

Chapter 4              Extensive risk 

 

 

Chapter 5              Resilience challenged

039

043

053

089

099

x

Part II

 I(cid:43)(cid:48)(cid:38)(cid:33)e (cid:33)(cid:38)(cid:48)a(cid:48)ter r(cid:38)(cid:48)(cid:40) (cid:42)a(cid:43)a(cid:36)e(cid:42)e(cid:43)t

Chapter 6              Disaster risk governance

Chapter 7               A culture of prevention and resilience?

Chapter 8              Managing disasters

Part III

(cid:8)(cid:43)ter the (cid:51)(cid:44)(cid:38)(cid:33)

Chapter 9              Risk inequality 

 

Chapter 10           For a few dollars more: The increasing hazard exposure of 
                                    economic assets

Chapter 11           Segregated urban disaster risk

113

117

131

153

177

183

199

213

Chapter 12           Welcome to the Anthropocene: Overconsumption and biocapacity

229

Chapter 13

C(cid:44)(cid:43)(cid:32)(cid:567)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:38)(cid:44)(cid:43)(cid:1145) (cid:16)a(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:43)(cid:36) (cid:33)e(cid:51)e(cid:567)(cid:44)p(cid:42)e(cid:43)t 
(cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:48)ta(cid:38)(cid:43)a(cid:31)(cid:567)e

247

(cid:10)(cid:41)(cid:44)(cid:48)(cid:48)ar(cid:54)
(cid:4)(cid:32)r(cid:44)(cid:43)(cid:54)(cid:42)(cid:48)
(cid:4)(cid:32)(cid:40)(cid:43)(cid:44)(cid:52)(cid:41)e(cid:33)(cid:36)e(cid:42)e(cid:43)t(cid:48)
(cid:21)e(cid:35)ere(cid:43)(cid:32)e(cid:48)
I(cid:43)(cid:33)e(cid:53)

(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:41)(cid:53)(cid:51)(cid:38)(cid:38)(cid:38)
(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:41)(cid:53)(cid:53)
(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:41)(cid:53)(cid:53)(cid:38)(cid:38)
(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:41)(cid:53)(cid:53)(cid:53)(cid:38)
(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:51)(cid:38)(cid:38)(cid:38)

(cid:53)(cid:38)

The Global Assessment Report (GAR) brand iconography is based on an image of 
a person holding an inverted umbrella. The inverted “A” in the GAR 2015 logo is a 
resonance of this motif. 

The person holding an inverted umbrella is about seeing something from a new 
perspective, a call for creative responsiveness to change. A simple, ubiquitous tool, 
proposed in a new way... the grandest breakthroughs often come from such humble 
beginnings. 

The image represents acting to overturn a legacy of apathy and ignorance. It points to 
a way beyond conducting business as usual. GAR 2015 provides clear and actionable 
information about the risks and rewards of disaster risk reduction, as well as a wealth 
of information about how we unwittingly generate, and exacerbate, risks. 

The  icon  also  represents  the  key  message  of  GAR  2015:  “Making  Development 
Sustainable”. This is nowhere more evident than in the power that each of us has to 
work together to make our societies more resilient, to reduce disaster risks and enable 
responsible the use of resources. Raindrops, one at a time, may seem insignificant, 
but given a platform to become pooled resources, they can quickly become a powerful 
force for good. 

Thus, the inverted umbrella is an icon of positive empowerment, advocating disaster 
risk management as an opportunity rather than a cost, and as something which makes 
human and planetary well-being possible.

xii

Preface

The  2015  Global  Assessment  Report  on  Disas-
ter Risk Reduction (GAR15), Making Development 
Sustainable: The Future of Disaster Risk Manage-
ment, is the fourth in the series coordinated by 
the United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduc-
tion (UNISDR) in the context of the Hyogo Frame-
work for Action 2005-2015: Building the Resilience 
of Nations and Communities to Disasters (HFA). 
The HFA is an international framework adopted 
by 168 UN member States in Kobe, Japan in Janu-
ary 2005 to achieve an expected outcome of: 

The substantial reduction of disaster losses, in 
lives and in the social, economic and environmen-
tal assets of communities and societies.

Every biennium governments have self-assessed 
their progress towards the achievement of this 
outcome using the online HFA Monitor. In 2007 
UNISDR published Disaster Risk Reduction: Global 
Review 2007, which assessed progress in the first 
two years of the HFA. Shortly afterwards, work 
began on the first edition in the GAR series, which 
has compiled and analysed data and information 
on disaster risk patterns and trends, government 
self-assessments of progress, and critical chal-
lenges to disaster risk reduction since 2009.

inequality are addressed, disaster risk will con-
tinue to rise. At the same time, disaster losses 
aggravate the depth and breadth of poverty and 
undermine any progress towards poverty reduc-
tion and sustainable development. GAR09 made 
the  case  for  action  to  address  the  underlying 
risk drivers through aligning the efforts pursued 
under the disaster risk reduction, climate change 
and poverty reduction agendas.

The  findings  of  GAR09  flowed  into  GAR11, 
Revealing Risk, Redefining Development, where 
the  focus  shifted  to  identifying  effective  pub-
lic policies to address the disaster risk–poverty 
nexus.  GAR11  analysed  the  political  and  eco-
nomic imperatives and constraints for increased 
public  investment  in  disaster  risk  reduction. 
Using innovative hybrid probabilistic risk mod-
els, GAR11 produced risk profiles for a number of 
countries in order to demonstrate how a risk-lay-
ered approach to managing disaster risks could 
maximize benefits while reducing costs. GAR11 
also  built  on  the  recommendations  of  GAR09, 
highlighting opportunities to integrate disaster 
risk reduction into existing development instru-
ments and mechanisms in the urban, environ-
mental, social and economic sectors.

GAR09, Risk and Poverty in a Changing Climate, 
provided evidence that disaster risk is dispropor-
tionately  concentrated  in  lower-income  coun-
tries  with  weak  governance.  Within  countries, 
it showed how underlying drivers such as badly 
planned and managed urban development, vul-
nerable rural livelihoods, environmental degra-
dation, poverty and inequality further generate 
and accumulate disaster risk in low-income com-
munities and households. GAR09 highlighted that 
the relationship between disaster risk and pover-
ty is bidirectional. Unless poverty and underlying 

In GAR13, From Shared Risk to Shared Value: The 
Business  Case  for  Disaster  Risk  Reduction,  the 
focus  shifted  once  again,  this  time  from  pub-
lic policies and investment to the largely unex-
plored nexus between private investment and 
disaster risk. In most economies, public invest-
ment represents only 15-30 per cent of total cap-
ital formation. How disaster risk is addressed in 
the other 70-85 per cent of capital investment is 
therefore critical. GAR13 showed how business-
es can invest in managing their disaster risks to 
reduce the costs and interruptions represented 

xiii

by  disaster  losses  and  impacts,  and  how  they 
can  enhance  performance  and  reputation  by 
minimizing  uncertainty  and  unpredictability. 
By underlining the interdependence of the pub-
lic and private sectors, the report demonstrated 
why effectively managing disaster risks in both 
sectors  is  critical  to  competitiveness,  sustain-
ability and resilience, and why it is necessary to 
adopt a broader approach to value creation that 
also addresses the underlying drivers of risk.

Each  GAR  produced  detailed  sets  of  recom-
mendations.  While  these  were  specific  to  the 
theme of each report, they can be summarized 
as  two  mutually  supportive  streams,  brought 
into increasing focus as they flowed through the 
three reports: (1) address the underlying drivers 
of disaster risk to avoid risk generation and accu-
mulation, and (2) strengthen the governance of 
disaster risk in order to be able to do so.

GAR15 focuses on the second of these streams 
and  presents  the  case  for  a  broad  reinterpre-
tation  of  disaster  risk  reduction.  As  the  HFA 
draws to a close, GAR15 questions whether the 
way  in  which  disaster  risk  reduction  has  been 
approached under the HFA is really fit for pur-
pose in a world now threatened by catastrophic 
increases in disaster risk.

In Part I of GAR15, new evidence on contempo-
rary patterns and trends in disaster risk is pre-
sented in order to assess the extent to which the 
expected outcome of the HFA has been achieved. 
Parts II and III examine whether the way disaster 
risk reduction has been approached is appropri-
ate to address an increasingly accelerated gen-
eration and accumulation of disaster risks. The 
concluding chapter shows why the focus of disas-
ter risk reduction needs to move from managing 
disasters to managing risks if it is to contribute to 
making development sustainable. 

Disaster risk still on the rise
GAR15 comes at a critical time for disaster risk 

xiv

Preface

reduction. The expected outcome of the HFA has 
only been partially achieved. Twenty-five years 
after UN Member States adopted the Internation-
al Decade for Natural Disaster Reduction (IDNDR) 
and ten years after the adoption of the HFA, glob-
al disaster risk has not been reduced significant-
ly. While improvements in disaster management 
have led to dramatic reductions in mortality in 
some countries, economic losses are now reach-
ing an average of US$250 billion to US$300 billion 
each year. 

More critically, both the mortality and econom-
ic loss associated with extensive risks in low and 
middle-income countries are trending up. Inter-
nationally, extensive risk is a largely invisible risk 
layer. Nevertheless, it is a central concern for the 
low-income  households  and  small  businesses 
that depend on public infrastructure and for the 
local governments that provide it.

Presented  using  a  different  metric,  around  42 
million human life years are lost in internation-
ally  reported  disasters  each  year,  a  setback  to 
development  comparable  to  diseases  such  as 
tuberculosis.  Disaster  risk  continues  to  be  dis-
proportionately  concentrated  in  low  and  mid-
dle-income countries, in particular in small island 
developing states (SIDS), and is being magnified 
by climate change.

Meanwhile, the average annual losses (AAL) from 
earthquakes, tsunamis, tropical cyclones and riv-
er flooding are now estimated at US$314 billion in 
the built environment alone. The AAL is an accu-
mulating contingent liability and represents the 
amount that countries should be setting aside 
each year to cover future disaster losses. 

Protecting development against itself
Since the HFA was adopted, there has been an 
exponential  increase  in  political  commitment 
to disaster  risk reduction, in the development 
of  institutional  and  legislative  arrangements, 
in  improvements  in  preparedness  and  early 

warning, in the production of risk information 
and in the formulation of policies and strategies 
at all levels. From that perspective the HFA has 
undoubtedly been a success.

While the HFA gave detailed guidance on manag-
ing underlying risk, most countries have under-
stood and practised disaster risk reduction as the 
management of disasters. The latter approach 
includes  appropriate  and  effective  actions  to 
strengthen  disaster  preparedness  and  early 
warning, and to reduce disaster impacts through 
appropriate response. But while this approach is 
appropriate to manage disasters, it has proved 
unfit for purpose to manage the underlying risks. 
Given that these risks are generated inside devel-
opment, addressing them requires actions such 
as reducing poverty, planning and managing cit-
ies appropriately and protecting and restoring 
ecosystems.  This is the area where most coun-
tries have made least progress during the HFA.  
Cases where disaster risk considerations are ful-
ly factored into social and economic investments 
or where risk knowledge is integrated into devel-
opment plans and practice are still the exception.  
As such, and despite notable improvements in 
disaster management, new risks have been gen-
erated and accumulated faster than existing risks 
have been reduced.

This  approach  reflects  an  interpretation  of 
disasters as external threats and shocks. As a 
result, the policy goal of disaster risk reduction 
has been interpreted as the protection of social 
and economic development from those exter-
nalities. The expected outcome of the HFA has 
not  been  achieved  because,  on  the  contrary, 
disasters are socially constructed inside devel-
opment.  Development  cannot  be  protected 
from itself, and until development itself is trans-
formed, disaster risk will continue to increase.

overconsumption  of  natural  capital,  social 
inequality, as well as the generation and accu-
mulation of disaster risk. GAR15 highlights four 
interlinked global drivers that, if left unmanaged, 
are likely to lead to dangerous increases in risk.

Increasingly globalized disaster risks
Investment decisions rarely take hazard expo-
sure into account, or otherwise they excessive-
ly discount disaster risk due to the potential for 
short-term  returns.  As  competition  increases, 
large flows of investment may continue to flow 
into  hazard-exposed  areas,  leading  to  further 
increases in intensive risk. These risks become 
increasingly  systemic  as  both  risk  drivers  and 
disaster  impacts  ripple  through  global  supply 
chains and spill over from one sector to another.

Growing risk inequality
Social and economic inequality is likely to con-
tinue  to  increase,  and  with  it  disaster  risk  for 
those countries, communities, households and 
businesses that have only limited opportunities 
to manage their risks and strengthen their resil-
ience. The geography of risk inequality expresses 
itself at all scales: between regions and countries, 
within countries and inside cities and localities.

Segregated cities
Disaster risk is increasingly concentrated in haz-
ard-exposed cities. However, within cities, par-
ticularly  in  low  and  middle-income  countries, 
urban space is structured in a way that accentu-
ates risk inequality. Globally, the population liv-
ing in informal settlements continues to grow in 
absolute  terms.  Disaster  risk  is  thus  amplified 
as low-income households are forced to occupy 
hazard-exposed areas with low land values, defi-
cient or non-existent infrastructure, an absence 
of social protection and high levels of environ-
mental degradation.

Economic growth, overconsumption and inequality
In  its  pursuit  of  economic  growth,  the  cur-
rent  development  paradigm  generates  an 

Consumption surpassing biocapacity
The overconsumption of energy, water and oth-
er resources arising from economic growth has 

xv

now  surpassed  the  biocapacity  of  the  planet, 
breaching the limits of critical planetary systems 
and threatening human survival. Many ecosys-
tems  that  provide  vital  protective  and  provi-
sioning services are being degraded beyond the 
point of recovery, while changes in temperature, 
precipitation, sea level and other factors due to 
global climate change are modifying hazard pat-
terns and magnifying disaster risks. These risks 
are unequally distributed, as sectors and territo-
ries with high levels of income live beyond their 
means, consuming environmental resources and 
exporting risks to and importing them from oth-
er areas.

Disaster risk reduction at a crossroads
In 2015, three mutually supportive intergovern-
mental processes will come to a conclusion. In 
March  2015,  at  the  Third  World  Conference  on 
Disaster  Risk  Reduction  in  Sendai,  Japan,  UN 
Member States are expected to adopt a successor 
framework to the HFA. This new framework will 
guide how countries should achieve the policy 
goal of disaster risk reduction in the coming years.

The main outcome of the 2012 Rio+20 Confer-
ence was the agreement by Member States to 
launch a process to develop a set of Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs) by September 2015, 
which will build upon the Millennium Develop-
ment Goals (MDGs) and converge into the post-
2015 development agenda.

The  Conference  of  the  Parties  (COP  21)  to  the 
1992 United Nations Framework Convention on 
Climate Change (UNFCCC) and the 11th session of 
the Meeting of the Parties (CMP 11) to the 1997 
Kyoto Protocol will be held in Paris in Decem-
ber 2015, with the objective of reaching a legal-
ly binding and universal agreement on climate 
change among all countries.

These  three  processes  are  closely  interrelat-
ed.    Growing  disaster  risks,  climate  change  as 
well as poverty and inequality are all indicators 

xvi

Preface

of unsustainability.  At the same time, increasing 
disaster loss and impacts, magnified by climate 
change, will undermine the capacity of many low 
and middle-income countries, particularly small 
island developing states (SIDS), to make the cap-
ital investments and social expenditures neces-
sary to achieve the SDGs. 

In this context, disaster risk reduction is at a cross-
roads: It can continue to focus on managing an 
increasing number of disasters or it can shift the 
focus to managing the underlying risks in a way 
that facilitates sustainable development.  

Making development sustainable
If an accelerated increase in disaster risk is to 
be avoided, there is a growing consensus that 
the development drivers of risk, such as climate 
change, the overconsumption of natural capital, 
poverty and inequality will have to be addressed.  
Implicit values with regard to social and econom-
ic development do seem to be changing, challeng-
ing and overturning deep-rooted assumptions 
about economic growth, social well-being and 
disaster  risk.  The  understanding  that  beyond 
a  given  threshold  social  progress  and  human 
development  are  not  dependent  on  unlimited 
economic  growth  and  increasing  energy  con-
sumption is now increasingly well accepted and 
is informing the global discussion on sustainable 
development. 

The private sector, citizens and cities have gener-
ated increasing momentum to transform devel-
opment  practices  in  renewable  energy,  water 
and waste management, natural resource man-
agement, green building and infrastructure, and 
sustainable  agriculture.  These  development 
transformations  contribute  to  reducing  disas-
ter risks:  for example, moving to a low-carbon 
economy reduces the risk of catastrophic climate 
change; protecting and restoring regulatory eco-
systems can mitigate a variety of hazards; and 
risk-sensitive  agriculture  can  strengthen food 
security. All editions of the GAR have consistently 

identified and highlighted transformative devel-
opment practices with co-benefits for disaster 
risk reduction.

Managing disaster risks inside development
GAR15 consolidates and builds on those recom-
mendations by highlighting not only how such 
transformative practices are essential to reduce 
risks, but also how an effective management of 
risks inside development can play a critical role in 
making development sustainable and in achiev-
ing the outcomes of all three of the new interna-
tional frameworks under negotiation in 2015.

Managing  the  risks  inherent  in  social  and  eco-
nomic activity, rather than mainstreaming disas-
ter risk management to protect against external 
threats, is very different to the current approach 
to disaster risk reduction.  It implies that manag-
ing risk, rather than managing disasters as indi-
cators of unmanaged risk, now has to become 
inherent to the art of development; not an add-
on to development, but a set of practices embed-
ded in its very DNA. Without effective disaster risk 
management, sustainable development will not 
be sustainable and the SDGs will not be achieved.

Investing in disaster risk reduction is thus a pre-
condition for developing sustainably in a chang-
ing  climate.  It  is  a  precondition  that  can  be 
achieved and that makes good financial sense. 
Global annual investments of only US$6billion 
in appropriate disaster risk management strat-
egies can generate benefits of US$360 billion or 
an equivalent of more than 20 per cent reduc-
tion  in  new  and  additional  expected  annual 
losses.i

Such an annual investment in disaster risk reduc-
tion represents only around 0.1 per cent of the 
US$6 trillion per year that will have to be invest-
ed in infrastructure over the next 15 years.  But 
for many countries that small additional invest-
ment could make the crucial difference in achiev-
ing  national  and  international  goals  of  ending 

poverty, improving health and education, and 
ensuring sustainable and equitable growth. 

The key message of GAR15, therefore, is that an 
appropriate set of mutually supportive strategies 
for  disaster  risk  management  that  weave  and 
flow through development decisions is critical to 
the success of all three international frameworks 
currently under discussion. Without the effective 
management of disaster risks, sustainable devel-
opment will, in fact, not be sustainable.  

The future of disaster risk management
As disaster risk has increased rapidly during the 
HFA, disaster risk management itself is rapidly 
evolving. New stakeholders, including city gov-
ernments, businesses and the financial sector are 
driving change. Innovations in areas as diverse 
as risk governance, risk knowledge, cost-benefit 
analysis and accountability are challenging old 
assumptions and creating new opportunities. 

Rather  than  a  programme  or  framework  for 
action, GAR15 presents a discussion on the future 
of  disaster  risk  management  that  recognizes 
ongoing innovation. Its purpose is to stimulate 
further  reflection,  debate  and  improved  prac-
tice as countries begin to address the challeng-
es posed by the new international agreements on 
disaster risk reduction, climate change and sus-
tainable development in 2015 and beyond.

Reforming the governance of disaster risk
Countries  will  continue  to  require  a  dedicated 
and specialized disaster management sector to 
prepare for and respond to disasters, emergen-
cies and other incidents, including maritime, avi-
ation, industrial and environmental accidents. To 
the extent that risks continue to grow, there will 
be more rather than less demand for such a sector.

However, disaster and climate risks in develop-
ment need to be approached not just through a 
specialized and stand-alone sector, but rather 
through strengthened governance arrangements 

xvii

in  sectors  and  territories  to  ensure  a  low  dis-
counting of future risk as well as transparency 
and accountability as risks are generated, trans-
ferred and retained.

This requires a combination of prospective risk 
management to ensure that risks are appropri-
ately managed in new investment, corrective risk 
management to reduce the risk present in exist-
ing capital stock, and compensatory risk man-
agement to strengthen resilience at all levels.

From risk information to risk knowledge
Managing risks in this way requires greater risk 
awareness and knowledge. The social produc-
tion of risk information itself needs to be trans-
formed, with a shift in focus from the production 
of risk information per se towards information 
that is understandable and actionable by differ-
ent kinds of users: in other words, risk knowledge.

A change in perspective in the production of risk 
information is also required: from measuring risk 
as an objective externality that can be reduced 
towards understanding risk as both an opportunity 
and a threat, and towards improved identification 
and estimation of the causes and consequences of 
risk generation and accumulation.

An increasing sensitivity to extensive risk is par-
ticularly important. Because of its pervasiveness, 
this form of risk relates directly to the day-to-day 
concerns  of  households,  communities,  small 
businesses and local governments, and therefore 
it can stimulate and leverage social demand for 
disaster risk reduction. At the same time, precise-
ly because it is a risk layer that internalizes social, 
economic and environmental vulnerability, it can 
be managed effectively through an appropriate 
combination of prospective, corrective and com-
pensatory disaster risk management practices.

Assessing the costs and benefits
Disaster  risk  management  always  weighs  risk 
against opportunity and future threats against 

xviii Preface

current needs. As such, the costs and benefits of 
disaster risk management need to become ful-
ly encoded into public and private investment 
at all levels, into the financial system and into 
the design of risk-sharing and social protection 
mechanisms.

At present, cost-benefit analyses are usually limit-
ed to the avoided replacement costs of damaged 
buildings or infrastructure versus the additional 
costs of reducing the relevant risks. This analysis 
needs to be expanded to highlight the trade-offs 
implicit  in  each  decision,  including  the  down-
stream benefits and avoided costs in terms of 
reduced poverty and inequality, environmental 
sustainability, economic development and social 
progress as well as a clear identification of who 
retains the risks, who bears the costs and who 
reaps the benefits.

Such a broader approach to cost-benefit analy-
sis can increase the visibility and attractiveness 
of investments in disaster risk management by 
stressing  their  positive  development  benefits 
rather than the avoided costs and losses alone. If 
encoded into the financial system, it can help to 
identify the potential risks inherent in asset and 
loan portfolios, in credit and debt ratings and in 
forecasts and analyses, thus defusing the dan-
gerous link between global financial flows and 
investments that increase disaster risk.

This approach may also provide a rationale to 
encourage the expansion of risk financing and 
social protection measures to low-income house-
holds, small businesses and local governments.

Becoming accountable
It will only be possible to encode the full costs 
and benefits of disaster risk management into 
investment decisions, the financial sector and 
risk-sharing mechanisms if those responsible can 
be held to account for their decisions. If societ-
ies become more sensitive to both the causes and 
consequences of disaster risk, responsibility for 

the subsequent losses and impacts will become a 
societal issue that can be subjected to social dis-
course and negotiation.

This can lead to enhanced accountability not only 
for realized disaster loss and impacts, but also for 
the generation and accumulation of future risks, 
through a combination of social demand, appro-
priate normative frameworks, voluntary standards 
and  enhanced  monitoring  of  progress  against 
explicit and transparent benchmarks and targets.

A transformational force
As these and other innovations start to challenge 
the way disaster risk has been managed up to 
now, disaster risk reduction has the potential to 
become a truly transformational force.   

The reduction of poverty, the improvement of 
health and education for all, the achievement of 
sustainable and equitable economic growth and 
the protection of the health of the planet now 
depend on the management of disaster risks in 
the day-to-day decisions of governments, com-
panies,  investors,  civil  society  organizations, 
households and individuals. Strengthened disas-
ter risk reduction is essential to make develop-
ment sustainable.

Key features of GAR15
GAR15 is addressed to all those committed to sus-
tainable development, reducing disaster risk and 
addressing climate change. The report contains a 
number of new features and enhanced content.

Disasters measured in human life years
In this edition, the concept of human life years 
is  introduced  as  an  alternative  representation 
of disaster impact, as it provides a metric that 
describes the time required to produce econom-
ic development and social progress; time which is 
lost in disasters. The loss of human life years, be it 
through disasters, disease or accidents, is there-
fore a way of measuring setbacks to development 
that goes beyond conventional metrics such as 

mortality and economic loss. This metric brings 
the real scale of disaster loss into clear focus, and 
its use as a common currency allows compari-
sons with other development challenges.

Globally comparable risk metrics
The  mapping  and  understanding  of  the  glob-
al risk landscape has been greatly enhanced by 
the latest iteration of the GAR Global Risk Assess-
ment. This now estimates the risks associated 
with  earthquakes,  tropical  cyclone  winds  and 
storm surges, tsunamis and riverine flooding for 
all countries of the world. In addition, the risks 
associated with volcanic ash in the Asia-Pacific 
region, drought in various countries in sub-Saha-
ran  Africa  and  climate  change  in  a  number  of 
countries have been calculated. Using the same 
methodology,  arithmetic  and  exposure  mod-
el to calculate risk probabilistically for all haz-
ards enables risk levels to be compared between 
countries and regions, across hazard types and 
with development metrics such as capital invest-
ment and social expenditure.ii 

Volcanic hazard and risk
A major scientific review of volcanic hazard and 
risk has been produced for the GAR by leading 
national and international scientific institutions. 
For the first time, GAR15 includes a dedicated 
section on volcanic hazard and risk, which sum-
marizes selected findings from this review.

Increased coverage of data on extensive risk
One  of  the  principle  contributions  of  the  GAR 
series has been to reveal extensive risk through 
a  pioneering  approach  in  which  countries  are 
empowered to record their disaster losses sys-
tematically at all levels. The evidence base on 
extensive  risk  presented  in  GAR15  represents 
another significant step towards a global under-
standing of this risk layer. GAR15 now presents 
systematic  and  comparable  disaster  loss  data 
from 85 countries and territories, compared to 56 
countries and territories in 2013, 22 in 2011 and 
only 13 in 2009.iii 

xix

Measuring financial resilience
The  availability  of  comparable  global  disaster 
risk metrics has enabled initial estimates of the 
financial  resilience  of  governments.  Countries 
have been stress-tested to see if they would be 
resilient to a 1-in-100-year disaster loss, and their 
resource gaps have been estimated. In addition, 
GAR15 updates the findings originally presented 
in GAR09 on how disaster losses challenge devel-
opment over the medium term, particularly in 
countries with small and vulnerable economies.

A peer-reviewed assessment of progress
Previous editions of the GAR have analysed the 
results of government self-assessments of prog-
ress prepared using the HFA Monitor. The fourth 
cycle  of  the  HFA  Monitor  (2013-15)  was  still  in 
progress  when  GAR15  was  produced,  and  an 
insufficient number of progress reports had been 
completed to enable a global analysis.  In GAR15, 
progress  has  been  reviewed  on  the  basis  of  a 
broad, peer-reviewed assessment across the dif-
ferent Priorities for Action specified in the HFA, 
which  complements  the  results  from  previous 
HFA  monitoring  cycles.  The  22  core  indicators 
of the HFA were divided into thirteen research 
areas, plus an additional four areas identified for 
elements of the HFA that were not explicitly mea-
sured by the core indicators. The progress assess-
ments were coordinated by organizations of the 
United Nations system, the World Bank, the OECD 
and other institutions with specific expertise in 
each sector. Following an open call for papers, 
more than 200 input papers were received and a 
peer-reviewed background paper was prepared 
for each research area.

The future of disaster risk management
In partnership with UNDP and with leading aca-
demic institutions in Africa, Asia and the Amer-
icas, an innovative seminar programme on The 
Future  of  Disaster  Risk  Management  brought 
together  over  100  researchers  and  practitio-
ners between April 2013 and October 2014. This 
collective  reflection  on  and  identification  and 

xx

Preface

construction of the challenges currently facing 
disaster risk reduction has informed the objec-
tives and structure of GAR15, especially its find-
ings and recommendations.iv 

How to use GAR15
GAR15 is structured around a set of contributed 
and commissioned background papers as well as 
risk and disaster data. For this edition of the GAR, 
more in-depth research and case studies have 
been developed than ever before. All this materi-
al and data is available on the interactive web ver-
sion of GAR15 at www.preventionweb.net/gar15. 

The print version of GAR15 is available in all six 
UN languages (Arabic, Chinese, English, French, 
Russian and Spanish). The main report includes 
augmented reality features: enhanced content 
that provides tablet and smartphone users with 
access to additional digital information, such as 
dynamic maps, videos, photos and case studies. 
The Pocket GAR provides the main evidence and 
messages of the report in a short and easy-to-
read format.

The  risk  and  loss  data  produced  for  GAR15  is 
available on a new interactive data platform on 
PreventionWeb  as  well  as  Tangible  Earth,  the 
world’s  first  interactive  digital  globe,  and  the 
GAR for Tangible Earth (GfT), a fully interactive 
stand-alone  application  for  tablet  and  smart-
phone users.

Notes

i  Depending on the benefit-cost ratio (BCR) and discount rate ap-
plied.
ii  For more information on the global risk assessment methodol-
ogy and results, see Annex 1.
iii  For more information on the loss databases and extensive risk 
analysis, see Annex 2.
iv  For a summary of all inputs and discussions in the meeting se-
ries, see Annex 4.

Introduction:
A history of violence
1.1  

Dis-astrum and kata-strophe

 

 

 

Disasters have been interpreted as threatening 
development from the outside. As a result, di-
saster risk generation within development has 
not been addressed effectively.

In the early morning hours of 26 December 2004, a 
9.1 magnitude earthquake, the third largest ever 
registered on a seismograph, occurred between 
the island of Simeulue and mainland Indonesia.1  
The earthquake triggered massive tsunamis that 
impacted the coast of Sumatra as well as most of 
the countries that border the Indian Ocean. The 
violence of their impact was such that an estimat-
ed 230,000 people died in 14 countries, particu-
larly in Indonesia, Sri Lanka, Thailand and India, 
but also as far away as Somalia.

Devastating tsunamis have occurred throughout 
history. The word tsunami is Japanese, formed 
by the combination of tsu (= harbour) and nami 
(= waves). The most destructive tsunami in Jap-
anese history took place on 15 June 1896, killing 

Figure 1.1  Devastating earthquake and tsunami in Messina, 1908

(Source: Miller, 1909.)

Chapter 1   

around 22,000 people.2 Triggered by an earth-
quake off the Sanriku coast, the waves reached 
a height of 40 metres, destroying everything in 
their path.

The earthquakes and tsunamis that engulfed the 
port of Callao in Peru in 1746 and Lisbon in 1755 
captured the attention of Enlightenment think-
ers such as Voltaire and Rousseau and provoked 
speculation  on  the  causes  of  disaster  (UNIS-
DR, 2011a). In the Indian Ocean, the eruption of 
Krakatoa on 27 August 1883 led to massive tsu-
namis. On 28 December 1908, the Messina earth-
quake and tsunami in the Mediterranean killed 
approximately 123,000 people in Sicily and Cal-
abria  and  was  considered  the  worst  tsunami-
related disaster prior to the events in the Indian 
Ocean in 2004 (Figure 1.1).

The  coastal  population  of  Simeulue  and  the 
Andaman Islands largely escaped the impact of 
the Indian Ocean tsunami in 2004. Understand-
ing and responding to tsunamis was still deep-
ly ingrained in their culture, prompting them to 
evacuate  to  higher  ground.  But  elsewhere  the 
tsunami  caught  local  populations  and  foreign 
tourists unaware and unprepared.

A tsunami early warning system, including edu-
cation and preparedness on how to react after 
an  earthquake,  could  have  enabled  hundreds 
of  thousands  of  people  to  evacuate  and  sur-
vive the disaster. An operational tsunami warn-
ing system had existed in the Pacific Basin since 
1949.3  However, no such early warning system 
had been developed in the Indian Ocean, and for 

2323

most coastal populations living there in 2004, the 
experience of responding to a tsunami had long 
faded from living memory.

Eight months after the Indian Ocean tsunamis, a 
very different history of violence unfolded on the 
other side of the world. On 29 August 2005, Hur-
ricane Katrina (Figure 1.2) hit coastal areas of the 
States of Louisiana and Mississippi in the Unit-
ed States of America, killing 1,833 people and 
causing an estimated US$125 billion in econom-
ic damage.4

Katrina was a large, strong but not exception-
al Category 3 hurricane when it made landfall. 
In fact, Hurricanes Andrew and Charley, which 
impacted Florida in 1992 and 2004, respective-
ly, and Hurricane Camille, which hit Mississippi 
in 1969, involved higher wind speeds and, in the 
case of the Florida storms, lower central pressure 
than Katrina (NOAA, 2005). Moreover, unlike the 
Indian Ocean tsunamis, Katrina could hardly be 

Figure 1.2   
 
Hurricane Katrina

(Source: NASA.5)

24

Chapter 1

considered unexpected. Hurricane early warn-
ing  systems  have  existed  in  the  Atlantic  Basin 
since the nineteenth century. Katrina occurred in 
the middle of the Atlantic hurricane season and 
made landfall in a region with a history of recur-
rent hurricane activity.

Similarly, the cascading disaster that unfolded 
in New Orleans, where the levees that protected 
the city from flooding were breached and utilities 
and the transport network collapsed, should not 
have come as a surprise. Much of the city of New 
Orleans lay below sea level and was considered 
a disaster risk hotspot. The Federal Emergency 
Management Agency (FEMA) had already devel-
oped scenarios that modelled the consequenc-
es if the levees that protected the city were to fail.

On August 26th, three days before Katrina made 
landfall, warnings were issued and the Gover-
nors of Louisiana and Mississippi declared states 
of  emergency  (Moynihan,  2009).  However,  the 
city, state and federal authorities failed to evac-
uate in a timely fashion around 100,000 out of 
a total population of approximately 1.3 million 
(Tierney, 2008).

When the Mayor of New Orleans finally gave the 
evacuation order on the morning of August 28th, 
twenty-four  hours  before  the  hurricane  made 
landfall,  a  significant  share  of  the  largely  low-
income population that inhabited flood-exposed 
areas of New Orleans did not have access to any 
means to evacuate. The contingency plans for the 
city assumed evacuation by automobile. No plans 
had been made for those without cars, including 
the elderly and disabled, or without the resourc-
es to procure transport and hotel rooms.

There are many reasons why the federal, state and 
city authorities, faced with a predictable hazard 
event and identified risks, failed to respond effec-
tively and why so many people were left behind. 
FEMA had been weakened as priority shifted from 
physical hazards like hurricanes to other threats 

survived. Now the stories as they are told have the 
fashion of a legend, but the truth of them lies in the 
shifting of the bodies in the heavens that recurs at 
long intervals.”

In the case of such extreme hazards, the degree 
of  disaster  risk  is  conditioned  more  by  expo-
sure  than  by  vulnerability.  In  other  words,  all 
those  exposed  to  the  tsunamis  were  at  risk, 
irrespective of their income, ethnicity or social 
class (UNISDR, 2011a). The only possible disas-
ter risk management strategies would have been 
to reduce exposure through timely evacuation, 
which in turn would have depended on the exis-
tence of reliable early warning systems and effec-
tive  preparedness  planning  grounded  in  the 
exposed communities, and then to compensate 
for loss through insurance or other risk financing 
instruments.

In contrast, the disaster in New Orleans repre-
sented  a  predictable  and  tragic  kata-strophe 
(Greek for “down-turn”), the tragic finish to a long 
drama. While Hurricane Katrina was an intense 
hurricane, it was the historically configured risk 
in  New  Orleans,  the  vulnerability  of  those  left 
behind and the lack of effective actions to assist 
them that conditioned the scale of the disaster. 

in the wake of the World Trade Center attacks of 
September  11,  2001.  Emergency  management 
organizations at all levels were reportedly under-
staffed and under-resourced. But over and above 
institutional weaknesses and administrative fail-
ures, the disaster unveiled a history of inequality 
that configured the city’s vulnerability to the hur-
ricane as well as the authorities’ response to it. 
In some ways, that history seems to have contin-
ued unchanged in the recovery of New Orleans, 
reproducing and rebuilding new vulnerabilities 
(Box 1.1).

Superficially, the disasters associated with the 
Indian  Ocean  tsunamis  and  Hurricane  Katrina 
appear  to  be  different  moments  in  a  common 
history of violent and destructive disasters: rep-
resentations  of  overwhelming  natural  events 
causing  massive  death  and  destruction.  But 
beneath the surface, the two disasters have very 
different narratives.

In many ways the Indian Ocean disasters were a 
representation of dis-astrum (Latin for “bad star”), 
the impact of an infrequent and unexpected nat-
ural event of extraordinary magnitude outside of 
human agency. In Timaeus, Plato commented:

“There have been many and diverse destructions 
of mankind. We know this because we possess the 
records  of  those  who  witnessed  the  events  and 

Box 1.1  Rebuilding social vulnerability in New Orleans

The  failure  of  flood  protection  infrastructure,  a  failure  to  anticipate  the  disaster  and  a  badly  managed 
response exacerbated and magnified the pre-existing conditions of social vulnerability and inequality in 
New Orleans (Levitt and Whitaker, 2009; Tierney, 2006; Amnesty International, 2010; Masozera et al., 2007).

Subsequent to Hurricane Katrina, the reconstruction process, and within it the construction sector, have 
been key drivers in the reproduction of inequality and social vulnerability (Jenkins et al., 2012).  In 2011, six 
years after the disaster, the average wage in New Orleans was 6 per cent lower than the US average and pov-
erty  stood  at  29  per  cent,  almost  double  the  US  average  of  15.9  per  cent.  Recent  data  shows  that  New 
Orleans ranks second among all major US cities in terms of inequality.6 Between 1999 and 2011, median 
household income fell by 9 per cent, while income inequality had risen by up to 50 per cent (Bishaw, 2012; 
GNOCDC, 2013).

25

In  the  case  of  Category  3  hurricanes  affecting 
similar numbers of exposed people, about 46 per 
cent of the variance in mortality risk is explained 
by vulnerability (UNISDR, 2011a). This means that 
if effective actions are taken to address social and 
economic vulnerability and to strengthen resil-
ience, disaster risk can be significantly reduced. 
Disasters such as the one that unfolded in New 
Orleans in 2005 cannot be blamed on extreme 
natural events or on “bad stars”, but rather on 
the lack of a political and economic imperative 
to reduce risks.

Disaster risk is normally considered a function of 
the severity and frequency of the hazard, of the 
numbers  of  people  and  assets  exposed  to  the 
hazard, and of their vulnerability or susceptibili-
ty to damage. From that perspective, dis-astrum 
and kata-strophe are not opposing or mutually 
exclusive disaster types, but rather different lay-
ers of risk.

The most intensive risk layers, which are charac-
terized by very low-frequency but high-severity 
losses and are normally associated with extreme 
hazard events such as the Indian Ocean tsunamis, 
manifest as dis-astrum. The more extensive risk 
layers, which are characterized by high-frequen-
cy but low-severity losses and are associated with 
localized  and  recurrent  hazard  events  such  as 
flash floods, landslides and storms, manifest as 
kata-strophe. In the more intensive risk layers, it 
is the hazard and exposure that dominate the risk 
equation, while in the more extensive layers vul-
nerability plays a larger part.

The risk profile of most countries includes a range 
of risk layers. However, in most contexts, disas-
ter risk reduction has been approached through 
an interpretation of disaster as dis-astrum, as a 
set of practices to protect development against 
exogenous threats rather than to prevent or avoid 
the generation and accumulation of risks within 
development. This interpretation has influenced 
and permeated the practice of disaster risk man-
agement and its effectiveness in achieving the 
policy objective of disaster risk reduction.

Figure 1.3  The Hyogo Framework for Action

(Source: UNISDR, 2005.)

26

Chapter 1

1.2  

 

 
Enter the HFA

 

Decades of disaster and risk management expe-
rience  have  defined  the  disaster  risk  reduction 
agenda  laid  down  in  the  Hyogo  Framework  for 
Action (HFA). 

On  17  January  1995,  the  Great  Hanshin  earth-
quake devastated the port of Kobe, Japan (UNIS-
DR, 2013a). Ten years after the quake, some 23 
days after the impact of the Indian Ocean tsuna-
mis and 223 days before Hurricane Katrina made 
landfall in New Orleans, 168 UN Member States 
gathered in Kobe to adopt a new international 
framework for disaster reduction, better known 
as the Hyogo Framework for Action: 2005-2015, or 
HFA.

Under the slogan Building the Resilience of Nations 
and Communities to Disasters, the HFA was struc-
tured around an expected outcome, three strate-
gic goals and five priorities for action (Figure 1.3).

Box 1.2  International agreements to address disaster risks

The  World  Conference  in  Kobe  was  planned 
long before the Indian Ocean tsunamis, and the 
HFA  was  not  the  first  international  agreement 
to address disaster risks. Since 1979, a number 
of international agreements and policy frame-
works have evolved to guide global and national 
efforts in disaster risk reduction (Box 1.2). How-
ever, the magnitude of the disasters in the Indian 
Ocean and the consequent global humanitarian 
response galvanized a level of political interest 
in the HFA that might not have arisen otherwise.

These 25 years of international agreements indi-
cate a growing, albeit sometimes symbolic, polit-
ical  commitment  by  UN  Member  States  to  the 
policy goal of disaster risk reduction (Olson et al., 
2011). However, 25 years after the declaration of 
the IDNDR, 20 years after the Yokohama Strate-
gy, 15 years after the launch of the ISDR and 10 
years after the endorsement of the HFA, evidence 
of continued disaster risk and loss still questions 
the extent to which the expected outcome of the 
HFA, “The substantial reduction of disaster losses, 

As early as 1979, an expert group convened by the Office of the United Nations Disaster Relief Coordinator 
(UNDRO) concluded that “it is now also realized that the actual and potential consequences of natural haz-
ards are becoming so serious and so increasingly global in scale, that much greater emphasis will henceforth 
have to be given to pre-disaster planning and prevention” (UNDRO, 1980).

Nearly a decade later, the UN General Assembly designated the 1990s as the International Decade for Natural 
Disaster Reduction (IDNDR) and defined five specific goals, including “to disseminate existing and new informa-
tion related to measures for the assessment, prediction, prevention and mitigation of natural disasters” and to 
develop programmes of “technical assistance and technology transfer, demonstration projects and education 
and training, tailored to specific hazards and locations, and to evaluate the effectiveness of those programmes”.

In 1991, the General Assembly noted that approximately 100 States had established national strategies to 
achieve  the  objectives  of  the IDNDR  and  endorsed  a  World  Conference,  which  took  place  in  Yokohama, 
Japan  in  June  1994.  The  resulting  Yokohama  Strategy  for  a  Safer  World  emphasized  the  importance  of 
disaster prevention, mitigation and preparedness, highlighting that response alone was not sufficient.

The shift in emphasis from disaster response to disaster risk reduction was taken further in the Interna-
tional Strategy for Disaster Reduction (ISDR), which was launched in 1999 to follow up on the IDNDR and to 
develop the Yokohama Strategy and Plan of Action. In addition, in 2002 the Plan of Implementation of the 
World Summit on Sustainable Development declared: “an integrated, multi-hazard, inclusive approach to 
address  vulnerability,  risk  assessment  and  disaster  management,  including  prevention,  mitigation,  pre-
paredness, response and recovery, is an essential element of a safer world in the twenty-first century”.

27

Figure 1.4  From disaster response to disaster risk reduction

(Source: adapted from UNISDR Virtual Library.)

In 2004 the UN General Assembly convened the second World Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction, held in 
Kobe in 2005, to build on the Yokohama Strategy and the Johannesburg Plan of Action. The resulting Hyogo 
Declaration emphasized the reduction of vulnerabilities and the strengthening of resilience of nations and 
communities “in the context of the disaster reduction cycle, which consists of prevention, preparedness, and 
emergency response, as well as recovery and reconstruction”.

(Source: International Law Commission, 2013.)

in lives and in the social and economic assets of 
communities  and  countries”,  has  really  been 
achieved and therefore whether the way disas-
ter risk reduction has been understood and prac-
tised by most countries is really fit for purpose.

28

Chapter 1

1.3 The emergence of the disaster 

risk management sector

An evolution from managing disasters to manag-
ing risks has slowly taken shape at national and 
international  levels.  At  its  centre  has  been  the 
disaster management cycle.

A national system is born
On 13 November 1985, the Nevado del Ruiz Vol-
cano in Colombia erupted. Although the govern-
ment had received multiple warnings of volcanic 

activity from scientific organizations since Sep-
tember of that year and hazard maps had been 
prepared, the local population was warned but 
not evacuated. In the town of Armero, around 
20,000 out of a total population of 29,000 were 
killed, as were a further 1,500 in nearby Chinchiná. 

manage disaster risk (Government of Colombia, 
1988; World Bank, 2012) and were symbolic of the 
emergence of a dedicated disaster risk manage-
ment sector; this paradigm shift was consecrated 
with the adoption of the HFA in 2005.

Just one week earlier, 100 hostages—including 
11 judges—had died when the Colombian armed 
forces ended a siege of the Palace of Justice in 
Bogota by the M-19 guerrilla group (Procuradu-
ría General de la Nación, 2005). The government 
was widely held responsible for the loss of life in 
both events. In the case of the volcanic disaster, 
the government was faulted for multiple failures 
in risk identification, early warning, prepared-
ness, evacuation and response (Zeiderman and 
Ramirez Elizalde, 2010).

Four  years  later,  in  1989,  the  National  System 
for Disaster Prevention and Response was creat-
ed in an ambitious reform of disaster risk man-
agement (Government of Colombia, 1988). The 
national system embraced better disaster man-
agement and incorporated the country’s origi-
nal civil defence organization at the time. But it 
also adopted disaster risk reduction as a policy 
goal and gave explicit priority to a much broad-
er range of disaster risk management practices. 
Moreover, it introduced an innovative systems 
approach  to  risk  governance  which  was  inte-
grated  horizontally  across  government  minis-
tries and departments, vertically across regional, 
departmental and local governments, and with 
specified roles for scientific and technical institu-
tions, the Red Cross and other non-governmen-
tal organizations.

The  concurrent  creation  of  the  Colombian 
national  system  and  the  declaration  of  the 
IDNDR  marked  a  paradigm  shift  in  the  gover-
nance  arrangements  that  countries  adopt  to 

Emergency management
The origins of what is now a disaster risk man-
agement sector in most countries can be found in 
the institutions, legislation and policies, adminis-
trative arrangements and instrumental systems 
created to respond to and manage disasters and 
crises. The concept of civil defence emerged fol-
lowing the bombing of civilian areas in the First 
World War, and in 1935 a Civil Defence Service 
was established by the Home Office of the United 
Kingdom. Likewise, the Office of Civilian Defense 
was created in the United States of America in 
1941.7 

After  the  Second  World  War,  the  focus  of  civ-
il defence, particularly in Europe, shifted to the 
goal of protecting the population against nucle-
ar  destruction.  But  when  the  Cold  War  came 
to an end, the focus shifted again towards pro-
tecting the population against hazards such as 
floods, earthquakes and storms, and in the 2000s 
towards  protection  against  terrorist  attacks. 
These  successive  changes  in  focus  can  be 
observed in the United States of America, where 
in 1979 the different civil defence agencies were 
brought together in the Federal Emergency Man-
agement Agency (FEMA), which was assimilated 
into the Department of Homeland Security fol-
lowing the September 11, 2001 attacks in New 
York and Washington, D.C.

Massive  disasters  associated  with  droughts 
and conflict in sub-Saharan Africa, with floods, 
cyclones  and  conflict  in Bangladesh,  and  with 
earthquakes, for example in Peru in 1970, Nica-
ragua in 1972 and Guatemala in 1976, generated 

29

a perceived need for stronger international coor-
dination of response and relief efforts (Hannigan, 
2012; FAO, 2010; Bamidele, 2011; CEPAL, 1973; 
CEPAL, 1976; European Commission and Comu-
nidad Andina, 2006). This was supported by the 
creation of the United Nations  Disaster Relief 
Office  (UNDRO)  in  1971  to  coordinate  interna-
tional efforts to respond to disaster and conflict 
(Hannigan, 2012).

The  governance  arrangements  developed  for 
emergency management displayed a number of 
characteristics that would later influence the way 
disaster risk management has been approached.

These  arrangements  were  adopted  to  protect 
societies against what were conceived as exter-
nal  threats  to  civilians  and  to  national  securi-
ty. Disasters were perceived as one such threat, 
along with technological, maritime and aviation 
accidents and the effects of conflict. Disasters 
were regarded as unpredictable, extreme events, 
which is aptly illustrated by an early 1990s slo-
gan from the Pan American Health Organization: 
“Disasters don’t warn; be prepared”.

An effective response to such external threats 
required increasingly sophisticated, profession-
alized and technically specialized institutions and 
mechanisms at all levels, leading to the structur-
ing of a distinct sector with its own doctrine, dog-
ma, and distinctive signs and symbols. In some 
countries, civil defence and protection organi-
zations were military structures, while in others 
they were located in the interior or home min-
istry, which is also responsible for law enforce-
ment, emergency services and domestic security.

The sector and the institutions it comprises have 
demonstrated a remarkable institutional resil-
ience  and  capacity  to  adapt  to  changing  cir-
cumstances  and  needs,  as  the  series  of  shifts 
from warfare to nuclear threat, to disaster and 
to terrorism have shown. This highlights a con-
solidated sector that defends not only national 

30

Chapter 1

security but also its own interests and agenda 
and expresses this in its distinctive community 
identity and branding.

Standards and regulation
In parallel with the evolution of emergency man-
agement, countries adopted other kinds of gov-
ernance arrangements to manage disaster risk, 
including statutory norms and standards in areas 
such as public health, environment, planning and 
building.

Societies  have  always  adapted  their  build-
ing, agricultural and other practices to manage 
disaster risks within a range of environmental, 
technological,  social,  economic  and  political 
constraints.

In the wake of large disasters, it was common for 
building practices or urban design to be modified 
with a view to reducing risk. For example, follow-
ing the 1746 earthquake in Lima, Peru, Viceroy 
Jose Antonio Manso de Velasco commissioned 
French mathematician Louis Godin to develop a 
reconstruction plan for the city. While never ful-
ly implemented, Godin’s plan included detailed 
specifications for widened streets and reduced 
building height to avoid future earthquake dam-
age (UNISDR, 2011a), an early example of recon-
struction planning which integrates risk-sensitive 
planning and building codes.

From the nineteenth century onwards, industrial-
ized countries has begun to codify risk-reducing 
practices  into  statutory  regulations  and  stan-
dards on a scientific basis. For example, during 
the 1854 epidemic in London, Dr. John Snow used 
a geographical analysis of cholera cases to trace 
the cause of the epidemic back to contaminated 
water from a single well in Broad Street (Figure 
1.5). This led not only to the identification of the 
causes of cholera but also to the introduction of 
public health regulations in the United Kingdom, 
which dramatically reduced the risk of devastat-
ing epidemics.

Figure 1.5  Clusters of cholera cases in the 
Broad Street area of London in 1854

(Source: http://scienceline.org/2010/05/john-snows-maps-of-the-broad-
street-cholera-outbreak. )

The  work  of  both  Louis  Godin  and  John  Snow 
reflected  the  change  of  perspective  that  had 
occurred  during  the  Enlightenment  in  Europe, 
when disasters began to be identified as the result 
of human agency rather than divine retribution. 
Once it was recognized that disaster risk could be 
configured by social and economic activities over 
time, the adoption of regulatory frameworks to 
manage risk became increasingly common, par-
ticularly in higher-income countries.

The first quantitative seismic building code was 
adopted by an Italian commission following the 
1908  Messina earthquake;  the  Home  Office  of 
Japan adopted a seismic coefficient and a limit 
on building heights in 1923, and in response to 
the Santa Barbara earthquake in 1925, the Unit-
ed States of America introduced seismic design 
provisions into the 1927 Uniform Building Code 
(FEMA, 1998).

By the time the IDNDR was declared, most high-
income as well as many middle and low-income 
countries had a range of norms, standards and 
regulations in place to manage disaster risk in 
different sectors. In high-income contexts in par-
ticular, regulation has proved highly effective in 

gradually reducing risk, for example as vulner-
able  buildings  and  infrastructure  are  replaced 
over  time  with  new  structures  built  to  higher 
standards.

From emergency to disaster risk management
At some point in the 1970s, disaster risk manage-
ment began to emerge as a specialized domain 
and sector. The work of academics (Hewitt, 1983), 
built environment professionals (Davis, 1978) and 
progressive  emergency  management  experts 
(Cuny, 1983) made a strong case that emergency 
management should be only one component of 
a broader approach that also includes actions to 
reduce risks before disasters occur and during the 
post-disaster recovery and reconstruction phas-
es. An artefact called the disaster management 
cycle, first presented in 1975 (Baird et al., 1975), 
was  adopted  as  a  pragmatic  concept  in  which 
activities to reduce risk and to ensure prepared-
ness, response and recovery were described as 
four phases of a cyclical process (Figure 1.6).

By  the  time  the  International  Conference  on 
Disaster Mitigation Program Implementation was 
held in Ocho Rios, Jamaica in 1984, the contours 
of a broadened disaster risk management sec-
tor had begun to take shape (Virginia Polytechnic 
Institute, 1985). By then, progressive emergen-
cy management organizations in countries like 
Jamaica and the Philippines had already start-
ed to adopt the disaster management cycle and 
expand their mandate to include what were then 
described as disaster prevention and mitigation, 
recovery and reconstruction.

By the time the Colombian national system was 
created,  the  notion  that  governments  should 
manage  disasters  through  this  more  com-
prehensive  approach  rather  than  emergency 
management  alone  was  becoming  increasing-
ly  mainstream.  With  its  innovative  systems 
approach,  the  Colombian  national  system 
became paradigmatic. Coinciding as it did with 
the declaration of the IDNDR, it influenced how 

31

Figure 1.6  The original disaster management cycle and a current interpretation

(Source: Baird et al., 1975 and Khan et al., 2008.)

other countries began to approach disaster risk 
management, at first in Latin America (Lavell and 
Franco, 1996) and later in other regions.

Many  countries  reformed  their  governance 
arrangements after major disasters (Wilkinson 
et al., 2014), often adopting the principles pio-
neered in the Colombian system, and with crucial 
support from national or regional champions. For 
example, Nicaragua adopted new arrangements 
in 2000 following the 1998 disasters associated 
with Hurricane Mitch (Government of Nicaragua, 
2005), India followed suit after the 1999 Orissa 
super-cyclone and the 2001 Gujarat earthquake 
(Government of India, 2004), and Sri Lanka and 
Indonesia introduced reforms after the 2004 Indi-
an Ocean tsunami.

At  the  same  time,  regional  organizations  such 
as  CEPREDENAC,  CDERA,  SOPAC  and  the  SAA-
RC Disaster Management Centre, technical cen-
tres  such  as  ADPC  and  time-bound  regional 
programmes such as PREDECAN were created.8  

32

Chapter 1

Multilateral  organizations,  including  the  Euro-
pean Commission (ECHO), UNDP (BCPR) and the 
World Bank (GFDRR), likewise began to create spe-
cialized units which combined emergency man-
agement functions, post-disaster recovery as well 
as activities designed to reduce disaster risks.

The IDNDR, the Yokohama Plan of Action and the 
HFA served to consolidate, legitimize and empow-
er this emerging disaster risk management sec-
tor globally, regionally and nationally. The three 
strategic goals of the HFA implicitly reflect the 
logic of the disaster management cycle. The cen-
tral goal of strengthening institutions and gov-
ernance arrangements supports the other two 
goals,  which  are  designed  to  integrate  disas-
ter risk reduction into sustainable development 
and  into  effective  emergency  preparedness, 
response and recovery.

1.4  

 

 

The limits of control

 

In  recent  years,  a  better  understanding  of  the 
role of vulnerability and exposure has begun to 
take  shape,  suggesting  that  development  cre-
ates disaster risk. Yet, disaster risk management 
practice did not adapt.

It is fitting that Colombia, one of the first countries 
to create a visible disaster risk management sector 
in 1989, should also be one of the first to identify 
the limits of an approach to disaster risk reduction 
based on the disaster management cycle.

In 2010 and 2011 Colombia experienced a strong 
but not exceptional El Niño Southern Oscillation 
(ENSO) event. The country did not experience a 
single,  large  disaster,  but  thousands  of  small-
er-scale extensive events that occurred over an 
18-month period and affected 93 per cent of the 
country’s 1,041 municipalities (UNISDR, 2013a), 
causing over US$6 billion in direct economic loss-
es. These disasters questioned the effectiveness 
of the way disaster risk management was being 
practised, and they revealed an underlying real-
ity of disaster risk accumulation, exacerbated by 
the displacement and insecurity associated with 
ongoing civil conflict and by investments in recon-
struction that had sometimes rebuilt and repro-
duced disaster risks. In 2012, Colombia initiated 
reforms and passed new legislation (Box 1.3).

Most  countries  would  have  been  seriously 
challenged  to  manage  the  relentless  series  of 

Box 1.3   Moving from consequence to cause in Colombia

disasters that occurred in Colombia in 2010 and 
2011. However, while the Colombian case is idio-
syncratic, it unveiled cracks and fissures in the 
way disaster risk reduction has been approached 
and organized in other countries and regions.

Research  highlighting  that  risk  is  endogenous 
to social, economic, territorial and environmen-
tal change has been published since the 1970s 
and 1980s (Zobler, 1976; Quarantelli, 1978; Davis, 
1978; Hewitt, 1983; Watts, 1983; Maskrey, 1989) 
and  has  gradually  permeated  academic  liter-
ature (Wisner et al., 2003; Lavell, 2003; Weber, 
2006; Cannon, 2008; Aragón-Durand, 2009; Cut-
ter, 2014; van Niekerk, 2014) and science research 
agendas  (ICSU-LAC,  2010;  IRDR,  2013).  All  the 
evidence  assembled  in  successive  editions  of 
the GAR (UNISDR, 2009a, 2011a, 2013a) has con-
firmed how disasters are manifestations of unre-
solved  development  problems  (Hagman,  1984) 
and  are  thus  outcome-based  indicators  of  a 
skewed, unsustainable development paradigm 
based on unlimited growth, inequality and over-
consumption. Exposure and vulnerability as well 
as hazard itself (through climate change and envi-
ronmental degradation) are socially constructed 
through  underlying  risk  drivers,  including  glo-
balized  economic  development,  poverty  and 
inequality, badly planned and managed urban 
development,  environmental  degradation  and 
climate change.

Emerging patterns and trends of disaster loss and 
risk reflect the operation of these drivers. In par-
ticular, increases in extensive disaster loss and 

As highlighted in this chapter, the creation of the Colombian National System for Disaster Pre-
vention and Response (SNPAD) in 1989 (World Bank, 2012) marked the emergence of a struc-
tured approach to disaster risk governance. However, while this approach led to reductions in 
disaster  mortality,  economic  loss  has  trended  upwards  over  the  last  40  years  (Figure  1.7), 
revealing unaddressed gaps and challenges (Cardona et al., 2005).

33

Figure 1.7  Disaster risk reduction and loss trends in Colombia (in constant 2012 US$)9

 (Source: UNISDR with data from national loss databases; World Bank, 2012; Government 
of Colombia, 2010; Colombia HFA Report 2011-2013; López, 2009; AIS, 2014.)

While  responsibilities  had  been  decentralized,  local  governments  often  lacked  commitment  as  well  as 
financial and technical capacities. Adoption and implementation of local disaster risk management plans 
was limited to larger urban centres, creating dependency on the national level. Risk transfer mechanisms 
were not in place, nor were clear risk financing strategies. This meant that specialized agencies like the Fund 
for the Reconstruction and Social Development of the Coffee-Growing Region (FOREC) had to be created 
after  major  disasters  such  as  those  associated  with  the  1999  earthquake,  which  weakened  the  national 
disaster  risk  management  agency.  At  the  same  time,  that  agency  had  been  moved  from  the  President’s 
office to the Ministry of the Interior, reducing its political leverage and influence.

Disaster risk management was interpreted primarily in terms of disaster preparedness and recovery rather 
than risk prevention and reduction. The mainstreaming of disaster risk considerations into land-use plan-
ning,  environmental  management,  and  economic  and  social  development  planning  was  more  symbolic 
than real. Involvement of the private sector was limited, and there was an overall lack of accountability.

In 2012, those deficiencies were addressed in a new law (INGENIAR, 2010) which makes disaster risk man-
agement a responsibility of the state and the population as a whole. This new piece of legislation is based 
on  three  key  processes:  risk  knowledge,  risk  management  and  disaster  management,  with  particular 
emphasis on prospective risk management. The ultimate responsibility for disaster risk management has 
returned to the President of the Republic (Government of Colombia, 2012).

With the 2012 law, Colombia has taken a second step in pioneering governance arrangements for disaster 
risk management. The coming years will show whether these arrangements are effective or not.10

34

Chapter 1

damage provide empirical evidence that disas-
ter risk is an endogenous indicator of failed or 
skewed development, of unsustainable econom-
ic and social processes, and of ill-adapted soci-
eties; socially constructed problems driven by 
underlying processes whose neglect manifests as 
a predictable—and always tragic—kata-strophe.

The  HFA  certainly  created  space  for  address-
ing the underlying risk drivers in Strategic Goal 
1, the integration of disaster risk reduction into 
sustainable development policy and planning, as 
well as Priority for Action 4, which aims to reduce 
the underlying risk factors. In other priorities for 
action,  the  HFA  was  equally  incisive.  In  Priori-
ty for Action 1, for example, the HFA called upon 
governments to demonstrate the strong political 
determination required to promote and integrate 
disaster  risk  reduction  into  development  pro-
gramming. And in Priority for Action 2, it advised 
institutions  dealing  with  urban  development 
to provide information to the public on disaster 
reduction options prior to constructions, land pur-
chase or land sale.

However, this has been the path less travelled in 
most countries. The HFA has more generally been 
approached through an underlying conception of 
disasters as externalities to be managed; as exog-
enous and unforeseen shocks that affect normal-
ly functioning economic systems and societies; 
as  dis-astrum  rather  than  kata-strophe  (Lavell 
and Maskrey, 2014). The slogan of the HFA advo-
cates building resilience to disasters rather than 
building resilience in development.

Interpreting disasters as exogenous shocks lies 
at  the  root  of  the  disaster  management  cycle, 
which—as  its  name  implies—revolves  around 
disasters as events. While the disaster manage-
ment cycle was and still is seductive due to its 
simplicity and internal logic, it encouraged and 
justified the syncretic expansion of emergency 
management organizations into other aspects of 
disaster risk management, such as prevention, 

reduction and recovery. Responsibilities for these 
other aspects, as described in the HFA and the 
preceding international frameworks, were mere-
ly added on to the governance arrangements for 
emergency management.

As such, disaster risk reduction continues to be 
principally understood and practised as disas-
ter management and as a set of instrumental and 
administrative mechanisms to protect develop-
ment against tangible external threats. Logically, 
if disaster risk is conceptualized as an exogenous 
threat, then instruments can be designed to pro-
tect  against  it.  For  example,  terms  like  finan-
cial protection point towards protecting public 
finances  against  external  threats,  rather  than 
recognizing that the way those finances are used 
either reduces or generates disaster risk. By defi-
nition, interpreting disaster risk in this way weak-
ens  responsibility  and  accountability  for  risk 
generation.

Ultimately, this approach to disaster risk reduc-
tion encapsulates a fundamental contradiction: 
it  aims  to  protect  the  same  development  par-
adigm that generates risk in the first place. As 
such, if increased investments are made to pro-
tect development without addressing the under-
lying  risk  drivers  at  the  same  time,  more  and 
more effort will lead to diminishing returns and 
flagging progress. Disaster risk will continue to 
be generated faster than it can be reduced.

The HFA has generated an enormous investment 
in  and  commitment  to  disaster  risk  reduction 
by stakeholders at all levels, including national 
governments, municipal authorities, utility pro-
viders,  non-governmental  organizations,  sci-
entific and technical institutions, regional and 
international organizations, and the private sec-
tor. There have been numerous and sometimes 
spectacular  successes  in  addressing  specific 
risks, such as the dramatic reduction in tropical 
cyclone mortality in Bangladesh.

35

However, these very real achievements in reduc-
ing disaster risk under the HFA are now rowing 
against a fast-rising tide of risk construction and 
accumulation. And given the growing evidence 
of systemic risk at the planetary scale, there is 
now a very real possibility that disaster risk will 
reach a tipping point beyond which the effort and 
resources necessary to reduce it will exceed the 
capacity of future generations.

If  disaster  risk  is  an  endogenous  indicator  of 
a  flawed  development  paradigm,  then  prog-
ress towards the policy objective of disaster risk 
reduction will depend on the transformation of 
that paradigm. If the world is to be fit to survive 
by the middle of the twenty-first century and if 
a global kata-strophe is to be averted, it will be 
necessary to take firm strides along the path less 
travelled in the HFA and to imagine a different 
way of approaching disaster risk management.

Notes

1  Source: United States Geological Survey, http://earthquake.
usgs.gov/ (accessed 27 November 2014).
2  Sources for all 1896 Japanese tsunami data: http://earthquake.
usgs.gov/earthquakes/world/events/1896_06_15.php;  http://
ngm.nationalgeographic.com/1896/09/japan-tsunami/scid-
more-text;  http://www.sozogaku.com/fkd/en/cfen/CA1000616.
html (accessed 27 November 2014).
3  http://ptwc.weather.gov/ (accessed 1 July 2014).
4  Source for all internationally reported disaster loss data (un-
less stated otherwise): Centre for Research on the Epidemiology 
of Disasters (CRED), EM-DAT, http://www.cred.be/.
5  http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/hurricanes/archives/2005/
h2005_katrina.html (accessed 27 November 2014).
6  http://www.bloomberg.com/visual-data/best-and-worst/
most-income-inequality-us-cities (accessed 27 November 2014).
7  http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/?pid=16117 (accessed 23 
November 2014).
8  Centro de Coordinación para la Prevención de los Desastres 
Naturales en América Central (CEPREDENAC), Caribbean Disas-
ter Emergency Management Agency (CDERA), Secretariat of the 
Pacific Community (SOPAC), South Asian Association for Regional 
Cooperation (SAARC), El Proyecto Apoyo a la Prevención de De-
sastres en la Comunidad Andina (PREDECAN).
9  Unless stated otherwise, all graphs and figures on economic 
loss valuation from national loss databases used in this report are 
in constant 2012 US dollars.
10  With additional information from personal communication 
with Omar Dario Cardona (August and September 2014).

36

Chapter 1

Part I  
Unfinished business

39

As the HFA comes to its close, all the indications 
are that its expected outcome, to achieve “The 
substantial reduction of disaster losses, in lives 
and  in  the  social  and  economic  assets  of  com-
munities and countries”, has only been partially 
achieved.

Disaster mortality remains high: 1.6 million peo-
ple have died in internationally reported disas-
ters since the start of the IDNDR in 1990, making 
for an average of around 65,000 deaths per year. 
Yet this number is far less than the average of 1.24 
million deaths in traffic accidents every year1 or 
the average of 1 million who die from tubercu-
losis every year. From that perspective, disaster 
mortality could be considered a less critical glob-
al problem than disease or accidents.

Economic losses from internationally reported 
disasters have also grown steadily since 1990, 
reaching an estimated annual average of US$200 
billion (Munich Re., 2013). However, this is only a 
fraction of global GDP, which was close to US$75 
trillion in 2013,2  and fails to ring the same alarm 
bells as the US$4 trillion in losses to the banking 
sector during the global financial crisis of 2007-
2009 (IMF, 2009).

Part  of  the  reason  why  disaster  losses  have 
not  created  the  same  political  or  economic 

imperative  to  address  the  risks  of  disease  or 
financial risks may be the way in which they are 
measured. In reality, disasters affect households, 
communities and countries due to the combined 
impact of mortality, morbidity and damaged or 
destroyed housing, infrastructure and agricul-
ture. Separate measurements of mortality and 
economic loss fail to capture the full dimensions 
of disaster.

To address this problem, and for illustrative pur-
poses, the concept of human life years can be 
used to provide a better representation of disas-
ter impact, as it provides a metric describing the 
time required to produce economic development 
and social progress. The loss of human life years, 
be it through disasters, disease or accidents, is 
therefore a way of measuring setbacks to social 
and economic development (Box I.1).

When disaster losses are expressed using human 
life  years  as  a  common  currency  (Noy,  2014), 
their  potential  scale  comes  into  clearer  focus. 
Between 1980 and 2012, more than 1.3 billion 
life years were lost worldwide in internationally 
reported disasters (ibid.), making for an annual 
average of 42 million life years. Expressed in this 
way, disaster loss is roughly equivalent to the 43 
million life years lost annually from tuberculosis, 
about 20 per cent lower than the life years lost 

Box I.1   An innovative way to measure disaster impact

The standard way in which disaster damage is measured involves a separate examination of the number of 
fatalities, injuries, and people otherwise affected, and the financial damage that natural disasters cause. A 
new way to aggregate measures of disaster impact aims to overcome many of the difficulties previously iden-
tified in the literature, including the difficulty of assessing overall disaster impact, the need to conduct cost-
benefit  analyses  that  take  different  disaster  impacts  into  account,  and  the  problem  of  assessing  damage 
relative to its value in different countries.

Despite some conceptual differences, the new approach proposed is similar to the World Health Organiza-
tion’s calculation of Disability Adjusted Life Years (DALYs) lost from the burden of diseases and injuries.3  All 
measures of disaster impact are converted into “life years” to allow a worldwide comparison of trends in 
disaster losses. The advantage of this new measurement is that it accounts for the more general impact of 
disasters on human welfare and enables a comparison of these impacts across the globe.4 

(Source: Noy, 2014.)

40

Part I  

from malaria and about half the 90 million years 
lost from HIV/AIDS.5

Major disasters such as the Christchurch earth-
quake or the Bangkok floods in 2011 can cause 
a significant number of lost life years to accu-
mulate in a single country. New Zealand lost a 
total of almost 200,000 life years in the Febru-
ary 2011 earthquake, equivalent to about 17 days 
per inhabitant. In Thailand, 4.76 million life years 
were lost in the 2011 Chao Phraya River floods; 
this figure translates into about 26 days per per-
son (Noy, 2015).

In low and middle-income countries, the losses 
are generally higher than in high-income coun-
tries. In China, 557,438,270 life years were lost 
between 1990 and 2012, which equals a per capi-
ta loss of 162 days (Figure I.1.). In Turkey, total life 
years lost in the same period amounted to more 
than 4 million, or 25 days per person (Noy, 2015).

These figures are even higher when the loss of 

life years from nationally reported disasters is 
included. Globally, the additional life years lost 
due to extensive disasters are estimated to add 
another 20 per cent to internationally reported 
disasters, and this increase can be as high as 130 
per cent in low-income countries. In Indonesia, 
for example, when lost life years are calculated 
using national loss data, the total for the peri-
od from 1990 to 2012 amounts to more than 25 
million life years lost, or 42 days lost per person. 
Small island developing states, such as the South 
Pacific island nation of Tuvalu, experience signif-
icantly larger per capita losses, amounting to 4 
years per person since 1980 (Noy, 2015).

As an illustration, this data underlines that disas-
ter loss is as much a critical global challenge to 
economic development and social progress as 
disease is. However, the figures also show that 
it is a challenge unequally shared. Over 90 per 
cent of the total life years lost in disasters are 
spread across low and middle-income countries 
(Figure I.2).

Figure I.1  Loss of life years in China, 1990-2012

(Source: Noy, 2015.)

41

Figure I.2  Share of life years lost across income groups

(Source: Noy, 2014.)

In particular, more life years are lost per capita in 
low-income countries than in any other income 
group (Figure I.3).

These findings suggest that while disaster risk is 
a universal problem that affects all regions and 

Figure I.3  Lost life years relative to population, 1990 - 2012

income groups, as a development challenge it 
continues  to  be  concentrated  in  low  and  mid-
dle-income  countries.  As  explored  in  detail  in 
the different chapters of this part of the report, 
these are the countries that will need to increase 
capital investment and social expenditure sub-
stantially if they are to achieve the Sustainable 
Development Goals and whose capacity to do so 
will be challenged by increasing disaster risk.

(cid:17)(cid:44)te(cid:48)

1  WHO Factsheet No. 358, March 2013: http://www.who.int/
mediacentre/factsheets/fs358/en/. 
2  World Bank data: http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.
MKTP.CD/countries/1W?display=graph. 
3  http://www.who.int/topics/global_burden_of_disease/en 
(accessed 3 January 2015).
4  For details on the methodology, please see Noy, 2014.
5  Calculated using data on DALYs from the WHO: http://www.
who.int/healthinfo/global_burden_disease/estimates/en/
index2.html.

(Source: UNISDR with data from Noy, 2014.)

42

Part I  

Chapter 2
Reducing disaster losses:
A partial success

43

Twenty-five years after UN Member States adopted the International Decade for Natural Disaster 
Reduction (IDNDR) and ten years after the adoption of the HFA, global disaster risk has not been 
reduced significantly. While improvements in disaster management have led to dramatic reduc-
tions in mortality in some countries, economic losses are now reaching an average of US$250 
billion to US$300 billion each year. 

2.1  

Saving lives

 

 

 

The last decade has seen dramatic reductions in 
disaster mortality in selected countries and re-
gions. But not all countries have been able to re-
duce the vulnerabilities associated with disaster 
mortality faster than the hazard-exposed popu-
lation has increased.

The super-cyclone that impacted the State of Odi-
sha, India on 29 and 30 October 1999 killed 9,843 
people.  Fourteen  years  later,  in  October  2013, 
no more than 47 died when the equally power-
ful Cyclone Phailin swept through the same area. 
This dramatic reduction in disaster mortality has 
been attributed to improvements in disaster risk 
management effected by the Odisha State Gov-
ernment (GFDRR, 2013a; UNEP, 2013).

The Odisha State Disaster Management Author-
ity  (OSDMA)  was  established  shortly  after  the 
super-cyclone  in  1999  (GFDRR,  2013a).  Subse-
quently, 200 cyclone shelters were built and ear-
ly  warning  systems  were  developed,  including 
communication networks that enabled warnings 
to reach both exposed communities and fisher-
men out at sea. Embankments were built to pro-
tect against storm surges and coastal flooding. 
When  cyclones  are  predicted,  reservoir  levels 
are now lowered in order to mitigate anticipated 
inland flooding. At the same time, the vulnerabil-
ity of urban areas has been assessed and building 
codes introduced (GFDRR, 2013a; UNEP, 2013). In 
addition, the accuracy of forecasts made by the 

44

Part I - Chapter 2

Indian  Meteorological  Department  has  greatly 
improved. In 2013, warnings were disseminated 
four days before Cyclone Phailin made landfall, 
which points to a significant improvement com-
pared  to  the  two  days’  warning  given  in  1999 
(UNEP,  2013).  Finally,  the  cyclone  made  land-
fall in a pre-electoral period, meaning that both 
the  national  and  state  governments  deployed 
all available resources to ensure that the disas-
ter was well managed and its impacts minimized.

The case of Odisha is indicative of a trend which 
was modelled in GAR11 (UNISDR, 2011a) and in 
which  improving  development  conditions  and 
strengthened disaster management lead to dra-
matically  reduced  mortality,  at  least  in  those 
events for which warning is possible. Globally, the 
modelled mortality risk associated with floods 
and  tropical  cyclones  was  estimated  to  have 
peaked in the year 2000 before trending down.1  
In  East  Asia  and  the  Pacific,2  for  example,  the 
number of people exposed to floods and tropical 
cyclones each year is estimated to have increased 
by around 70 per cent since 1980, while modelled 
mortality risk is estimated to have halved (UNIS-
DR, 2011a). However, in sub-Saharan Africa, esti-
mates  indicate  that  modelled  flood  mortality 
risk has grown consistently since 1980 (UNISDR, 
2011a) because increasing population exposure 
has not been accompanied by a commensurate 
reduction in vulnerability. Not all countries have 
been able to reduce the vulnerabilities associat-
ed with disaster mortality faster than the hazard-
exposed population has increased.

Disaster mortality risk is closely correlated with 
income and the quality of governance. Since 1990, 
almost 90 per cent of the mortality recorded in 

internationally reported disasters has occurred in 
low and middle-income countries (Figure 2.1).

Figure 2.1  Distribution of disaster mortality by 
income group, 1990-2013

 (Source: UNISDR with data from EM-DAT.)

Faced with similar numbers of people exposed and 
hazards of the same severity, lower-income coun-
tries with weaker governance can expect mortali-
ty rates to increase by several orders of magnitude 
(UNISDR, 2009a). This was tragically confirmed in 
the case of the estimated 138,366 people killed 
when Cyclone Nargis struck Myanmar in 2008.

Disaster  mortality  can  be  expected  to  fall  as 
development conditions improve and vulnera-
bility is reduced. There is a greater chance that 
roads will exist to allow evacuation, that affected 
people can receive timely medical assistance and 
that greater levels of literacy and primary educa-
tion will strengthen people’s understanding of 
warnings and disaster preparedness plans. Ris-
ing incomes and strengthened governance have 
also gone hand in hand with enhanced disaster 
management. 

As  discussed  in  Part  II  of  this  report,  advanc-
es in early warning systems, ranging from more 
accurate monitoring of weather events to vastly 
increased mobile phone access and real improve-
ments in disaster preparedness and response, 
have meant that whereas people often used to be 
caught off guard by hazard events, there are now 
contingency plans which enable timely evacua-
tion to shelters and safe areas.

The experience of Odisha is not an isolated case. 
Several other low and middle-income countries 
have also made spectacular progress in reduc-
ing their mortality risk since the beginning of the 
IDNDR (Box 2.1).

Many countries have made significant progress in 
human development, in poverty reduction and 
in achieving the Millennium Development Goals 
(MDGs). Between 1990 and 2010, the proportion 
of people living below the poverty line more than 
halved, dropping from around 43 per cent to just 
over 20 per cent.3 Since 1990, the number of peo-
ple living on less than US$1.25 per day has fall-
en from 51 per cent of the population to 30 per 
cent in Southern Asia and from 56 per cent to 48 
per cent in sub-Saharan Africa (United Nations, 
2014a). In the same period, under-five mortality 
fell from 178 to 109 per 1,000 births in sub-Saha-
ran Africa and from 116 to 61 per 1,000 births in 
Southern Asia (ibid.).

Tsunami  early  warning  systems  can  also  be  a 
highly effective way of saving lives. One tangi-
ble outcome since the endorsement of the HFA 
has been the creation of the Indian Ocean Tsuna-
mi Warning and Mitigation System.4 However, the 
effectiveness of the system has not been tested 
by tsunamis of the kind that occurred in 2004.

Despite some notable exceptions,5 early warning 
is rarely effective in the case of earthquakes. Peo-
ple do not die in earthquakes; they die in build-
ings that collapse or catch fire in earthquakes, 
and  there  is  rarely  time  to  evacuate  to  safe 
areas and shelters. Consequently, many of the 

45

Box 2.1   Lives saved

In general, countries that have managed to reduce disaster mortality significantly have also managed to 
enhance disaster management within a broader context of improving development indicators.

In Bangladesh, for example, an innovative cyclone shelter programme has helped the country dramatically 
reduce tropical cyclone mortality since the 1970s. In the past five decades, Bangladesh has been struck by 
three severe tropical cyclones: Bhola (1970), Gorky (1991) and Sidr (2007). 

Bhola caused an estimated 300,000 deaths; Gorky was responsible for more than 138,866. The death toll 
for Sidr, however, was only 4,234. At the same time, Bangladesh’s major success in reducing mortality from 
tropical cyclones is supported not only by cyclone shelters but also by a slow but steady improvement in the 
provision of basic education, health and sanitation, and by a reduction in the number of people living below 
the poverty line (Figure 2.2).

Figure 2.2  Progress in selected human development 
indicators in Bangladesh

Figure 2.3  Decreasing poverty and under-five mortality 
in Mozambique

 (Source: UNISDR with data from the World Bank.)

  (Source: UNISDR with data from the World Bank.)

In February and March 2000, Mozambique saw heavy flooding that affected more than 4.5 million people and 
killed at least 800. While the floods in January 2013 were not as severe as in 2000, the numbers of people killed 
and affected were reduced by around 90 per cent. A steady reduction in extreme poverty in Mozambique has 
gone hand in hand with a dramatic decline in the under-five mortality rate, which is a key indicator of Goal 4 
of the MDGs (Figure 2.3). The country has also succeeded in reducing disaster mortality significantly over the 
last 20 years.

Similarly, hurricanes in Cuba in 1926 and 1932 caused approximately 600 and 2,500 deaths, respectively. In 
contrast, Hurricane Dennis in 2005 killed only 16 people, and Hurricane Sandy in 2012 claimed only 11 lives.

46

Part I - Chapter 2

improvements  in  disaster  management  which 
have been so effective in reducing disaster mor-
tality from floods and storms have not been as 
effective in the case of earthquakes.

Since 1990, around 85 per cent of international-
ly reported earthquake mortality has occurred 
in low and middle-income countries (Figure 2.4). 
In these countries, the number of exposed build-
ings increases exponentially with rapid econom-
ic development and urban growth. However, the 
quality of urban governance, including the appli-
cation of building codes and planning standards, 
is generally weaker than in high-income coun-
tries (UNISDR, 2009a). 

For example, even in an upper middle-income 
country  like  Turkey,  the  1999  earthquake—in 
which 17,000 people were killed—revealed that 
65 per cent of apartment blocks in Istanbul and 
other cities had been built in violation of local 
building  codes.  Thus  the  high  death  toll  high-
lighted  the  codes’  ineffective  implementation 
system, partly enabled by widespread corruption 
that provided building inspectors with incentives 
to look the other way and allow deficient con-
struction (Moullier, 2014).

In low-income countries in particular, a consid-
erable proportion of development takes place in 
the informal sector, which by definition is unreg-
ulated. The situation is most critical in countries 
like  Haiti  that  rarely  experience  major  earth-
quakes and thus have low levels of risk aware-
ness (Neumayer et al., 2012), thus reducing the 
likelihood of risk-sensitive urban planning and 
building regulation even further.

As  a  result,  while  economic  development  may 
lead  to  declining  weather-related  mortality,  it 
may  actually  bring  about  increases  in  earth-
quake  mortality,  as  rapidly  increasing  expo-
sure outpaces those reductions in vulnerability 
achieved through improved building and plan-
ning  standards.  As  a  country’s  income  rises, 

Figure 2.4  Earthquake mortality by income group, 1990-2013

 (Source: UNISDR with data from EM-DAT.)

these standards tend to improve. However, this 
does not translate into a visible reduction in mor-
tality in the short term. It may take decades for 
the outcome of improved planning regulations 
and building standards to translate into reduced 
disaster losses, as a critical mass of new, risk-sen-
sitive building and urban development has to be 
achieved. Therefore, countries that introduced 
a new seismic building code under the HFA may 
not see the results of their efforts until the mid-
dle of the century. As a result, while the number 
of buildings in areas exposed to earthquakes has 
increased considerably since 1990, the extent to 
which this has been offset by reductions in vul-
nerability is unclear.

Trends in earthquake mortality were not mod-
elled  in  GAR11  due  to  issues  with  the  under-
lying  data.  Given  the  infrequency  of  major 
earthquakes, it is not easy to find longitudinal 
comparisons  between  the  impacts  of  similar 
events in the same region as was possible in the 
case of Odisha or Bangladesh. Events such as the 
1906 San Francisco earthquake or the 1923 Tokyo 
earthquake have fortunately not repeated them-
selves to date.

At the same time, most disaster mortality is con-
centrated  in  very  intensive  disasters  (Figure 
2.5). More than 45 per cent of the total disaster 

47

Figure 2.5  Mortality from disasters concentrated in few intensive events

 (Source: UNISDR with data from national loss databases.)

mortality since 1990 is concentrated in only four 
events (Cyclone Gorky in Bangladesh in 1991, the 
Indian Ocean tsunamis in 2004, Cyclone Nargis 
in Myanmar in 2008 and the Haiti earthquake in 
2010). While mortality might appear to be on the 
rise, this trend is not statistically significant and 
changes arbitrarily depending on the time period 
chosen and the specific intensive disasters occur-
ring in that period.6 

48

Part I - Chapter 2

2.2  

 

 

 

Economic loss reduced?

Absolute economic loss is rising, but in relative 
terms, the global increase in economic loss from 
disasters is not statistically significant. However, 
in  some  regions,  losses  have  outstripped  GDP 
growth. While absolute economic loss is concen-
trated  in  higher-income  countries,  in  relative 
terms it remains a far greater problem for low-
income countries.

Most  high-income  countries  have  the  regula-
tory quality and have made investments to sig-
nificantly  reduce  the  more  extensive  layers  of 
disaster  risk  associated  with  losses  occurring 
over short return periods. In addition, the citi-
zens of these countries enjoy high levels of social 
protection,  including effective emergency ser-
vices and health coverage, meaning that high-
income  countries  account  for  less  than  12  per 
cent of internationally reported disaster mortal-
ity (Figure 2.1).

However,  although  investments  in  risk  reduc-
tion  and  regulation  have  enabled  a  reduction 
of extensive risks, the value of assets in hazard-
prone areas has grown, generating an increase 
in intensive risks. For example, investing in risk 
reduction  measures  to  protect  a  floodplain 
against a 1-in-20-year flood may encourage addi-
tional development on the floodplain in a way 
that actually increases the risks associated with 
a 1-in-200-year flood.

This relationship is not linear. For example, the 
way  in  which  losses  increase  with  wealth  may 
depend on the level of hazard exposure (Schum-
acher  and  Strobl,  2008).  In  countries  with  low 
hazard  exposure,  losses  seem  to  rise  rapidly 
along with economic development and subse-
quently fall; in contrast, in countries with high 
hazard  exposure,  losses  seem  to  rise  faster  in 
higher-income countries than in middle-income 
countries. This probably reflects the fact that in 
countries exposed to extreme hazards and with 
high levels of intensive risk, vulnerability reduc-
tion is less effective in reducing risk than in coun-
tries with more extensive risks.

The trend of increased hazard exposure leading 
to increased economic loss risk was modelled in 
GAR11 (UNISDR, 2011a). For example, econom-
ic loss risk from cyclones was estimated to have 
increased by 265 per cent in the OECD, by 181 per 
cent in sub-Saharan Africa and by 150 per cent 
in all other regions since 1980. The increase was 
considered to be higher (262 per cent) in high-
income countries than in upper middle-income 
countries (165 per cent), lower middle-income 
countries (152 per cent) and low-income coun-
tries (155 per cent).

Figure 2.6  Economic losses from disasters by 
income group, 1990-2013

 (Source: UNISDR with data from EM-DAT.)

According  to  Munich  Reinsurance  (Munich  Re, 
2013), both overall and insured losses have been 
increasing steadily since 1980, reaching an annu-
al average of US$200 billion in 2012 (Figure 2.7). 
This is consistent with figures from Swiss Rein-
surance (Swiss Re, 2014a), which also show eco-
nomic losses from disasters trending up to an 
annual average of around US$200 billion.

In  2013,  below-average  economic  losses  from 
disasters were recorded, with estimates ranging 
from US$140 billion (Swiss Re, 2014a) to US$190 
billion (Aon Benfield, 2013). The disasters with 
the largest economic impacts in 2013 were the 
Central European floods in May and June with an 
estimated total economic loss of US$22 billion 
(Box 2.2), an earthquake in China in April with 
US$14 billion, and Typhoon Haiyan in November 
with US$13 billion.

These modelled trends would seem to be con-
firmed by historical loss data. In absolute terms, 
over 60 per cent of internationally reported eco-
nomic losses are concentrated in OECD and other 
high-income countries, reflecting the concentra-
tion of economic assets (Figure 2.6).

While economic loss is rising in absolute terms, it 
mirrors increases in GDP (Neumayer and Barth-
el, 2010). This confirms results from other studies 
(UNISDR, 2009a), which show that when adjust-
ed for inflation and expressed as a proportion of 
global GDP, the global increase in economic loss 

49

from disasters is not statistically significant.

However,  it  is  important  to  note  some  impor-
tant regional differences in this context. Between 
1980 and 2010, GDP per capita grew by 703 per 
cent in East Asia and the Pacific and by 293 per 
cent in South Asia. This development outpaced 
the growth in exposure in both regions, mean-
ing that economic loss risk actually diminished 

in relative terms. In contrast, in income groups 
with more sluggish economic growth such as the 
OECD, economic loss risk rose faster than GDP 
per capita.

At the same time, while absolute economic loss 
is concentrated in higher-income countries, in 
relative terms it is a far greater problem for low-
income countries (Figure 2.8).

Figure 2.7  Overall and insured losses worldwide, 1980-2013

Billion US$

400

Insured losses (in 2013 values)*
Overall losses (in 2013 values)*

*Losses adjusted for inflation based on country CPI

300

200

100

1980

1982

1984

1986

1988

1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

2010

2012

 (Source: Munich Re, 2013: Geo Risks Research, NatCatSERVICE, as of January 2014.)

Box 2.2   The Central European floods

During an unusually wet spring in Central Europe, groundwater levels were high and soils already were satu-
rated when exceedingly high levels of rainfall occurred in late May and early June 2013, leading to severe 
flooding of the Elbe and Danube rivers and their tributaries. Rainfall levels with a 100-year return period 
were recorded,7 resulting in the evacuation of 52,500 people in Germany alone and 25 deaths across the 
Czech Republic, Germany and Austria. Total economic losses across Central Europe have been estimated at 
between US$14.7 billion and US$22 billion (EM-DAT;8 Munich Re, 2014; Zurich Insurance, 2014).

The events of 2002 and 2013 were by far the two greatest floods in Germany since 1900 (EM-DAT, 2014). While 
many areas were affected just as severely or even more so in 2013 than in 2002, the reduced loss suggests that 
investments were made in risk reduction (Munich Re, 2014; Zurich Insurance 2014). However, the fact that ten 
of Germany’s eleven US$1 billion disasters have occurred since 1990 clearly points to increasing risks.9 

50

Part I - Chapter 2

Figure 2.8  Economic losses relative to size of economy (GDP) by income group, 1990-2013

 (Source: UNISDR with data from EM-DAT and the World Bank.)

This confirms that those countries which need to 
invest the most in additional capacity, new infra-
structure, social services and economic develop-
ment will continue to struggle the most unless 
disaster risks are reduced. For these countries, 
development without disaster risk reduction is 
unsustainable. 

51

Notes

1  See  Figure  2.11,  GAR11  (UNISDR,  2011a),  http://www.
preventionweb.net /english/hyogo/gar/ 2011/en/what /
chapter2_2_3.html.
2  World Bank regions.
3  World Bank data: http://data.worldbank.org.  
4  www.ioc.tsunami.org. 
5  See the case study on Mexico’s earthquake early warning sys-
tem in Chapter 7.
6  In Figure 2.5 and the following graphs, it is possible to deter-
mine whether a trend is significant or not using the r-squared (R2) 
value, which is the coefficient of determination. R2 is a statistical 
measure that generally ranges from 0 to 1 and indicates how well 
data fits a statistical model. The higher the coefficient of determi-
nation is, the better the fit between the regression and the data.
7  https://w w w.zamg.ac.at/cms/de/klima/news/wetter-
beruhigt-sich-allmaehlich (accessed 23 December 2014).
8  www.emdat.be.
9  www.emdat.be.

52

Part I - Chapter 2

Chapter 3
The global riskscape

53

While historical losses can explain the past, they do not necessarily provide a good guide to the 
future. Most disasters that could happen have not happened yet.  

The global expected average annual loss (AA(cid:15)) in the built environment associated with tropical 
cyclones (wind and storm surge), earth(cid:46)uakes, tsunamis and floods is now estimated at US$314 
billion. This risk presents a real challenge to the global agenda of sustainable development.

3.1 Accumulating contingent 

liabilities

While  historical  losses  can  explain  the  past, 
they  do  not  necessarily  provide  a  good  guide 
to the future. Most disasters that could happen 
have not happened yet (UNISDR, 2013a). Prob-
abilistic risk assessment simulates those future 
disasters  which,  based  on  scientific  evidence, 
are likely to occur. As a result, these risk assess-
ments resolve the problem posed by the limits 
of historical data. Even if a full century of histori-
cal data exists on extreme flooding and drought 
events in a country, any model derived from that 
data would not be able to forecast the previous 
extremes that had occurred over the past 1,000 
years (Figure 3.1).

Figure 3.1   The small sample size of hazard records

Probabilistic models therefore “complete” his-
torical  records  by  reproducing  the  physics  of 
the phenomena and recreating the intensity of a 
large number of synthetic events. As such, they 
provide a more complete picture of the full spec-
trum of future risks than is possible with histori-
cal data. While the scientific data and knowledge 
used is still incomplete, provided that their inher-
ent uncertainty is recognized, these models can 
provide guidance on the likely “order of magni-
tude” of risks.

The results of probabilistic risk models are nor-
mally presented in terms of metrics such as aver-
age  annual  loss  (AAL).  The  AAL  is  the  average 
expected loss annualized over a long time frame. 

 (Source: GFDRR, 2014.)

54

Part I - Chapter 3

It represents the amount that countries would 
have to set aside each year to cover the cost of 
future disasters in the absence of insurance or 
other disaster risk financing mechanisms.

Disaster risk should be understood as a contin-
gent liability (described as “another category of 
toxic assets” in GAR13). If a country ignores disas-
ter risk and allows risk to accumulate, it is in effect 
undermining its own future potential for social 
and economic development. However, if a coun-
try invests in disaster risk reduction, over time it 
can reduce the potential losses it faces, thus free-
ing up critical resources for development.

Global average annual loss (AAL) in the built envi-
ronment associated with tropical cyclones (wind 
and  storm  surge),  earthquakes,  tsunamis  and 
floods is now estimated at almost US$314 bil-
lion.1  This is the amount of money that should be 
set aside each year worldwide to cover the future 
disaster losses associated with these hazards.

If  this  risk  were  shared  equally  amongst  the 
world’s population, it would be equivalent to an 
annual loss of almost US$70 for each individual 
person of working age,2 or two months’ income 
for  people  living  below  the  poverty  line.3  This 
represents an existential risk for people already 
struggling for survival on a daily basis.

For higher-income groups, these losses are not 
existential, yet they can be compared with oth-
er ways in which household disposable income 
can  be  lost.  For  example,  in  the United  States 
of America, electricity prices were increased by 
US$0.24 per kilowatt-hour in 2011, meaning that 
monthly household bills increased by an aver-
age of US$24 per year.4 If the risk were shared 
out equally among the world’s population, and 
assuming an average household size of 3 people,5  
each household should be setting aside US$210 
a year to cover potential disaster losses—around 
nine times the reduction of household dispos-
able income from rising electricity costs.

At a macroeconomic level, global AAL is almost 
equivalent  to  the  entire  GDP  of  high-income 
economies such as New Zealand or Kuwait, or ten 
times the gross national income of Niger.6 It is also 
significantly higher than the cost of non-conflict 
armed violence,7 which is currently estimated at 
US$95 billion to US$163 billion (Geneva Decla-
ration, no date). Global AAL also corresponds to 
more than the estimated total cost of armed con-
flict on the African continent since 1990 (IANSA et 
al., 2007) and almost 40 times the value of inter-
national investments to fight HIV/AIDS in 2013 
(UNAIDS, 2014). It is significantly higher than the 
total investment in water and sanitation in either 
China or India. Even more critically, it is almost 
equivalent to the estimated annual global financ-
ing that will be required in areas such as trans-
port infrastructure or education in order to meet 
the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) (UNC-
TAD, 2014). Unless addressed, the contingent lia-
bility represented by disaster risk will therefore 
threaten the achievement of the SDGs.

The AAL has been calculated as part of the new 
Global Risk Assessment, the first of its kind to 
provide worldwide coverage for multiple hazards. 
While an increasing number of risk assessments 
are now being produced for specific hazards and 
portfolios of exposed assets, up to now it has 
been difficult to estimate global disaster risk due 
to major geographical gaps and the fact that glob-
al assessments for single hazards use different 
data sets and methodology.8  By using the same 
methodology, arithmetic and exposure model to 
calculate the risk for all hazards, the new global 
assessment (Box 3.1) enables comparisons of risk 
levels between countries and regions and across 
hazard types. In this way, it enables a better map-
ping and understanding of the global risk land-
scape, an estimation of the order of magnitude 
of losses in each country, and a calculation of the 
risk contributions from different hazards.

The global AAL data illustrates how disaster risk 
is distributed across countries, income groups, 

55

Box 3.1   The UNISDR-led Global Risk Assessment

Since 2011, UNISDR has spearheaded a multi-hazard Global Risk Assessment in partnership with leading scientific 
and  technical  organizations.9  The  objective  is  to  provide  comparable  open-access  disaster  risk  metrics  across 
countries and hazard categories with a relatively coarse resolution as a means of raising risk awareness.

This fills a major gap in understanding risk. Most probabilistic risk assessments have been developed commercially 
for  the  insurance  industry  and  cover  specific  risks,  mainly  in  higher-income  countries.  However,  they  are  rarely 
accessible and are based on proprietary models. While more and more public-domain risk models are now being 
developed, the use of different methodologies and data sets makes comparison difficult.

In the UNISDR-led assessment, probabilistic hazard models have been developed for earthquake, tropical cyclone 
wind  and  storm  surge,  tsunami  and  river  flooding  worldwide,  for  volcanic  ash  in  the  Asia-Pacific  region  and  for 
drought in parts of Africa. A global exposure model for the built environment has been developed at a 1kmx1km 
resolution along coastlines and 5kmx5km elsewhere. Appropriate vulnerability functions have been used on the 
basis of expert knowledge in each region. The impact of climate change on wind hazard in the Caribbean and on 
drought in Africa has also been modelled. The open-source multi-hazard risk platform CAPRA10  is used to calculate 
risk. At this point, the flood risk model is still being finalized, meaning that the estimates of flood risk presented in 
this chapter should be considered provisional and are likely to change.

The principal metric from the global assessment used in this report is average annual loss (AAL), also known as the 
pure risk premium (when normalized by exposed value or capital stock). This is the expected average loss per year 
considering all the events that could occur over a long time frame. It is a compact metric with a low sensitivity to 
uncertainty. Unlike historical estimates, AAL takes into account all the disasters that could occur in the future, 
including very intensive losses over long return periods, and thus overcomes the limitations associated with esti-
mates derived from historical disaster loss data.

The other metric presented is probable maximum loss (PML), which represents the maximum loss that could be 
expected within a given period of time. Typically, PML is relevant to determine the size of reserves that, for exam-
ple, insurance companies or a government should have available to buffer losses.

Figure 3.2  Return periods

 (Source: UNISDR.)

56

Part I - Chapter 3

Probability refers to the frequency of occurrence or the return period of losses associated with hazardous events. 
The concept of return period is often misunderstood. If a loss has a 500-year return period, this does not mean that 
the loss occurs every 500 years. If the loss occurred today, it does not mean that it will not recur for another 500 
years. What it really means is that on average it occurs once every 500 years. For example, if there were records of 
losses of different intensities over 1,000 years (Figure 3.2), it can be seen that nine losses exceeded an intensity of 
60 over that period. The intervals between these losses fluctuate between 60 and 200 years. However, losses of an 
intensity of 60 were exceeded every 100 years on average, and that is the return period. Expressed in a different 
way, the annual probability of a loss exceeding an intensity of 60 is 0.1 per cent.

The PML for different return periods can therefore be expressed as the probability of a given loss amount being 
exceeded over different periods of time (Table 3.1). Thus, even in the case of a thousand-year return period, there is 
still a 5 per cent probability of a PML being exceeded over a 50-year time frame. This metric is relevant, for example, 
to the planners and designers of infrastructure projects, where investments may be made for an expected lifespan 
of 50 years.

In the development of risk models, many different data sets are used as input components. The level of uncertainty 
is directly linked to the quality of the input data. On many occasions during model development, expert judgment 
and proxies are used in the absence of empirical data, and the results are very sensitive to most of these assump-
tions and variations in input data. As such, all the AAL and PML figures presented in this chapter should be consid-
ered indicators of the order of magnitude of the risks, not as exact values.

For example, PML curves developed with the same hazard and exposure models change when different vulnerabil-
ity functions are used, although the order of magnitude remains the same (Figure 3.3). Better data quality and 
advances in science and modelling methodologies reduce the level of uncertainty, but it is crucial to interpret the 
results of any risk assessment against the backdrop of unavoidable uncertainty.

Table 3.1  Probabilities for different return periods

Figure 3.3  Sensitivity of results to input data

 (Source: UNISDR.)

 (Source: CIMNE-INGENIAR, 2014.)

57

geographical  regions  and  hazard  types.  As 
such, it is appropriate for ranking and compar-
ing country risk levels. However, given the lim-
itations  arising  from  its  global  resolution  and 
lack of granularity, it is not appropriate for the 
development of detailed national or local disas-
ter  risk  management  strategies,  including  risk 
financing schemes. However, it can be used by 
governments  to  provide  an  initial  risk  profile 
for a country, which should in turn motivate the 
development  of  detailed  assessments  in  spe-
cific sectors and territories as a basis for pub-
lic and private investment strategies and for the 
design of risk financing schemes. The global AAL 
is extremely conservative  for three reasons.

First, it does not include all hazards and relevant 
sectors. it only represents direct physical risk to 
residential and commercial buildings, schools, 
hospitals and other public and industrial build-
ings. It does not include risks to infrastructure 
such as roads and bridges, ports and airports, 
energy and electrical facilities, telecommunica-
tion facilities, dams and mines, or to agriculture. 
At the same time, it only includes a number of 
potential global hazards. If the risk of extra-trop-
ical windstorms, ice and snow, sandstorms and 
tornadoes were also taken into account, the fig-
ure would again be significantly higher.

Second,  extensive  risk,  associated  with  small-
scale, high frequency localised events is not con-
sidered. The analysis of 85 national disaster loss 
data sets presented in Chapter 4 show that this 
risk layer may account for up to 40 per cent of 
economic losses, particularly in low and middle 
income countries.  

Third, AAL does not consider indirect losses and 
impacts. While it is difficult to calculate a glob-
al value, evidence from specific countries shows 
that these indirect losses can surpass the direct 
costs, particularly if economic resilience is low. 
When compared to reference income without a 
disaster, impacts from large disasters can  lead to 

58

Part I - Chapter 3

income (GDP) reductions of up to 20 per cent over 
a number of years following a devastating event.  
A much-cited example of this effect is the impact 
of Hurricane Mitch in Honduras in 1998.

To give a perspective on how losses to the built 
environment from a disaster are only a share of 
total losses, direct losses to the built environ-
ment in the Haiti earthquake in 2010 represented 
80 per cent of total direct losses and 47 per cent 
of combined direct and indirect losses (Govern-
ment of the Republic of Haiti, 2010). In the case 
of the May 2014 floods in Serbia, the losses to the 
built environment were 54 per cent of total direct 
losses and only 31 per cent of combined direct 
and indirect losses, to which the agriculture sec-
tor contributed 8 per cent (Government of the 
Republic of Serbia, 2014).

3.2 Capital investment and social 

expenditure challenged

In absolute terms, global AAL is concentrated in 
large,  higher-income,  hazard-exposed  econo-
mies. However, in relation to annual capital in-
vestment  or  social  expenditure,  many  low  and 
middle-income countries, and in particular small 
island developing states (SIDS), have the highest 
concentrations of risk.

Disaster  risk  is  not  evenly  distributed  around 
the earth, but reflects the social construction of 
hazard, exposure and vulnerability in different 
countries in the context of different risk drivers 
(UNISDR, 2009a). Globally, the distribution of AAL 
reflects the value and vulnerability of the capital 
stock concentrated on cyclone or tsunami-prone 
coastlines, along seismic fault lines or in flood-
prone river basins.

In absolute terms, global AAL is concentrated in 
large,  higher-income,  hazard-exposed  econo-
mies, such as Japan and the United States of Amer-
ica (Figure 3.4). However, the disproportionately 

high risk of lower-income countries relative to the 
size of their economies or the value of their capi-
tal stock has been repeatedly recognized (UNIS-
DR, 2009a, 2011a, 2013a). In relation to annual 
capital investment, for example, many low and 

middle-income countries, and in particular small 
island developing states (SIDS), have the highest 
concentrations of risk (Figure 3.5).

Figure 3.4  Global multi-hazard average annual loss

 (Source: UNISDR with data from Global Risk Assessment.)

Figure 3.5  Global multi-hazard average annual loss in relation to capital investment11

 (Source: UNISDR with data from the Global Risk Assessment and the World Bank.)

59

The level of disaster risk in a country is therefore 
influenced not only by the absolute AAL but also 
by the way in which disaster risk could under-
mine  the  capacity  for  capital  investment  and 
social expenditure.  

The value of the world’s capital stock12 is heav-
ily  concentrated  in  regions  like  East  Asia  and 
the Pacific, Europe and Central Asia, and North 
America.13  However,  in  relative  terms,  Latin 
America and the Caribbean would be expected 
to lose four times more of their assets each year 
compared to Europe and Central Asia and two 
times more compared to North American coun-
tries (Figure 3.6).14

When comparing different income groups, the 
AAL of high-income countries is around 25 times 
that of low-income countries. In relation to their 
capital  stock,  however,  low-income  countries 
could be expected to lose around five times more 
than high-income countries (Figure 3.7).

The relationship between AAL and capital stock 
is key to assessing the need for corrective disas-
ter risk management, in other words investments 
to protect or to retrofit existing disaster-prone 
building stock. Countries with a very high ratio 
of AAL to capital stock in particular would need 
to invest in corrective risk management to avoid 
losing essential development assets. This is espe-
cially critical in countries which exhibit sluggish 
growth and low levels of capital investment and 
which  would  be  challenged  to  replace  capital 
stock lost in disasters.

Countries  also  need  to  consider  the  relation-
ship between AAL and capital investment (gross 
fixed capital formation, or GFCF). In general, low-
income countries have less capacity for capital 
investment than high-income countries. However, 
disaster risk may represent a far higher proportion 
of that investment in low-income countries, chal-
lenging their potential for economic development. 

Figure 3.6  Multi-hazard average annual loss in relation to capital stock by geographical region

 (Source: UNISDR with data from the Global Risk Assessment and the World Bank.)

60

Part I - Chapter 3

Figure 3.7  Multi-hazard average annual loss in relation to capital stock by income group

 (Source: GAR Global Risk Assessment.)

The level of capital investment as a proportion 
of existing capital stock is very different across 
income groups, as it accounts for some 30 per 
cent in low-income countries compared to only 
10 per cent in upper middle-income and 5 per 
cent  in  high-income  countries.  Thus  the  new 
investments that low-income countries make on 
an annual basis represent a significant propor-
tion of their total capital stock. A high ratio of 
AAL to capital investment represents a threat to 
future development prospects. Prospective risk 
management then takes on critical importance 
in order to ensure that new investment does not 
increase disaster risk.

In terms of geographical regions, capital invest-
ment varies from 12 to 33 per cent of GDP,15 and rel-
ative AAL varies significantly as a result. In South 
Asia, AAL is the equivalent of almost 5 per cent of 
annual capital investment, compared to only 1.23 
per cent in Europe and Central Asia (Figure 3.8). 

The AAL in Europe and Central Asia represents a 
lower percentage of annual capital investment 
than that of East Asia and the Pacific. However, 
annual  capital  investment  in  Europe  and  Cen-
tral Asia is currently little more than a quarter of 
that in East Asia and the Pacific. As mentioned 
above, this highlights the importance of investing 
in corrective disaster risk management in coun-
tries with sluggish or stagnating economies, as 
disaster risk can erode what little growth capac-
ity there is.

In  other  regions,  capital  investment  is  also 
exposed to significant risk. Annual capital invest-
ment in Latin America and the Caribbean is cur-
rently less than a third of that in East Asia and the 
Pacific; however, the AAL is equivalent to more 
than 3 per cent of that investment, compared to 
1.89 per cent in East Asia and the Pacific. This acts 
as a significant brake on future development.

61

Figure 3.8  Multi-hazard average annual loss in relation to capital investment by geographical region

 (Source: UNISDR with data from Global Risk Assessment and the World Bank.)

In terms of income groups, annual capital invest-
ment is around 10 times greater in high-income 
countries than in lower middle-income countries. 
However, relative to capital investment, the AAL 
of these regions is comparable, indicating that 
lower middle-income countries will be more chal-
lenged to achieve their development goals (Fig-
ure 3.9).

In such circumstances, it is impossible to achieve 
sustained,  let  alone  sustainable,  growth.  For 
example, in Asia, Myanmar’s AAL represents 30 
per cent of its annual capital investment and in 
the Philippines and Cambodia 14 per cent and 10 
per cent respectively. In Latin America, for Hon-
duras and Guatemala the AAL represents almost 
18 per cent and around 10 per cent of new capital 
investment, respectively.

Disaster risk also challenges social development. 
While  social  expenditure  in  absolute  terms  is 

lowest in South Asia, the region’s AAL is equiva-
lent to more than 10 per cent of that expenditure. 
Disaster risk thus threatens the capacity for social 
expenditure precisely in those countries with the 
least capacity and the greatest need to invest. 
For example, social expenditure in sub-Saharan 
Africa is little more than 1 per cent of that in East 
Asia and the Pacific, or around 3 per cent of that 
in Latin America and the Caribbean. However, the 
AAL in sub-Saharan Africa is equivalent to almost 
3 per cent of this limited investment.

Similarly,  while  annual  social  expenditure  is 
about 400 times greater in high-income countries 
than  in  low-income  countries,  the  AAL  in  low-
income countries is equivalent to about 22 per 
cent of social expenditure, compared to only 1.45 
per cent in high-income countries (Figure 3.10). 
Given that spending on social protection, public 
health and public education investment is criti-
cal to the Sustainable Development Goals, this 

62

Part I - Chapter 3

Figure 3.(cid:1098)  Multi-hazard average annual loss in relation to capital investment by income group

 (Source: UNISDR with data from Global Risk Assessment and the World Bank.)

Figure 3.10  Multi-hazard average annual loss in relation to social expenditure by income group

 (Source: UNISDR with data from Global Risk Assessment and the World Bank.)

63

Figure 3.11  Top 15 countries: Multi-hazard average annual loss in relation to social expenditure (excluding SIDS)

 (Source: UNISDR with data from Global Risk Assessment and the World Bank.)

again highlights that those objectives cannot be 
achieved unless disaster risk is addressed.

A number of larger countries like Myanmar, Mad-
agascar, Philippines and Honduras face particu-
larly difficult challenges in this regard, as the AAL 
represents almost 55 per cent of social expendi-
ture in Honduras, nearly 69 per cent in the Phil-
ippines,  more  than  80  per  cent  in  Madagascar 
and 200 per cent in Myanmar (Figure 3.11). In Lat-
in American countries like Ecuador, Guatemala 
and Peru, the AAL represents over 15 per cent of 
annual social expenditure.

64

Part I - Chapter 3

3.3  

 

 

Ha(cid:55)ard-specific risk profiles

 

Different  hazards  can  be  seen  to  represent  dif-
ferent  risk  layers  and  are  therefore  associated 
with various levels of frequency and impact. It is 
important  to  understand  the  implications  of 
these different hazards and the way that they in-
terrelate with drivers of vulnerability and expo-
sure to create specific patterns of risk.

The AAL figures used for these estimates aggre-
gate the expected annual losses from different 
hazards  (Figure  3.12),  which  in  turn  represent 
different risk layers. For example, tsunamis are 
usually associated with very low-frequency but 
high-severity  impacts,  while  tropical  cyclones 
have a much higher frequency and usually medi-
um to high severity of impact. Earthquakes are 
lower-frequency events that can cause greater 
losses, i.e. generate significant damage across 
large areas of a country, while floods are more 

Figure 3.12  Contribution of each hazard to global AAL

 (Source: UNISDR with data from Global Risk Assessment.)

regular occurrences. In contrast, tsunamis usu-
ally  affect  only  a  relatively  small  area  beyond 
the  coastline.  These  differences  in  frequency 
and spatial extent determine how the different 
hazards contribute to global AAL. For example, 
even though it contributes only 0.29 per cent to 
global AAL, tsunami risk may have devastating 
local impacts when it does occur, as the events 
in the Indian Ocean in 2004 and Japan in 2011 
highlighted.

Earthquakes
Earthquakes  occur  infrequently  but  can  cor-
relate with high losses across large regions. In 
Japan  and  on  the  Pacific  coasts  of  the  United 
States of America and Chile, earthquake risks are 
explained by major concentrations of exposed 
assets in areas of high seismicity. However, the 
vulnerability of building stock is low thanks to 
good construction standards, a long history of 
earthquakes, and strong governance. In low and 
middle-income countries, such as Bangladesh, 
China, the Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Iran, 
Nepal and the Philippines, the vulnerability of the 
building stock makes a far greater contribution 
to risk.

Seismic  hazard  depends  on  the  magnitudes 
and  locations  of  likely  earthquakes,  on  their 

frequency and on the properties of the rocks and 
sediments that earthquake waves travel through. 
Tectonic earthquakes can occur anywhere where 
an active fault exists, and the magnitude depends 
on the area of the fault that ruptures. Although 
earthquakes cannot be predicted, scientific anal-
ysis can provide information on the potential fre-
quency and magnitude of events. Earthquakes 
can also trigger secondary hazards associated 
with landslides, liquefaction and tsunamis.

Earthquake  risk  contributes  US$113  billion  to 
global AAL. To put this figure into perspective, it 
is equivalent to annual public education expendi-
ture in all of the Middle East and North Africa, or 
50 per cent of public health expenditure in Latin 
America and the Caribbean.

The countries with the highest absolute AAL val-
ues are the United States of America, Japan and 
Italy. However, relative to both capital stock and 
investment, the risk is significantly higher in low 
and middle-income countries (Figure 3.13).

In terms of geographical regions, the highest rel-
ative risks can be found in Latin America and the 
Caribbean and in the Middle East and North Afri-
ca. The earthquake AAL in these regions is equiv-
alent to 1.6 per cent and 1 per cent of their capital 
investment,  respectively,  compared  to  0.6  per 
cent in Europe and Central Asia and 0.4 per cent 
in North America.16 These are regions where the 
exposed  building  stock  is  growing  in  contexts 
that may exhibit relatively weak regulatory qual-
ity and where prospective disaster risk manage-
ment is critical to avoiding future disaster risk 
accumulation. Middle-income countries such as 
Honduras,  Guatemala,  Peru  and  Tajikistan  all 
have a high ratio of AAL to capital investment.

Earthquake risk has also become a critical prob-
lem for countries that have experienced a severe 
economic  downturn  and  where  capital  invest-
ment has dried up. For example, Greece’s annual 
capital investment now amounts to only around 

65

Figure 3.13  Top 15 countries: Earthquake AAL in relation to capital stock (excluding SIDS)

 (Source: UNISDR with data from Global Risk Assessment and the World Bank.)

2.5  per  cent  of  its  building  stock.  This  invest-
ment is now just over half of that observed in 
upper  middle-income  countries  such  as  Peru. 
As a result, Greece’s earthquake AAL has come 
to  represent  10  per  cent  of  its  annual  capital 
investment. 

In terms of PML, over a 20-year period there is a 
4 per cent probability of a loss equivalent to the 
value of more than 8 per cent of Greece’s capital 
stock (Figure 3.14) and over 300 per cent of the 
country’s annual capital investment. The coun-
try’s  AAL  is  also  equivalent  to  almost  2.5  per 
cent  of  its  national  income  (GNI).  It  is  unclear 
whether this contingent liability was taken into 
account when the international community pro-
vided over EUR 200 billion in loans to support the 
Greek economy between 2010 and 2012. In reali-
ty, earthquake risk could spill over into the finan-
cial system and become increasingly systemic.

66

Part I - Chapter 3

Figure 3.14  Top 15 countries: Earthquake PML500 in relation 
to capital stock (excluding SIDS)

 (Source: UNISDR with data from Global Risk Assessment.)

Figure  3.14  shows  the  15  countries  (excluding 
SIDS)  where  the  highest  proportion  of  capital 
stock could be lost with a probability of 10 per 
cent over a fifty-year period (500-year PML). As 
can be seen, these potential losses are impor-
tant, representing between 2 and 12 per cent of 
the total capital stock for these countries.

These losses are equivalent to 800 per cent of 
annual capital investment in Trinidad and Toba-
go, 100 per cent of annual capital investment in 
Peru and 90 per cent in Japan. To avoid system-
ic risk, it is important to factor contingent liabil-
ities into international loans and other financial 
instruments.

Tropical cyclones
Global  average  annual  loss  from  recurrent 
cyclone winds and storm surge is estimated at 
US$80 billion, which is equivalent to 1.4 times the 
total public health expenditure in Africa or 85 per 
cent of public education expenditure in Australia 
and New Zealand combined.

Figure 3.15  Worldwide historical tropical cyclone tracks

The  physical  intensity  of  tropical  cyclones  is 
determined by their wind speeds, which affect 
both coastal and inland areas. Historically, the 
highest concentration of cyclonic wind has been 
in the Western Pacific (Figure 3.15). The weak-
est storms take place near the equator, in their 
first stages of development; over land, as they 
run out of energy; and in the mid-latitudes due 
to the cooler temperature of the water.17 Given 
the concentration of economic assets and popu-
lation along the coasts in many countries, risk is 
heavily influenced by exposure. However, in low 
and middle-income countries the vulnerability of 
building stock is an important risk factor which 
increases in weight in the case of low-intensity 
cyclones (UNISDR, 2011a).

Strong winds and low air pressure in the eye of 
the storm may also cause storm surges up to 10 
metres  high.  In  contrast  to  wind,  storm  surge 
can only contribute to significant damage along 
the  coast,  depending  on  the  slope  of  the  sea-
bed in the area where the cyclone makes landfall 

 (Source: NASA.18)

67

(Graham and Riebeek, 200619). Storm surges can 
be  severely  destructive,  and  losses  are  highly 
dependent on exposure, especially in areas with-
out coastal protection works.

As in the case of earthquakes, the absolute AAL 
from tropical cyclones (wind and storm surge) is 
concentrated in large countries like Japan and 
the United States of America, which have a large 
stock of exposed capital (Figure 3.16). However, 
this is equivalent to only 1 and 2 per cent (respec-
tively) of their capital investment. In contrast, 
while  the AAL  in  the  Philippines  is  less  than  a 
quarter of that of the United States of America, it 
is equivalent to almost 12 per cent of the former’s 
capital investment. With the exception of SIDS, 
the Philippines and Madagascar are the countries 
with the largest proportion of their capital invest-
ment at risk, again highlighting the importance of 
prospective disaster risk management.

Accurate estimates of storm surge risk require 
detailed data on exposure and the morphology 
of the seabed. As such, detailed risk assessments 
are  necessary  in  areas  prone  to  storm  surges, 
such as Belize City (Box 3.2).

Tsunami
The  global  AAL  for  tsunamis  is  estimated  at 
US$530 million. This figure is significantly lower 
than that associated with other hazards due to 
the fact that tsunami impacts are very localized 
along coasts and that while tsunamis are highly 
destructive, they are also highly infrequent.

More  than  80  per  cent  of  tsunami  events  are 
caused by earthquakes. However, other phenom-
ena such as submarine and sub aerial landslides 
or volcanic eruptions can also produce or con-
tribute to tsunami occurrence. For example, the 
1998 Papua New Guinea tsunami, which killed 
2,182 people (EM-DAT, 201420), was caused by a 

Figure 3.16  Top 15 countries: Tropical cyclone AAL in relation to capital investment (excluding SIDS)

 (Source: UNISDR with data from Global Risk Assessment and the World Bank.)

68

Part I - Chapter 3

Box 3.2  Strong wind and storm surge risk in Belize City

In the context of an assessment supported by the Inter-American Development Bank, tropi-
cal  cyclone  (hurricane)  AAL  in  Belize  City  was  estimated  at  US$37  million  (ERN-AL,  2010). 
Through the collection of detailed information on building classes, topography and bathym-
etry, it was possible to identify the areas at risk from both hurricane winds and storm surges.

In the case of storm surge (left-hand map) only low-elevation areas located within a certain distance from the 
shore  are  at  risk,  whereas  wind  hazard  is  distributed  throughout  the  city  (right-hand  map).  These  results 
formed the basis for an emergency response plan devised by the National Emergency Management Organiza-
tion (NEMO). In addition, training activities have been implemented with many institutions to evaluate the 
hazards and risk with a probabilistic approach. 

Tropical cyclone risk from storm surge (AAL by building)

Tropical cyclone risk from strong wind (AAL by building)

The risks were evaluated on the basis of the current level of hazard as well as future scenarios of climate 
change.

 (Source: CIMNE-INGENIAR, 2014.)

69

submarine landslide, which itself was triggered 
by an earthquake. In areas like eastern Indonesia 
(Løvholt et al., 2012 and 2014) and the Caribbe-
an (Harbitz et al., 2012), tsunamis due to land-
slides and volcanic eruptions are more frequent 
and contribute to a significant portion of the risk 
in those regions.

In the open ocean, the speed of tsunami waves 
may exceed 970 km/h. Once tsunamis make land-
fall,  wave  heights  may  reach  30  metres  above 
sea level or more. The speed and the distance 
that  tsunami  waves  travel  inland  depends  on 
the topography of the coastal area and land cov-
er.21  The waves from the Tohoku tsunami of 2011 
in Japan were as high as 10 metres and affected 
more than 400 km of coastline.22

Given that intense tsunamis completely destroy 
rather than damage physical assets in the prox-
imity of the shore, tsunami risk is heavily influ-
enced by exposure. This is reflected in the results 

Figure 3.17  Top 15 countries: Tsunami AAL (excluding SIDS)

 (Source: UNISDR with data from Global Risk Assessment.)

70

Part I - Chapter 3

of the Global Risk Assessment, which show that 
tsunami risk is concentrated in a relatively small 
number of countries (Figure 3.17).

In terms of geographical regions, East Asia and 
the  Pacific  have  the  highest  absolute  tsunami 
AAL by far. Japan in particular has a far higher 
tsunami AAL than any other country.

As tsunami risk constitutes only a small portion 
of multi-hazard risk, it is not directly compara-
ble to social expenditure or capital investment 
in either geographical regions or income groups.

However,  the  potential  impact  of  tsunamis  on 
the economy at the local, national, and even the 
global level cannot be ignored due to the cas-
cading  impacts  that  tsunamis  can  generate  in 
countries where critical facilities such as nucle-
ar power stations are located in coastal areas. 
This fact was highlighted by the Tohoku tsuna-
mi in 2011, which caused about US$130 billion in 
damage to buildings and total of US$210 billion in 
direct economic damage including infrastructure 
and the agriculture sector (GFDRR, 2012a). There 
is a 10 per cent probability that a number of ter-
ritories and countries will lose a significant pro-
portion of their capital stock to tsunami risk over 
a 50-year period (PML500). This includes territo-
ries such as Macau and Hong Kong, where capital 
stock is heavily concentrated along the coastline, 
as well as larger countries such as the Philippines 
or New Zealand (Figure 3.18).

River floods
Floods affect more people worldwide than any 
other hazard. There are many different manifes-
tations of flooding, including flash floods, coast-
al flooding, surface water and ponding floods. In 
this analysis, flood risk23  is calculated only con-
sidering river flooding, and the measure of inten-
sity used is the depth of the water. For frequent 
small-scale floods, risks can be estimated statis-
tically using historical data, but for major floods a 
probabilistic approach is required.

Figure 3.18  Top 15 countries: Tsunami PML500 in relation to capital stock

 (Source: UNISDR with data from Global Risk Assessment and the World Bank.)

While flood risk should be managed through pro-
spective  measures  such  as  land-use  planning, 
the  continued  industrial,  commercial  and  res-
idential  development  on  floodplains,  together 
with climate change, has made flooding a very 
dynamic risk. Corrective measures such as flood 
defences can protect against losses up to a cer-
tain threshold, and countries like Japan and the 
Netherlands  have  made  major  investments  in 
flood protection. However, flood defences may 
encourage further development on floodplains, 
leading to devastating consequences if a low-fre-
quency but high-severity loss above the protec-
tion threshold were to occur. In contrast, flood 
risk in low-income countries often reflects a lack 
of capacity to invest in flood protection.

As the 2011 Chao Phraya River floods in Thailand 
demonstrated, flooding may produce major cor-
related losses that equal those arising from earth-
quakes or tropical cyclones. The Thailand floods 

also  revealed  the  risk  to  global  supply  chains 
when industries are concentrated on floodplains 
(UNISDR, 2013a; CEO Risk Forum, 2012). A recent 
analysis of “hidden hotspots” in emerging mar-
kets revealed that other countries in the world 
present an even greater flood loss potential than 
Thailand (Swiss Re, 2012): China tops the ranking, 
followed by Brazil, Russia and India (Figure 3.19).

Floods also cause major losses in high-income 
countries. While the average annual economic 
damage from floods in the United Kingdom, for 
example, is in the range of US$250 million (Pen-
ning-Rowsell, 2014), the United Kingdom saw the 
second wettest year on record in 2012 (second 
only to 2007), with flood-related losses reaching 
approximately US$1.8 billion. The RMS UK Inland 
Flood Model estimated that nearly half of the UK’s 
expected average annual flood loss comes from 
major river flooding, and the remainder is attrib-
uted  to  small  river  and  stream  flooding,  flash 

71

Figure 3.19  “Flood hot spot” rankings in emerging markets

 (Source: Swiss Re, 2012.)

flooding,  pluvial  flooding  and  localized  heavy 
precipitation (RMS, 2013). The UK government 
itself estimates that around 2.4 million proper-
ties are at risk of riverine and coastal flooding in 
any given year (National Audit Office, 2014).

Flood  risk  contributes  US$104  billion  to  glob-
al AAL. To put this figure into perspective, it is 
equivalent to twice the public health expenditure 
in the Middle East and North Africa or 30 per cent 
of annual public education expenditure in Latin 
America and the Caribbean.

The countries with the highest absolute AAL are 
China, the United States of America and India. 
However, in relation to their capital stock, a dif-
ferent set of countries in South-East Asia rank 
even higher, with Myanmar, Lao People’s Demo-
cratic Republic and Cambodia facing the highest 
relative AAL from riverine floods (Figure 3.20).

Relative to capital investment, many low-income 
and  lower  middle-income  countries  have  high 

levels  of  flood  AAL  in  relation  to  their  capital 
investment  (Figure  3.21)  because  those  coun-
tries have not had the capacity to make the same 
investments  in flood  defences  as  high-income 
countries. For example, the AAL for flooding in 
Myanmar  and  Somalia  represents  over  20  per 
cent of the countries’ capital investment. This 
highlights  the  importance  of  prospective  risk 
management if new capital investment is to be 
protected.

The AAL from floods also represents an impor-
tant proportion of social expenditure. Myanmar, 
for example, faces an AAL that is equivalent to 
around 200 per cent of its total social expenditure 
(Figure 3.22). Lao People’s Democratic Republic, 
Bangladesh, Cambodia and Bhutan are all chal-
lenged with AALs that represent around a third of 
their social expenditure.

This  means  that  floods  represent  a  significant 
challenge to both capital investment and social 
development  in  many  low-income  and  lower 

72

Part I - Chapter 3

Figure 3.20  Top 15 countries: Flood AAL in relation to capital stock (excluding SIDS)

 (Source: UNISDR with data from Global Risk Assessment and the World Bank.)

Figure 3.21  Top 15 countries: Flood AAL in relation to capital investment (excluding SIDS) 

 (Source: UNISDR with data from Global Risk Assessment and the World Bank.)

73

Figure 3.22  Top 15 countries: Flood AAL in relation to social expenditure (excluding SIDS)

 (Source: UNISDR with data from the Global Risk Assessment and the World Bank.)

middle-income countries, which are not able to 
make the necessary investments in flood defenc-
es.  Increased  investment  in  flood  risk  man-
agement in these countries will therefore be a 
precondition for achieving the Sustainable Devel-
opment Goals.

74

Part I - Chapter 3

3.4 Small island developing states 

at risk

Due to their size, location and characteristics of 
their  economies,  SIDS  are  particularly  chal-
lenged by disaster risk. In relation to their capi-
tal  stock,  investment  and  social  expenditure, 
they face the highest potential losses associated 
with several hazards.

Small island developing states (SIDS)24 face dispro-
portionally high risks. For example, SIDS would 
be expected to lose 20 times more of their capi-
tal stock each year compared to Europe and Cen-
tral Asia. Relative to capital investment or social 
expenditure, SIDS also top all of the regional risk 
rankings. Their combined AAL is equivalent to 10 
per cent of their total annual capital investment, 
compared to less than 2 per cent in East Asia and 
the Pacific and around 1.2 per cent in Europe and 
Central Asia (see Figure 3.8 in Section 3.2 above). 
Similarly, the AAL in SIDS is equivalent to almost 

Figure 3.23  Top 15 SIDS: Multi-hazard AAL in relation to social expenditure

 (Source: UNISDR with data from Global Risk Assessment and the World Bank.)

20 per cent of their total social expenditure, com-
pared to only 1.19 per cent in North America and 
less than 1 per cent in Europe and Central Asia.

Individual countries such as the Bahamas and 
Antigua  and  Barbuda  have  an  extraordinari-
ly high ratio of AAL to social expenditure (Figure 
3.23). In five SIDS, the AAL is equivalent to over 
100 per cent of what these countries are currently 
able or willing to spend on education, health and 
social protection.

In the case of earthquakes, the AAL in Trinidad 
and Tobago represents over 20 per cent of the 
islands’ capital investment, and in Saint Kitts and 
Nevis the figure is over 10 per cent. Over a 50-year 
period, both countries face a 10 per cent proba-
bility of losing around 27 per cent of their total 
capital stock in an earthquake (Figure 3.24).

In the case of tropical cyclones, nearly all of the 
countries with the highest AAL relative to capital 

Figure 3.24 Top 15 SIDS: Earthquake PML500 in relation to 
capital stock

 (Source: UNISDR with data from Global Risk Assessment and the World Bank.)

75

investment, capital stock and social expenditure 
are SIDS (Figure 3.25).

Due to high coastal exposure, storm surges make 
a major contribution to tropical cyclone AAL in 
SIDS. In contrast, it tends to represent only a small 
proportion  of  the  overall  cyclone  AAL  in  large 
countries, where winds can affect not only coast-
al but extensive inland areas. While the Cayman 
Islands and Antigua and Barbuda have the high-
est relative AAL for cyclone wind, the highest rela-
tive risk with respect to storm surge is found in the 
Bahamas, Montserrat and Dominica (Figure 3.26).

In  terms  of  tsunami  risk,  SIDS  such  as  Tonga, 
Palau, Solomon Islands and Vanuatu also rank at 
the top in terms of average annual loss relative to 
their capital stock. While the AAL may seem rela-
tively low in comparison to other hazards (Figure 
3.27), tsunami risk levels are significant in both 
absolute and relative terms in coastal zones that 
are directly exposed. As a great deal of critical 
infrastructure and primary transport facilities 
are  located  in  coastal  zones  in  SIDS  (UNISDR, 
2013a), tsunami impact can be significant.

Figure 3.25  Top 15 countries: Tropical cyclone AAL in relation to social expenditure, capital investment and capital stock

 (Source: UNISDR with data from Global Risk Assessment and the World Bank.)

76

Part I - Chapter 3

Figure 3.26  Top 15 SIDS: Tropical cyclone AAL (storm surge and cyclone wind) in relation to capital stock

 (Source: UNISDR with data from Global Risk Assessment.)

Figure 3.27  Top 15 SIDS: Tsunami PML500 in relation to capital stock

 (Source: UNISDR with data from Global Risk Assessment.)

77

3.5 The additionality of climate 

change

While climate change can result in lower expect-
ed losses in selected regions, for some parts of 
the world, changing hazard patterns and higher 
levels of vulnerability due to climate change are 
expected to increase overall losses. In the Carib-
bean, these losses will be significant.

The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
(IPCC) has highlighted that there is low confidence 
in any observed long-term (i.e., 40 years or more) 
increases in tropical cyclone activity (intensity, 
frequency  and  duration),  after  accounting  for 
past changes in observing capabilities. It is likely 

that the global frequency of tropical cyclones will 
either decrease or remain essentially unchanged. 
However, average tropical cyclone maximum wind 
speed is likely to increase, although increases may 
not occur in all ocean basins (IPCC, 2012).

In the Caribbean, the risk associated with tropical 
cyclone winds was recalculated using possible 
future cyclone trajectories in the North Atlantic 
basin simulated using climate change scenarios 
up to 2055 (CIMNE-INGENIAR, 2014a) but assum-
ing constant exposure and vulnerability.

In most countries, the AAL increases under the 
climate  change  scenario  (Figure  3.28).  For  the 
Caribbean  basin  as  a  whole,  climate  change 
contributes an additional US$1.4 billion to the 
expected average annual losses associated with 

Figure 3.28  AAL from tropical cyclone wind for Caribbean and Central American countries, with and without climate change

 (Source: CIMNE-INGENIAR, 2014.)

78

Part I - Chapter 3

wind  damage  alone,  excluding  changes  in  the 
AAL associated with storm surge due to sea lev-
el rise. Given that Caribbean countries are collec-
tively responsible for only a small proportion of 
global greenhouse gas emissions, the addition-
al AAL of US$1.4 billion raises important ques-
tions regarding accountability for risk generation 
and regarding who should pay for these addition-
al losses.

In some countries, the additionality of climate 
change is very significant. One example is Anguil-
la, where the AAL attributable to cyclone wind 
doubles  with  climate  change,  or  Trinidad  and 
Tobago, which faces a fivefold increase due to 
climate change. In contrast, Mexico would actu-
ally see a reduction in AAL, highlighting that the 
effects of climate change are not evenly distrib-
uted but will affect different countries in differ-
ent ways.

3.6  

Volcanic risk

 

 

 

New  results  from  volcanic  risk  assessments 
show  that  while  expected  losses  may  be  lower 
than those from other hazards at a global scale, 
in affected regions, they can be significant. Fur-
ther,  the  impacts  from  volcanic  ash  fall  can  af-
fect economic activity and the environment far 
beyond the locality of the hazard event.

There are 1,551 volcanoes on land that are known 
to have been active in the last 10,000 years (the 
Holocene), with a total of 9,444 eruptions. Since 
1950, an average of 31 volcanoes have erupted 
each year. Most active volcanoes are located at 
the boundaries between tectonic plates, where 
the earth’s crust is either created or consumed 
(GVM, 2014a).

Volcanoes are associated with multiple hazards, 
including pyroclastic flows and surges; volcanic 

ash and tephra (large quantities of intensely frag-
mented rock); ballistics (rocks ejected by volca-
nic explosions); lahars and floods (fast-moving 
and destructive mixtures of volcanic debris and 
water);  debris  avalanches,  landslides  and  tsu-
namis; volcanic gases and aerosols; lava flows; 
earthquakes; and lightning. Each hazard affects 
people, agriculture, the built environment and 
transport (e.g. aviation) in very different ways. 
For  example,  people  living  close  to  a  volcano 
may be at direct risk from pyroclastic flows, ava-
lanches or lahars. At the other extreme, volcanic 
ash clouds in the atmosphere and ash fall on the 
ground can have impacts hundreds to thousands 
of kilometres from their source.

At present, more than 800 million people in 86 
countries  live  within  100  km  of  a  volcano  that 
could potentially erupt (GVM, 2014a). The coun-
tries with the greatest number of people exposed 
are Indonesia, the Philippines and Japan. Howev-
er, in some small countries, a higher proportion 
of the population is exposed, for example over 90 
per cent in Guatemala and Iceland (GVM, 2014a).

Five major eruptions in historical time dominate 
the  mortality  records  directly  associated  with 
volcanoes. All five major events have occurred 
since the late 1700s, with mortality ranging from 
15,000  to  60,000  per  event.25  However,  volca-
nic eruptions have also contributed indirectly to 
severe mortality, for example by inducing climate 
variability in other regions and thus causing fam-
ine (UNISDR, 2011a).

According to the Population Exposure Index,26  
only  4  per  cent  of  volcanoes  in  the  world 
account for 61 per cent of the exposed popula-
tion worldwide. The top ten “high exposure” vol-
canoes are concentrated in Indonesia, Mexico, 
the Philippines and Japan. Based on the num-
ber of active volcanoes in the country, the haz-
ard  level27  posed  and  the  size  of  the  exposed 
population living within 30 km of each volcano, 
around 95 per cent of the population exposed to 

79

volcanic hazard is concentrated in six countries: 
Indonesia, the Philippines, Japan, Mexico, Ethi-
opia, Guatemala and Italy. Around two-thirds of 
the total exposed population is concentrated in 
Indonesia.

For example, in Naples, Italy (Figure 3.29), over 
2 million people live in close proximity to three 
active volcanoes (Vesuvius, Campi Flegrei and 
Ischia).

Figure 3.29  Satellite image of the Naples area

 (Source: GVM, 2014a.)

Relatively small countries, such as SIDS (Figure 
3.30), have the highest proportion of their popu-
lations exposed to volcanic hazard.

However, given that most volcano-related mor-
tality has occurred in a small number of erup-
tions, volcanic disaster risk is highly idiosyncratic 
and difficult to model. For example, the relative-
ly modest eruption of Nevado del Ruiz in Colom-
bia in 1985 resulted in the death of more than 
23,000 people in towns up to 45 km away as a 
result of lahars.

Despite population growth, the number of fatal-
ities per eruption has declined dramatically in 

80

Part I - Chapter 3

the last few decades, suggesting that mortality 
has been reduced thanks to improved volcano 
monitoring, hazard assessment and awareness, 
early  warning,  forecasts,  communication  and 
preparedness  around  specific  volcanoes.  In 
fact,  it  is  estimated  that  such  measures  have 
saved about 50,000 lives over the last century 
(Auker et al., 2013). However, some “high expo-
sure” volcanoes remain unmonitored. For exam-
ple, there are 5.7 million people living within 10 
km of Mexico’s Michoacán-Guanajuato volcanic 
field, which currently has no dedicated ground 
monitoring system.

Economic loss risk from volcanic eruption
Volcanic eruptions are associated with increas-
ingly large economic impacts. For example, the 
losses from the November 2010 eruption of Mera-
pi in Indonesia are estimated at US$3.12 billion 
(Surono et al., 2012). The 2010 eruption of the 
Eyjafjallajökull volcano in Iceland caused serious 
disruptions to air traffic in the North Atlantic and 
Europe as fine volcanic ash in the atmosphere 
drifted  thousands  of  kilometres  from  the  vol-
cano.  The  resulting  global  economic  losses 
from  this  modest-sized  eruption  accumulated 
to about US$1.7 billion for the aviation industry 
alone (UNISDR, 2013a) and have been estimat-
ed to reach a total of US$5 billion including the 
effects on global businesses and supply chains 
(Ragona et al., 2011).

Volcanic ash is the most widespread of all vol-
canic  hazards.  Volcanic  eruptions  generate 
convective plumes of gas, ash and rock frag-
ments  which  can  spread  over  hundreds  of 
kilometres, depending on the size of the erup-
tion and the speed and direction of prevailing 
winds.  Depending  on  the  intensity  of  volca-
nic ash fall (i.e. from 1 mm to 200 mm) and the 
exposed environment, impacts may be diverse 
and range from traffic and aviation disruption 
to health problems, soil and water contamina-
tion, crop failure, damage to machinery, and col-
lapsing roofs.

are higher in smaller countries like Vanuatu and 
Papua New Guinea (Figure 3.32).28

The probability of ash fall can be estimated based 
on  the  geographical  distribution  of  volcanoes 
and their eruption potential as well as the pre-
vailing winds in different seasons (Figure 3.31).

Risk  from  ash  fall  can  be  estimated  using  the 
same approach as for other hazards. In the Asia-
Pacific region, Japan has the highest AAL associ-
ated with structural damage due to volcanic ash 
at more than US$11 billion, followed by Indonesia 
with almost US$6 billion. However, relative losses 

Figure 3.30  Top 20 countries and territories: relative population exposed to volcanic hazard

 (Source: UNISDR, based on data from GVM, 2014a)

81

Figure 3.31  Global map of probabilistic ash fall hazard and regional maps for South-East Asia and Central America

Note: Displayed as the average recurrence interval of ash fall thicknesses exceeding 1 mm.

 (Source: GVM, 2014b.)

Figure 3.32  Volcanic ash fall AAL in relation to capital investment, Asia-Pacific region29

 (Source: UNISDR, based on data from Geoscience Australia, 2014 and CIMNE-INGENIAR, 2014.)

82

Part I - Chapter 3

3.7  

Agricultural drought risk

 

 

In  several  countries,  losses  from  agricultural 
drought not only pose risks to the national econ-
omy but can also lead to devastating effects on 
the rural population. With climate change, pat-
terns of agricultural drought can be expected to 
change.

Agricultural drought is probably the most social-
ly constructed of all disaster risks (UNISDR, 2011a). 
Besides insufficient rainfall, agricultural drought 
is associated with other factors such as tempera-
ture and wind, which influence evaporation, tran-
spiration and the soil’s capacity to hold moisture. 
However, while agricultural drought hazard occurs 
when  there  is  insufficient  moisture  in  the  soil 
to meet the needs of a particular crop at a given 
time and location, it is also associated with factors 
such as land degradation, inappropriate land-use 
and cropping patterns, over-extraction of ground 
water, and overgrazing. Low-income rural house-
holds and communities may have no alternative 
but to farm or graze marginal, drought-prone and 
degraded land. And with little capacity to mobilize 
assets, they are vulnerable to even small shortfalls 
in production and have low levels of resilience.

The  direct  impacts  of  agricultural  drought  are 
reduced crop, rangeland and forest productivity, 
reduced water levels, increased fire hazard, dam-
age to wildlife and fish habitats, and increased 
livestock  and  wildlife  mortality.  The  indirect 
impacts include reduced income from agricul-
ture and increased food and timber prices, which 
in turn lead to wider impacts such as malnutrition 
(especially  among  children),  increased  unem-
ployment, migration, reduced tax revenues and 
the risk of foreclosures on bank loans to farmers. 
Although  agricultural  droughts  can  persist  for 
several years, even a short, intense drought can 
cause significant damage to the local economy 
(FAO, 2013a).

In  sub-Saharan  Africa,  only  1  per  cent  of  the 
farmed area is irrigated (Ward et al., 2014), while 
52 per cent of land is degraded to some degree 
(Erian et al., 2014). Despite increasing productivi-
ty, the total productivity gap between the region 
and developing countries as a whole is still wid-
ening (Figure 3.33).

Figure 3.33  Total factor productivity (TFP) index

 (Source: USDA Economic Research Service.)

In many low-income countries in this region, agri-
culture  remains  a  critical  economic  sector.  In 
many of those countries where economic activity 
and employment are concentrated in agriculture, 
such as Eritrea and Ethiopia, a significant propor-
tion of the population is undernourished, and a 
significant proportion of the area covered by veg-
etation is affected by high levels of land degrada-
tion and agricultural drought hazard (Table 3.2).

In  these  countries,  agricultural  drought  not 
only  poses  risks  to  the  national  economy  but 
also  leads  to  devastating  effects  on  the  rural 
population.

In Malawi, for example, agriculture is responsible 
for around 30 per cent of GDP. Estimated annual 
losses due to drought represent about 1 per cent 

83

Table 3.2  Agriculture, land degradation and drought in sub-Saharan Africa

 Note: Where data is not included in the table, it is because no data was readily available.
 (Source: UNISDR with data from FAO, 2014 and Erian et al., 2014.)

of GDP, and the probable maximum loss (PML) 
from  a  1-in-25-year  drought  is  equal  to  10  per 
cent of GDP. In addition, a 1-in-25-year drought 
would exacerbate income poverty by 17 per cent, 
which would mean an additional 2.1 million peo-
ple falling below the poverty line (World Bank et 
al., no date).

The picture is equally critical in West Africa. Mali, 
for example, faces a 10 per cent probability of 
suffering production losses amounting to US$48 

million or larger in 50 years for millet alone (Fig-
ure  3.34).  In  Senegal,  millet  production  losses 
for the same return period are US$15 million or 
more.

According to the IPCC, “climate change is very 
likely to have an overall negative effect on yields 
of major cereal crops across Africa, with strong 
regional variability in the degree of yield reduc-
tion” (IPCC, 2014). However, this regional variabil-
ity would be considerable and may even involve 

84

Part I - Chapter 3

increases in maize production in eastern Africa 
(IPCC 2014).

In Kenya, Malawi and Niger, income from agri-
culture respectively contributes 30 per cent, 30 
per cent, and 38 per cent to each country’s GDP. 
Estimated average annual losses (AAL) vary with 
and without near-term climate change in all three 

countries (Figure 3.35). While maize production 
in Malawi is expected to face higher AAL with cli-
mate change, Kenya and Niger show reduced AAL 
figures  for  the  same  climate  change  scenario, 
both in terms of absolute values and as a percent-
age of their GDP for maize and millet production, 
respectively.

Figure 3.34   Probability of production loss in West Africa

 (Source: Jayanthi, 2014.)

Figure 3.35   Drought AAL and PML100, with and without climate change

 (Source: Jayanthi, 2014.)

85

Figure 3.36   Malawi maize production loss in tons with respect to 2007 countrywide production of maize

 (Source: Jayanthi, 2014.)

Table 3.3   Estimated maize production losses in Malawi with and without climate change

 (Source: Jayanthi, 2014.)

For example, losses in maize production from a 
1-in-25-year drought in Malawi are estimated to 
be 23 per cent higher in 2016-2035 than in 1981-
2010 based on near-future climate change sce-
narios (Figure 3.36).

Climate change could result in significant addi-
tional losses in maize production (Table 3.3) and 
potentially push countries like Malawi over a resil-
ience threshold in terms of the national economy 
as well as poverty.

86

Part I - Chapter 3

In contrast, climate change could have a positive 
impact on maize and millet yields in Kenya and 
Niger, respectively (Jayanthi, 2014). The results 
also  show  that  the  impact  of  climate  change 
could be different depending on the intensity of 
drought.

The  agricultural  drought  risk  to  maize  in  the 
Kenya  Rift  Valley,  for  example,  is  forecast  to 
decline in the near future (2016-2035) due to the 
impact of climate change. In the climate change 
scenario, PML100 (probable maximum loss cor-
responding to a 1-in-100-year drought) would fall 

from 866,440 tons (baseline) to 351,225 tons. The 
average annual loss (AAL) is thus projected to be 
48,463 tons (1.78 per cent of the total maize pro-
duction in the Rift Valley Province in 2012), a full 
38 per cent lower than the baseline AAL of 78,190 
tons (2.86 per cent of the total maize production 
in Rift Valley Province in 2012; see Table 3.4).

to the observed losses for the 1981-2010 period, 
losses from more severe and infrequent droughts 
would  be  significantly  lower  (Figure  3.37).  For 
example, a crop loss of 390,000 tons with a cur-
rent probability of 1 in 20 years would have an 
occurrence probability of 1 in 100 years under the 
near-term climate change scenario.

While  losses  due  to  frequent  droughts  (return 
periods shorter than 5 years) would be similar 

Table 3.4   Estimated maize production losses in the Rift Valley, Kenya with and without climate change

 (Source: Jayanthi, 2014.)

Figure 3.37  Probable losses in maize production in the Rift Valley, Kenya with and without climate change

 (Source: Jayanthi, 2014.)

87

near the equator can exist—as witnessed during the Category 5 
Typhoon Bopha in Mindanao in 2012—tropical cyclones do not 
typically occur at those latitudes. This is because of the Coriolis 
Effect and the fact that storms rotate clockwise in the southern 
hemisphere and anticlockwise in the northern hemisphere with-
out crossing over.
18  http://www.earthobservatory.nasa.gov/IOTD/view.php?id 
=7079. 
19  Hurricanes:  The  Greatest  Storms  on  Ear th.  http://
earthobservatory.nasa.gov/Features/Hurricanes/ (accessed 10 
December 2014).
20  http://www.emdat.be.
21  http://www.ready.gov/tsunamis.
22  http://www.jma.go.jp/jma/en/Activities/jishintsunami/
jishintsunami_low2.pdf.
23  The provisional results presented here give an overview of the 
risks associated with river flooding. Factors other than the depth 
of the water also have a considerable influence on loss, which 
means that there is greater uncertainty compared with other haz-
ards.
24  Most SIDS are located in the region of Latin America and the 
Caribbean or East Asia and the Pacific. 
25  The  five  historical  eruptions  responsible  for  the  majority 
of fatalities are: Tambora, Indonesia in 1815 (60,000 fatalities); 
Krakatau, Indonesia in 1883 (36,417 fatalities); Pelée, Martinique 
in 1902 (28,800 fatalities); Nevado del Ruiz,  Colombia in 1985 
(23,187 fatalities); Unzen, Japan in 1792 (14,524 fatalities).
26  Developed by Aspinall et al. (2011), the Population Exposure 
Index (PEI) is one of the prominent indices used in assessing vol-
cano risk. it is based on the population within 10, 30, and 100 km 
of a volcano, which is then weighted according to evidence on 
historical distributions of fatalities within a given distance from 
volcanoes. The PEI is divided into seven levels, from sparsely to 
very densely populated areas. The results of the index show that 
just 4 per cent of volcanoes account for 60 per cent of the total 
population exposed.
27  A  Volcano  Hazard  Index  (VHI)  has  also  been  developed  to 
characterize the hazard level of volcanoes based on their record-
ed eruption frequency, modal and maximum recorded volcanic 
explosivity levels, and the occurrence of pyroclastic density cur-
rents, lahars and lava flows. Only half of the historically active vol-
canoes have sufficiently detailed eruptive histories to calculate 
VHI.
28  For this loss estimate, a simplified methodology emulating 
volcanic ash fall for multi-scale analysis was used for probabilis-
tic hazard modelling of volcanic ash fall in the Asia-Pacific region 
(different from the model used in the production of maps in Figure 
3.35).
29  It should be noted that these values only represent the losses 
from structural damage, which are only a fraction of potential 
economic losses that can be caused by ash fall. This also does not 
include the losses to the aviation industry from airborne ash.

Notes

1  The global AAL for earthquake and tropical cyclone wind has 
changed  compared  to  the  figures  published  in  GAR13  due  to 
changes in the methodologies for seismic and tropical cyclone 
hazard assessments. Details on the improvements to the meth-
odology can be found in Annex 1 and in CIMNE-INGENIAR, 2014.
2  Persons aged 15 to 64 based on data from the United Nations; 
see http://esa.un.org/unpd/wpp/index.htm.
3  World Bank definition of poverty line: those living on less than 
US$1.25 per day.
4  Calculations based on data from the EIA: http://www.eia.gov.
5  Based on United States Government census data: https://www.
census.gov/hhes/families/data/cps2012.html.
6  Based on data from the World Bank: http://data.worldbank.
org/.
7  This is defined as armed criminal violence in situations that are 
not identified as conflict or armed conflict.
8  For example, models from the Global Earthquake model 
(http://www.globalquakemodel.org)  or Deltares (http://www.
deltares.nl/en).
9  The Global Risk Assessment was conducted in a partnership of 
20 institutions. The probabilistic risk model for all hazards was 
developed and run by CIMNE and INGENIAR LTDA on the CAPRA 
modelling platform. The exposure model at the global scale was 
developed by UNEP-GRID and CIMNE in collaboration with WAP-
MERR, EU-JRC, Kokusai Kogyo and Beijing Normal University. The 
hazard models were developed by CIMNE and INGENIAR LTDA (cy-
clones and earthquakes, with inputs from GEM for earthquakes), 
CIMA and UNEP-GRID (floods), NGI and Geoscience Australia (tsu-
namis and volcanoes), and GVM and Geoscience Australia (volca-
noes). Vulnerability was modelled by CIMNE and INGENIAR LTDA 
for Latin America and the Caribbean, and by Geoscience Australia 
for the Asia-Pacific region. In other regions, HAZUS vulnerabil-
ity functions developed by USGS were used. Agricultural drought 
risk assessments were undertaken by ACSAD and FEWSNET. Peer 
reviews were conducted by WMO (hydro-meteorological hazard 
models), UNESCO (geohazard models), and an ad-hoc group of 
seismic hazard and exposure experts. For more details on part-
ners and their contributions, see Annex 1.
10  http://www.ecapra.org/.
11  Throughout this chapter, capital investment refers to gross 
fixed capital formation (GFCF) based on data from 2013.
12  Capital stock refers to a country’s building stock, compris-
ing residential and commercial buildings, schools and hospitals, 
based on the exposure model (see Annex 1 for more details).
13  All regions are according to World Bank country and regional 
classification;  see  http://data.worldbank.org/about/country-
and-lending-groups.
14  See Annex 1 for full risk results by geographical region.
15  http://data.worldbank.org/.
16  Please see Annex 1 for more details on hazard-specific risk re-
sults and graphs depicting key economic and social development 
metrics.
17  The GAR15 risk model considers only tropical cyclones (i.e. 
hurricanes on the Saffir Simpson Scale), including strong winds 
and storm surges. Other tropical circulations, such as tropical de-
pressions or tropical storms, are not considered. These kinds of 
events usually involve lower wind speeds, and therefore effects 
such as strong winds and storm surge are usually not present in 
those cases. Thus, although rare but potentially intense storms 

88

Part I - Chapter 3

Chapter 4
Extensive risk

89

Unlike intensive risk, extensive risk is more closely associated with inequality and poverty than 
with earthquake fault lines and cyclone tracks. In many cases, the hazard, exposure and vulner-
ability  are  simultaneously  configured  through  the  underlying  risk  drivers.    This  also  makes 
extensive risk an important poverty attribute.  

4.1  

 

 

Increasing extensive risk

 

Extensive  disaster  risk  is  magnified  by  drivers 
such as badly planned and managed urban de-
velopment, environmental degradation, poverty 
and inequality, vulnerable rural livelihoods and 
weak governance. As a result, it continues to in-
crease.

Extensive risk refers to the risk layer of high-fre-
quency, low-severity losses. In general, this lay-
er is not captured by global risk modelling, nor 
are the losses reported internationally. One key 
feature of the GAR (UNISDR, 2009a, 2011a, 2013a) 
has been to highlight the contingent liabilities 
associated with this risk layer, which tend to be 
absorbed by low-income households and com-
munities, small businesses, and local and nation-
al governments, and which are a critical factor in 
poverty (UNISDR, 2009a).

Extensive  risk  manifests  as  large  numbers  of 
recurrent,  small-scale,  low-severity  disasters 
which are mainly associated with flash floods, 
landslides, urban flooding, storms, fires and oth-
er  localized  events.  In  addition,  damage  from 
electrical  storms  and  lightning  is  increasingly 
contributing to loss from extensive risk due to 
wildfires.1 

Extensive  disaster  risk  is  magnified  by  drivers 
such as badly planned and managed urban devel-
opment,  environmental  degradation,  poverty 
and inequality, vulnerable rural livelihoods and 
weak governance. This risk layer is characteristic 
of informal urban settlements and low-income 
rural areas (UNISDR, 2009a).

90

Part I - Chapter 4

In cities, for example, poverty forces low-income 
households to occupy areas of low land value that 
may be exposed to floods, landslides and other 
hazards (Wamsler, 2014). Informal settlements 
are  usually  characterized  by  highly  vulnerable 
housing and a deficit of risk-reducing infrastruc-
ture such as drainage (Mitlin and Satterthwaite, 
2013). At the same time, speculative urban devel-
opment, which can lead to the paving of green 
areas  in  rapidly  expanding  cities  and  subsid-
ence due to the over-extraction of groundwater, 
may also increase the frequency and severity of 
urban flooding (UNISDR, 2013a). Unlike intensive 
risk, extensive risk is less closely associated with 
earthquake fault lines and cyclone tracks than 
with inequality and poverty. In many cases, the 
hazard, exposure and vulnerability are simulta-
neously constructed by the underlying risk driv-
ers. For example, all of Panama’s municipal areas 
report extensive disaster losses even though the 
country  lies  south  of  the  Caribbean  hurricane 
belt and earthquakes are infrequent.

Given  that  extensive  and  intensive  risk  simply 
refer  to  different  risk  layers,  any  quantitative 
threshold between them is arbitrary. The GAR 
has used a statistically determined loss thresh-
old  (Box  4.1)  within  which  a minimum  number 
of  disasters  accumulate  the  maximum  possi-
ble  mortality  and  economic  damage  (UNISDR, 
2011a, Annex II), though it would be equally val-
id to determine a threshold on the basis of return 
periods.

At  the  time  when  the  HFA  was  adopted,  the 
mortality, physical damage and economic loss 
from extensive risk had not been accounted for 
in national or international reports, except in a 
number of Latin American countries.2 As a result, 

Box 4.1   Intensive vs extensive risk: two different footprints

The variables used to define the threshold between intensive and extensive disaster losses are mortality and 
housing destruction. Statistically, the threshold is fixed at:

Mortality: less than 30 people killed (extensive); 30 or more killed (intensive); or

Housing destruction: less than 600 houses destroyed (extensive); 600 or more houses destroyed (intensive).

This threshold has proved robust even as the universe of national disaster databases continues to grow.

As the case of Indonesia shows, extensive and intensive disasters have very different footprints (Figure 4.1).

Figure 4.1   The different footprints of extensive vs intensive disaster loss in Indonesia, 1990-2013

 (Source: UNISDR with data from Indonesian national loss database.)

91

Box 4.2  Understanding loss and risk from the bottom up: national loss accounting

To uncover extensive risks, an increasing number of countries around the world are adopting a simple and 
well-defined methodology to report, analyse and display disaster occurrence and losses at the local level 
through a standard definition of hazards, impacts and other indicators.3 Because the loss data is captured at 
the level of local administrative units, this makes it possible to record losses associated with huge numbers 
of small extensive disasters that are not internationally reported and thus do not appear in other disaster 
databases.

In a pattern that resembles the growth of computer processing power, the number of countries systemati-
cally collecting disaster loss data has roughly doubled every two years since these efforts began in Latin 
America in the 1990s. 

GAR15  features  data  collected  using  the  same  methodology  and  parameters  in  82  countries  and  3  states 
(Tamil Nadu and Odisha in India, and Zanzibar in Tanzania).

Countries that have published data sets in the last two years, including: Comoros, Madagascar, Mauritius and 
Seychelles in the Indian Ocean; Morocco and Tunisia in North Africa; Niger, Senegal, Sierra Leone and Togo in 
West Africa; Barbados, Grenada, Saint Lucia, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Vincent, and Trinidad and Tobago in 
the Caribbean; Cambodia, Pakistan and the State of Palestine in Asia; and Albania, Serbia, Spain and Turkey 
in Europe (Figure 4.2). 

Figure 4.2  Increase in number of national loss databases featured in Global Assessment Reports

 (Source: UNISDR with data from national loss databases.)

92

Part I - Chapter 4

per cent resulting from weather-related events. 
The  economic  losses  from  extensive  disasters 
account for more than 45 per cent of total accu-
mulated loss.

Across these countries, extensive disasters are 
responsible for only 14 per cent of total disaster 
mortality. However, since 1990 extensive mortal-
ity has increased almost fourfold in those coun-
tries  that  have  consistent  data  spanning  that 
period (Figure 4.3), and the trend is statistically 
significant. 

this risk layer remained largely invisible. However, 
since 2007, a sustained effort to assist countries 
in systematically recording local disaster losses 
(UNISDR, 2009a, 2011a, 2013a) has generated sys-
tematic and comparable evidence regarding the 
scale of extensive risk from over 80 countries (Box 
4.2). Given that 95 per cent of these databases 
have been built using a comparable approach and 
methodology, it is possible to analyse these local 
records at a global level of observation.

Table 4.1 shows that 99.1 per cent of the local-lev-
el loss reports from these 85 countries and states 
are manifestations of extensive risk, with 96.4 

Table 4.1  National disaster loss data for 85 countries and states4

 (Source: UNISDR with data from national loss databases.)

Figure 4.3  Extensive mortality, 1990-2013 (65 countries, 2 states)5

 (Source: UNISDR with data from national loss databases.)

93

A similar trend can be observed among small-
er-scale disasters in global loss data sets (Fig-
ure 4.4). There is a statistically significant trend 
towards increasing mortality in events with few-
er than 100 deaths.

While extensive risk is responsible for only a small 
percentage of mortality, it is associated with a far 
more significant proportion of morbidity and dis-
placement (Figure 4.6), both of which feed direct-
ly back into poverty.

Extensive disaster mortality is also increasing rel-
ative to population size (Figure 4.5).

Extensive  risk  critically  erodes  development 
assets. Reports show that the majori ty of damage 

Figure 4.4  Internationally reported global disaster mortality (events with fewer than 100 deaths)

 (Source: UNISDR with data from EM-DAT.)

Figure 4.5  Extensive disaster mortality relative to population (65 countries, 2 states)

 (Source: UNISDR with data from national disaster loss databases.)

94

Part I - Chapter 4

and losses since 1990 have been associated with 
extensive disasters in those countries with con-
sistent data sets (Figure 4.7).

This makes extensive risk a central concern for 
the low-income households and small business-
es that depend on public infrastructure and for 
the  local  governments  that  provide  it.  These 

reported losses all show statistically significant 
upward trends from 1990 onward (Figure 4.8). In 
part, these trends reflect improved reporting in 
some countries. However, upon closer analysis, 
this bias has only a low to moderate influence on 
the overall trends.6 

Figure 4.6  Proportion of injured and displaced people reported in extensive disasters (65 countries, 2 states)

 (Source: UNISDR with data from national loss databases.)

Figure 4.7  Percentage of damage and loss from extensive and intensive disaster events (65 countries, 2 states)

 (Source: UNISDR with data from national loss databases.)

95

Figure 4.8  Reported damage from extensive disasters to housing, education and health facilities, 
and agricultural production (65 countries, 2 states)

 (Source: UNISDR with data from national loss databases.)

4.2 Undermining development 

capacities and gains

Losses from extensive disasters are responsible 
for  most  disaster  morbidity  and  displacement, 
and  represent  an  ongoing  erosion  of  develop-
ment assets. This presents a particular challenge 
to the achievement of development goals in ar-
eas  and  regions  that  already  experience  social 
inequality and exclusion.

Extensive  risk  particularly  challenges  the 
achievement of development goals in areas and 
regions already characterized by social inequal-
ity  and  exclusion.  The  deficit  of  infrastructure 
in  these  areas  is  already  an  underlying  driv-
er of vulnerability and disaster risk and weak-
ens resilience. The loss of this infrastructure in 

96

Part I - Chapter 4

disasters further aggravates the situation, gen-
erating a vicious cycle. For example, a deficit of 
primary health facilities increases the vulnerabil-
ity of low-income households that suffer flood-
ing. Households with poor health are likely to be 
less resilient to disaster loss, and the damage or 
destruction of those facilities in disasters further 
compounds the problem.

The economic value of these social assets is sig-
nificant. While the economic losses from intensive 
disasters are usually evaluated by governments 
or international organizations and insured losses 
are assessed by the insurance industry, the eco-
nomic cost of extensive risk is largely unaccount-
ed for and ultimately reabsorbed into poverty. 
Estimates of the cost of those unreported disas-
ters  highlight  a  growing  and  largely  unknown 

economic  loss  since  1990  as  well  as  an  over-
looked poverty factor.

In  2012,  EM-DAT  reported  economic  losses  of 
US$157  billion,  an  estimate  that  is  lower  than 
those  published  by  Swiss  Re  (US$186  billion), 
Munich Re (US$160 billion) and Aon (US$200 bil-
lion). If the economic cost of assets lost in exten-
sive  disasters  in  82  countries  (Figure  4.9)  is 
extrapolated  globally,  direct  economic  losses 
would be around 60 per cent higher than those 
internationally reported by EM DAT, implying a 
total of around US$250 billion for 2012.

This total loss represents 0.33 per cent of global 
GDP, 1.4 per cent of global capital investment and 
an annual loss of more than US$35 per capita.7 
For those 1.4 billion people living below the pov-
erty line with an income under US$1.25 per day,8 
the loss is equivalent to almost 8 per cent of their 
annual income.

In  particular,  such  losses  represent  a  serious 
erosion of public investment in some of those 
countries with the least capacity to invest. For 
example,  the  average  historical  annual  loss-
es from disasters in Madagascar since 2001 are 
equivalent to around 75 per cent of annual aver-
age public investment in the same period;9 in El 
Salvador, they amount to almost 60 per cent, and 
in Vanuatu they exceed 40 per cent.

Chapter 2 showed how countries have partial-
ly  succeeded  in  reducing  mortality  in  inten-
sive disasters through improvements in disaster 
management.  In  contrast,  the  increasing  level 
of extensive risk shows how countries have not 
been able to address the underlying risk drivers. 
Increasing risk at the local level is the necessary 
counterfactual to the success in reducing disas-
ter mortality in some countries. It is in reducing 
losses in the social and economic assets of commu-
nities where countries have gained the least trac-
tion in the HFA.

Figure 4.9  Economic losses reported internationally and additional losses reported nationally in 82 countries, 1990-2013

 (Source: EM-DAT and national loss databases.)

97

Increases  in  extensive  risk  threaten  efforts  to 
reduce poverty and to achieve the Sustainable 
Development Goals related to poverty and social 
development,  and  they  highlight  that  under-
standing and practising disaster risk reduction as 
disaster management has not been effective in 
avoiding risk generation and accumulation. This 
theme will be explored further in Parts II and III 
of this report.

Notes

1  A new analysis of national disaster loss data shows that be-
tween 1980 and 2013, 41 countries reported a total of more than 
6,000 events involving electrical storms which killed more than 
8,700 people, injured around 4,500 people and destroyed almost 
42,000 houses.
2  http://www.desenredando.org/public/libros/1999/edete/.
3  For more information on national loss databases and the data 
sets used in this report, see www.desinventar.net.
4  82 countries and 3 states (Odisha and Tamil Nadu, India, and 
Zanzibar, Tanzania) in total over varying time frames. For access 
to the loss databases and more details on the countries and states 
included, see www.desinventar.net. 
5  The two states referred to in Figures 4.3, 4.5, 4.6 and 4.7 are Odi-
sha and Tamil Nadu, India.
6  Only a very small group of countries show an increasing trend 
that can be associated with improved reporting, but the popula-
tion of those countries (and the impact reported) is low in com-
parison  to  the  majority  of  countries  with  loss  databases.  The 
group with low reporting bias accounts for more than 95 per cent 
of the population represented (1.6 billion) and 74 per cent of all 
reports in the sample. Reports of mortality impacts show simi-
larly stable patterns, and reports on other types of impacts show 
slightly higher trends which suggest that better reporting should 
be taken as one of the causes of the increase, but with a moderate 
to low influence. See Annex 2 for more details.
7  Gross Domestic Product (GDP) and Gross Fixed Capital Forma-
tion (GFCF) of 2013.
8  Data from the World Bank Development Indicators: http://data.
worldbank.org/.
9  Public investment was calculated as an average of the annual 
percentage of public investment in relation to GDP from 2001 to 
2011, based on data from the World Bank.

98

Part I - Chapter 4

Chapter 5
Resilience challenged

99

In those countries where AAL significantly exceeds key economic progress metrics, such as aver-
age annual GDP growth, national savings rates or the ratio of new capital investment to existing 
capital stock, it is impossible to ensure sustained, let alone sustainable, growth.

Where countries are not able to buffer and absorb disaster losses, economies can be severely dis-
rupted. A significant number of countries face this challenge even for events that may happen 
within a 50 to 100-year time span.

In lower-income countries, and in particular in 
countries like SIDS with small economies, disas-
ter losses may challenge an economy’s resilience, 
that is, its capacity to absorb losses and recover.
There is insufficient data and evidence to show 
whether  economic  resilience  has  increased  or 
decreased since the adoption of the HFA. 

However, existing evidence on the distribution 
of  risk  and  countries’  ability  to  absorb  losses 
points to critical differences related to income 
levels, insurance coverage, the size and pattern 
of economies, and the financial capacity of vari-
ous countries.

5.1  

 

 

National resilience challenges

 

Economies can be severely disrupted if there is a 
high ratio of AAL to the value of capital stock and 
savings.  Similarly, future economic growth can 
be compromised if there is a high ratio of AAL to 
capital  investment  and  reserves.    Social  devel-
opment will be challenged if there is a high ratio 
of AAL to social expenditure. 

significant with respect to other economic prog-
ress metrics, such as the existence of reserves or 
national savings rates. In such circumstances, it 
is impossible to ensure sustained, let alone sus-
tainable, growth. 

Ultimately the capacity  of a country  to devel-
op sustainably will depend on the combination 
of  these  different  factors.    Economies  can  be 
severely disrupted if there is a high ratio of AAL 
to the value of capital stock and savings. Many 
countries  will  not  be  able  to  cover  their  AAL 
through  domestic  savings,  which  may  impact 
their capacity to invest in social and econom-
ic  development.    Countries  with  high  rates  of 
domestic savings will be better able to absorb 
even  high  levels  of  AAL.  Similarly,  future  eco-
nomic growth can be compromised if there is 
a  high  ratio  of  AAL  to  capital  investment  and 
reserves.  Social development will be challenged 
if there is a high ratio of AAL to social expendi-
ture.  Ultimately  the  countries  where  develop-
ment and the achievement of the SDGs will be 
most challenged by disaster risk are those where 
the AAL represents a high proportion across all 
three domains (Figure  5.1).

The capacity for future development
AAL can be interpreted as an opportunity cost giv-
en that resources set aside to cover disaster loss-
es could be used for development. As highlighted 
in Chapter 3, in certain income groups and geo-
graphic regions, in particular in SIDS and some 
low-income countries, AAL estimates represent a 
significant proportion and in some cases surpass 
levels  of  capital  investment  and  social  expen-
diture. In those countries, the AAL is also often 

This highlights that the countries with high risks 
to  development  include  not  only  low-income 
countries such as Madagascar and Haiti but also 
middle-income countries like Honduras, Jamai-
ca and Philippines, and high-income countries 
like Greece. Although Jamaica and Greece have 
a far lower relative AAL compared to the Philip-
pines, Honduras and Madagascar, the negative 
implications for development are very similar. At 
the same time, while it is economic growth that 

100

Part I - Chapter 5

Figure 5.1  Countries with high overall ratio of AAL to social expenditure, capital stock and savings and capital investment and reserves

 (Source: UNISDR with data from Global Risk Assessment and the World Bank.)

is most threatened in Greece, it is social develop-
ment that is most threatened in the Philippines. 

Fiscal resilience
Budgeting for disaster loss based on the AAL is 
critical but not enough. As the AAL is an annual 
average, it does not guarantee economic and fis-
cal resilience against high-level events for coun-
tries that lack the fiscal resilience to cope with 

extreme but infrequent losses.  Fiscal resilience is 
broadly defined as comprising internal and exter-
nal  savings  to  buffer  against  disaster  shocks.  
Once domestic savings are exhausted, a common 
approach  is  to  divert  funding  from  discretion-
ary budgets, which in some cases may have been 
previously earmarked for development spend-
ing. In other cases, countries utilize loans from 
international or multilateral financial institutions 

101

for recovery, reallocating funding and reducing 
the available future borrowing capacity for devel-
opment as well, thus hampering future growth. 

In  most  higher-income  countries,  a  significant 
proportion of economic losses are insured. For 
example, in the July 2013 hailstorms in Germa-
ny  and  France,  an  estimated  US$3.8  billion  of 
the total losses of US$4.8 billion were insured, as 
were US$1.9 billion of the total losses of US$4.7 
billion in the June 2013 floods in Canada (Swiss 
Re,  2014a).  Furthermore,  despite  their  size  in 
absolute terms, these losses are rarely signifi-
cant compared with annual capital investment in 
those countries.

In contrast, many countries with lower incomes 
and  smaller  economies,  including  least  devel-
oped  countries  (LDCs)  and  small  island  devel-
oping states (SIDS), are severely challenged by 
rising  economic  loss.  In  such  countries,  most 
loss is uninsured and governments do not have 
the financial reserves or access to contingency 
financing that would allow them to absorb losses, 

recover and rebuild. For example, while estimates 
of  the  total  losses  from  Typhoon  Haiyan  vary, 
there is agreement that insured losses are only a 
small fraction of the overall loss due to low insur-
ance penetration in the region. For example, AIR 
Worldwide estimates total damage at US$6.5 bil-
lion to US$14.5 billion, of which only US$300 mil-
lion to US$700 million are thought to be insured.1 
In fact, a considerable number of countries face 
resource  gaps  for  events  with  return  periods 
below 100 years. For example, while Canada and 
the United States would only face challenges in 
absorbing the impact from a 1-in-500-year loss, 
Algeria, Bolivia, Chile, Indonesia, Iran, Madagas-
car, Mozambique and Pakistan would face diffi-
culties finding the resources to absorb the impact 
from as small as a 1 in 3-25 year loss (Williges et 
al., 2014). Clearly, the financial risk to these coun-
tries is substantial. In particular, a very significant 
number of countries would not pass a stress test 
of their financial capacity to absorb the impact of 
a 1-in-100-year loss (Figure 5.2).2

Figure 5.2  Countries facing a financing gap for a 1-in-100-year loss event

 (Source: Williges et al., 2014.)

102

Part I - Chapter 5

Figure 5.3  Disaster risk in Zanzibar, Mauritius, Madagascar, and Comoros

 (Source: UNISDR with data from CIMNE.)

Coupled with the limited availability of reserve 
funds, contingent credit agreements, insurance 
and access to emergency financing options, the 
limited  investments  in  reducing  existing  risk 
and avoiding the creation of new risk mean that 
many SIDS in particular are characterized by high 
risks and low economic resilience. In the Indian 
Ocean, calculating risk in Madagascar, Mauritius,  
Comoros  and  Zanzibar  (Figure  5.3)  has  been  a 
first step in identifying the threshold of loss levels 
where countries would struggle to finance a recov-
ery. In these countries, losses with return periods 
of 500 years would require resources equal to 7 to 
18 per cent of GDP (Williges et al., 2014).

Countries with large budget deficits are usually 
unable to divert funding from revenues to absorb 
disaster  losses  and  therefore  need  to  use  oth-
er mechanisms, including taxation, national and 
international  credit,  foreign  reserves,  domes-
tic  bonds,  aid  and  risk  financing  instruments. 
Using all these financing mechanisms, Mauritius 
would still face a resource gap for any losses from 

cyclone wind and earthquake with a return period 
of 62 years or over (Figure 5.4). The corresponding 
return period is only 24 years for Madagascar and 
28 years for Comoros (Mochizuki et al., 2014).

A limited ability to absorb losses can increase 
the  indirect  economic  costs  of  a  disaster  and 
can slow recovery (UNISDR, 2013a). For exam-
ple, disruptions in the transport sector due to 
post-disaster reconstruction delays can impact 
on a range of other sectors, such as manufactur-
ing and retail trade. However, access to ex-ante 
financing arrangements can prevent this prob-
lem (Williges et al., 2014). For example, assuming 
that post-disaster reconstruction financing were 
available in Cambodia 6 months to 1 year after 
a disaster,3 access to ex-ante financing, such as 
contingent credit to facilitate more rapid recov-
ery,  would  help  stem  the  decline  in  economic 
output across a range of sectors, ranging from 
more than US$1 million in retail trade to almost 
US$6 million in the transport sector and US$7.5 
million in manufacturing (ibid.).

103

Figure 5.4  Financing gap for cyclone wind and earthquake risk in Mauritius

Note: MFIs = multilateral financial institutions.

 (Source: Mochizuki et al., 2014.)

In  addition  to  ex-ante  financing  mechanisms, 
investments in disaster risk reduction measures 
are expected to significantly reduce the expected 
negative impact of disasters on economic growth 
(UNISDR, 2013a). Previous analysis has shown, 
for example, that a 1-in-100-year event in Hon-
duras could produce direct losses of up to 33 per 
cent and additional indirect and cumulative loss-
es of up to 24 per cent of GDP. New simulations of 
real GDP growth after historical disaster impacts 
in Honduras—with and without previous disas-
ter risk reduction investments—show that these 
losses could be significantly reduced by investing 
in risk reduction.4 Interestingly, the simulations 
also show that in a country such as Honduras, 
where  high-intensity  disasters  occur  relative-
ly frequently, even larger investments targeted 
at reducing the risk of large-scale events make 
financial and economic sense.

In countries with very low rates of capital invest-
ment, recovery may take years if disasters destroy 
a  significant  proportion  of  their  capital  stock. 
Countries with small and vulnerable economies 

have  particularly  low  resilience,  as  their  entire 
economy may be devastated; if they also have lim-
ited fiscal manoeuvrability, they may also have dif-
ficulties financing a recovery (UNISDR, 2009a).

The cumulative effect of disaster loss on fixed 
capital may be dramatic in SIDS such as Vanu-
atu (Figure 5.5) or small countries like Belize.5 It is 
estimated that Belize has lost almost 18 per cent 
of its accumulated capital investment since 1970 
due to the cumulative effects of disasters over 
the past 20 years. For Vanuatu, this amounts to a 
full 24 per cent of capital investment since 1970. 
However,  even  in  higher-income  small  island 
states,  economic  losses  can  also  have  a  high-
ly disruptive effect on economic development. 
For example, the Cayman Islands suffered signif-
icant losses from Hurricane Ivan in 2004 and its 
economy still has not recovered fully, leading to 
a reduction of cumulative capital investment by 
almost 23 per cent since 1970. 

In  contrast,  large  economies  such  as China  or 
Mexico seem to have sufficient capacity to absorb 

104

Part I - Chapter 5

losses from a large number of events without sig-
nificant effects on economic growth in the years 
following the event.

As the HFA draws to a close, there is also more 
evidence  that  disaster  loss  negatively  affects 

longer-term growth prospects in countries with 
limited liquidity and assets (Hochrainer, 2009; 
Noy, 2009) despite potential short-term increases 
in GDP due to reconstruction efforts and through 
large cash injections into the local economy (Kim, 
2010; Cavallo et al., 2009; Albala-Bertrand, 1993 

Figure 5.5  National economic growth with and without disaster loss impact

 (Source: Baritto, 2014 with data from EM-DAT and the World Bank.)

105

and 2006; Skidmore and Toya, 2002). For exam-
ple,  cyclone  impact  simulations  for  various 
countries show that medium-term economic per-
formance would be adversely affected by disas-
ter losses (UNISDR, 2013a).

Figure 5.6  La Anemona, El Salvador

5.2  

 

 
No place to call home

 

 

When  disasters  affect  already  vulnerable  peo-
ple, the resulting patterns of migration and dis-
placement  themselves  can  become  drivers  of 
new risks. 

La Anemona is a community of almost 200 fam-
ilies on the periphery of San Salvador, a com-
munity born out of disaster (Figure 5.6). When 
Hurricane Ida swept over El Salvador in 2009, the 
people of La Anemona suffered heavy losses and 
decided to leave their former homes. The land 
they chose lacks basic infrastructure, services 

 (Source: Lynette Wilson/Episcopal News Service.)

and land titles, and is considered unsuitable for 
housing, but it was the only unoccupied land the 
families could find.6 

Almost 90 per cent of El Salvador’s land mass and 
more than 95 per cent of its population are consid-
ered to be at risk of disasters.7 Examples of commu-
nities such as La Anemona abound, showing similar 
patterns of how migration and displacement them-
selves become drivers of new risks (Box 5.1).

Box 5.1  Mobility and vulnerability in Alaska

The Kigiqitamiut people, a small Inupiat community on Alaska’s Bering Sea, are used to prac-
tising mobility as an adaptive strategy, having lived a nomadic existence for centuries as a 
fishing and hunting community. But at the beginning of the twentieth century, the govern-
ment promoted their settlement (Marino, 2011), creating new risk by locking the Kigiqitamiut 
into a sedentary lifestyle in a hazard-exposed environment as well as creating dependency 
on non-local products. Over the last few decades, and despite protection measures put in place, houses and 
basic  infrastructure  have  been  destroyed  by  diminished  sea  ice,  more  frequent  winds  and  storms,  and 
increased coastal erosion and flooding (ibid.).

Today, climate change is adding to the challenges the community faces, and the question of relocating the 
entire village of Shishmaref has become a major concern, manifest in the creation of the Shishmaref Erosion 
and Relocation Coalition in 2001 (USGAO, 2009). But Shishmaref’s relocation is not without obstacles. First, 
the  cost  is  estimated  at  around  US$180  million  for  only  609  inhabitants  (ibid.).  While  U.S  legislation  has 
guidelines for “recovery through rebuilding”, no clear guidelines exist for cases in which complete relocation 
is required; in Shishmaref, in situ reconstruction is not sustainable in the long run due to sea level rise and 
coastal erosion. Finally, the lack of coordination between different actors and government agencies is also 
an obstacle to effective relocation (Marino, 2011).

The case of the Kigiqitamiut people highlights that dramatic social changes can be expected and that eco-
nomic investments will not only have to be made in small island developing states and low-income nations. 
In Shishmaref, a marginalized minority community in one of the richest countries in the world, future predic-
tions of climate risk have already become reality. Other parts of the world may follow soon.

106

Part I - Chapter 5

Figure 5.7  People displaced by disasters since 1970

 (Source: IDMC, 2014.)

New  global  data  sets  enable  up-to-date  esti-
mates  of  the  number  of  persons  displaced 
by disasters (IDMC, 2014). The figures are not 
encouraging,  particularly  for  weather-related 
disasters,  as  they  show  a  clear  upward  trend 
over time (Figure 5.7), with 143.9 million people 
displaced by disasters between 2008 and 2012 
alone.

Displacement  is  particularly  associated  with 
weather-related disasters (Figure 5.8). Interna-
tional  estimates  of  displacement  trends  and 
patterns are hampered by limited data availabil-
ity.  Due  to  the  multidimensional  and  complex 
dynamics of migration and displacement, quanti-
tative projections for future trends have low con-
fidence levels, even though there is agreement 
that  climate  change  will  drive  future  displace-
ment  and  patterns  of  movement  (IPCC,  2014; 
Gemenne, 2010). 

Where data is available, it highlights that disas-
ter impacts go far beyond the immediate loss of 
assets. Between 2008 and 2014, for example, it is 

estimated that 165 million people were displaced 
by disasters (IDMC, 2014).

While mobility, migration and displacement are 
sometimes consequences of disasters, they can 

Figure 5.8  People displaced due to weather-related and 
geophysical hazard events

 (Source: IDMC, 2014.)

107

also be drivers of new disaster risk (IOM, no date). 
Investment and economic development in haz-
ard-prone regions attract people to those areas. 
As  a  result,  the  population  in  hazard-exposed 
regions  is  growing  proportionally  faster  than 
elsewhere  (UN-HABITAT,  2010;  UNISDR,  2011a; 
Lall and Deichmann, 2011).

Human mobility has always been a strategy to 
manage environmental risk and natural resourc-
es (Oteros-Rozas, 2012; Warner et al., 2012; Cas-
tillo, 2011). But increasingly, everyday social and 
political risks add to the pressures on marginal 
groups in society to migrate (Schensul and Dod-
man, 2013). Local displacement can also drive up 
hazard exposure and vulnerability by increasing 
the pressure on already fragile resource bases (de 
Sherbinin et al., 2007; UNISDR, 2009a; Peduzzi, 
2010),  and  urban  displacement  is  a  particular-
ly important driver of disaster risk (IPCC, 2014). 
Where  informal  settlements  are  demolished 
to make way for the development of shopping 
malls, luxury apartments and hotels (Menon-Sen 
and Bhan, 2008), people are often displaced to 
other hazard-prone locations.

Thus displacement and migration put a spotlight 
on the critical role that vulnerability will continue 
to play in driving disaster risk upwards over the 
years to come.

No country for old men
Aside from migration and displacement, demo-
graphic change will continue to shape risk pat-
terns and trends, including future complex and 
systemic risks. Ageing populations in OECD coun-
tries,  but  also  in  some  emerging  economies, 
mean that an increasing share of people affect-
ed will be over 60, which will increase fatalities, 
longer-term impacts on well-being and the liveli-
hoods of a large part of the population. 

108

Part I - Chapter 5

Evidence from recent events indicate that this 
trend is already showing its effects: 71 per cent 
of lives lost during Hurricane Katrina and around 
50  per  cent  of  fatalities  from Hurricane  Sandy 
were people aged 60 and over (Parry, 2013). Dur-
ing heat waves such as the one experienced in 
Europe during 2003, most lives lost are those of 
the elderly (OECD, 2014a).

5.3 The international resilience 

challenge

The increasing gap between demand for response 
to  disasters  and  available  global  funding  high-
lights  the  need  for  effective  disaster  risk  reduc-
tion. Resource gaps in a number of countries are 
significant even for relatively frequent events.

There is also a humanitarian resource gap, which 
can be expressed as the difference between esti-
mated losses and the funding provided by the 
global  humanitarian  community.  While  it  has 
been  internationally  recognized  that  response 
and relief are not sustainable as the main pillar 
of disaster risk management, recent figures are 
a stark reminder that this gap continues to grow 
(Figure 5.9). While humanitarian funding requests 
have more than quadrupled over the last 20 years, 
the gap between the funding requested and pro-
vided has grown by more than 800 per cent. In 
other  words,  global  funding  requirements  are 
increasing, while the national and international 
capacity to meet them is not growing at the same 
rate. Rather than justifying the need for addition-
al humanitarian assistance, this reinforces the 
case for investing in disaster risk reduction. Ulti-
mately, the growing humanitarian resource gap 
is unsustainable, and an approach based prin-
cipally on responding to disaster is increasingly 
bankrupt.

Globally, the resource gaps vary significantly for 
different risk layers (Figure 5.10). For example, 
covering the resource gaps caused by losses with 

a return period of 10 to 50 years would require 
more  than  US$2.5  billion  per  year  globally 
(Hochrainer-Stigler et al., 2014). This is based on 
the assumption that there is a cap on the maxi-
mum payment a country can receive, as is usually 
the case with reinsurers’ average claim payments. 

Assuming there is no cap on payments that can 
be made to countries, the funding requirements 
grow dramatically, ranging from US$3.3 billion 
per year for a loss with a 10 to 50-year return peri-
od to more than US$20 billion per year for a loss 
with a 250 to 500-year return period.

Figure 5.(cid:478)  Funding requested and received through United Nations appeals (CAP and flash appeals)

 (Source: UNOCHA, 2014a.)

Figure 5.10  Resource gaps for different risk layers at the global level

 (Source: Hochrainer-Stigler et al., 2014.)

109

Notes

1  http://www.air-worldwide.com/Press-Releases/AIR-Estimates-
Insured-Losses-from-Super-Typhoon-Haiyan-at-Between--USD-
300-Million-and-USD-700-Million. 
2  Calculations are based on results of the UNISDR Global Risk As-
sessment for earthquakes, tropical cyclone wind and storm surge, 
and tsunami. Estimates of losses from flood events were generat-
ed by fitting empirical loss observations to parametric loss curves. 
These results should not be used for in-depth national analysis. 
For further information on the methodology, see Williges et al., 
2014, and Hochrainer-Stigler et al., 2014.
3  Information provided by the Japan International Cooperation 
Agency (JICA) in support of GAR15. The simulations were carried 
out with JICA’s improved DR2AD model, an economic model that 
allows policymakers to assess the impacts of disasters and the 
benefits of disaster risk reduction investments at different points 
in time.
4  A similar calculation was performed for the 2009 Global Assess-
ment Report; the findings from that time have been confirmed 
using 5 additional years of new data and the analysis has been 
updated.
5  http://episcopaldigitalnetwork.com/ens/2013/06/25/natural-
disasters-displacement-perpetuate-poverty-in-el-salvador/.
6  http://www.pnud.org.sv/2007.

110

Part I - Chapter 5

Part II
Inside disaster risk 
management

113

Since the declaration of the IDNDR in 1990 and in 
particular since the adoption of the HFA in 2005, 
the disaster risk management sector has grown 
exponentially in both size and salience.

It could be argued that the disaster risk manage-
ment sector first became conscious of its own 
existence  at  the  International  Conference  on 
Disaster Mitigation Program Implementation in 
Ocho Rios, Jamaica in 1984 (Virginia Polytechnic 
Institute, 1985). Yet only 51 international partic-
ipants attended that conference, indicating the 
small size of the incipient sector at that time. In 
contrast, the Fourth Session of the Global Plat-
form for Disaster Risk Reduction held in Gene-
va in May 2013 attracted over 3,500 participants, 
including 172 government delegations, 240 non-
governmental organizations, 175 businesses, 30 
parliamentarians  from  26  countries  as  well  as 
local government representatives, scientists and 
academics. Over thirty years, the size of the sec-
tor has increased by two orders of magnitude.

PreventionWeb, the United Nations-hosted glob-
al portal for disaster risk management informa-
tion, now identifies 32,600 professionals involved 
in  the  disaster  risk  management  sector,  com-
pared to 5,000 in 2006.1 This represents only a 
small proportion of those who actually work in 
the sector at the national or local level. According 
to PreventionWeb, in 2013 there were 1,127 con-
ferences, seminars, workshops and other events 
that connected and integrated the sector, again 
reflecting only a small proportion of the events 
occurring on the national and local stage.

As the sector has grown, government self-assess-
ments prepared using the HFA Monitor (UNISDR, 
2011b, 2013b, 2013c; UNISDR et al., 2009) pro-
vide  evidence  of  an  enormous  investment  by 
governments in new legislative and instrumen-
tal  systems,  policies,  budgetary  allocations, 
information  systems,  early  warning  mecha-
nisms,  disaster  preparedness,  and  to  a  lesser 
extent in corrective disaster risk management. 

Figure II.1  Progress in implementing the HFA (2007-2013)

(Source: UNISDR, 2013a.)

114

Part II 

HFA progress reports highlight that governments 
have not only committed to the policy objective 
of disaster risk reduction, they have also made 
considerable efforts to achieve that objective.

Since  2007,  146  governments  have  participat-
ed in at least one cycle of the HFA review using 
the online HFA Monitor. In 2011-2013, 136 coun-
tries submitted reports, and governments have 
reported growing levels of HFA implementation 
(Figure II.1) over time. The 2013-2015 assessment 
cycle is ongoing as part of the preparations for 
the successor framework to the HFA, and coun-
try reports will contribute to a complete picture 
of progress over the course of the HFA.

However, from the HFA Monitor alone it is difficult 
to gauge how much of the progress reported has 
really led to measurable outputs and outcomes 
in terms of reduced disaster risks. In other words, 
while there is no doubt that the HFA has been a 
resounding success in terms of catalysing activi-
ty, it is far less clear how effective all that activi-
ty has really been.

The HFA Monitor is constructed around 22 core 
indicators spread across five priorities for action. 
These  core  indicators  are  broad  and  generic, 
aggregating the far more specific guidance on 
key activities provided in the HFA itself and refer-
ring to multiple areas of public policy and actions 
by different stakeholders. 

As such, it is often unclear from progress reports 
which (and whose) actions have made a real con-
tribution to  the progress reported under  each 
core indicator. For many of the key activities, it 
is also unclear whether any progress has been 
made at all. As a result, where disaster risks have 

been reduced it is often difficult to identify which 
policies, strategies or instrumental systems are 
responsible.

At the same time, the core indicators measure 
inputs into disaster risk reduction rather than 
outputs  and  outcomes.  For  example,  the  HFA 
Monitor provides information on the adoption 
of new national policies (input) but has no way 
of measuring the level of implementation (out-
put) or whether it has led to a real reduction in 
risk (outcome). Therefore, while the momentum 
of the disaster risk management sector under the 
HFA is undeniable, its effectiveness is unclear. 
Increased  inputs  do  not  necessarily  indicate 
achievement of the desired outcome.

Furthermore,  while  the  HFA  Monitor  captures 
activities in the disaster risk management sec-
tor, it does not necessarily include actions under 
agendas such as the environment, poverty reduc-
tion, energy or climate change that may have con-
tributed to disaster risk reduction or actions from 
other stakeholders, including the private sector 
and civil society.

The archive of accumulated national HFA prog-
ress reports now represents the most compre-
hensive  body  of  information  available  on  how 
countries have implemented the HFA. However, 
seen from a broader perspective, this informa-
tion is largely self-referential. The HFA Monitor 
documents real achievements in developing the 
policies,  legislation,  information  systems  and 
institutional frameworks recommended by the 
HFA, but not the achievement of the policy goal 
of reducing disaster risk.

Where  success  in  implementing  parts  of  the 
HFA is conflated with success in reducing disas-
ter risk, there is a real possibility of delusion in 
the disaster risk management sector. The rapid 
growth of the sector and its apparent success in 
implementing the HFA may have generated a self-
reinforcing hyper-reality (Baudrillard, 1994; Eco, 

115

Box II.1  Peer-reviewed assessment of progress towards the expected outcome of the HFA

The 22 core indicators of the HFA were divided into thirteen research areas, with four additional areas cover-
ing subjects that were not explicitly addressed in the core indicators, namely interconnected and interdepen-
dent  risk,  private  investment  in  disaster  risk  reduction,  climate  change  adaptation  and  mitigation,  and 
standards and normative mechanisms for disaster risk management.

Assessments were coordinated by organizations of the United Nations, the World Bank, the Organisation for 
Economic Co-operation and Development and other institutions according to sector-specific expertise. Fol-
lowing an open call for papers, more than 200 input papers were received, and a peer-reviewed background 
paper was prepared for each research area.3 

1986).2 In this hyper-reality, perceptions of prog-
ress and achievement in disaster management 
contrast with the lack of progress in addressing 
the underlying risk drivers.

To provide a more complete picture of wheth-
er the inputs described by the HFA Monitor have 
led to outputs that contribute to the expected 
outcome, and to identify common success fac-
tors and challenges, peer-reviewed research was 
commissioned  for  GAR15  to  complement  the 
findings from the HFA Monitor (Box II.1).

The peer-reviewed assessment has filled many 
gaps in knowledge. However, there is still a gen-
eral absence of systematic and comparable out-
put indicators that could allow a more rigorous 
assessment of what has actually been achieved 
under each priority for action, such as the num-
ber of buildings built to disaster-resistant codes, 
the proportion of watersheds protected, the cov-
erage of early warning systems, or the proportion 
of risk-sensitive public or private investment. As 
such, the assessment still relies heavily on anec-
dotal evidence, from which broader tendencies 
have to be induced.

This part of the report uses the evidence from 
the  peer-reviewed  assessment  together  with 
findings  from  the  HFA  Monitor  to  look  inside 
the disaster risk management sector. Chapter 6 
examines how and why the understanding and 

116

Part II 

practice of disaster risk management as disaster 
management has not been effective in prevent-
ing and avoiding risk generation and accumula-
tion. Chapter 7 analyses the social production of 
risk information and questions the effectiveness 
of public awareness and information in generat-
ing a culture of prevention. Chapter 8 reviews the 
strengthening  of  disaster  management,  at  the 
same time highlighting unmet challenges in post-
disaster recovery.

Notes

1  www.preventionweb.net.
2  Baudrillard (1994) defined hyper-reality as “the generation by 
models of a real without origin or reality”. Eco (1986) likewise sug-
gests that the action of hyper-reality is to desire reality and, in the 
attempt to achieve that desire, to fabricate a false reality that is to 
be consumed as real.
3  For full list of research areas and related concept notes, see 
http://www.preventionweb.net/english/professional/networks/
private/hfa-thematic-review. 

Chapter 6
Disaster risk governance

117

The model of disaster risk governance proposed by the HFA is one of the areas in which countries 
report greatest progress. And these efforts have involved not just a minority but a large majority 
of  countries.  Although  it  is  still  incomplete,  the  transition  from  emergency  management  to 
disaster risk management has picked up momentum.

In  practice,  however,  most  resources  continue  to  be  invested  in  strengthening  capacities  for 
disaster management, and there has been limited success in applying policies, norms, standards 
and regulations to manage and reduce risk across development sectors.

6.1  

 

 

 
The HFA as a catalyst

Progress in some areas has been significant: over 
100 countries now have dedicated national insti-
tutional arrangements for disaster risk manage-
ment; more than 120 countries have undergone 
legal or policy reforms; over 190 have established 
focal  points  for  disaster  risk  reduction;  and  85 
have  created  national  multi-stakeholder  plat-
forms since 2007.

Governance refers to the different ways in which 
governments, the private sector and in gener-
al  all  individuals  and  institutions  in  a  society 
organize themselves to manage their common 
affairs (UNDP, 2010). The concept of governance 
includes formal and explicit mechanisms such as 
legislation, policies, mandatory standards and 
administrative procedures through which soci-
eties are organized as well as the wide range of 
informal and implicit arrangements that mediate 
social, economic and political relationships and 
the management of territory and resources.1

Governance  arrangements  evolve  over  time 
in  the  context  of  the  broader  political  econo-
my, reflecting how social, economic and politi-
cal relationships emerge, mesh and interweave 
in space and time, and become infused with and 
justified by symbolic values relating to notions 
such as democracy, freedom, human rights or the 
nation-state (Ishiwatari, 2013).

Within  this  broader  governance  concept, 
disaster risk governance refers to the specific 

118

Part II - Chapter 6

arrangements that societies put in place to man-
age  their  disaster  risk  (UNISDR,  2011a;  UNDP, 
2013a Gall et al., 2014a) within a broader con-
text of risk governance (Renn, 2008). This reflects 
how risk is valued against a backdrop of broad-
er social and economic concerns (Holley et al., 
2011). For example, the fact that a country adopts 
and enforces a seismic building code is as much a 
reflection of the importance of safe buildings for 
economic development and social well-being as 
it is a safeguard against earthquake risk.

The HFA placed considerable emphasis on dif-
ferent aspects of governance (Box 6.1), including 
the development of institutional and legislative 
frameworks, the allocation of resources and the 
mobilization of communities. The model of disas-
ter  risk  governance  proposed  by  the  HFA  was 
influenced by the approach adopted by Colom-
bia in 1989 and subsequently by many other mid-
dle and low-income countries (with important 
variations). This model stressed a horizontally 
and vertically integrated systems approach with 
strong coordination across sectors and a delega-
tion of responsibilities to the local level based on 
the principle of subsidiarity. It emphasized the 
adoption  of  regulation  and  other  mechanisms 
to  ensure  compliance  and  provide  incentives. 
The model also recommended specific budget-
ary allocations for disaster risk reduction, and 
it promoted the participation of volunteers and 
communities. At the same time, it stressed the 
importance  of  integrating  disaster  risk  reduc-
tion into development policies, including pov-
erty  reduction,  on  the  basis  of  strong  political 
determination.

Box 6.1  Key activities relating to disaster risk governance in the HFA

National institutional and legislative frameworks:

(a) Support the creation and strengthening of national integrated disaster risk reduction mechanisms, such as 
multi sectoral national platforms, with designated responsibilities at the national through to the local levels to 
facilitate  coordination  across  sectors.  National  platforms  should  also  facilitate  coordination  across  sectors, 
including  by  maintaining  a  broad  based  dialogue  at  national  and  regional  levels  for  promoting  awareness 
among the relevant sectors.

(b) Integrate risk reduction, as appropriate, into development policies and planning at all levels of government, 
including in poverty reduction strategies and sectors and multi sector policies and plans.

(c) Adopt, or modify where necessary, legislation to support disaster risk reduction, including regulations and 
mechanisms that encourage compliance and that promote incentives for undertaking risk reduction and mitiga-
tion activities.

(d) Recognize the importance and specificity of local risk patterns and trends, decentralize responsibilities and 
resources for disaster risk reduction to relevant sub-national or local authorities, as appropriate.

Resources

(e) Assess existing human resource capacities for disaster risk reduction at all levels and develop capacity-build-
ing plans and programmes for meeting ongoing and future requirements.

(f) Allocate resources for the development and the implementation of disaster risk management policies, pro-
grammes, laws and regulations on disaster risk reduction in all relevant sectors and authorities at all levels of 
administrative and budgets on the basis of clearly prioritized actions.

(g)  Governments  should  demonstrate  the  strong  political  determination  required  to  promote  and  integrate 
disaster risk reduction into development programming.

Community participation

(h) Promote community participation in disaster risk reduction through the adoption of specific policies, the pro-
motion of networking, the strategic management of volunteer resources, the attribution of roles and responsi-
bilities, and the delegation and provision of the necessary authority and resources.

The 302 self-assessment reports prepared using 
the HFA Monitor2 and the UN Global Assessment 
Reports  on  Disaster  Risk  Reduction  published 
in 2009, 2011 and 2013, as well as the Mid-Term 
Review  of  the  HFA  (UNISDR,  2011b)  and  other 
published analyses from the HFA Monitor (UNIS-
DR,  2011c,  2013b,  2013c;  UNISDR  et  al.,  2009), 
have provided detailed country-by-country evi-
dence of how participating states have invested 
in most (but not all) of these key activities. The 
measures taken have included the formulation of 
legislation and national policies, the creation of 
institutional frameworks, the decentralization of 

responsibilities to local governments and the cre-
ation of dedicated budgets.

When understood as an instrument of policy for-
mulation and institutional organization, the mod-
el of disaster risk governance proposed by the 
HFA is one of the areas in which countries report 
making greatest progress (Figure 6.1). According 
to the HFA Monitor, over 100 countries now have 
dedicated  national  institutional  arrangements 
for disaster risk management. As of 2014, more 
than 120 countries had undergone legal or poli-
cy reforms, over 190 had established focal points 

119

Figure 6.1  Progress against Priority for Action 1 of the HFA

 (Source: UNISDR with data from the HFA Monitor.)

for disaster risk reduction and 85 had created 
national multi-stakeholder platforms since 2007 
(UNDP, 2014a).

Over the last two years, at least eight countries 
have established new legal frameworks for disas-
ter risk management. For example, Bhutan (Gov-
ernment  of  Bhutan,  2013)  and  Burkina  Faso 
(Government of Burkina Faso, 2014) have applied 
a number of legal principles to reform their insti-
tutional arrangements, including a reform of the 
division of powers between all stakeholders and 
strengthened  national  mechanisms.  Paraguay 
decided in December 2013 to reform its nation-
al policy on disaster risk reduction based on four 
pillars: to strengthen institutional capacities, to 
increase funding, to improve education, commu-
nication and citizen participation in disaster risk 
reduction, and to improve the acquisition and 
management of knowledge and technology (Gov-
ernment of Paraguay, 2013). This evidence is tes-
timony to an extraordinary burst of progress in 
only a short period of time, and the efforts have 
involved not just a minority but a large major-
ity of countries. It reflects how countries have 
been able to use the HFA to catalyse a range of 
activities  and  an  increasing  concern  with  and 

120

Part II - Chapter 6

commitment to disaster risk reduction. Although 
it is still incomplete, the transition from emer-
gency  management  to  disaster  risk  manage-
ment which began under the IDNDR has picked 
up speed and momentum under the HFA (Gall et 
al., 2014a).

At the same time, and as highlighted in Chapter 1, 
the syncretic evolution of the sector from emer-
gency  management  organizations  means  that 
disaster risk management has been principally 
understood and practised as disaster manage-
ment. For a number of reasons, this approach has 
not been effective in achieving the policy goal of 
disaster risk reduction.

6.2 Prospective disaster risk 

management: the divorce  
between discourse and practice

 

 

 

 

While a number of new policies, legislation and 
organizations have been developed and set up, 
there remains a disconnect between theory, for-
mal  arrangements  and  disaster  risk  manage-
ment practice.

In the 1990s, the work of disaster research net-
works such as LA RED in Latin America, Peri-
Peri U in sub-Saharan Africa, Duryog Nivaran in 
South Asia3 (Lavell, 2004; Gellert-de Pinto, 2012; 
PeriPeri U, no date) and others influenced both 
the Yokohama Strategy and the HFA, highlight-
ing how disasters are indicators of unresolved 
social and development problems and making 
the case that disaster risk reduction could not 
be achieved unless the underlying drivers of risk 
were addressed (Gall et al., 2014a).

Priority for Action 1 of the HFA called for the inte-
gration  of  disaster  risk  reduction  into  poverty 
reduction and other development strategies on 
the basis of strong political determination by gov-
ernments. Reflecting these key activities under 
the HFA, the governance arrangements adopted 

by  many  countries  have  increasingly  incorpo-
rated language that stresses the importance of 
addressing the underlying risk drivers. In recent 
years, many national disaster management orga-
nizations have been relabelled as disaster risk 
management  systems.  Regional  and  national 
plans, strategies and policies have given increas-
ing prominence to reducing risk rather than man-
aging disaster, to prospective rather than merely 
corrective disaster risk management, and to pro-
tecting vulnerable households and communities 
instead of strategic economic assets and infra-
structure alone (UNDP, 2014a). 

Unfortunately, many of these commitments in 
law and policy have not been translated into real 
priorities and investments. A review of the quali-
tative information in HFA progress reports (UNIS-
DR, 2014a) highlights a divorce between discourse 
and practice and a continued focus on disaster 
management  and corrective  risk  management 
rather than on addressing the underlying driv-
ers. Although they include language consistent 
with  prospective  risk  management,  most  new 
laws continue to focus largely on disaster man-
agement. The priority assigned to prospective 
risk management is usually weak, as highlighted 
by the consistently low level of achievement of 
HFA Priority for Action 4 in HFA progress reports 
(UNISDR, 2009a, 2011a, 2013a).

In  other  words,  disaster  risk  management  has 
become  synonymous  with  interventions  to 
address  specific  and  existing  risks,  for  exam-
ple  by  constructing  flood  defences,  reinforc-
ing or upgrading infrastructure, and retrofitting 
schools and hospitals, to name but a few exam-
ples (Lavell and Maskrey, 2014). In practice, how-
ever, most resources and efforts continue to be 
invested in strengthening capacities for disaster 
management (Gall et al., 2014a).

At the same time, the sector in general has devel-
oped only weak connections with and influence 
on development sectors, and it has often lacked 

the political authority, governance arrangements 
and technical competencies to do so. Develop-
ment policies, plans and investments that gen-
erate  and  accumulate  risks  continue  to  enjoy 
political support in many countries, for example 
if they are seen to boost economic growth (UNDP, 
2014a).  Prospective  disaster  risk  management 
generally requires lower levels of financial invest-
ment  but  higher  levels  of  political  capital  and 
support  than  corrective  disaster  risk  manage-
ment. Given that disaster risk management has 
been understood and put into practice as a set of 
instrumental and administrative mechanisms to 
protect development against exogenous threats, 
this political support has rarely been forthcom-
ing. At the same time, development sectors also 
tend  to  understand  disaster  risk  management 
as disaster management, again weakening the 
imperative for prospective risk management.

As a result, the disaster risk management sec-
tor has had little success in mainstreaming its 
priorities and ensuring that other ministries or 
departments adopt policies, norms, standards 
and regulations to manage and reduce risk. Sim-
ilarly, there has been little systematic engage-
ment with the private sector in most countries, 
except  through  the  lens  of  corporate  social 
responsibility.

In  effect,  the  strong  political  determination 
required  by  the  HFA  to  promote  and  integrate 
disaster  risk  reduction  into  development  pro-
gramming has rarely materialized. The practice 
of  prospective  disaster  risk  management  con-
tinues to be more symbolic than real. As the HFA 
comes to a close, it is difficult to identify coun-
tries where the strengthening of disaster risk gov-
ernance has seriously influenced the direction of 
development.

121

6.3 A transient political and 

economic imperative

While risk management generally gains momen-
tum  in  the  aftermath  of  disasters,  the  impor-
tance of investing in risk reduction is usually not 
part of daily political agendas.

The political importance of the disaster risk man-
agement sector in most countries is transient. 
When  large-scale  disasters  threaten  develop-
ment, the sector enjoys strong political support 
and  budgetary  allocations.  Before  and  after 
large disasters, the sector is often relegated to 
the political and economic margins of govern-
ment as other priorities and crises come into the 
foreground.

This transient political and economic support for 
the sector reflects its focus on protecting devel-
opment  from  disasters  as  merely  occasional 
events rather than on managing risks which are 
generated and accumulated on an ongoing basis. 
While extensive disasters occur regularly in most 
countries, they have only localized impacts and 
generally affect low-income households, small 
businesses  and  local  infrastructure,  so  they 

rarely translate into a national political and eco-
nomic imperative for disaster risk management 
(UNISDR, 2011a).

This  transient  imperative  is  reflected  in  inad-
equate  financing  of  the  disaster  risk  manage-
ment sector and insufficient investment in weak 
human  and  institutional  capacities.  National-
ly, some countries have established designated 
budget mechanisms to ensure that the disaster 
risk reduction sector has some level of guaran-
teed  resources.  Examples  include  percentage 
allocations by law in the Philippines, budgetary 
policy in Japan, or specially earmarked funds in 
Mexico (IFRC and UNDP, 2014).

However, in many other countries the sector is 
dependent  on  resources  from  emergency  and 
contingency funds, which are only replenished 
when large disasters occur. In the HFA Monitor, 
some countries report insufficient resources to 
maintain  even  basic  response  capacities.  The 
dependence  on  emergency  funding  encourag-
es a form of humanitarian materialism in which 
disasters themselves become commodities that 
can influence the consolidation of institutional 
resources and power.

Figure 6.2  Share of development aid allocated to disaster prevention and preparedness

 (Source: GFDRR, 2012b.)

122

Part II - Chapter 6

The  transience  of  this  political  and  economic 
imperative is reflected at all scales. Internation-
ally, resources for disaster risk management rep-
resent only a small fraction of those dedicated to 
disaster response, which in turn represent only 
a small proportion of overall development assis-
tance (Figure 6.2). On average, only around 1 per 
cent of the total international development aid 
budget is allocated to disaster risk management 
(Kellett and Sparks, 2012), and 75 per cent of that 
budget is allocated to only four countries (ibid.)

6.4  

 

 

 

Uneven decentralization

While there is agreement on the critical role of 
local governments in disaster risk management, 
efforts to strengthen their capacities remain re-
stricted to a handful of countries.

In those cases where a national political imper-
ative for disaster risk reduction has been identi-
fied, implementation has often been challenged 
by weak capacities at the local level. For exam-
ple, Peru’s Ministry of Economy and Finance has 
been  working  since  2007  to  integrate  disaster 
risk management into public investment plan-
ning and evaluation. The implementation of this 
policy, however, has been undermined by weak 
capacities  in  many  regional  and  local  govern-
ments, where most public investment is planned 
and implemented.

A  pervasive  problem  reported  by  many  coun-
tries through the HFA Monitor is the general lack 
of implementation of laws and policies (UNISDR, 
2009a, 2011a, 2013a). National policies and laws 
are often developed but fail to include real mech-
anisms  of  implementation.  This  is  particularly 
critical at the local level.

In  many  countries,  primary  responsibility  for 
disaster  risk  management  has  been  devolved 
to  the  municipal  level.  Many  larger  cities  with 

well-resourced  local  governments  have  been 
able to take full advantage of this decentraliza-
tion. One of the success stories of the HFA is the 
growing engagement of city governments in all 
income  groups,  from  Istanbul  to  Medellin  and 
from San Francisco to Manila, in managing their 
disaster risks. The growing number of cities sign-
ing up to the United Nations Making Cities Resil-
ient campaign is testimony to this achievement.4  
Some  of  these  local  governments  have  shown 
greater effectiveness than their national counter-
parts and are becoming role models and leaders 
in disaster risk reduction.

In  contrast,  many  smaller  local  governments, 
particularly  in  rural  areas,  lack  the  necessary 
capacities to implement disaster risk manage-
ment  or  even  basic  emergency  management 
(UNISDR, 2011a). For example, while disaster risk 
management  has  been  legally  integrated  into 
municipal-level development planning in South 
Africa  since  2002,  local  government  capacity 
remains limited (Scott and Tarazona, 2011; Botha 
and van Niekerk, 2013; Johnson, 2011). Similar-
ly, a large proportion of municipalities in Colom-
bia have mandated local committees for disaster 
risk reduction, but only a fraction of these have 
developed contingency plans (Scott and Tarazo-
na, 2011). While it is widely recognized that local 
governments should play a critical role in disas-
ter risk management, there is little evidence to 
suggest that there has been any concerted effort 
to strengthen their capacities outside of a hand-
ful of countries which have dedicated training 
institutions (Box 6.2).

In many countries, the decentralization of disas-
ter risk reduction to local governments can there-
fore become a weakness rather than a strength 
and represents another manifestation of a hyper-
reality in which disaster risk management capaci-
ties exist on paper but not on the ground.

123

Box 6.2  India’s investment in capacity building

In India, the National Institute of Disaster Management (NIDM), constituted under the Disas-
ter Management Act of 2005, bears national responsibility for human resource development, 
capacity  building,  training,  and  policy  advocacy  in  the  field  of  disaster  risk  management. 
Under this mandate, the Institute delivers a basic online course on comprehensive disaster 
risk management as well as specialized courses on community-based disaster risk reduction 
(CBDRR), climate change and disaster risk, earthquake risk management, safer cities, and gender aspects of 
disaster recovery and reconstruction (NIDM, 2013). The NIDM has also published numerous online training 
manuals, including a step-by-step guide to the development of village disaster management plans (NIDM, 
2012a), train-the-trainer modules on flood risk mitigation and management (NIDM, 2012b) and on urban risk 
mitigation (NIDM, 2014), and a manual on psychosocial care in disasters (Satapathy and Subhasis, 2009).

In  some  countries,  local  structures  for  disas-
ter risk reduction have been set up in parallel to 
local government, further undermining the effec-
tiveness  of  both.  And  while  the  arrangements 
for disaster risk governance in many countries 
echo the HFA by explicitly calling for community 
involvement, most of the progress in communi-
ty-based or local-level disaster risk reduction has 
been restricted to specific short-term projects or 
programmes,  often  supported  by  non-govern-
mental organizations. Community and local-lev-
el disaster risk management has perhaps become 
another hyper-reality: it appears to have become 
mainstream and ubiquitous at all levels, while in 
reality community empowerment has been more 
symbolic than real (Maskrey, 2011).

124

Part II - Chapter 6

6.5  

 

 

Weak regulatory capacity

 

Effective regulation and dedicated investments 
in  corrective  disaster  risk  management  have 
enabled many high-income countries to reduce 
their disaster risk. However, many low and mid-
dle-income countries lack the necessary regu-
latory  quality  for  norms  and  standards  to  be 
applied effectively.

The HFA Monitor also points to continued prog-
ress  in  the  adoption  of  norms,  standards  and 
codes in areas such as land-use planning, build-
ing and environment.

In higher-income countries, laws, norms, stan-
dards and regulation can be (and have been) effec-
tive mechanisms for disaster risk management 
because of factors such as strong institutional 
frameworks, mechanisms for accountability and 
redress, free flows of information and a general 
culture of compliance (IFRC and UNDP, 2014). The 
successful application of voluntary standards in 
particular requires a trusted certification process 
(UNECE, 2014).

The  combination  of  effective  regulation  and 
major  investments  in  corrective  disaster  risk 
management  has  enabled  many  high-income 
countries  to  successfully  reduce  their  more 

extensive risk layers. In Japan, for example, con-
tinued investment in flood protection—togeth-
er  with  regulation—has  resulted  in  a  dramatic 
reduction in the areas flooded and in mortality 
(Figure 6.3).

In contrast, many low and middle-income coun-
tries  lack  the  necessary  regulatory  quality  for 
norms and standards to be applied effectively. In 
many such countries, weak accountability of local 
to central government, of government to citizens, 
and across government sectors has undermined 
the effectiveness of norms, standards, laws and 
policies (Coskun, 2013). For example, while most 
disaster risk reduction laws provide some kind of 
mandate for the involvement of women and vul-
nerable groups, these often consist of general 
aspirational statements without specific mecha-
nisms for implementation (IFRC and UNDP, 2014).

As  a  consequence,  the  adoption  of  improved 
building  codes  or  environmental  regulations 
in lower-income countries may lay a veneer of 
disaster  risk  management  over  the  surface  of 
relentless risk accumulation (Wamsler, 2006). In 

particular, where a significant proportion of eco-
nomic and urban development takes place infor-
mally (either in an informal sector per se or due 
to corruption and lack of compliance in the for-
mal sector), instruments such as building codes 
and zoning plans are only effective in strictly lim-
ited areas and sectors, typically in higher-income 
enclaves and strategic economic sectors. Most 
building outside of these enclaves and sectors is 
non-engineered, most urbanization is unplanned 
and local governments have weak capacities to 
promote or enforce standards.

In  addition,  the  adoption  of  inappropriately 
strict codes and standards may have the oppo-
site effect of driving more development into the 
informal sector, as low-income households and 
small businesses are unable to afford the costs of 
building to code in areas zoned for residential or 
commercial use.

Finally,  the  responsibility  of  those  taking  the 
decisions with regard to urban development, the 
application of building codes or land-use plan-
ning is not always clear-cut, as seen in the legal 

Figure 6.3  Successful flood reduction in Japan

 (Source: UNISDR with data from Takyea Kimio, JICA.)

125

Box 6.3  Legal repercussions after Xynthia 5

At 2 a.m. on 28 February 2010, a strong tempête (storm) hit the French Atlantic coast. Xynthia 
combined a storm surge with a high tide, and the large waves caused flood defences to fail all 
along the coast from the Gironde near Bordeaux to the Loire Estuary. Over 50,000 hectares of 
land  were  flooded  and  47  people  died.  Some  10,000  people  were  forced  to  evacuate  their 
homes on the Atlantic coast.

The town of La Faute-sur-Mer in Vendée saw 29 deaths, 28 of which were in a 3-hectare area labelled the 
“bowl of death” by the media as well as political authorities.

Four years after Xynthia, the French state prosecutor identified excessive urbanization as a reason for the high 
losses and attributed responsibility to the mayor and deputy mayor of La Faute-sur-Mer. Flood risk in the 
area was known to be high, but risk information had been hidden deliberately by the authorities to allow the 
construction of more than 200 new dwellings in flood-prone areas of La Faute-sur-Mer. 

As a consequence, the town’s mayor has been sentenced to four years in jail. Other officials are on trial for up 
to 5 years of imprisonment along with fines of up to EUR 75,000.

aftermath of the storm Xynthia in France in 2010 
(Box 6.3).

6.6 Corruption: an inconvenient 

truth

Corrupt practices in hazard-prone areas contrib-
ute  directly  to  increasing  the  vulnerability  and 
exposure of assets and people. Those countries 
that have high levels of corruption and weak reg-
ulatory frameworks will be challenged to reduce 
their disaster risk.

Although the HFA provides detailed guidance on 
institutional and legislative arrangements, bud-
getary allocations and local capacities, it does 
not mention accountability or transparency as 
a requirement for effective disaster risk gover-
nance. Nor does it make reference to the chal-
lenge posed by corruption. And yet, these terms 
and the social and institutional realities that they 
signify are critical to the effectiveness of disas-
ter risk management (Wisner et al., 2003; UNIS-
DR, 2009a; Kelman, 1998). The absent or limited 
voice of citizens and accountability of decision-
makers to the people they represent have been 

126

Part II - Chapter 6

identified as underlying drivers of disaster risk 
(UNISDR, 2009a). It is also a common character-
istic of countries in conflict situations. Perhaps 
unsurprisingly, many countries that are ranked 
high on indices of disaster risk and vulnerability 
are in conflict or post-conflict situations (Maplec-
roft, 2014; UNU, 2013).

Corruption  mediates  both  the  generation  of 
disaster risk and the impact of disasters. At the 
global scale, corruption has reached dimensions 
that dwarf development efforts (Lewis and Kel-
man, 2012): global proceeds from criminal activ-
ities, corruption and tax evasion that flow freely 
across  international  borders  are  estimated  at 
US$1 trillion to US$1.6 trillion per annum (Unit-
ed Nations and World Bank, 2007). Illicit finan-
cial flows from low and middle-income countries 
from 2003 to 2012 were US$6.6 trillion, equivalent 
to almost 10 times the flow of overseas develop-
ment assistance (GFI, 2014). 

Corrupt practices during and following disasters 
have been well studied (Ambraseys and Bilham, 
2011; Lewis, 2011; IFRC, 2011; Lewis and Kelman, 
2012). For example, a study conducted on corrup-
tion and disaster occurrence in the United States 

between 1990 and 2002 found that high rates of 
corruption-related crimes in Mississippi, Florida 
and South Dakota were correlated to large num-
bers of disaster events and related losses in the 
same three states and throughout America (Lee-
son and Sobel, 2008). There was some causality 
to  this  correlation  in  that  opportunity  for  cor-
ruption in those states was bred by the inflow of 
large sums of relief funding and lucrative post-
disaster construction contracts (ibid.).

In contrast, the different ways in which corrupt 
practices  shape  patterns  of  vulnerability  and 
exposure and determine levels of risk are not as 
well understood. In sectors and localities, corrupt 
practices can increase disaster risk by corroding a 
culture of compliance that is key to the effective-
ness of codes, standards and similar regulatory 
mechanisms. The construction industry is one of 
the sectors most critical to disaster risk manage-
ment and also one of the most prone to corruption 
(Transparency International, 2005). An estimat-
ed US$4 trillion per year is spent on government 
procurement for construction worldwide, and a 

significant part of this expenditure is lost to cor-
ruption, accounting for an estimated 10-30 per 
cent of every project’s value (ibid.).

Corrupt practices in hazard-prone areas contribute 
directly to increasing the vulnerability and expo-
sure of assets and people (Lewis, 2011). For exam-
ple, following the Sichuan earthquake in China in 
2008, the depletion of funds for school buildings 
reportedly led to compromised design standards 
and regulatory codes (Pei, 2007; Lewis, 2011). While 
many older buildings survived the earthquake rel-
atively unscathed, over 7,000 more recently built 
classrooms collapsed, resulting in high mortality; 
one local school reported the death of 900 children 
in the earthquake (Lewis, 2011).

Given that disaster risk is configured by hazard 
and  exposure  as  well  as  vulnerability,  there  is 
no direct correlation between disaster risk and 
levels  of  corruption  (Figure  6.4).  For  example, 
Japan and Eritrea or Grenada and Haiti are pairs 
of countries with similar relative levels of disas-
ter risk (AAL as a proportion of exposed assets). 

Figure 6.4  Control of corruption and disaster risk

 (Source: UNISDR based on data from Global Risk Assessment and the World Bank.)

127

However, Haiti and Eritrea have far higher levels 
of corruption than Japan and Grenada, and the 
former are likely to be more challenged to man-
age their risks effectively.

6.7  

 

 

The times they are a-changing

 

The governance arrangements adopted by many 
countries,  relying  heavily  on  specialized  emer-
gency  management  organizations,  are  not  al-
ways  appropriate  to  address  disaster  risk.  The 
governance  approach  based  on  the  disaster 
management cycle and represented by a special-
ized disaster risk management sector may have 
reached its limit, while at the same time a new 
governance paradigm has yet to emerge.

Emergency management is a specialized techni-
cal domain that is relevant not only to disasters 
but also to technological, marine and aeronauti-
cal accidents, civil disturbances and other events. 
However, the governance arrangements required 
to manage emergencies effectively are not nec-
essarily  appropriate  to  address  development 
challenges  related  to  urban  development  and 
environmental management. Put simply, while 
the fire services at the local level may be com-
pletely capable of  rescuing flood victims from 
their roofs or earthquake victims from collapsed 
structures, these capabilities and the underlying 
institutional and legislative arrangements have 
little connection with those required to address 
issues of land use or water management.

While  emergency  management  was  able  to 
evolve  as  a  stand-alone  sector  addressing  the 
challenges of responding to accidents, techno-
logical disasters and the impacts of conflict, the 
governance arrangements required to manage 
disaster risks need—by definition—to interweave 
with and flow through the broader governance 
arrangements used by countries to manage eco-
nomic and social development (UNDP, 2014a). As 

128

Part II - Chapter 6

additional responsibilities have been assigned 
to  specialized  emergency  management  orga-
nizations in their syncretic evolution into disas-
ter risk management systems, the governance 
arrangements adopted by many countries have 
become unfit for purpose. In other words, while 
specialized  and  self-contained  arrangements 
for disaster risk governance may be appropriate 
for emergency and disaster management, other 
aspects of disaster risk management are heavily 
dependent on the overall quality of governance 
to achieve its objectives (UNDP, 2014a; Lavell and 
Maskrey, 2014).

As such, while strengthening disaster risk gov-
ernance may have catalysed progress in disas-
ter management and contributed to a significant 
reduction in mortality in some countries, it has 
not  guaranteed  effectiveness  and  success  in 
those  areas  of  the  HFA  related  to  prospective 
risk management. Today’s governance failures 
may ripple through time and affect future gen-
erations; this is the case with the 2008 financial 
crisis, which resulted from decades of failure to 
effectively govern increasingly interdependent 
financial markets and mechanisms (Turnbull and 
Pirson, 2011).

When  the  multiple  mirrors  that  make  up  the 
hyper-reality  of  the  disaster  risk  manage-
ment sector begin to shatter in real disasters, it 
becomes clear that—in the same way that disas-
ter risk is endogenous to the social and economic 
processes that configure it over time—managing 
risks cannot be separated from the broader gov-
ernance of social and economic development. 
Capacities  for  disaster  risk  management  can-
not be strengthened autonomously without ref-
erence to broader governance constraints such 
as low levels of voice and accountability, under-
resourced local governments, dysfunctional judi-
cial systems, social conflict and economic crisis.

As  this  hyper-reality  is  revealed  through  the 
experience  of  risk  and  disaster,  new  forms  of 

managing disaster risk, new stakeholders and 
new  forms  of  governance  are  beginning  to 
emerge. The traditional disaster risk manage-
ment sector now shares an increasingly crowd-
ed space with the climate change sector, finance 
and planning ministries, the private sector and 
city governments, amongst other stakeholders 
and players.

The creation of the UNFCCC in 1994 as an inter-
national mechanism to address global climate 
change  soon  spawned  a  specialized  climate 
change sector. Climate change is an underlying 
driver of disaster risk, and many plans for climate 
change  adaptation  have  a  strong  disaster  risk 
management component (IPCC, 2012; SEI, 2014; 
UNDP, 2014a). However, this sector, which is usu-
ally anchored in environment ministries, is only 
weakly integrated with the disaster risk manage-
ment sector in most countries (SEI, 2014); excep-
tions include the small island states in the Pacific 
(UNDESA,  2014a).  The  climate  change  sector, 
however, has been more successful in attract-
ing  resources  and  political  support  and  now 
challenges the disaster risk reduction sector for 
salience. Climate change adaptation has there-
fore become another forum for disaster risk gov-
ernance. At the same time, it remains a major 
challenge to reconcile the policy arenas of disas-
ter risk reduction and climate change adaptation 
as well as climate change mitigation, economic 
growth and sustainable development (SEI, 2014).

Recent years have also seen a growing interest in 
risk financing from both the disaster risk reduc-
tion and climate change sectors. Finance minis-
tries, insurance regulators, international finance 
institutions  as  well  as  insurance,  reinsurance 
and catastrophe modelling companies (Arnold, 
2008;  Cummins  and  Mahul,  2009;  Muir-Wood, 
2011;  GFDRR,  2014b)  have  also  increased  their 
involvement  in  developing  and  extending  risk 
financing mechanisms such as insurance, contin-
gency financing and catastrophe bonds, includ-
ing in regional arrangements such as CCRIF and 

PCRAFI.6  These  mechanisms  have  the  explic-
it  objective  of  protecting  social  and  econom-
ic development against external shocks and can 
be interpreted as a modernization of the logic of 
the disaster management cycle. At the same time, 
finance and planning ministries have also been 
involved in promoting new approaches to disaster 
risk governance based on public investment plan-
ning and evaluation (Lavell, 2014; GFDRR, no date; 
UNISDR, 2009a and 2011a) and have responded 
to concerns regarding sustainable public invest-
ment and the quality of public spending.

Since the major disasters in Japan and Thailand 
in  2011  exposed  risks  to  global  supply  chains, 
interest in disaster risk reduction has increased 
among  businesses  and,  more  recently,  in  the 
financial  sector  (Ingirige  et  al.,  2014;  UNISDR, 
2013a).  This  has  led  to  a  large  number  of  ini-
tiatives that seek to develop new forms of risk 
governance involving both business and govern-
ment, investors and financial regulators, such as 
the innovative R!SE or 1-in-100 initiatives, both of 
which seek to make investments more risk-sen-
sitive.7 In addition, large cities are now provid-
ing spaces where the public and private sectors, 
disaster  risk  management  and climate  change 
adaptation are starting to converge.

Government statutory regulation has also been 
complemented  by  a  range  of  voluntary  stan-
dards  relevant  to  disaster  risk  reduction,  not 
just in sector-specific areas such as private hous-
ing, transport networks and hubs, schools, hos-
pitals’  electro-technical  equipment  and  other 
critical infrastructure, but also in cross-cutting 
areas such as environmental management (Fig-
ure 6.5), corporate social responsibility and busi-
ness continuity (UNECE, 2014). Both public and 
private organizations have begun to apply stan-
dards that combine risk management with envi-
ronmental  and  social  codes  of  conduct  and 
principles in areas as diverse as housing, protect-
ed areas management, industry and investment 
portfolio management. Codes governing social 

129

Figure 6.5  Uptake of environmental management system standards

 (Source: ISO, 2014.)

and environmental responsibility are increasing-
ly being adopted by businesses to enhance their 
value proposition (UNECE, 2014).

The way in which disaster risk management has 
been  approached  is  now  being  challenged  by 
these innovative efforts, most of which are cur-
rently in a phase of exploration rather than con-
solidation. As the HFA comes to a close, therefore, 
disaster risk management finds itself at some-
thing of a crossroads. Disasters such as Typhoon 
Haiyan  in  the  Philippines  in  2013  are  blowing 
away the veils of hyper-reality to show that even 
countries with apparently mature and compre-
hensive disaster risk governance arrangements 
in place are challenged by continued risk accu-
mulation.  The  governance  approach  based  on 
the disaster management cycle and represented 
by a specialized disaster risk management sector 
may have reached its limit, while at the same time 
a new governance paradigm has yet to emerge.

130

Part II - Chapter 6

Notes

1  http://iog.ca/defining-governance.
2  For  more  information  on  local,  national  and  regional  HFA 
reports,  see  http://www.preventionweb.net/english/hyogo/
progress/?pid:73&pil:1.
3  www.duryognivaran.org. 
4  http://www.unisdr.org/campaign/resilientcities.
5  Various sources:  
http://www.nat-hazards-earth-syst-sci.net/11/2321/2011/
nhess-11-2321-2011.pdf;  
http://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-30453552;  
http://www.lemonde.fr/planete/article/2014/12/12/xynthia-l-
ancien-maire-de-la-faute-sur-mer-condamne-a-quatre-ans-de-
prison-ferme_4539436_3244.html (accessed 11 January 2015).
6  For more information on the Caribbean Catastrophe Risk In-
surance Facility, see http://www.ccrif.org/content/about-us and 
the Pacific Catastrophe Risk Assessment and Financing Initiative: 
http://pcrafi.sopac.org/ (accessed 28 August 2014).
7  For  more  information  on  these  initiatives,  see  www.
theriseinitiative.org  and  http://www.un.org/climatechange/
summit/action-areas. 

Chapter 7
A culture of prevention
and resilience?

131

Investment in public awareness, education and risk assessment has increased. However, these 
efforts have rarely taken into account the social and economic constraints on disaster risk reduc-
tion or the opportunities sacrificed by not addressing that risk. As a result, the increasing volume 
of risk information available has not generally been translated into risk knowledge.

7.1 From Ratnapura to the Chao 

Phraya River

Where risk awareness is limited, those exposed 
to hazards have limited motivation to invest in 
reducing their risk levels. 

It is highly improbable that any resident of the 
District of Ratnapura, Sri Lanka, is unaware of 
disaster risk. Since 1990, Ratnapura has report-
ed a staggering 2,601 extensive disaster events, 
an average of over 100 per year, which have dam-
aged or destroyed 23,000 homes, affected over a 
million people and eroded essential local infra-
structure.1 Ratnapura is a highly disaster-prone 
district which is particularly affected by floods 
and landslides (OXFAM, 2006). Thirteen per cent 
of its low-lying areas are generally affected by 
floods  during  heavy  rains  (UN-Habitat,  2009). 
Moreover, increases in annual rainfall and tem-
perature variations have led to increased annual 
landslide occurrence over the last decade (Rath-
naweera, et al., 2012).

Ratnapura is only one of thousands of municipal-
ities around the world that experience recurrent 
extensive disasters. In general, the residents of 
these localities are fully aware of the risks they 
face. But their choice as to where to live and work 
is often constrained by social and economic fac-
tors, including a lack of access to safer land, the 
need to be close to employment opportunities, 
insufficient  investment  in  risk-reducing  infra-
structure by local and national authorities, and 
sometimes  discrimination.  With  constrained 
opportunities, people faced with recurrent exten-
sive risk often have no choice but to live with that 
risk and periodically recover from disaster loss 
and damage.

132

Part II - Chapter 7

In contrast to Ratnapura, it is probable that very 
few of the companies that built factories on the 
floodplains of the Chao Phraya River in Thailand 
before the massive flooding in November 2011 
were fully aware of the risk they faced. Flood risk 
in the basin had never been modelled, and the 
scale of the disaster took global businesses, the 
government and the insurance industry by sur-
prise. Rippling through global supply chains, the 
disaster affected production around the world 
and resulted in massive losses. The total loss of 
operating profit to Toyota and Honda alone was 
estimated at US$1.25 billion and US$1.4 billion, 
respectively (UNISDR, 2013a).

Despite the scale of these losses, very few com-
panies have decided to relocate to less hazard-
ous  areas  of  Thailand  or  to  other  countries.  A 
survey conducted among Japanese businesses 
in Bangkok in 2012 showed that almost 80 per 
cent had decided to stay in the same locations, 
compared to 16 per cent that had already moved 
or were planning on moving to other locations 
in Thailand and 6 per cent that planned to move 
overseas (Government of Japan, 2012). All of the 
businesses in the area are now fully aware of the 
flood risks. While it may not always be a matter of 
choice, particularly due to financial constraints 
(ibid.),  for  most  businesses  the  value  creation 
opportunities provided by the location outweigh 
any contingent liabilities posed by future floods.

Awareness,  identification,  understanding  and 
estimation of disaster risks are all clearly funda-
mental underpinnings of disaster risk manage-
ment. If those exposed to hazards are unaware of 
the risks they face, it is difficult to see how or why 
households, businesses or governments would 
invest in reducing their risk levels.

7.2  

 

 

The information challenge

 

While  much  more  disaster  risk  information  is 
generated today than ever before, it is not neces-
sarily accessible to households, businesses and 
investors.

Under Priority for Action 3, the HFA attached con-
siderable importance to improving risk aware-
ness and information in order to contribute to the 
adoption of a culture of disaster prevention and 
resilience (Box 7.1).

However, the examples of Ratnapura and the Chao 
Phraya River illustrate that disaster risk is not an 
objective and tangible externality to be reduced. 
Similarly, risk awareness does not automatical-
ly lead to investments in disaster risk manage-
ment. Risk can only be understood in terms of the 
dynamic relationship between exposed and vul-
nerable households, businesses or governments 
and the probability of hazard events of different 
intensity and extent. While risk awareness may 
be a precondition, the importance people attach 
to managing their risks can only be understood 
in the context of the full range of social, econom-
ic, territorial and environmental constraints and 
opportunities they face.

Box 7.1  Risk awareness and information

Information management and exchange

(a) Provide easily understandable information on disaster risks and protection options, especially to citizens in 
high-risk areas, to encourage and enable people to take action to reduce risks and build resilience. The informa-
tion should incorporate relevant traditional and indigenous knowledge and culture heritage and be tailored to 
different target audiences, taking into account cultural and social factors.

(b) Strengthen networks among disaster experts, managers and planners across sectors and between regions, 
and create or strengthen procedures for using available expertise when agencies and other important actors 
develop local risk reduction plans.

(c) Promote and improve dialogue and cooperation among scientific communities and practitioners working on 
disaster risk reduction, and encourage partnerships among stakeholders, including those working on the socio-
economic dimensions of disaster risk reduction.

(d) Promote the use, application and affordability of recent information, communication and space-based tech-
nologies and related services, as well as earth observations, to support disaster risk reduction, particularly for 
training and for the sharing and dissemination of information among different categories of users.

(e) In the medium term, develop local, national, regional and international user-friendly directories, inventories 
and national information-sharing systems and services for the exchange of information on good practices, cost-
effective and easy-to-use disaster risk reduction technologies, and lessons learned on policies, plans and mea-
sures for disaster risk reduction.

(f) Institutions dealing with urban development should provide information to the public on disaster reduction 
options prior to constructions, land purchase or land sale.

(g)  Update  and  widely  disseminate  international  standard  terminology  related  to  disaster  risk  reduction,  at 
least in all official United Nations languages, for use in programme and institutional development, operations, 
research, training curricula and public information programmes.

Public awareness

(p) Promote the engagement of the media in order to stimulate a culture of disaster resilience and strong com-
munity involvement in sustained public education campaigns and public consultations at all levels of society.

133

HFA progress reports show that countries have 
made significant progress in this area. Howev-
er, progress in general is lower than the average 
across the various priorities for action (Figure 
7.1). With notable exceptions, citizens, business-
es and other stakeholders in most countries rare-
ly have access to risk information before they 
make investment decisions or undertake prop-
erty transactions. As discussed below, there has 
been explosive growth in the production of risk 
information and in collaboration between scien-
tific and technical institutions, but too little of 
this information ends up in the hands of users in 
a format that can inform decisions (CDKN, 2014).

Figure 7.1  Progress in risk awareness

disasters for millennia. Shaped by that experi-
ence, risk awareness is high amongst citizens and 
government authorities alike, research into risk 
identification and estimation is a priority, and risk 
knowledge permeates disaster risk management 
strategies and policies at all levels. Sustainabili-
ty depends on sound disaster risk management.

In contrast, the disaster risk awareness of house-
holds, businesses and governments in countries 
with low levels of hazard exposure and infrequent 
disasters is likely to lack that essential experien-
tial quality. Irrespective of public information on 
hazards, a strong political and economic impera-
tive for disaster risk management is far less like-
ly to emerge in those countries (Neumayer et al., 
2012).

At  the  global  level,  disaster  risk  awareness  is 
not systematically assessed, and it is difficult to 
measure how it has evolved since the adoption 
of the HFA or the declaration of the IDNDR. How-
ever, the number of nationally and international-
ly reported disasters has shown a strong upward 
trend since 1990 (Figure 7.2), which could indi-
cate that more people have experienced mani-
festations of risk first-hand.

Large intensive disasters with major social and 
economic impacts certainly generate risk aware-
ness, at least in the short term, and may catalyse 
change. As noted in Chapter 1, the impetus to 
reform risk governance arrangements often sur-
faces in the wake of large disasters. This change 
is not limited to governments. For example, the 
impact of the 2011 disasters in Japan and Thai-
land  on  global  supply  chains  (UNISDR,  2013a) 
certainly led to raised awareness of and concern 
with disaster risk in the private sector. 

This awareness (Box 7.2) continues to grow, and 
disaster  and  climate-related  risks  now  figure 

 (Source: UNISDR with data from the HFA Monitor.)

7.3 Experiencing disaster risk

Gaining  risk  awareness  is  a  dynamic  process 
which  is  highly  dependent  on  disaster  experi-
ence. It therefore differs across time and space. 

Risk awareness and understanding would seem 
to be fundamentally experiential. For example, 
Japan has the highest level of hazard exposure 
in the world and has been dealing with repeated 

134

Part II - Chapter 7

Figure 7.2  Disaster records in global (left) and national databases (right)

 (Source: UNISDR with data from EM-DAT and national disaster loss databases.)

highly on the radar screens of senior executives 
in global corporations.

Whether risk awareness is maintained over the 
medium and long term would seem to depend 
on  disaster  frequency.  When  intensive  disas-
ters are very infrequent, as in the case of Indian 
Ocean tsunamis, inter-generational awareness of 
disaster risks may fade. To cite an extreme exam-
ple, it is highly doubtful whether earthquake risk 
awareness is still strong in the south-east of Eng-
land as a result of the Canterbury earthquake on 

21 May 1382. As a result of migration, popula-
tions that may have lived in an area for decades 
are unaware of the risks manifested in histori-
cal disasters hundreds of years ago. In addition, 
increasing geographical mobility now means that 
people frequently live, work and travel far from 
the areas and disaster risks they are familiar with.

As highlighted by the case of Ratnapura, exten-
sive disasters clearly shape risk awareness in a 
far more tangible way in the localities where they 

Box 7.2  Increasing awareness of disaster and climate risks

Around 70 per cent of companies responding to a recent survey by the Carbon Disclosure Project identified 
clear business continuity risks to their supply chains and thus risks to their revenue streams due to climate 
change and the resulting extreme weather events (CDP, 2013). Most importantly, more than half of these risks 
have either already impacted these companies or are expected to do so within the next five years (ibid.).

Local surveys of a similar nature reflect these global results and show that awareness of climate risk in par-
ticular is rising across the globe. For example, of more than 300 businesses responding to an annual survey 
on climate change in Hong Kong, 82 per cent identified disruptions due to extreme weather as critical risks, 
compared to “only” 44 per cent in 2010 (BEC CCBF, 2014).

However, smaller companies may be less aware of the potential scale of climate risks (Ceres, 2013). Among 
184 companies surveyed in the insurance sector, only 23 large companies had a “specific, comprehensive 
strategy  to  cope  with  climate  change”  (ibid.,  p.  7).  The  approaches  of  others  range  from  viewing  climate 
change  as  a  risk  inherently  captured  in  their  enterprise  risk  management  strategies  to  an  environmental 
issue immaterial to their business.

135

experience of disasters in particular places. This 
global risk awareness has been strengthened by 
the threat of catastrophic climate change to the 
extent that disaster risk has been increasingly 
portrayed as synonymous with climate change.

However,  the  global  media  focuses  on  major 
disaster events rather than the underlying pro-
cesses and drivers that generate and accumulate 
disaster risks. Like resources for the disaster risk 
management sector, media coverage of and inter-
est in disasters is transient: it spikes when major 
events occur, for example following the Indian 
Ocean tsunamis in 2004 and the East Japanese 
earthquake in 2011, but it falls silent between 
events (Box 7.3).

Against this backdrop, while the global media can 
increase risk awareness, it may tend to reinforce 
the perception of disasters as exogenous events, 
thus dissimulating and veiling the drivers through 
which the development paradigm generates and 
accumulates risk. In addition, while these drivers 
do become visible through extensive disasters, 
the resulting risk awareness is largely limited to 
the local level.

occur. And given their frequency, this awareness 
is unlikely to fade. However, as they affect mainly 
low-income households and communities, small 
businesses and local infrastructure rather than 
strategic political and economic interests, they 
are less likely to catalyse an increased imperative 
for disaster risk management at the national level 
(UNISDR, 2011a). At the same time, opportunities 
to manage risks are often severely constrained at 
the local level.

7.4    

 

 
In search of the scoop

 

 

Media  interest  in  disasters  is  transient,  and  re-
porting on disaster causes and impacts can rein-
force the perception of disasters as exogenous to 
development.

The  world  is  changing  rapidly  as  connectivi-
ty increases and global television, the Internet 
and social media become all-pervasive. Images 
of disasters occurring anywhere in the world are 
now  transmitted  and  disseminated  globally  in 
real time. Similarly, disaster impacts themselves 
ripple through global supply and value chains. A 
more global awareness of risk would seem to be 
emerging that is not necessarily grounded in the 

Box 7.3  Disaster mortality and the media

The space dedicated to mortality in the media is not proportional to the number of deaths that actually occur 
(Bomlitz and Brezis, 2008). Mortality associated with illicit drugs, motor accidents, toxic agents and homicide 
are overrepresented (Frost et al., 1997), as are hazards such as SARS and bioterrorism. In contrast, more prev-
alent mortality factors such as AIDS, physical inactivity and smoking are under-represented (Bomlitz and 
Brezis, 2008).

In general, the media tends to overlook creeping changes (Glantz, 1999) even though the threats posed by 
environmental change such as biodiversity loss, climate change, desertification, stratospheric ozone deple-
tion, tropical deforestation, mangrove and coral destruction, soil erosion, soil and water pollution, overfish-
ing, invasive species (Meadows et al., 1972; Turner, 2008; Randers, 2008 and Rockström et al., 2009) and other 
global  drivers  may  increase  disaster  risk  to  catastrophic  levels.  These  incremental  changes  go  unnoticed 
until  they  pass  a  threshold  and  quickly  lead  to  changes  in  the  environment  or  are  revealed  by  a  disaster 
(Maskrey, 1999). Only then does the media pay attention.

136

Part II - Chapter 7

7.5 Information but not 

communication

Risk information is being generated and dissemi-
nated on a large scale, but how far it reaches and 
whether it changes risk perceptions and aware-
ness levels is not well understood.

Since  the  declaration  of  the  IDNDR,  there  has 
been explosive growth in the production and dis-
semination of information on disaster risks and 
disaster risk reduction (UNISDR, 2014c). Howev-
er, it is unclear to what extent this has contribut-
ed to increasing awareness of disaster risk.

As  the  disaster  risk  management  sector  has 
grown  and  become  structured  around  differ-
ent communities of practice, such as emergen-
cy management, community-based disaster risk 
management, insurance and risk financing,2 the 
volume of information produced and exchanged 
has  increased  exponentially,  facilitated  by  the 
expansion of the Internet since the early 1990s. 
PreventionWeb  now  records  6,587  organiza-
tions that have promoted disaster risk reduction 
through  their  websites,  including  1,093  media 
and news organizations, mediated regionally and 
thematically by dedicated information portals 
and online documentation centres such as CRID 
in Latin America, PreventionWeb itself, Pacific 
Disaster Net and others (UNISDR, 2014c).

A large number of formal and informal networks 
now  provide  channels  for  information  sharing 
and dissemination inside the sector. In addition, 
whereas there were only a handful of specialized 
training programmes on disaster risk reduction 
in 1990, there are now over 100 dedicated mas-
ter’s programmes servicing the sector across all 
regions (Holloway, 2014).

Therefore,  there  is  evidence  of  exponential 
growth in the production and exchange of infor-
mation  on  disaster  risk  management.  What  is 
unclear, however, is how much of that information 

actually seeps and spills out of the sector into 
other  social,  economic  and  political  domains. 
And it is even less clear how much of this informa-
tion has truly generated changes and transfor-
mation in development practices. As mentioned 
in Chapter 1, some of the key activities proposed 
in the HFA regarding risk information, for exam-
ple,  “Institutions  dealing  with  urban  develop-
ment should provide information to the public on 
disaster reduction options prior to constructions, 
land  purchase  or  land  sale”,  were  incisive  and 
could have directly influenced and transformed 
the operation of land markets and valuations of 
disaster  risk.  However,  there  is  little  evidence 
that this key activity was ever acted on.

In contrast, far more progress has been made in 
disseminating information through public aware-
ness programmes. According to the HFA Monitor, 
the number of countries with national disaster 
information systems and mechanisms for pro-
active information dissemination has increased 
over the last two reporting cycles (2009-2013), 
with  important  regional  differences.  In  Africa, 
lack of capacity, funding and Internet connectiv-
ity are all cited as barriers, and many countries 
face issues of sustainability. In Asia, some low-
income  countries  would  appear  to  have  more 
advanced systems than high-income countries.

However, in most countries (UNISDR, 2014c; SCI, 
2014) the existence of a web site is often taken as 
evidence for the existence of a disaster informa-
tion system. Increases in the number of websites 
offering risk information or the number of experts 
attending regional and international conferences 
certainly gives the impression of expanding risk 
awareness, but as indicated in the introduction to 
this part of the report, this may simply strengthen 
the hyper-reality of the sector. Little information is 
available on the extent to which households, busi-
nesses and government institutions from outside 
the sector visit these web sites or whether the 
information available is actionable.

137

Many countries have also used media campaigns 
(print  media,  radio,  television)  to  raise  public 
awareness. However, the dissemination of infor-
mation  is  generally  unidirectional  and  reflects 
the agenda and vision of the sector rather than 
the information needs of those at risk. Top-down 
media campaigns by definition tend to be simple 
and generic. They generally focus on awareness 
of hazards and on disasters as exogenous events 
rather  than  on  socially  constructed  processes 
of  risk  generation  and  accumulation.  The  con-
straints and opportunities for risk management, 
the rights of those at risk, or the responsibility of 
local and national governments are rarely fea-
tured, and the specific needs of women, the elder-
ly, people with disabilities, and children have only 
occasionally been brought into focus. At the same 
time, a number of governments still consider risk 
and even disaster loss information sensitive from 
a national security standpoint, meaning that it is 
not disseminated or made available to citizens.

This is insufficient to build a culture of preven-
tion and resilience given that it does not empow-
er  risk-prone  households  and  businesses  to 
manage  their  risks  in  the  face  of  wider  social 
and  economic  opportunities  and  constraints. 
In many sectors, opportunities for short-term 
economic gain often still outweigh longer-term 
risks. A culture of prevention and resilience will 
only emerge if the information allows a trans-
parent and comprehensive assessment of the 
costs and benefits of disaster risk management 
and if a system of accountability is put in place 
that offers incentives and encourages compli-
ance (OECD, 2014b).

138

Part II - Chapter 7

7.6 Education as a vehicle to 

effective risk management

Education, and in particular formal school edu-
cation, is a strong foundation enabling individu-
als to understand disaster risk. Adapted curricu-
la can support a significant improvement in risk 
awareness.

In  Nepal,  villages  with  higher  mean  years  of 
schooling had fewer families affected by floods 
and landslides (KC, 2013), and in Thailand, bet-
ter-educated communities suffered lower wel-
fare impacts, particularly in terms of lost income 
(Garbero and Muttarak, 2013). The policy implica-
tions from these findings are clear: investments 
in education, and particularly in female educa-
tion, have been shown to  reduce vulnerability 
and should therefore be presented as a core stra-
tegic investment in disaster risk reduction (Mut-
tarak and Lutz, 2014).

While general formal education lays the founda-
tions for synoptic brain structure and the accom-
panying problem-solving and cognitive skills, it 
also creates the required literacy and numeri-
cal skills and abstract thinking that enables indi-
viduals  to  better  understand  risk  information 
such  as  early  warning  messages  and  evacua-
tion plans (ibid.). More directly, education facil-
itates knowledge acquisition on a broad range 
of issues directly related to individual and com-
munity vulnerability, including health and nutri-
tion  practices  as  well  as  direct  knowledge  of 
hazards. In addition, education may enhance the 
socio-economic status of individuals and fami-
lies and thus contribute to improved disaster risk 
management through increased income, better 
access to information and stronger social net-
works (ibid.).

Recent  studies  comparing  national  edu-
cation  levels  with  mortality  risk  show  that 
countries with higher education levels, partic-
ularly amongst women and girls, exhibit lower 

mortality  from  disasters  (KC,  2013;  Striessnig 
et al., 2013). For example, education levels and 
mortality rates were shown to be highly corre-
lated in the case of weather-related disaster risk 
in 56 countries with an average of one or more 
disasters per annum (Figure 7.3).

While education in itself is critical to disaster risk 
reduction,  the  HFA  proposed  a  number  of  key 
activities under Priority for Action 3 which relate 
specifically to the inclusion of disaster risk reduc-
tion in education and training (Box 7.4).

Since 2005, an abundance of educational mate-
rials in the form of guidelines, teacher’s guides 
and  curriculum  reform  guides  have  been  pro-
duced in various languages.3 However, the con-
tent  and  quality  of  educational  materials  on 
disaster risk reduction has not been seriously 
reviewed, and the uptake of the available materi-
als by educational institutions is not monitored. 
As a result, it is difficult to assess what progress 
has been made, to what extent efforts in reform-
ing curricula to include risk considerations have 
been  successful,  or  where  and  why  they  may 
have failed.

Box 7.4  Key activities related to education and training in the HFA

Figure 7.3  Weather-related disaster mortality and female 
education in Cuba, the Dominican Republic and Haiti 

Note: The graph shows deaths per 1,000 based on 1980 population levels 
(y-axis) proportional to secondary and higher education among women 
aged 20-39 (x-axis) for 56 countries with one or more disasters on average 
per annum.
 (Source: Pichler and Striessnig, 2014.)

The nature of curriculum development in itself 
makes it difficult for a framework like the HFA to 
exert strong influence on the decision-making 
process. On the one hand, curricula are reviewed 
and adapted in 5 to 10-year cycles, which may not 

(h) Promote the inclusion of disaster risk reduction knowledge in relevant sections of school curricula at all levels 
and the use of other formal and informal channels to reach youth and children with information; promote the 
integration of disaster risk reduction as an intrinsic element of the United Nations Decade of Education for Sus-
tainable Development (2005–2015).

(i) Promote the implementation of local risk assessment and disaster preparedness programmes in schools and 
institutions of higher education.

(j) Promote the implementation of programmes and activities in schools for learning how to minimize the effects 
of hazards.

(k) Develop training and learning programmes in disaster risk reduction targeted at specific sectors (develop-
ment planners, emergency managers, local government officials, etc.).

(l) Promote community-based training initiatives, considering the role of volunteers, as appropriate, to enhance 
local capacities to mitigate and cope with disasters.

(m) Ensure equal access to appropriate training and educational opportunities for women and vulnerable con-
stituencies; promote gender and cultural sensitivity training as integral components of education and training 
for disaster risk reduction.

139

Box 7.5  The role of children in strengthening preparedness

The United States and Australia have developed educational materials that foster leadership among school 
children in disaster preparedness and teach them how to share this information with others. Looking at chil-
dren as active agents of change instead of objects that need to be protected can broaden the scope of educa-
tion  and  its  future  impact.  Several  programmes  have  been  developed  in  order  to  develop  children’s 
awareness of and capacities for DRR, such as Save the Children’s school safety programmes or the Children’s 
Charter for Disaster Risk Reduction (Children in a Changing Climate Coalition, 2011).

In France, The Memo’Risks initiative has been operating in the Loire River catchment area since 2004 and 
brings together local governments and schools to survey local disaster risk awareness (UNISDR et al., 2010). 
Students are rallied by local mayors to investigate and map risks and to survey the preparedness and risk 
knowledge of the local population. The survey results then become a valuable data resource on perceptions 
of risk and levels of risk knowledge in the local population. The process of collecting, presenting and publiciz-
ing the results is used by local government to raise disaster awareness through the media, to increase com-
munity participation in disaster risk reduction, and to form the basis of targeted disaster risk information 
campaigns (ibid.).4  

correspond to the short cycles of projects aimed 
at raising risk awareness in schools. On the other 
hand, the generic and global guidance in the HFA 
is often difficult to align to the sub-national con-
texts where curricula are often developed.

However, about 72 per cent of countries report-
ing through the HFA Monitor indicate that disas-
ter risk reduction is included in some way in the 
national educational curriculum, with coverage 
in primary school curricula slightly higher than 
in secondary and university or professional pro-
grammes. Only about a third were able to report 
on the inclusion of disaster risk reduction in cur-
ricula at all education levels as well as in pro-
fessional  education  programmes  (UNICEF  and 
UNESCO, 2014).

While there is little systematic research on chang-
ing perceptions, anecdotal evidence shows that 
preparedness drills and simulation activities in 
schools (Box 7.5) may make an important contri-
bution to risk awareness, particularly amongst 
children and youths. 

140

Part II - Chapter 7

Children’s engagement in school disaster man-
agement, including risk assessment and active 
problem-solving, lays the foundation for critical 
thinking and promotes an increasing willingness 
to take on other challenges. Engaging students 
and families in planning for educational conti-
nuity  may  also  be  a  factor  in  reducing  school 
drop-out rates when disasters occur (UNICEF and 
UNESCO, 2014).

Rather  than  promoting  disaster  risk  reduction 
as  a  stand-alone  curricular  subject,  there  are 
obvious synergies in combining it with related 
subjects, such as climate change. For example, 
Cambodia is promoting a combined disaster risk 
reduction and climate change adaptation curric-
ulum that reduces the pressure on what is seen as 
an already overcrowded school curriculum. There 
are  other  examples  where  disaster  risk  reduc-
tion has been linked with topics like conflict and 
peace-building, sustainable development, oth-
er common localized risks, and with the underly-
ing social, economic and political drivers of risk. 
Unfortunately the silo-like nature of the disaster 
risk management sector and institutional rival-
ries with other sectors such as climate change 
may be obstacles to this sort of integration.

7.7  

 

 

Living in a modelled world

 

The volume of risk information produced has in-
creased significantly over time and is accompa-
nied by associated communities of practice, in-
creasing  data  availability  and  scientific  and 
technical capacities to transform that data into 
risk information.

In parallel with the growth of the disaster risk 
management sector as a whole, there has been 
equally  exponential  growth  in  the  number  of 
people and institutions involved in risk assess-
ment. At all levels, the volume of risk information 
produced  has  increased  significantly,  and  this 
development has been accompanied by a com-
mensurate increase in the size of the associated 
community of practice, in the data available and 
in the scientific and technical capacities to trans-
form that data into risk information. The series 
of Understanding Risk meetings organized by the 
World Bank since 20105 highlights the emergence 
of an increasingly large and dedicated commu-
nity of practice in this area. It would appear that 
disaster risk management is increasingly taking 
place in a modelled world.

Until  the  early  1990s,  much  of  the  insurance 
industry based its business decisions on actuar-
ial approaches using historical data. The use of 
catastrophe risk models in this industry grew dra-
matically after Hurricane Andrew, which struck 

Box 7.6  Key activities related to risk assessment in the HFA

National and local risk assessments

Florida  in  1992  and  gave  rise  to  insured  loss-
es far greater than those expected on the basis 
of historical experience (GFDRR, 2014a). Shortly 
after the hurricane made landfall, the risk-mod-
elling company AIR modelled and estimated the 
insured  losses;  these  were  far  larger  than  any 
experienced in the past and closer to the actual 
insured losses from the hurricane.

The arrival of powerful personal computers in 
the early 1990s ushered in the era of mathemat-
ical modelling of disaster risks using probabilis-
tic approaches. Following Hurricane Andrew, the 
insurance industry began to invest heavily in risk 
modelling in order to set premiums appropriately 
and to protect itself against insolvency.

With a few notable exceptions,6 probabilistic risk 
modelling was largely confined to the insurance 
industry and to specialized risk modelling com-
panies until the advent of the HFA. While many 
national  and  local  governments,  internation-
al organizations and non-governmental organi-
zations carried out risk assessments, these were 
generally qualitative in character (e.g. highlight-
ing areas of low, medium or high risk) or deter-
ministic (calculating risk quantitatively for one 
particular  hazard  scenario)  and  limited  by  the 
availability of historical data.

The HFA gave detailed guidance on key activities 
in risk assessment under Priorities for Action 2 
and 3 (Box 7.6).

(a) Develop, update periodically and widely disseminate risk maps and related information to decision-makers, 
the general public and communities at risk in an appropriate format.

(b) Develop systems of indicators of disaster risk and vulnerability at national and sub-national scales that will 
enable decision-makers to assess the impact of disasters on social, economic and environmental conditions and 
disseminate the results to decision makers, the public and populations at risk.

(c)  Record,  analyse,  summarize  and  disseminate  statistical  information  on  disaster  occurrence,  impacts  and 
losses on a regular basis through international, regional, national and local mechanisms.

141

Capacity

(i) Support the development and sustainability of the infrastructure and scientific, technological, technical and 
institutional  capacities  needed  to  research,  observe,  analyse,  map  and  where  possible  forecast  natural  and 
related hazards, vulnerabilities and disaster impacts.

(j)  Support  the  development  and  improvement  of  relevant  databases  and  the  promotion  of  full  and  open 
exchange and dissemination of data for assessment, monitoring and early warning purposes, as appropriate, at 
international, regional, national and local levels.

(k) Support the improvement of scientific and technical methods and capacities for risk assessment, monitoring 
and  early  warning,  through  research,  partnerships,  training  and  technical  capacity-  building.  Promote  the 
application  of  in  situ  and  space-based  earth  observations,  space  technologies,  remote  sensing,  geographic 
information systems, hazard modelling and prediction, weather and climate modelling and forecasting, com-
munication tools and studies of the costs and benefits of risk assessment and early warning.

(l) Establish and strengthen the capacity to record, analyze, summarize, disseminate, and exchange statistical 
information and data on hazards mapping, disaster risks, impacts, and losses; support the development of com-
mon methodologies for risk assessment and monitoring.

Regional and transboundary risks

(m) Compile and standardize, as appropriate, statistical information and data on regional disaster risks, impacts 
and losses.

(n) Cooperate regionally and internationally, as appropriate, to assess and monitor regional and trans-bound-
ary hazards, and exchange information and provide early warnings through appropriate arrangements, such 
as, inter alia, those relating to the management of river basins.

Research

(n) Develop improved methods for predictive multi-risk assessments and socioeconomic cost–benefit analysis of 
risk  reduction  actions  at  all  levels;  incorporate  these  methods  into  decision-making  processes  at  regional, 
national and local levels.

(o) Strengthen the technical and scientific capacity to develop and apply methodologies, studies and models to 
assess vulnerabilities to and the impact of geological, weather, water and climate-related hazards, including 
the improvement of regional monitoring capacities and assessments

Since the adoption of the HFA, there has been 
explosive growth in the production of risk infor-
mation  by  public-sector  scientific  and  techni-
cal  institutions,  universities  and  international 
organizations at all scales (GFDRR, 2014a). This 
growth  has  been  facilitated  by  the  increasing 
availability of remotely sensed information, open 
source  software  and  platforms,  social  media, 
crowdsourcing and mobile phones, and by expo-
nential  increases  in  computing  power.  At  the 
same time, there has been growing convergence 
between risk assessment efforts in the insurance 
and catastrophe modelling industries and those 
in the public and academic sectors. As a result, 

significant progress has been made in each crit-
ical element of the risk assessment process (Fig-
ure 7. 4).

There has been substantial progress towards cre-
ating and providing open access to many global 
and national data sets critical to understanding 
hazard.  The  greater  availability  of  global  data 
sets on population, building types, satellite imag-
ery, and so on is opening up significant oppor-
tunities to model global exposure at higher and 
higher  resolutions.  At  the  national  and  sub-
national levels, data and information from gov-
ernment ministries (such as statistics authorities, 

142

Part II - Chapter 7

Figure 7.4  Progress in risk identification and assessment 

HFA Priority for Action 2: Identify, assess and monitor 
disaster risks and enhance early warning.
 (Source: UNISDR with data from the HFA Monitor.)

transportation and infrastructure departments, 
and  education  and  health  departments)  are 
increasingly being liberated7 and merged in order 
to  understand  community,  city  and  national 
exposure. At the city and community levels, the 
growing  popularity  of  crowdsourcing  has  also 
enabled the collection of exposure data as well 
as the survey and mapping of disaster impacts in 
real time, for example after the 2010 Haiti earth-
quake and Pakistan floods (Degrossi et al., 2014; 
Chohan et al., 2011). Applications such as Open-
StreetMap (Box 7.7) are helping to make this infor-
mation increasingly pervasive.
 
At the same time, tools and models for identify-
ing, analysing, and managing risk have grown in 

Box 7.7  OpenStreetMap

number and utility; and risk data and tools are 
increasingly being made freely available to users 
as part of a larger global trend towards open data. 
More than 80 freely available software packages, 
many of which are open source, are now avail-
able for flood, tsunami, cyclone (wind and storm 
surge)  and  earthquake  risk  assessment,  with 
at least 30 of them in widespread use (GFDRR, 
2014a). Significant progress has also been made 
in improving open source geospatial tools such 
as QGIS, GeoNode and PREVIEW, which are low-
ering the financial barriers to risk information at 
the national and sub-national levels.

Since the publication of an initial global multi-
hazard  risk  analysis  by  UNDP  in  2004  (UNDP, 
2004), models designed to provide insight into 
global and regional trends in disaster risk have 
also become more sophisticated and, as high-
lighted  in  Chapter  3  of  this  report,  have  now 
adopted probabilistic approaches.

Disaster loss data has also significantly improved. 
As  mentioned  in  Chapter  4,  over  85  nationally 
owned databases of disaster loss and damage 
now exist, compared to only 12 in 2005. Similar-
ly, efforts have been undertaken to improve the 
interoperability of disaster loss data from nation-
al  and  global  databases  through  the  develop-
ment  of  common  data  standards8  and  unique 
identifiers such as GLIDE.9 In a number of coun-
tries  the  compilation  of  national  disaster  loss 
data has opened the doors to a broader approach 

OpenStreetMap is an online geospatial database and a global community of over 1.5 million contributors 
engaged in building a free and open map of the world. The principle that anyone can contribute to the data-
base and that it can be used in any tool or analysis is the reason why it is also known as the “the Wikipedia of 
maps”. Established in the United Kingdom in 2004 in reaction to restrictions around the use and/or availabil-
ity of geospatial data across the world, OpenStreetMap is a confederation of organizations and technologies 
that seek to improve public understanding of natural hazard risks and climate change impacts. 

 (Source: Simpson, 2014. For more information, see http://www.openstreetmap.org/.)

143

Box 7.8  A policy-maker’s view of understanding risk

A recent initiative towards “Building capacities for increased public investment in integrated climate change 
adaptation and disaster risk reduction” that will span around 40 countries by the end of 2015 helps countries 
understand and manage disaster risk in a uniquely comprehensive manner.10 The UNISDR-led and European 
Commission-supported initiative, in partnership with several international agencies and academic institu-
tions,  supports  countries  through  a  full  package  approach  for  disaster  loss  accounting,  probabilistic  risk 
assessment, economic analysis and policy development.

For example, in Mauritius, a total of 1,105 data cards on disaster loss in 1980-2013 were registered, with total 
economic losses estimated at US$59 million. Of these losses, 82 per cent were found to be from cyclones 
alone. The following probabilistic risk assessment therefore calculated the average annual loss and probable 
maximum  loss  for  tropical  cyclonic  wind,  which  were  estimated  at  US$87  million  (AAL)  and  U$1.7  billion 
(PML) for a 100-year return period.

While these numbers highlighted the need to reduce tropical cyclone risk, in themselves they did not provide 
any policy guidance. Therefore, a thorough policy review and economic analysis were implemented, and it 
was found that the country would face difficulties in managing losses from cyclones and earthquakes with 
return periods of only 62 to 87 years. This pointed to the need for Mauritius to invest in both disaster risk 
reduction as well as risk financing mechanisms, including insurance. 

Probabilistic cost-benefit analyses were then conducted to support concrete and specific decision-making, 
for example on retrofitting of housing, and a further review of the public finance systems was undertaken. As 
a result, the government found that there were significant gaps in terms of a coherent risk-sensitive invest-
ment policy across all relevant sectors, in particular for critical infrastructure, and that contingency financ-
ing mechanisms were underdeveloped. Examining the disaster loss and risk information from the perspective 
of policy-makers, especially financial planners, in Mauritius, highlighted the importance of a linked approach 
to disaster risk reduction and resulted in concrete recommendations from the Ministry of Finance.

 (Source: UNISDR. For more details, see Annex 3.)

to disaster risk management including probabi-
listic risk assessment and dialogue with finance 
and planning ministries (Box 7.8).

7.8  

 

 

On rigour in science

 

 

The  extent  to  which  the  risk  information  pro-
duced since the adoption of the HFA is really in-
forming  development  is  not  well  known.  Even 
within the disaster risk management communi-
ty, new scientific information is not applied con-
sistently.

 “. . . In that Empire, the Art of Cartography attained 
such  Perfection  that  the  map  of  a  single  Prov-
ince occupied the entirety of a City, and the map 
of the Empire, the entirety of a Province. In time, 

144

Part II - Chapter 7

those Unconscionable Maps no longer satisfied, 
and the Cartographers Guilds produced a Map of 
the Empire whose size was that of the Empire, and 
which coincided point for point with it. The follow-
ing Generations, who were not so fond of the Study 
of Cartography as their Forebears had been, saw 
that that vast map was Useless, and not without 
some Pitilessness was it, that they delivered it up to 
the Inclemencies of Sun and Winters. In the Deserts 
of the West, still today, there are Tattered Ruins of 
that Map, inhabited by Animals and Beggars; in all 
the Land there is no other Relic of the Disciplines of 
Geography.” 11

In  principle,  risk information should provide a 
critical  foundation  for  raising  risk  awareness 
and for informing disaster risk management pol-
icies, practices, investments and measures from 
the local to the global level, including financial 

applications  to  transfer  risk  and  contingency 
plans to deal with possible disasters.

Globally, risk information should inform interna-
tional agreements and policies on development 
priorities.  In  the  insurance  sector,  the  quanti-
fication  of  disaster  risk  is  essential  given  that 
the solvency of most non-life insurance compa-
nies is strongly influenced by their exposure to 
catastrophe risk. Through their finance or plan-
ning  ministries,  governments  should  be  using 
risk information to inform public investment and 
to  assess  their  fiscal  resilience  to  large  disas-
ters  (UNISDR,  2011a).  In  the  construction  sec-
tor, quantifying the potential hazard expected in 
the lifetime of a building, bridge, or critical facil-
ity should be driving the creation and modifica-
tion of building codes. In the land-use and urban 
planning  sectors,  an  analysis  of  flood  risk,  for 
example, should be driving investment in flood 
protection, informing zoning changes and pos-
sibly  leading  to  changes  in  insurance  pricing 
(GFDRR, 2014a). In hazard-exposed communities, 
risk information should be underpinning local-
level disaster risk management initiatives. Final-
ly, in the private and financial sectors, it should 
be informing not only business continuity plan-
ning but also corporate planning, investment and 
risk management (UNISDR, 2013a).

In practice, however, and as the short story by 
Jorge Luis Borges cautions, the burgeoning risk 
assessment community would appear to be mak-
ing greater investments in increasing the accu-
racy and rigour of risk models and assessments 
than in developing understandable and action-
able information that responds to the needs of 
users.

It is unclear how much of the risk information 
that  has  been  produced  since  the  adoption  of 
the HFA is really seeping and spilling out of that 
community of practice into sector and territorial 
development or even into the mainstream disas-
ter risk management sector (CDKN, 2014). In fact, 

the exponential growth of risk information has 
the effect of creating an elaborate play of reflec-
tions in a room full of mirrors. Inside the commu-
nity of practice, there would seem to be growing 
opportunities to produce more and better risk 
information. Seen from outside the room, how-
ever, disaster risk information is still perceived 
as  an  exotic  commodity.  Outside  of  the  insur-
ance industry, cases where risk information has 
become fully integrated into decision-making are 
still the exception rather than the rule (Box 7.9).

There  appear  to  be  a  number  of  instrumen-
tal  reasons  for  this  disconnect.  Risk  informa-
tion produced by the insurance and catastrophe 
modelling  industry  is  still  largely  retained  as 
intellectual property within each company and is 
rarely accessible to governments, businesses or 
households. The information is based on propri-
etary models, and even if the results were made 
available, it might be unclear how the data was 
transformed and what assumptions were made 
to generate risk estimates.

The predominant academic culture of publica-
tion in scientific journals is likewise an obstacle 
to accessing risk information. For many universi-
ty-based risk modellers and researchers, publica-
tion becomes an end in itself rather than a means 
of opening the results for application and dissem-
ination. Given that scientific journals are usually 
only read by other scientists, this creates a closed 
circuit. The fact that so much published scientif-
ic literature is in English further removes it from 
application in non-English speaking countries.

Insufficient emphasis has been placed on mak-
ing fundamental data sets generated through the 
risk assessment process more open and acces-
sible  for  reuse  and  repurposing,  meaning  that 
resources are wasted through the repetitive cre-
ation of the same data sets (GFDRR, 2014a).

Hazard and risk assessments tend to be driven by 
well-intentioned science and engineering experts 

145

Box 7.9  Risk assessment informing a comprehensive disaster risk management strategy in Manizales, Colombia

In Manizales, Colombia, a full set of probabilistic risk assessments were carried out to devel-
op a comprehensive disaster risk management strategy. This included retrofitting existing 
structures, updating a municipal earthquake insurance scheme and performing a cost-bene-
fit analysis of structural risk reduction measures and land-use planning. Probabilistic seismic 
hazard assessment was used to calibrate the national earthquake building code to local seis-
mic micro-zones for both building stock and the water and sewage network.

Flood hazard for the Chinchiná basin was assessed using 30 years of rainfall data. Landslide risk analysis 
based on detailed information about land use, topography and geological information was used to support 
urban planning applications.

In addition, probabilistic volcanic ash hazard was analysed for the Ruiz Volcano located 30 km south-east of 
Manizales.

Ultimately, the Manizales voluntary municipal insurance scheme was based on this multi-hazard risk assess-
ment.  In  this  innovative  scheme,  middle  and  high-income  groups  underwrite  policies,  while  low-income 
homeowners are subsidized by other homeowners and the local government, which acts as an intermediary.

Relative AAL loss distribution for the building stock of Manizales

Volcanic ash thickness hazard map (m)

 ( Source: Salgado et al., 2014a and 2014b.)

rather than by the end-users and decision-mak-
ers who need access to targeted information in 
different formats. All too often, risk information 
is driven by supply rather than demand, meaning 
that even when decision-makers are aware that 
they require risk information, it is often not avail-
able in a usable form.

Finance ministers, for example, might be inter-
ested  in  metrics  such  as  annual  average  loss 

(AAL) or probable maximum loss (PML) in order to 
estimate the potential fiscal impact of disasters 
or the costs and benefits of investing in disaster 
risk reduction. They need numbers, not maps. In 
contrast, planners preparing local land-use or 
zoning plans will require hazard and risk maps 
rather than numbers (GFDRR, 2014a). Global risk 
indices or assessments are useful for comparing 
risk levels across countries but are too coarse-
grained to inform national and local planning. In 

146

Part II - Chapter 7

any case, decision-makers may not understand 
the uncertainties inherent in modelling. A risk 
model can produce very precise results. It may 
show, for example, that a 1-in-100-year flood will 
affect 388,123 people. In reality, however, the 
accuracy of the model and input data may pro-
vide only an estimate of the order of magnitude.

At the same time, given the continued focus on 
managing  disasters  rather  than  disaster  risk, 
demand for risk information from governments 
may be weak. Many risk assessments are one-off 
projects, particularly in the context of post-disas-
ter recovery operations, and even the maintenance 
of national disaster loss databases faces sustain-
ability issues (Wirtz et al., 2014; Gall et al., 2014).

While international organizations have supported 
risk assessments in many high-risk, low-income 
contexts (GFDRR, 2014a), these assessments are 
rarely appropriated by national institutions and 
seldom contribute to risk awareness in the coun-
try, simply because the underlying research infra-
structure to sustain such efforts does not exist 
(Gall et al., 2014b). The capacity to produce and use 
risk information varies enormously from country 
to country. Unsurprisingly, the HFA Monitor high-
lights that high-income countries with strong sci-
entific and technical communities have been able 
to make significant progress in monitoring and 
forecasting hazards and developing national and 
local risk assessments, whereas many low-income 
countries simply do not have the capacities to do 
so. As such, the coverage of risk information is 
patchy from a geographical perspective, respond-
ing  more  to  project  opportunities  than  to  real 
needs. And even when risk information is available 
in  national  institutions,  mechanisms  to  ensure 
that the information is available and usable at the 
local level are often missing, especially given the 
weak capacity of most local governments outside 
of major cities (CDKN, 2014).

Linked open data, social media and crowdsourc-
ing could potentially bridge this gap. But there 

remain tensions between data as a power source, 
as an income generator and as a social good. Legal 
obstacles often remain regarding the extent to 
which proprietary data needs to be transformed 
to become free and open (GFDRR, 2014a).

Another problem identified by the HFA Monitor is 
the absence of agreed standards or normalized 
approaches. This means that large volumes of 
studies and research carried out by universities, 
research institutions and others at the nation-
al level do not provide standardized results. In 
Padang,  Indonesia,  for  example,  no  less  than 
twelve different tsunami risk assessments were 
carried  out,  each  producing  different  results 
(Løvholt  et  al.,  2014).  In  many  other  tsunami-
prone locations, not a single detailed assessment 
has been carried out.

Shared  language,  terminology  and  translation 
are other barriers to sharing and using risk infor-
mation. While international efforts under UNIS-
DR and the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change (IPCC) have developed standard termi-
nologies, words such as vulnerability, resilience 
and mitigation are used in widely differing ways 
in different communities. When such words are 
translated into other languages, this divergence 
multiplies  even  further.  In  practice,  national 
meteorological  and  geological  institutions  are 
rarely  integrated  and  frequently  use  different 
concepts and methods to assess risk.

This makes multi-hazard assessment particularly 
challenging. Multiple or concatenated risks from 
cascading and technological hazards are increas-
ingly common, meaning that a single-hazard risk 
assessment is often not relevant to the decision-
makers  responsible  for  broader  risk  manage-
ment. Moreover, failing to consider the full risk 
spectrum can actually increase risk. For exam-
ple,  heavy  concrete  structures  with  a  ground-
level soft story for parking can protect against 
cyclone wind, but can be deadly in an earthquake 
(GFDRR, 2014a).

147

Given these challenges, there are relatively few 
contexts (Box 7.10) where decision-makers have 
successfully incorporated risk information into 
day-to-day  planning,  regulation  and  decision-
making. Risk knowledge implies an appropriation 
of risk information by society in a way that facil-
itates risk management. From that perspective, 
the increased production of risk information dur-
ing the HFA has not necessarily led to greater risk 
knowledge  nor  to  improved  risk  management  
(Gall et al., 2014b). The growing supply of increas-
ingly sophisticated and accurate risk information 
remains an exotic commodity which is still large-
ly divorced from mainstream social, economic 
and territorial concerns. Like the cartographers 
described by Jorge Luis Borges, modern-day risk 
modellers are still too often disconnected from 
the needs of their potential users.

7.9 The social production of risk 

information

The role of social and economic constraints and 
opportunities facing households, businesses or 
governments has to become more central to the 
understanding of risk and to choices of disaster 
risk management strategies.

Experience  has  shown  that  a  purely  techni-
cal  assessment  of  risk,  however  sophisticated 
and cutting-edge, is by itself unlikely to trigger 
actions that reduce risk. Successful risk assess-
ments  produce  information  that  is  targeted, 
authoritative, understandable, and usable.

For example, the Build Back Better campaign led 
by the government of Indonesia in the aftermath 

Box 7.10  Turning risk data into applicable risk knowledge

In Peru, all hazard information from the national seismic hazard model is being integrated into the National 
Public Investment System (Sistema Nacional de Inversión Pública) database, which facilitates the sharing of 
findings with the scientific community, government authorities and the general public. The findings of a seis-
mic probabilistic risk assessment carried out for 1,540 schools and 42 hospitals in Lima and Callao are being 
used by the Ministry of Education to complement the countrywide infrastructure census and to design the 
National School Infrastructure Plan (GFDRR, 2014a; AIFDR, 2013).

The  earthquake,  tsunami,  and  volcanic  hazard  modelling  activities  of  the  Australia-Indonesia  Facility  for 
Disaster Reduction have increased government capacity to understand the country’s hazard risk profile, and 
these gains have in turn informed significant policy directives at the national level, such as the 2012 Indone-
sian Presidential Master Plan for Tsunami Disaster Risk Reduction (GFDRR, 2014a).

As early as 1987, France adopted a law that grants every citizen the right to information on their exposure to 
major  risks  (Government  of  France,  2004),  on  foreseeable  damage,  on  possible  preventive  measures  to 
reduce vulnerability, and on protection and relief support available from the government in the case of an 
emergency. Since 1990, local authorities have been obliged to provide the information online (Government 
of France, 1990).

Since 2009, the international NGO ACTED has been working closely with the Government of Uganda to man-
age the Karamoja Drought Early Warning System (DEWS). By collecting and monitoring data on key indica-
tors, this system allows drought prediction across Karamoja, a region prone to cyclical droughts. Monthly 
drought bulletins alert communities, districts and development partners of the risk of drought and suggest 
preparedness measures to be initiated (ACTED, 2012).

In  Colombia,  the  provision  of  risk  information  is  now  a  legal  obligation  under  which  the  authorities  are 
accountable for keeping all citizens and residents fully informed about levels of disaster risk, disaster man-
agement, rehabilitation and construction efforts, as well as all related funding received, managed and deliv-
ered (Government of Colombia, 2012).

148

Part II - Chapter 7

of the Padang earthquake in 2009 demonstrated 
conclusively that well-targeted education and the  
communication of risk information can increase 
awareness of hazards and their potential impacts 
(GFDRR,  2014a).  However,  the  campaign’s  key 
assumption—that  increased  awareness  would 
lead the West Sumatra population to invest in 
safer  building—turned  out  to  be  false.  In  fact, 
those living in the worst-affected areas demon-
strated higher resistance to change than those in 
less-affected areas, reflecting their higher expo-
sure to other risks and hence greater constraints 
on change. The influence of the earthquake on 
safe building practices seemed to be limited to 
those who had gone through a traumatic first-
hand experience during the earthquake, such as 
being trapped or injured by falling debris.

While risk can be objectivized through metrics 
such as annual average loss (AAL) or probable 
maximum loss (PML) or through maps, these met-
rics only become useful if they are socially appro-
priated. Given that risk is socially constructed, 
this  is  a  prerequisite  for  a  transformation  in 
how  the  social  and  economic  constraints  and 

opportunities  facing  households,  business-
es or governments are valued. What is consid-
ered acceptable or unacceptable risk, or what is 
an optimum strategy for risk management can 
only be understood in the relationship between 
the  stakeholders  and  these  opportunities  and 
constraints.

Local assessments of everyday and disaster risks, 
for example, show how the prevalence of non-
physical  hazards  and  of  small-scale  recurrent 
events is part of an undifferentiated multi-threat 
environment (Figures 7.5 and 7.6). They also show 
how households of different income levels have 
very different perceptions of risk.

Not only risk but also the production of risk infor-
mation is socially constructed. Beyond the instru-
mental  barriers  to  its  use  (described  in  detail 
in Section 7.8), risk information so often fails to 
trigger changes in how risk is managed precisely 
because disaster risk is presented as an objective 
externality that can be measured and reduced 
rather than only one of a number of variables in 
a complex social, economic, political and cultur-
al web of constraints and opportunities (UNISDR, 
2011a). Risk then becomes technical, neutral and 
objective, delinked from its underlying drivers.

Figure 7.5  High-priority threats as reported by communities in ten countries in Latin America12

 (Source: Gibson, 2014.)

149

Figure 7.6  Perceived losses according to self-reported income level

 (Source: GNDR, 2013.)

As  a  consequence,  risk  assessments,  particu-
larly in the private sector, have tended to focus 
more on hazards, exposure and physical vulnera-
bility than social and economic vulnerability and 
resilience, on extreme intensive risks rather than 
recurrent extensive risks, and on applications to 
protect  development  against  external  threats 
rather than applications to transform develop-
ment. For example, these assessments are meant 
to identify optimum levels of protection for stra-
tegic and critical infrastructure which is essen-
tial to a country’s economy, to identify options 
for risk transfer and financial protection, or to 
inform preparedness and early warning for inten-
sive disasters (GFDRR, 2014a).

As noted in Chapter 4 of this report, far less atten-
tion  has  been  devoted  to  assessing  extensive 
risks. Despite the magnitude of associated losses 
and impacts, these risks remain unaccounted for 
and largely invisible because the disasters rarely 
challenge strategic economic and political inter-
ests (Box 7.11).

Therefore, while improved interoperability, open 
data, sustainability and capacities may make risk 
information more usable and actionable, a differ-
ent approach to the production of risk informa-
tion is required.

Risk  always  implies  both  opportunities  and 
costs for different stakeholders. A factory built 
in  a  hazard-exposed  location  but  in  an  area 
with low labour costs and good access to mar-
kets  may  represent  an  opportunity  for  busi-
ness owners and investors. However, damage 
from  a  disaster  will  not  only  affect  the  busi-
ness, but also the workers, who may lose their 
employment  temporarily  or  permanently,  as 
well as the local economy and the government, 
which may lose tax receipts, among others. Risk 
information should clarify who takes the risks, 
who  benefits,  who  pays  and  thus  who  owns 
the risks. It should also clarify the benefits and 
costs of investing in disaster risk management. 
In other words, in order for risk information to 
become risk knowledge, the basic parameters of 
accountability have to be clarified in a way that 

150

Part II - Chapter 7

Box 7.11  Something’s burning

Catastrophic urban fires devastated Rome in 64 CE, London in 1666, Chicago in 1871, and Boston in 1872; the 
1906 San Francisco fire destroyed nearly 95 per cent of the city, and the Tokyo fire of 1923 killed over 40,000 
people. The implementation of modern building codes, land-use planning, the establishment and expansion 
of emergency services, greater citizen responsibility, and insurance regulations have largely consigned the 
catastrophic  urban  fire  to  history.  From  the  perspective  of  intensive  risk,  the  problem  has  been  solved 
(GFDRR, 2014a).

National disaster loss data, however, reveals a very different story. The occurrence of fires in urban informal 
settlements and rural villages is trending up, and housing damage has been increasing since 1990. In Odisha 
and Tamil Nadu, India, for example, fires have caused 13 per cent of all housing damage since 1990 and are on 
the rise (Figure 7.7).

Figure 7.7  Number of houses damaged and destroyed in Tamil Nadu and Odisha, 1990-2013

 (Source: UNISDR with national loss data.)

provides clear incentives to manage risks and to 
ensure compliance.

The  current  understanding  of  the  different 
groups with vested interests in the outcomes of 
risk management is far too broad. For example, 
private investment and the private sector encom-
pass  small  and  medium  enterprises,  farmers, 
informal traders and labourers, households and 
individuals, national businesses and large inter-
national  corporations,  investment  banks  and 
asset managers, insurers and a vast range of ser-
vice providers to all of these groups.

For risk information to play such a role, it needs 
to be located inside development and within the 
social and economic constraints and opportuni-
ties that frame risk management. The room full of 
mirrors needs to open its doors; only then can a 
real culture of prevention and resilience emerge.

151

Notes

1  All data from national loss databases. See www.desinventar.
net for an overview and links to national websites and data sets.
2  PreventionWeb lists 95 disaster risk reduction communities of 
practice; see www.preventionweb.net.
3  For  more  information,  see  http:www.//preventionweb.net/
english/themes/education.
4  For more information, see http://www.memorisks.org/index.
htm.
5  Three  Understanding  Risk  forums  have  taken  place  so  far 
(2010, 2012 and 2014). For more information, see https://www.
understandrisk.org/node/4889.
6  The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) released 
Hazus97, the first version of Hazards US (Hazus), a geographic 
information system (GIS) based natural hazard loss estimation 
software package, in 1997.
7  Liberated data refers to data that was at one time inaccessible 
due to format, policies, systems, etc., but is now being made avail-
able for use, either as discoverable and useable data sets or (in 
many cases) as technically open data sets. 
8  http://www.irdrinternational.org/projects/data. 
9  http://glidenumber.net/glide/public/search/search.jsp. 
10  For more information on the initiative, see Annex 3.
11  Suarez Miranda, 1658; cited in Borges, J.L., 1998: p. 325. 
12  Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, Paraguay, 
Peru, Uruguay and Venezuela.

152

Part II - Chapter 7

Chapter 8
Managing disasters

153

8.1 From early warning to early 

warning systems

The development and implementation of early 
warning systems is one of the areas where the 
most progress has been made within the HFA. 
Improvements in risk monitoring and forecast-
ing,  satellite  data  quality  and  increasing  com-
puter power and connectivity have resulted in a 
transformation  of  early  warning  across  the 
globe. 

Despite  much  progress,  gaps  remain:  integra-
tion  of  comprehensive  risk  information  into 
hazard warning information is still weak, and it 
is still rare for alerts to provide information on 
the  level  of  risk  and  possible  actions  beyond 
evacuation alerts.

The first International Conference on Early Warn-
ing Systems for Natural Disaster Reduction was 
held in Potsdam, Germany in 1998 and set out the 
conceptual and programmatic foundations for 
the development of early warning systems.

A study produced for that conference (Maskrey, 
1997) introduced the notion that an early warn-
ing system should be far more than a mechanism 
to issue warnings of impending hazard events. 
For an early warning to become a system, four 
integrated sub-systems are required: a warning 
sub-system in which hazards are monitored and 
forecasts and warnings issued; a risk information 
sub-system in which risk scenarios can be generat-
ed for the areas and population likely to be affect-
ed; a preparedness sub-system that indicates the 
actions that should be taken to reduce loss and 
damage, and a communication sub-system which 
allows the timely communication of information 
on pending hazard events, risks and appropriate 
preparedness strategies to those at risk.

From that perspective, the effectiveness of an 
early warning system should be judged less on 
whether warnings are issued per se but rather 
on the basis of whether the warnings facilitate 
appropriate and timely decision-making by those 
most at risk (Maskrey, 1997).

Box 8.1  Key activities related to early warning systems in HFA Priority for Action 2

d) Develop early warning systems that are people centered, in particular systems whose warnings are timely and 
understandable to those at risk, which take into account the demographic, gender, cultural and livelihood char-
acteristics of the target audiences, including guidance on how to act upon warnings, and that support effective 
operations by disaster managers and other decision makers.

(e) Establish, periodically review, and maintain information systems as part of early warning systems with a view 
to ensuring that rapid and coordinated action is taken in cases of alert/emergency.

(f) Establish institutional capacities to ensure that early warning systems are well integrated into governmental 
policy and decision-making processes and emergency management systems at both the national and the local 
levels, and are subject to regular system testing and performance assessments.

(g) Implement the outcome of the Second International Conference on Early Warning held in Bonn, Germany, in 
2003,  including  through  the  strengthening  of  coordination  and  cooperation  among  all  relevant  sectors  and 
actors in the early warning chain in order to achieve fully effective early warning systems.

(h) Implement the outcome of the Mauritius Strategy for the further implementation of the Barbados Programme 
of  Action  for  the  sustainable  development  of  small  island  developing  States,  including  by  establishing  and 
strengthening effective early warning systems as well as other mitigation and response measures.

154

Part II - Chapter 8

By the time of the Second International Confer-
ence on Early Warning, which was held in Germa-
ny in 2003, this systems approach to early warning 
had become orthodox and influenced national leg-
islation such as the National Integrated Drought 
Information  System  (NIDIS)  Act  of  2006  (Public 
Law 109-430) in the United States of America.1 

Further momentum for the development of ear-
ly warning systems was generated by the Indian 
Ocean tsunamis in 2004, which highlighted how 
many lives could have been saved if a regional 
tsunami early warning system had existed. As a 
consequence, early warning featured heavily on 
the agenda of the Second World Conference on 
Disaster Reduction in 2005 and was given heavy 
emphasis in the HFA, which reprises the emerg-
ing early warning systems concept in key activi-
ties within Priority for Action 2 (Box 8.1).

Government self-assessment reports prepared 
using the HFA Monitor show significant progress 
against the third core indicator under Priority for 
Action 2: Early warning systems are in place for 
all major hazards, with outreach to communities 

Figure 8.1  Progress in early warning

HFA Core Indicator 2.3: Multi-hazard early warning system with commu-
nity outreach. 
 (Source: UNISDR with data from the HFA Monitor.2)

(Figure 8.1). Each biennial reporting period since 
2007 has shown growing achievement, although 
the indicator is too generic to capture how much 
progress has actually been made against each of 
the key activities listed above.

The development and implementation of early 
warning systems has been repeatedly cited as one 
of the areas where the most progress has been 
made within the HFA (WMO, 2011, 2014a; UNISDR, 
2013b, 2011b). Success stories from Bangladesh, 
Chile, India, the Philippines and other countries 
show that timely and effective warning and com-
munication coupled with risk information and a 
prepared population significantly reduces mor-
tality. The Third International Conference on Ear-
ly Warning, which was held in Germany in 2006 
took advantage of the momentum generated by 
the HFA and, under the slogan From concept to 
action, documented over one hundred initiatives 
to develop early warning systems at different lev-
els (UNISDR and Government of Germany, 2006).

In particular, HFA progress reports highlight suc-
cess in developing early warning systems that 
correspond  more  closely  to  local  needs.  For 
example, Australia reports that every state and 
territory now has the ability to tailor core mes-
sages  to  fit  local  conditions  and  evacuation 
plans. In Sri Lanka, a people-centred early warn-
ing system was established that includes teams 
of volunteers using local communication meth-
ods. In Thailand, volunteers have been trained at 
the village level to monitor hazards and transmit 
early warnings in a timely manner.

Technical, institutional and social challenges in 
developing and maintaining these systems are 
often reported in conjunction with the remote-
ness of villages and difficulties of terrain, making 
outreach  to the  last  mile  difficult.  Many  coun-
tries also note financial constraints and limited 

155

human capacity and are still dependent on inter-
national assistance to finance and maintain their 
systems, in particular when it comes to upgrad-
ing the equipment to monitor hazards and trans-
mit warnings (WMO, 2014a).

Early warning reframed
Since the Third International Conference on Early 
Warning Systems, rapid changes in information and 
communications technology have shaken many of 
the assumptions that had framed the development 
of early warning systems up to that point.

The  growing  sophistication  of  hydro-meteoro-
logical  monitoring  and  forecasting  has  greatly 
increased the probability of being able to provide 
accurate forewarnings of tropical cyclones, storms, 
floods,  droughts,  tsunamis  and  other  hazards. 
The growing availability of high-resolution satel-
lite data, coupled with an exponential increase in 
computing power and the development of pre-
dictive models, has transformed hazard-warning 
capabilities since the adoption of the HFA. These 
technological advances have been supported by 
enhanced international cooperation (Box 8.2). At 
the same time, meteorological information in par-
ticular has become increasingly pervasive through 
global media and the Internet. There is less and 
less dependence on official channels for hazard 
forecasts, although this has created new issues 
around the accuracy of warning information, par-
ticularly when conflicting information is available 
from apparently credible sources.

A  second  and  even  more  disruptive  change  is 
associated with exponentially increasing glob-
al connectivity through access to the Internet, 
social  media  and  particularly  through  mobile 
phones.  Globally,  mobile  telephone  penetra-
tion rates have reached 96 per cent. There is now 
almost one mobile phone per person on the plan-
et, with subscription rates of almost 90 per cent 
even in low-income countries (ITU, 2013). In sub-
Saharan Africa, for example, the penetration rate 
of mobile phones was around 10 per cent at the 
beginning of the HFA. It now stands at almost 80 
per cent (Deloitte, 2012).

This dramatically increases the potential to dis-
seminate timely warnings directly to those at risk 
and also opens the door to peer-to-peer warning, 
even across national boundaries (Gow and Waid-
yanatha, 2011). To the extent that mobile phone 
warnings facilitate timely preparedness by house-
holds and businesses, they contribute to reduc-
ing risks and avoiding loss of life. For example, 
earthquake early warnings are now also issued via 
mobile networks in Mexico (Box 8.3) and in Japan.

In  Sri  Lanka,  the  Sri  Lankan  Disaster  Manage-
ment Centre launched the Disaster and Emergen-
cy Warning Network (DEWN; Purasinghe, 2014). 
After a successful trial period, the system became 
operational in January 2009. Messages are sent 
to  emergency  personnel,  who  then  verify  the 
information and disseminate public alerts. Mass 

Box 8.2  The Global Data-Processing and Forecasting System (GDPFS)

The Global Data-Processing and Forecasting System (GDPFS) produces and disseminates weather and cli-
mate analyses and predictions to enable National Meteorological and Hydrological Services (NMHS) to pro-
vide  high-quality  meteorological  forecasts,  warnings  and  other  information  services  related  to  weather, 
environmental  quality  and  climate  on  a  24/7  basis.  Its  three-level  system—World  Meteorological  Centres 
(WMCs),  Regional  Specialized  Meteorological  Centres  (RSMCs;  including  Regional  Climate  Centres  [RCCs]), 
and  National  Meteorological  Centres  (NMCs)—support  NMHSs  and  their  early  warning  capacities.  The 
improved accuracy and lead time of predictions of high-impact weather events have made a major contribu-
tion to early warning.

156

Part II - Chapter 8

Box 8.3  Earthquake early warning in Mexico

In 1985, the Michoacán earthquake hit Mexico City, leaving an estimated 10,000 dead and 
30,000 people injured. The disaster raised awareness of earthquake risk and generated inter-
est in the feasibility of earthquake early warning. The primary seismic source for earthquakes 
that affect Mexico City is the Guerrero Fault along the Pacific Coast of Mexico. Given the time 
it  takes  seismic  waves  to  reach  Mexico  City  from  the  coast,  it  is  possible  to  provide  early 
warnings  that  allow  people  a  minute  or  more  to  move  to  a  safer  area  in  a  building  or  in  some  cases  to 
evacuate.

Operated by CIRES, the Seismic Alert System of Mexico City was established in 1991, and a similar system 
(SASO) was set up in Oaxaca in 2003. These two systems are now part of the Mexican Federal Government’s 
Seismic Early Warning System (SASMEX). Seventy-six seismic monitoring stations are now located along the 
Guerrero Fault, and warnings are provided to a number of important cities.

SASMEX issues two types of warning: “public” or emergency warnings for the risk of high-intensity move-
ments and “preventive” or alert messages for moderate intensity-movements. Since its creation, SASMEX 
has issued 34 emergency warnings and 72 alert messages. For example, in 1995, a 7.3 magnitude earthquake 
occurred 300 km away from Mexico City. An emergency warning was issued 72 seconds before the seismic 
waves shook the city, facilitating the partial evacuation of public buildings, schools, residential buildings and 
public transport systems. An estimated 2 million people were reached by the warning and acted upon it.

 (Sources: Cuéllar et al., 2010; Singh and Pérez-Campos, no date.3)

alerts are dispatched through cell broadcasting, 
which is immune to network congestion, while 
messages to certain groups are sent via SMS. The 
alerts are sent in three local languages and can 
be received by both smartphones and basic hand-
sets, or by an alarm device with a lamp and siren 
for public spaces (GSMA, 2013; Purasinghe, 2014).

Mobile  phones  are  increasingly  being  used  to 
disseminate  weather  and  climate  forecasts  to 
farmers, to provide information on market pric-
es, to access markets and even to take out insur-
ance.4 These changes are radical given that the 
communication of early warning information to 
remote, rural hazard-exposed communities was 
described  as  a  major  challenge  as  recently  as 
2006.5

These  technological  leaps  have  transformed 
and will continue to transform the landscape of 
early  warning  systems.  New  technologies  and 

enhanced trans-boundary cooperation for haz-
ard monitoring, forecasting and early warning 
are continuing to emerge (WMO, 2014a). More-
over, successful technologies in one context have 
sometimes been brought to market for broad-
er applications, for example in flood early warn-
ing systems (Box 8.4). The telemetric monitoring 
system at the Enguri Dam in Georgia served as a 
prototype to develop an early warning system for 
dam failure (Chelidze, 2013). In Italy, flood moni-
toring in Umbria formed the basis for the devel-
opment of an integrated early warning system for 
floods and landslides (Molinari et al., 2013).

Crowdsourcing  platforms  and  initiatives  such 
as OpenStreetMap and Ushahidi facilitated the 
engagement  of  thousands  of  volunteers  and 
experts  during the 2010 Chile  and Haiti earth-
quakes and the floods in Pakistan; these inno-
vations  are  also  challenging  conventional 
assumptions about early warning systems (Keim 
and Noji, 2011). When the concept was first pro-
posed in 1997, early warning systems were con-
ceived  as  vertically  integrated  chains  where 

157

Box 8.4  Advances in flood early warning in Europe and Africa

Belgium’s  early  warning  system,  which  has  been  operating  for  a  decade,  is  based  on  advanced  real-time 
monitoring  and  forecasting  technology  which  provides  high-resolution  flood  risk  maps,  while  simulation 
models are used for impact assessment. Warnings are sent out by SMS and e-mail and published on a web 
portal, which is frequently visited by the public during floods. The 24/7 early warning system operators col-
laborate closely with the civil protection crisis management team, which in turn is linked to a multi-sector 
and multi-scale response mechanism. However, dynamic maps of flooded areas are still lacking, and as the 
system is largely top-down, many local authorities and civil protection committees are still unfamiliar with 
the information generated by the system. Preparedness in general remains limited.

Egypt’s  early  warning  system  is  based  on  historical  analyses  of  storm  and  flash  flood  events,  while  local 
knowledge of exposed areas is used as a qualitative data source. The system has been successful in issuing 
alerts for flash floods on the basis of rainfall forecasts. Warnings are communicated to the disaster manage-
ment authorities, and as a result timely actions such as setting up roadblocks or releasing overflow water 
from dams have been taken on the basis of agreed decision-making protocols. However, the system faces 
operational  and  technical  challenges,  for  example  due  to  power  cuts  and  weak  cooperation  with  local 
communities.

Mali’s early warning system is largely based on a good understanding of the underlying drivers of flood risk 
and the impact of flooding on local economies and on biodiversity; this information is presented in a flood 
risk atlas for local use. Flood maps and forecasts are developed using satellite images of flooded areas, and 
warnings are issued with a long lead time by telephone, radio and the web.6  Although the early warning sys-
tem is still being tested, resolution and accuracy need to be improved, and scenarios on food security and 
disease outbreaks are yet to be included, the system heavily involves local communities. Early warning infor-
mation based on and packaged for end-user needs includes local knowledge and supports the traditional 
practice of decision-making based on local pastoral calendars and practices, thus blending modern science 
with traditional risk management know-how.

 (Source: Cools and Innocenti, 2014.)

failure in one link in the chain limits its effective-
ness and can even lead to failure across the entire 
system (UNISDR, 2011a; WMO, 2014a). Coupled 
with continuously improving mobile connectivity 
and the increasing pervasiveness of hazard mon-
itoring and forecasting information, crowdsourc-
ing has now disrupted that concept and opened 
the  door  to  more  horizontally  integrated  and 
organically evolving systems.

Early warning of vulnerability and risk?
At the same time, however, many of the challeng-
es to effective early warning described in the past 
still persist (UNISDR, 2009a). While major advanc-
es  have  been  made  in  hazard  monitoring  and 
forecasting and in the issuing of warnings (EEA, 
2013),  progress  in  integrating  the  appropriate 
risk information and risk management strategies 

into early warning and preparedness has lagged 
behind (WMO, 2014a; Molinari et al., 2013).

There are still major gaps in hazard monitoring, 
particularly in low-income countries, which are 
often challenged to maintain the necessary tech-
nical and institutional infrastructure. Similarly, 
there may be inadequate links and coordination 
between  geological  and  hydro-meteorological 
services and disaster risk management organi-
zations.  Some  low-income  countries  lack  the 
institutional and technical capacities to devel-
op a multi-hazard, multi-sector and multi-level 
approach to early warning (WMO, 2014a; Molinari 
et al., 2014).

Warnings are still not standardized within and 
across  countries,  meaning  that  they  may  be 

158

Part II - Chapter 8

incomplete or ineffective. Moreover, the prolifer-
ation of warning information with different mes-
sages may dilute their strength and authority. 
As discussed in Chapter 6, the capacities of local 
governments may be weak, local preparedness 
plans may only exist on paper, and there may be 
a lack of clarity with respect to roles and respon-
sibilities at all levels. The transmission of warning 
information across national borders is likewise a 
political challenge in some regions. Civil or mili-
tary conflicts undermine not only the effective-
ness of early warning, but also that of disaster 
risk reduction in general (WMO, 2014a).

as hazard early warning if the translation of disas-
ter losses into impacts is to be avoided. As recur-
rent  disasters  in  the  Horn  of  Africa  show,  early 
warning is not effective when chronic livelihood 
crises reach a tipping point, putting extreme pres-
sure on food prices, livestock survival, and water 
and food availability. At least 13 million people 
across southern Ethiopia, south-central Somalia 
and northern Kenya were affected by drought in 
2011-2012. Armed conflict across the region com-
pounded  chronic  ecological  and  economic  vul-
nerability, which escalated the crisis and limited 
people’s survival and recovery choices (Slim, 2012).

In particular, progress has been uneven in two key 
early warning sub-systems. Firstly, the integration 
of risk information (where available) into hazard 
warning information is still weak. Despite excep-
tions such as the Famine Early Warning System,7 
early warning continues to prioritize monitoring 
and forecasting hazards and may omit or under-
estimate  the  key  importance  of  exposure  and 
vulnerability in explaining risk levels (Box 8.5). Ulti-
mately, vulnerability early warning is as important 

A second issue is that in order to be effective, ear-
ly warnings not only have to forecast a hazard but 
need  to  include  value-added  information  with 
respect to the risks that can be expected and the 
actions that can be taken. Even while warnings can 
now be issued directly via SMS, which overcomes 
the communication barriers at the last mile, it is 
still rare for alerts to provide information on the 
level of risk. Both depend on detailed and intimate 
knowledge of the local contexts where impacts are 

Box 8.5  Absence of development in the Bolivian Chaco

The people of the Chaco region in south-eastern Bolivia know what an absence of develop-
ment  looks  like.  In  the  municipalities  of  Huacareta  (Chuquisaca),  Caraparí  and  Entre  Ríos 
(Tarija), for example, 82 per cent, 51 per cent, and 43 per cent of the population (respectively) 
live in extreme poverty, with infant mortality rates fluctuating between 64 and 72 for every 
1,000 live births.

In the course of the 2009/10 El Niño Southern Oscillation (ENSO) event in the region, reductions in rainfall 
began to generate problems with food availability and access, compromising livelihoods and food security. 
Access to water and basic sanitation was limited, leading to a greater incidence of health problems, especial-
ly for those living in more remote areas.

Following  alerts  of  rainfall  deficit  and  low  temperatures  in  late  2009,  an  assessment  by  external  experts 
focused on the variation in rainfall averages. In reality, the assessment should have focused on the underly-
ing drivers of risk: adverse soil conditions, biophysical and environmental degradation, and social and eco-
nomic deprivation, factors that ultimately resulted in an officially reported “humanitarian gap” of more than 
a third of the rural population of the Chaco towards the end of September 2010.

Where disaster is understood as a disruption to normal life and development, everyday and extensive risk are 
not recognized as indicators precisely because they are part of that normality in places such as the Chaco 
region. In the Chaco, this meant that warnings of a looming crisis did not come early, but late.

 (Source: adapted from Reyes and Lavell, 2012.)

159

expected and of local disaster risk management 
strategies.  As  described  in  Chapter  1,  the  fact 
that evacuation plans for New Orleans assumed 
car ownership negated the effectiveness of the 
early warning about Hurricane Katrina for part 
of  the  population  at  risk.  In  order  to  be  effec-
tive, early warning systems need to embrace an 
understanding  of  how  hazard-exposed  house-
holds and communities manage risks as well as 
their vulnerabilities and resilience. This in turn 
depends  on  local  governments  or  local  disas-
ter management agencies having both the skills 
and the willingness to engage with what are often 
low-income households and communities.

Lack of progress in these two of the original four 
early  warning  sub-systems  means  that  timely 
and accurate early warnings that reach those at 
risk may fail to trigger effective action, particular-
ly in the context of slow-onset hazards and where 
poverty is infused with everyday and extensive 
risk. Early warning information empowers only to 
the extent that households and communities are 
able to act on that information.

8.2  

Preparedness for response

 

 

Priority for Action 5 has been the area of the HFA 
where  most  progress  appears  to  have  been 
made. Many successes of the HFA are associated 
with improvements in preparedness, often com-
bined with more effective early warning. There 
have  been  real  improvements  in  disaster  pre-
paredness and major investments in the neces-
sary capacities.

While  effective  preparedness  can  be  achieved 
with the governance arrangements that evolved 
from  emergency  management,  local  capacity 
and  resource  constraints  still  hamper  progress 
in a number of countries. Preparedness for slow-
onset and extensive risks, in particular, remains 
a challenge.

160

Part II - Chapter 8

The main focus of the disaster risk 
management sector
Preparedness has been defined as “the capac-
ities and knowledge developed by governments, 
professional response organizations, communities 
and individuals to anticipate and respond effec-
tively to the impact of likely, imminent or current 
hazards or conditions” (UNISDR, 2009b).

Preparedness activities are a critical part of cor-
rective disaster risk management in that certain 
risks, particularly those associated with mortali-
ty and morbidity, can be reduced through antic-
ipation and response. Put simply, if a prepared 
population  is  able  to  evacuate  an  area  before 
a major flood, lives will be saved and mortali-
ty and morbidity risk will therefore be lower. At 
the same time, preparedness is part of compen-
satory risk management and helps strengthen 
resilience. Well-organized emergency assistance 
based on contingency plans can help households 
and communities to buffer disaster losses, recov-
er more quickly and avoid the translation of loss 
into broader impacts, such as increased pover-
ty or deteriorating health, nutrition or education.

By the 1980s it had been recognized that pre-
paredness was a core principle of effective emer-
gency management. At the international level, 
UN General Assembly resolution 46/182 of 1991 
reflected the need to prepare for response and 
created  mechanisms  such  as  the  Emergency 
Relief Coordinator (ERC), the Inter-Agency Stand-
ing  Committee  (IASC),  and  the  Consolidated 
Appeals Process (CAP) as coordination mecha-
nisms to support the ERC. This period also saw 
the  creation  of  the  UN  Disaster  Management 
Training  Programme  (UNDMTP)8  in  1990,  the 
International Search and Rescue Advisory Group 
(INSARAG) in 1991, and the UN Disaster Assess-
ment and Coordination (UNDAC) mechanism in 
1993 (IASC-WFP, 2014).

Similarly, preparedness has been central to all 
the  international  frameworks  for  disaster  risk 

Box 8.6  Key activities related to disaster preparedness in the HFA

(a) Strengthen policy, technical and institutional capacities in regional, national and local disaster manage-
ment, including those related to technology, training, and human and material resources.

(b) Promote and support dialogue, exchange of information and coordination among early warning, disaster 
risk reduction, disaster response, development and other relevant agencies and institutions at all levels, with 
the aim of fostering a holistic approach towards disaster risk reduction.

(c) Strengthen and when necessary develop coordinated regional approaches, and create or upgrade regional 
policies, operational mechanisms, plans and communication systems to prepare for and ensure rapid and effec-
tive disaster response in situations that exceed national coping capacities.

(d) Prepare or review and periodically update disaster preparedness and contingency plans and policies at all 
levels, with a particular focus on the most vulnerable areas and groups. Promote regular disaster preparedness 
exercises, including evacuation drills, with a view to ensuring rapid and effective disaster response and access to 
essential food and non-food relief supplies, as appropriate, to local needs.

(e) Promote the establishment of emergency funds, where and as appropriate, to support response, recovery 
and preparedness measures.

(f)  Develop  specific  mechanisms  to  engage  the  active  participation  and  ownership  of  relevant  stakeholders, 
including communities, in disaster risk reduction, in particular building on the spirit of volunteerism.

reduction since the IDNDR and was included in 
Priority for Action 5 of the HFA (Box 8.6).

HFA Priority for Action 5 is the area of the HFA 
where most progress appears to have been made 
(Figure 8.2).

HFA  progress  reports  highlight  that  prepared-
ness for response has been the main focus of the 
disaster risk management sector in many coun-
tries. Many success stories during the HFA are 
associated with improvements in preparedness, 
often combined with more effective early warn-
ing.  These  include  the  dramatic  reductions  in 
disaster mortality in countries like Bangladesh, 
Mozambique, India and Cuba described in Chap-
ter 2. But in a large majority of countries, there 
have  been  real  improvements  in  disaster  pre-
paredness and major investments in the neces-
sary capacities.

As Chapter 6 highlighted, disaster risk manage-
ment has generally been understood and prac-
tised  as  disaster  management,  including  in 

international organizations. For example, UNI-
CEF’s  disaster  risk  management  programmes 
focus heavily on school safety, emergency drills, 
an understanding of preparedness and life skills.9 
Regional organizations have also played a key 
role in supporting the preparedness agenda of 
their member countries and in setting up region-
al support mechanisms. For example, the ASEAN 
Agreement on Disaster Management and Emer-
gency  Response  (AADMER)  supports  member 
states in strengthening sub-regional emergen-
cy response capabilities, including the develop-
ment  of  Regional  Standby  Arrangements  and 
Coordination of joint disaster relief and emergen-
cy response operations (IASC-WFP, 2014).

Disaster  preparedness  has  been  strengthened 
through emergency preparedness drills, which 
are now carried out on a regular basis in schools 
and in other contexts (UNISDR, 2013b). For exam-
ple, the municipality of Quito in Ecuador carries 
out drills and simulations at the institutional lev-
el as well as in communities and schools; in Bhu-
baneswar, India, drills are held at the city, ward, 

161

and community levels, and at schools and colleg-
es (SCI, 2014).

Community-based  disaster  risk  management 
(CBDRM) programmes have also provided a criti-
cal vehicle for strengthening preparedness. Most 
CBDRM programmes usually have a strong com-
ponent of raising local awareness of risks (Shaw, 
2013).  Given  the  severe  social  and  econom-
ic constraints often faced by local communities 
(Maskrey, 1989 and 2011), CBDRM may do little 

to address the underlying risk drivers (SCI, 2014). 
However,  while  many  programmes  are  short-
lived, there are numerous examples of CBDRM 
programmes successfully leading to enhanced 
preparedness and early warning (Box 8.7).

The preparedness imperative
A  number  of  factors  may  explain  the  progress 
made  in  disaster  preparedness.  Unlike  other 
investments in disaster risk reduction, effective 
response is politically visible and therefore enjoys 

Figure 8.2  Progress reported against core indicators in HFA Priority for Action 5

HFA Core Indicator 5.1: Strong policy, technical and institutional 
capacities and mechanisms for DRM, with a DRR perspective.

HFA Core Indicator 5.2: Disaster preparedness plans and contin-
gency plans at all administrative levels, regular training drills and 
rehearsals.

HFA Core Indicator 5.3: Financial reserves and contingency mecha-
nisms in place for response and recovery.

HFA Core Indicator 5.4: Procedures in place for effective information 
sharing during and after disasters.

 (Source: UNISDR with data from the HFA Monitor.)

162

Part II - Chapter 8

Box 8.7  Community-based early warning and preparedness

Every year, Viet Nam experiences storms, floods and other hazards which give rise to annual economic losses 
equivalent  to  1-1.5  per  cent  of  GDP  (GFDRR,  2013b;  Nguyen,  2011).  In  2009,  the  government  introduced  a 
12-year  project  to  strengthen  community-based  disaster  risk  management  (GFDRR,  2013b;  Nguyen,  2011; 
AMDI, 2013).

In the project, international agencies have worked in partnership with the Vietnamese government, enabling 
local communities to prepare for disasters and reduce risks more effectively. Training in local communities 
and including disaster reduction in the school curriculum have allowed vulnerable populations to develop 
preparedness strategies, while infrastructure such as rural roads and irrigation systems has improved their 
resilience (ADPC, 2008; AMDI, 2013).

A new CBDRM project is underway in Myanmar, where the population is exposed to cyclones, earthquakes, 
tsunamis and storm surges. The Myanmar Action Plan on Disaster Risk Reduction was introduced by the Gov-
ernment  of  Myanmar  and  is  being  implemented  between  2013  and  2015  in  partnership  with  a  number  of 
international and UN agencies (UNDP, 2013b).

One of the main aims of the programme is to train 60,000 households in CBDRM by 2015. This will include 
increasing awareness of natural hazards within communities, first aid and early warning training, search and 
rescue training, and improving construction methods and standards in vulnerable rural areas (Government 
of Myanmar, 2012; UNDP, 2013b).

a strong political imperative. As noted in GAR11, 
electorally critical, hazard-prone states are twice 
as likely to have disasters officially declared than 
non-critical states, and for each disaster declara-
tion, a US President can expect a one-point increase 
in votes in a statewide contest (Reeves, 2010). Con-
versely,  the  disastrous  response  to  Hurricane 
Katrina generated negative political fallout for the 
city, state and federal administrations at the time.

At the same time, preparedness represents a rel-
atively natural and organic evolution from emer-
gency response. With its focus on contingency 
plans and evacuation drills, logistics and stock-
piles, trained and positioned search and rescue 
teams, hard-hats and uniforms, it is an exten-
sion of emergency response into the pre-disas-
ter  phase  of  the  disaster  management  cycle. 
Preparedness is both manageable and feasible 
with the kind of governance arrangements that 
evolved from emergency management.

The  resources  required  to  prepare  contingen-
cy  plans,  to  train  staff  and  students  and  to 
organize evacuation drills in the case of earth-
quake-exposed schools, for example, are infinitely 
smaller than what would be required to structur-
ally retrofit the school to make it safe. Similarly, 
preparedness does not require the same invest-
ment of political capital as prospective disaster 
risk management, which would include ensuring 
safe, well-located land to build future schools.

At the same time, and as noted above, prepared-
ness was not only integrated into the HFA and its 
predecessor frameworks for disaster risk reduc-
tion,  it  was  also  supported  by  another  set  of 
international mechanisms created through UN 
General Assembly resolution 46/182. In gener-
al, these mechanisms have enjoyed stronger and 
more  stable  funding  and  support  from  donor 
governments than the more prospective aspects 
of the HFA.

Unlike corrective disaster risk management, pre-
paredness does not require major investments. 

Importantly, the priority given to disaster pre-
paredness builds on periodic and well-publicized 

163

successes, for example the major reduction in 
mortality  following  Cyclone  Phailin  in  Odisha, 
India in 2013 compared to the super-cyclone of 
1999. While much of this success should be attrib-
uted to improving development indicators, it is 
disaster preparedness that has been able to cap-
italize on the political gains.

No bed of roses
At  the  same  time,  disaster  preparedness  is  no 
bed of roses. HFA progress reports highlight that 
some low-income countries remain challenged 
to create and sustain the necessary capacities. 
For example, Indonesia reports that a major chal-
lenge in enhancing preparedness measures is the 
lack  of  resources,  including  human  resources, 
expertise, budgets, equipment and facilities, at 
the local level coupled with continued dependen-
cy on the national level for preparedness plan-
ning (UNISDR, 2014a).

In effect, in some countries mortality risk remains 
high, as was tragically highlighted in Myanmar in 
2008. The capacity gap is often even greater in 
countries experiencing military or civil conflict. 
In addition, as the example of Hurricane Katrina 
demonstrated, capacities may not be as strong as 
they seem, even in the world’s richest countries.

The foundation for effective disaster prepared-
ness and response is laid at the local level. Well-
prepared localities can often significantly reduce 
their disaster losses, even if national level emer-
gency management structures collapse or fail to 
respond.  In  contrast,  even  the  best-organized 
disaster management at the national-level may 
be  ineffective  if  local  preparedness  capacities 
are weak or non-existent. As discussed in Chap-
ter 6, local capacities tend to be uneven, as they 
are stronger in larger urban centres with strong 
city governments and weaker in remote and rural 
areas.

More fundamentally, an extensive body of liter-
ature (Quarantelli, 1986; Yodmani, 2001; Pandey 

164

Part II - Chapter 8

and Okazaki, 2005) has demonstrated how verti-
cally integrated contingency plans and response 
mechanisms  often  seem  to  respond  more  to 
the command and control culture of emergency 
management and to preconceptions regarding 
response than to expressed needs and require-
ments on the ground. Preparedness plans and 
response may reflect ingrained prejudices and 
stereotypes regarding the affected population 
(Tierney, 2008) or fail to account for the specifici-
ties and complexity of local risk scenarios or local 
strategies for managing risk (IASC-WFP, 2014). As 
a result, disaster response may have unintended 
or negative consequences at the local level.

Often disasters themselves become simulacra, 
events configured and magnified by the media 
and by pre-existing stereotypes and conceptions 
rather than by what is happening in reality. For 
example, in the case of Hurricane Mitch in Hon-
duras in 1998, while the international media por-
trayed the total destruction of the entire country, 
in reality most damage was concentrated in only 
a few municipalities (UNISDR, 2011a). In the case 
of the mudslides in Vargas State, Venezuela in 
1999, it was found that a reported death toll of 
over 30,000 in reality did not exceed 700 (UNIS-
DR, 2009a). Disaster response (Box 8.8) often fails 
to understand or respond to local requirements 
and needs precisely because it responds to a sim-
ulacrum of disaster rather than to real local con-
ditions (Maskrey, 1996).

Preparedness  plans  may  often  exist  to  deal 
with  infrequent  intensive  risks  while  ignoring 
recurrent  local  extensive  risks.  The  fact  that 
the volume of response and support to disas-
ter-affected localities tends to be proportional 
to the number of fatalities rather than the num-
ber of survivors is one visible reflection of this 
mismatch.  Preparedness  plans  supported  by 
NGOs using mechanisms such as VCAs (vulnera-
bility and capacity assessments) are often more 
sensitive to local needs and strategies. Howev-
er, they are often developed in the context of 

Box 8.8  Disasters and simulacra: the experience of the Indian Ocean tsunami

That  national  plans  don’t  often  match  local  realities  is  nothing  new.  However,  in  disaster  response  as  in 
broader disaster risk management, the local diversity of conditions and needs are regularly overlooked as 
national visions can be skewed towards achieving humanitarian targets, including the distribution of assets 
such as boats (TEC, 2007). After the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami, highly politicized or socially contentious 
issues such as land rights, tax laws and gender relations were poorly understood by relief agencies. These 
agencies  often  had  no  effective  mechanisms  in  place  to  ensure  local  ownership  and  frequently  treated 
affected countries as “failed states”, undermining local and national capacities by offering unsolicited and 
often badly designed support programmes (TEC, 2006).

In  contrast,  international  action  was  most  effective  in  cases  where  local  actors  led  response  efforts  and 
received appropriate support (TEC, 2007). Unfortunately, the allocation of funds and staff was more often 
than not “driven by politics and funds, not by assessment and need” (ibid.). These politics were not only 
international; the international response to the tsunami was also severely hampered by indecisive and pro-
tective national and regional leadership (TEC, 2006).

short-term projects or programmes which may 
not be sustainable.

As currently defined, preparedness also seems 
challenged to address the increasingly complex 
multi-hazard and concatenated risks that now 
characterize large urban areas and regions (IASC-
WFP, 2014). The reality of risk in many contexts is 
now one of multi-dimensionality, which cannot 
be addressed through single-hazard contingen-
cy plans.

Finally, as highlighted in Chapter 6, with nota-
ble exceptions such as Mexico’s National Disas-
ter Prevention Fund and dedicated budget lines 
in countries such as the Philippines and Indo-
nesia, most disaster management agencies rely 
heavily  on  emergency  funding.  As  such,  they 
are usually under-resourced for preparedness 
activities.

8.3 Business as usual or building 

back better?

Even  though  recovery  and  reconstruction  after 
disasters are an integral part of the disaster man-
agement cycle and of disaster risk reduction, the 
HFA does not provide detailed guidance to coun-
tries in this area. In comparison to other aspects 
of the HFA, global progress has been limited.

Improvements can be observed in integrating di-
saster risk reduction into post-disaster needs as-
sessments  and  recovery  frameworks.  But  in 
many  situations,  the  willingness  to  build  back 
better is quickly replaced by business as usual.

Post-disaster recovery: a continuing challenge
Most of the citizens of Guiuan were still asleep 
when  a  heavy  storm  hit  the  small  city  in  the 
Eastern  Samar  province  of  the  Philippines  at 
4.40 a.m. on 8 November 2013. Typhoon Haiyan 
was the strongest tropical cyclone in recorded 
history to make landfall in the Philippines; and 
landfall it made, a total of five times across the 
islands of Samar, Leyte, Cebu and Iloilo (Figure 
8.3).10  

165

A Category 5 super-typhoon, it impacted the East-
ern Visayas region and the city of Tacloban before 
moving to the South China Sea and affecting Chi-
na, Taiwan (Province of China) and Viet Nam. To 
date, the death toll stands at 7,986,11 with more 
than 1,000 people still missing (NDRRMC, 2014) 
and  4.1  million  people  displaced  (IFRC,  2014). 
Total economic losses have been estimated at 
US$10 billion, over ten times the losses associat-
ed with Typhoon Bopha of 2012, known locally in 
the Philippines as Typhoon Pablo (EM-DAT, 2014; 
UNISDR, 2014b).

Of the 4.1 million people displaced, little more 
than  100,000  were  able  to  move  to  shelters 
(DSWD et al., 2014). The remaining 4 million found 
lodging  with  host  families  or  in  other  private, 
temporary accommodation (ibid.). However, six 

Figure 8.3  Typhoon Haiyan making landfall and 
the resulting destruction

 (Source: NOAA, 2014.)

 (Source: Russell Watkins/ Department for International Development.)

166

Part II - Chapter 8

months after the disaster, more than 2 million 
people were still living in temporary accommo-
dation (ibid.). Apart from housing issues, access 
to education, health facilities, transport, markets 
and income as well as unclear tenure and proper-
ty arrangements impeded the return of displaced 
people (ibid.).

It has long been recognized that new vulnera-
bilities can be generated in the gap between ini-
tial displacement and longer-term recovery and 
reconstruction (Berke et al., 1993; Ingram et al., 
2006; Brookings, 2008; IASC, 2009). In the case of 
Haiyan, of the US$776 million requested for recov-
ery, only 61 per cent of funding had been received 
by August 2014 (UNOCHA, 2014b). While recovery 
receives more attention and funding than other 
disaster risk management strategies (Kellett and 
Caravani, 2013; UNISDR, 2011a), it remains under-
resourced, and this gap may even widen as the 
human and economic cost of disasters continues 
to increase (IDMC, 2014; Swiss Re, 2014a).

Despite the fact that recovery and reconstruction 
have always been described as an integral part 
of the disaster management cycle and of disas-
ter risk reduction, the HFA does not emphasize 
this area heavily. Under Priority for Action 4 of 
the HFA, only one key activity specifically refers 
to recovery, namely:

(h) Incorporate disaster risk reduction measures 
into post-disaster recovery and rehabilitation pro-
cesses and use opportunities during the recovery 
phase to develop capacities that reduce disaster 
risk in the long term, including through the sharing 
of expertise, knowledge and lessons learned.

In comparison to other areas of activity, global 
progress in this area has been limited (Figure 8.4).

As in the case of preparedness, while recovery 
was  included  in  the  HFA,  its  development  has 
been influenced as much or more by other poli-
cy frameworks.

Figure 8.4  Progress in integration of DRR in recovery and 
rehabilitation

HFA Core Indicator 4.5: DRR measures integrated into post-disaster 
recovery and rehabilitation.
 (Source: UNISDR with data from the HFA Monitor.)

For example, the International Recovery Platform 
(IRP) was announced at the Second World Confer-
ence for Disaster Reduction in Kobe, Japan as a 
mechanism to identify gaps and constraints expe-
rienced in post disaster recovery and to serve as 
a catalyst for the development of tools, resourc-
es, and capacity for resilient recovery. IRP aims to 
be an international source of knowledge on good 
recovery practice.12 

Soon  afterwards,  the  Inter-Agency  Stand-
ing  Committee  (IASC)  created  a  Cluster  Work-
ing Group on Early Recovery (CWGER) as part of 
a new approach to improve coordination with-
in the UN system and between the UN and other 
stakeholders after major disasters. At the same 
time, support for national recovery planning and 
programming was an important component of 
the  Global  Facility  for  Disaster  Reduction  and 
Recovery (GFDRR), of the former UNDP Bureau 
for Crisis Prevention and Recovery (BCPR) as well 
as similar units in other regional and internation-
al  organizations.  At  the  same  time,  UNDP,  the 
World Bank and the European Union joined forc-
es to develop a common approach to assessing 

recovery needs: the Post-Disaster Needs Assess-
ment and Recovery Framework (PDNA/RF).

In search of space
When disaster occurs, an enormous quantity of 
accumulated risk is liberated. On the one hand, 
this vast energy is destructive. But on the oth-
er hand, it creates a space where new possibili-
ties can emerge. How this space can be used is 
the fundamental challenge facing post-disaster 
recovery. The experience of recovery and recon-
struction highlights just how difficult it is to take 
advantage  of  the  window  of  opportunity  that 
opens in the space or gap after a disaster and 
to ensure that new development prevents and 
avoids risks rather than reconstructing them.

A  first  set  of  problems  refers  precisely  to  the 
length of the gap or space between the destruc-
tion of the disaster and new development. This 
has variously been described as the gap between 
relief and recovery or the relief to development con-
tinuum (Buchanan-Smith and Maxwell, 1994; Lon-
ghurst, 1994). Fundamentally, the longer the gap, 
the greater the probability that losses to assets 
in disasters, including homes, possessions and 
livestock, as well as death or injury in the case of 
households; equipment, stocks and premises in 
the case of businesses; or infrastructure and facil-
ities in the case of local governments will trans-
late into longer-term impacts. GAR09 presented 
evidence indicating that unless losses are buff-
ered by prompt recovery actions, the depth and 
breadth of poverty increase, education, health 
and nutrition suffer, and social indicators dete-
riorate. GAR11 highlighted the financing gap that 
can arise for governments if they are unable to 
buffer disaster losses, while GAR13 showed how 
many small businesses never recover from those 
losses (UNISDR, 2009a, 2011a, 2013a).

Recovery, therefore, raises key issues in compen-
satory  risk  management,  in  particular  wheth-
er  mechanisms  are  in  place  which  can  allow 
households,  businesses  and  governments  to 

167

compensate for losses quickly and resume their 
activities before these losses translate into neg-
ative and longer-term impacts on development. 
This issue is complicated because ultimately the 
recovery of households, businesses and govern-
ment is interdependent. Restarting a business, 
for example, depends on restoring power, water, 
telecommunications and transport, which may 
be the responsibility of local governments or util-
ity providers. The recovery of households is con-
tingent on the recovery of the businesses that 
provide employment and income.

A second set of issues refers to prospective risk 
management: whether it is possible in the space 
or gap after a disaster to develop in a way that 
prevents the reconstruction of risks. By reveal-
ing risks, disasters uncover their underlying driv-
ers and can provide an imperative for change. As 
highlighted in Chapter 1, there are numerous his-
torical cases of changes in building practice or 
urban design, for example, in which risk-reduc-
ing  measures  have  been  introduced.  Howev-
er, for every case of positive change there seem 
to  be  many  more  cases  where  risk  is  rebuilt, 
sometimes literally brick by brick. Low-income 
households  and  small  businesses  in  particu-
lar often face severe constraints in changing the 
way they manage their risks and may be averse 
to taking the risks to experiment. In the case of 
governments and businesses, it is not straight-
forward to change the administrative and plan-
ning structures and processes that existed before 
a disaster. Therefore, the default option is often 
business as usual.

Using the recovery space to transform develop-
ment in a way that reduces future risks is com-
plicated because it requires consensus amongst 
a large group of stakeholders, including govern-
ment, international and regional organizations 
providing finance and technical advice, affect-
ed households and businesses, utility providers 
and others in order to move development onto 
a  different  track.  International  organizations, 

168

Part II - Chapter 8

bilateral and multilateral donors and non-gov-
ernmental  organizations  also  have  their  own 
agendas as well as client relations at the nation-
al level. In addition, there is a tension between 
the  need  for  speed  in  order  to  close  the  gap 
between relief and recovery as quickly as possi-
ble and the need for careful planning in order to 
avoid the reconstruction of risk. The window of 
opportunity for innovative change starts to close 
quite rapidly after the initial impact of a hazard, 
and normal politics often takes its place. As such, 
in many instances the momentum to capitalize 
on disaster as an opportunity for wider transfor-
mation is lost (GFDRR, 2014c; GFDRR et al., 2013; 
GFDRR et al., 2014).

Income and governance
Recovery processes in any country are heavily 
conditioned by factors such as income and gov-
ernance. Following the earthquakes in 2010, the 
very different paths taken by the recovery pro-
cesses in Chile and Haiti (Box 8.9) show that the 
way in which countries address the issues of both 
compensatory and prospective risk management 
in recovery processes depends far more on the 
strength of their economies and the quality of 
governance in normal times than on the volume 
of external assistance they receive.

Many  of  the  continuing  challenges  in  disaster 
recovery and reconstruction are related less to 
technical  issues  such  as  finance  or  the  quali-
ty of data for assessments than to the pre-exist-
ing political and economic cultures in countries, 
which may include competing and opaque insti-
tutional  mandates  and  the  power  relations 
between different social and economic groups. 
Coupled  with  nebulous  and  even  conflicting 
objectives of administrative units and agencies, 
diverging  national  and  sectorial  interests  can 
stand in the way of effective reconstruction and 
recovery (GFDRR, 2014c).

This  implies  that  countries  that  already  have 
compensatory  mechanisms  such  as  effective 

insurance16 in place and that can rapidly buffer 
losses will recover far more quickly than those 
that do not. Such mechanisms may include insur-
ance and reinsurance, catastrophe funds, contin-
gency financing arrangements with multilateral 
finance institutions and market-based solutions 
such as catastrophe bonds (UNISDR, 2011a and 
2013a). However, as the HFA draws to close, and as 
highlighted in Chapter 5, a financing gap remains 
in many low and middle-income countries, even 
when faced with less intensive disasters.

Financing recovery
Lack of finance is often cited as an obstacle to 
building  back  better  (UNISDR,  2013b;  GFDRR, 
2014c). Roughly a third of self-assessment reports 
submitted using the HFA Monitor list financing 
as  the  primary  limitation  to  the  integration  of 
disaster reduction into recovery and reconstruc-
tion. However, as highlighted in GAR11, building 
back better normally has a very attractive bene-
fit-cost ratio. It not only reduces future risk levels, 

but also contributes to reducing the financing gap 
that countries would face to buffer future loss-
es  (Williges  et  al.,  2014).  In  other  words,  it  can 
increase  a  country’s  economic  and  fiscal resil-
ience and enable it to absorb losses from events 
with longer return periods. For example, Ecua-
dor could shift the return period for a loss event in 
which it would experience a resource gap by more 
than 50 years (Figure 8.5). Similarly, by moving to 
a building back better approach, Pakistan would 
be able to shift a resource gap of more than US$3 
billion for a 1-in-100 year loss event (see Figure 5.2 
in Chapter 5) to a 1 in 143-157 year event..

At the same time, risk financing mechanisms are 
normally  designed  to  protect  public  finances 
from intensive events. Often no protection is in 
place in the case of the multiple extensive disas-
ters responsible for the vast majority of damage 
to housing, agriculture and local infrastructure. 
Therefore,  while  governments  and  large  busi-
ness can use insurance to protect themselves, 

Box 8.9  Recovery in Chile and Haiti

In  early  2010,  two  earthquakes  of  exceptionally  high  magnitude  hit  Haiti  and 
Chile within two months of each other. The 7.0 magnitude earthquake in Haiti 
left the capital Port-au-Prince in ruins. Some 222,570 people were killed and the 
economy devastated. The 8.8 magnitude earthquake in Chile also caused major 
damage, although only 562 people were killed.

The narrative of each disaster, however, was completely different. Low mortality in Chile reflected a long his-
tory of enforced seismic building codes. In contrast, the last major earthquake in Haiti was in 1842, and disas-
ter risk reduction efforts were focused on recurrent hurricanes rather than earthquakes. At US$30 billion, 
direct economic losses in Chile were around four times greater than those in Haiti, estimated at US$7.8 mil-
lion,  contrasting  the  value  of  exposed  assets  in  one  of  the  highest-income  countries13  and  in  the  lowest-
income country in the Americas. However, whereas in Chile these losses represented only 15 per cent of the 
country’s GDP (CEPAL, 2010), the much lower losses in Haiti equalled 120 per cent of the country’s GDP from 
2009.14

With most of its economy unaffected, high quality of governance15 and experience in managing earthquake 
disasters, Chile recovered relatively quickly. In contrast, five years after the disaster, with its economy devas-
tated, weak governance and no recent experience in managing earthquake events, Haiti has been challenged 
to recover at all. Efforts to build back better quickly fell apart (GFDRR, 2014c). These two narratives highlight 
how the potential for recovering quickly and in a way that prevents the generation of new risks is influenced 
by the level of economic development and quality of governance in a country.

169

Figure 8.5  Difference in financing gap with respect to return period from 
a “business as usual” (BAU) to a “building back better” (BBB) scenario

 (Source: Williges et al., 2014.)

low-income  households  and  small  businesses 
continue  to  absorb  the  persistent  losses  from 
extensive  risk.  Similarly,  international  assis-
tance is only forthcoming for recovery from larg-
er disasters.

In general, countries that already have effective 
policy and regulatory frameworks as well as strat-
egies and financial mechanisms in place to pre-
vent new disaster risks can take full advantage of 
the gap to transform development, whereas the 
window of opportunity opens and closes rapidly 
for those which have made little progress in put-
ting disaster risk management measures in place 
before disaster happens.

For example, in 2007 the principle of ensuring that 
risk-reducing measures are included in the recov-
ery and reconstruction of essential public assets 
was introduced into Australia’s Natural Disaster 

170

Part II - Chapter 8

Relief and Recovery Arrangements (NDRRA) with 
the goal of reducing future disaster losses and 
reconstruction  costs  (Government  of  Austra-
lia, no date). Following Cyclone Oswald in 2013, 
the  Queensland  and  Australian  Governments 
launched  the  Queensland  Betterment  Fund,  a 
joint, targeted fund of AU$80 million to finance 
upgraded  standards  in  the  reconstruction  of 
assets (Box 8.10).

Data for assessment and recovery planning
It is clear that post-disaster needs assessments 
and recovery frameworks are key instruments 
to reach consensus on how to kick-start recov-
ery in the shortest possible time frame as well 
as how to incorporate risk-reducing measures. 
While good assessments do not guarantee suc-
cessful recovery, weak or wrong assessments will 
almost surely result in badly conceived response 
and recovery (GFDRR, 2014a).

Understandably,  the  reliability,  relevance  and 
timeliness  of  data  is  crucial,  as  is  effective 

Box 8.10  Examples of building back better in Queensland, Australia

The Queensland Betterment Fund aims to cover the difference in cost between restoring or 
replacing an essential public asset to its pre-disaster standard and restoring or replacing the 
asset to a more disaster-resistant standard. Key projects financed by the AU$80 million fund 
include design enhancements to a variety of projects involving water supply (The Gayndah 
Water Supply Intake), bridges (George Bell Crossing) and roads (Gayndah-Mundubbera Road, 
Round Hill Road, Upper Mount Bentley Road). These projects reduce risk by securing roads to communities 
that have been isolated in past disasters and by protecting vital telecommunications infrastructure, to name 
but two examples.

 (Source: GFDRR et al., 2014.)

coordination  between  the  national  and  local 
governments,  international  organizations  and 
non-governmental actors, and in particular with 
affected households, businesses and communi-
ties (IRP, 2014). As in the case of early warning, 
there has been a major technological transforma-
tion in how data is collected since the adoption of 
the HFA. Social media now allows vast amounts 
of data to be sourced and broadcast and informa-
tion to be collected by and shared across global 
communities (Gundecha and Liu, 2012). Surveys 
conducted in Japan in 2011 showed that large 
parts of the population relied on social media for 
disaster-related information (Peary et al., 2012). 
Earthquake intensity information in Japan is cre-
ated in near real time by crowdsourcing informa-
tion online (IRP, 2014).

A number of countries have recognized the poten-
tial  of  such  accelerated  information-sharing 
mechanisms and have developed relevant legal 
and  regulatory  frameworks  and  policies  (IRP, 
2014). For example, following the Christchurch 
earthquake in 2011, the Government of New Zea-
land developed the Open Access and Licensing 
Framework to address the barriers experienced 
by utilities providers due to issues of confidenti-
ality in relation to property information (Ferreira 
et  al.,  2013).  In  Brazil,  efforts  to  enable  infor-
mation  sharing  between  civil  defence  author-
ities,  municipal  governments  and  local  actors 
have  been  reflected  in  the  new  National  Civil 

Protection and Defense Policy and by a dedicat-
ed complementary state law passed in 2013 (Oto-
ni de Araujo et al., 2013).

Building back better or business as usual?
Real progress has been made in ensuring that 
disaster  risk  reduction  is  factored  into  needs 
assessments  and  recovery  frameworks.  An 
assessment of twenty needs assessments con-
ducted in sixteen countries between 2004 and 
2011 found that roughly half recommended and 
promoted the integration of risk reduction into 
recovery. These principles included addressing 
both  structural  and  non-structural  measures, 
enhancing  preparedness  and  integrating  risk 
management into all sectors and levels of gov-
ernance. Almost all recent needs assessments 
provide recommendations for the integration of 
disaster risk reduction into sector-specific recov-
ery strategies (Box 8.11), in particular ensuring 
that damaged social and physical infrastructure 
such  as  schools,  health  facilities,  houses  and 
transportation networks are rebuilt to improved 
and reinforced standards (GFDRR, 2014c).

However, the incorporation of slogans such as 
build  back  better  into  needs  assessments  and 
recovery  is  rarely  actionable  unless  fully  fac-
tored into operational recovery plans and bud-
gets and ultimately into a more comprehensive 
approach to disaster risk management. One com-
mon  approach  following  major  disasters  is  to 

171

Box 8.11  Recovery-led disaster risk reduction and institutionalization in Mozambique

Following the impetus and momentum provided by the recovery after the massive floods of 
2007 in Mozambique, the Government incorporated community resilience and vulnerability 
reduction  as  key  components  in  its  Master  Plan  for  Disaster  Prevention  and  Mitigation. 
Recovery, resilience and development also came together in introducing farmers to drought-
resistant  crops,  the  construction  of  small-scale  rainwater  catchment  systems  using  local 
materials, and reforestation along riverbanks. Despite heavy rains, the number of people who were nega-
tively affected diminished considerably until the major floods of 2012/13 showed that still more effort was 
needed to reduce vulnerabilities. 

Subsequently, the National Institute for Disaster Management (INGC) was assigned to coordinate the reset-
tlement of displaced people from the banks of the Zambezi River in the absence of a housing ministry. An 
estimated 8,000 families benefited from government and international support in the construction of hous-
es, schools and clinics on higher ground using more resilient materials, although the government had to rec-
ognize the continued importance of structures closer to the river for the continuation of existing livelihoods. 
Furthermore, 776 community-level committees have since been trained and equipped to use the flood alert 
system for evacuating vulnerable populations.

Institutionally, disaster risk management practices have become well established under the leadership of 
INGC, and responsibility for disaster recovery increasingly blends into development plans under other gov-
ernment institutions (GFDRR, 2014c).

centralize responsibility for recovery and recon-
struction  in  an  ad-hoc  agency.  While  this  may 
speed  up  recovery  and  ensure  that  improved 
standards are observed, it may actually weaken 
the role of the administrative structures respon-
sible  for  ongoing  efforts  in  development  and 
disaster risk reduction. Often, once recovery is 
judged complete and the ad-hoc agency is dis-
mantled, the country does not necessarily con-
tinue to build back better, but rather reverts to 
business as usual.

In contrast, the recovery in Indonesia following 
the 2004 tsunamis did lead to a broader inclu-
sion of disaster risk reduction in recovery, and 
this approach was subsequently applied follow-
ing the 2006 Yogyakarta and Central Java earth-
quake, the 2009 West Sumatra earthquake, and 
the  2010  Merapi  volcanic  eruption.  Similarly, 
Mozambique’s efforts to institutionalize disas-
ter risk reduction and to ensure that it is factored 
into  recovery  have  been  mutually  supportive 
(GFDRR, 2014c).

For  example,  the  Earthquake  Reconstruction 
and  Rehabilitation  Authority  (ERRA)  in  Paki-
stan was able to substantially incorporate disas-
ter risk reduction into recovery after the 2005 
earthquake: over 85 per cent of the reconstruct-
ed  houses  were  compliant  with  new  seismic 
standards. However, this approach was not car-
ried over into the National Disaster Management 
Agency (NDMA) created in 2007, which made it dif-
ficult to address disaster risk reduction in recov-
ery following the 2010 floods (GFDRR, 2014c).

Even when implemented, the build back better 
concept may be limited to structural improve-
ments  in  buildings  or  to  specific  elements  of 
infrastructure, while no real attention is given to 
addressing the underlying drivers that construct-
ed the risk in the first place. In the aftermath of 
the Kashmir earthquake in 2005, hopes that the 
commonly felt impact would bridge the politi-
cal divide between Pakistan and India remained 
unfulfilled  (ODI,  2013).  In  contrast,  the  Aceh 
region managed to capitalize on the opportunity 

172

Part II - Chapter 8

to reconstruct not only its infrastructure but also 
the  foundations  of  Acehnese  society  after  the 
Indian Ocean tsunami in 2004 (ibid.).

Ultimately, the integration of disaster risk reduc-
tion into post-disaster recovery and reconstruc-
tion has been hampered by the same conception 
of disaster through which the HFA has been inter-
preted and which explains why so little progress 
has been made in prospective disaster risk man-
agement. If disasters are viewed as exogenous 
shocks,  recovery  and  reconstruction  are  seen 
first and foremost as a process of returning to 
normality rather than a process of transforming 
development and the underlying drivers of risk.

173

Notes

1  http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/PLAW-109publ430/pdf/PLAW-
109publ430.pdf.
2  http://www.preventionweb.net/applications/hfa/qbnhfa/
home.
3  For  additional  information,  see  http://www.cires.org.mx/
sasmex_es.php (accessed 11 December 2014).
4  http://www.howwemadeitinafrica.com/how-mobile-phones-
are-transforming-african-agriculture/8704 (accessed 11 January 
2015).
5  This challenge was discussed at the Third International Con-
ference on Early Warning (EWC III) held in Bonn, Germany, 27-29 
March 2006.
6  www.opidin.org.
7  http://www.fews.net/. 
8  The UNDMTP was launched in the 1990s as a joint initiative by 
UNDHA and UNDP on behalf of the Inter-Agency Task Force. Fol-
lowing the launch of the HFA in 2005, the UNDMTP was relaunched 
as the Capacity for Disaster Reduction Initiative (CADRI).
9  http://www.unicef.org/education/bege_61691.html.
10  http://www.metoffice.gov.uk/weather/tropicalcyclone/2013/
haiyan (accessed 10 October 2014).
11  www.em-dat.be.
12  http://www.recoveryplatform.org/about_irp. 
13  Chile  became  a  high-income  country  in  2013  (http://data.
worldbank.org/news/new-country-classifications).
14  http://www.unodc.org/lpo-brazil/es/frontpage/2010/03/18-
cepal-sismo-en-haiti-retrocedio-lucha-contra-la-pobreza-en-
una-decada.html (accessed 11 January 2015).
15  ht t p:// inf o.wor ldbank .or g /gove r nan ce/ wg i/ in de x .
aspx#home. 
16  Recovery following the Christchurch earthquakes was partly 
paralysed due to difficulties in settling insurance claims.

174

Part II - Chapter 8

Part III
Enter the void

177

On 26 July 2005, Mumbai was brought to a halt 
by severe flooding. Water supply, drainage and 
sewerage, all forms of public transport, power 
and telecommunications collapsed across wide 
areas (Revi, 2005). Some 1,150 people died (Car-
penter,  2006),  trains  were  derailed  and  parts 
of  the  city  were  submerged  under  the  heavi-
est rainfall recorded in Mumbai’s history (Hal-
legatte et al., 2010; Ranger et al., 2011; Dossal, 
2005).

Mumbai’s  150-year-old  municipal  government 
was unprepared and unable to organize an effec-
tive response. Many administrative and political 
institutions were paralysed, seemingly in a state 
of shock (ibid.). And yet city life continued, no 
riots broke out, and Mumbaikars soon organized 
themselves for a speedy response and recovery.1  
The event and its immediate aftermath highlight-
ed not only limitations but also the existence of a 
civic culture.

The 2005 floods affected a city of around 13 mil-
lion  people.2  Mumbai  has  now  grown  to  more 
than 20 million (UNDESA, 2014b), and this rapid 
growth continues to be characterized by high lev-
els of inequality. Informal settlements and mar-
kets with weak public infrastructure exist side by 
side with a dynamic economy and a strong middle 

Figure III.1  Mumbai in the early twentieth century

(Source: Bartholomew, 1908.)

178

Part III  

class. By 2020, the city is projected to have the 
highest population density in the world (ibid.).

Mumbai is no stranger to risk management chal-
lenges. At the end of the nineteenth century, fail-
ures  in  urban  planning,  regulation  and  public 
investment resulted in a devastating outbreak of 
the bubonic plague (Gandy, 2008; Christakos et 
al., 2007). The risks exposed by the 2005 floods 
were constructed in a very similar manner.

In 1908, Arthur Crawford, Municipal Commission-
er from 1865 to 1871, published plans for urban 
renewal  that  provided  for  adequate  housing, 
water supply, drainage and waste management 
systems (Crawford, 1908). He had already sug-
gested similar plans during his time in office, but 
they had been opposed by wealthy landowners 
and officials with vested interests. As a result, the 
bubonic plague that raged in the city for almost 
a decade until 1906 led to a heavy death toll and 
severely  impacted  the  city’s  economy,  social 
cohesion and self-image (Dossal, 2005).

Mumbai continued to grow rapidly in the twen-
tieth century at the same time as being exposed 
to a multitude of physical and technological haz-
ards, including earthquake, cyclone, storm surge, 
landslide, rainstorm and local flooding, sea lev-
el rise, drought, and nuclear and industrial acci-
dents. With  the  2005 floods, the strategic  and 
competitive  advantages  provided  by  location, 
history, and the resulting concentration of capi-
tal, human resources and technology seemed to 
have been overtaken by a dramatic accumulation 
of  both  systemic  and  idiosyncratic  risks  (Revi, 
2005).

Today,  more  than  half  of  the  population  lives 
in  informal  settlements  (Bertaud,  2011).  Pub-
lic investments in infrastructure have been play-
ing catch-up. Basic services and utilities such as 
uninterrupted energy and water supply, waste-
water management and garbage collection are 
non-existent or sub-standard in many parts of the 

city, particularly in informal settlements (Agarw-
al, 2011; Subbaraman et al., 2012). The municipal 
government is regulating and investing in a land-
scape of fluid and erratic changes in demograph-
ics, exigencies and prospects (Bertaud, 2011). In 
addition, it is forced to grapple with corruption 
in a society (Gandy, 2012). The next disaster is 
already in the making.

The case of Mumbai provides just a small glimpse 
of  the  limitations  of  the  current  approach  to 
disaster risk reduction as well as what the “new 
normal” of accelerating disaster risk is starting 
to look like.

Part II of this report highlights the success of the 
HFA  in  catalysing  major  investments  by  coun-
tries as well as regional and international orga-
nizations in disaster management. The different 
priorities for action identified in the HFA have dif-
ferent degrees of complexity and therefore man-
ageability.  And  the  disaster  risk  management 
sector  has  made  significant  progress  in  those 
areas  where  its  governance  arrangements  are 
appropriate (UNDP, 2014a).

As  suggested  in  Chapters  1  and  6,  while  the 
HFA  created  space  for  addressing  underlying 
risk, particularly in Strategic Goal 1 and Priori-
ty for Action 4, this space has been only partially 
explored by governments, regional and interna-
tional organizations. HFA progress reports have 
consistently highlighted a low level of achieve-
ment of Priority for Action 4. The syncretic evo-
lution, consolidation and expansion of a disaster 
risk management sector from its origins in emer-
gency management has led to its understanding 
and practice as disaster management (Enia, 2013; 
Hewitt, 2013; UNISDR, 2013a; 2011a). If disasters 
are understood as exogenous threats, then prior-
ity is given to policies, plans, strategies and other 
instruments designed to protect people and their 
assets from such threats rather than addressing 
the generation and accumulation of risk inside 
development.

As a result, it would appear that HFA Strategic 
Goal 1, the integration of disaster reduction into 
sustainable development policies and planning, 
has not been realized sufficiently. The genera-
tion and accumulation of new disaster risks, par-
ticularly extensive ones, seem to be outstripping 
the  increasing  efforts  to  protect  development 
against those risks. As underlined in Part I of this 
report, as the HFA draws to a close, disaster risk 
remains a growing challenge, particularly in low 
and middle-income countries. And the extensive 
risks of today can become the intensive risks of 
tomorrow.

However, this apparent shortfall masks a more 
complex reality. Innovation and progress in oth-
er  agendas,  including  those  related  to climate 
change, environment, water, urban design and 
management and sustainability, are leading to 
the adoption of policies and practices that have 
direct  or  indirect  co-benefits  for  disaster  risk 
reduction, even if they are not labelled as such. 
Given the focus of the disaster risk management 
sector on preparing for emergencies and man-
aging disasters, these practices are all too rarely 
documented through the HFA Monitor. Although 
the  tide  of  risk  generation  and  accumulation 
would still seem to be flowing in, there is now 
growing  momentum  in  some  sectors  to  trans-
form development in a way that addresses some 
of the underlying risk drivers.

Unease and uncertainty
Unfortunately, there is mounting evidence that 
notwithstanding  this  momentum,  the  world  is 
going  to  see  rapidly  accelerating  disaster  risk 
over the coming decades.

Despite the introduction of alternative metrics 
to measure progress in development, such as the 
Human Development Index (UNDP, 2014b), the 
Genuine Progress Indicator (Talberth et al., 2007), 
the World Happiness Report (Helliwell et al., 2013) 
or the Social Progress Index (Porter et al., 2014), 
the decisions of governments and investors alike 

179

are still largely determined by GDP per capita, 
the rate of GDP growth, credit ratings and short-
term return on capital rather than measures of 
sustainability and equity. The development par-
adigm continues to be based fundamentally on 
economic growth and is characterized by contra-
dictions and unsustainable qualities, including 
the overconsumption of natural capital and the 
production of inequality.

Over the last quarter of a century, the global econ-
omy has doubled in size, an estimated 60 per cent 
of the world’s ecosystems have been degraded 
and  the  benefits  of  growth  have  been  distrib-
uted  unevenly:  the  bottom  half  of  the  world’s 
population now shares just 1 per cent of glob-
al wealth. Even in high-income countries, huge 
gaps in wealth and well-being persist between 
rich and poor. As these trends evolve, the politi-
cal and social consensus on the benefits of devel-
opment is being replaced by growing uncertainty 
and unease, including concerns about increasing 
disaster risk.

Increasing exposure of economic assets
Global  GDP  per  capita  increased  by  122  per 
cent between 1990 and 2010.3 As the economy 
becomes more global, investment tends to flow 
to locations offering comparative advantages 
for capital accumulation, including low labour 
costs,  access  to  export  markets,  infrastruc-
ture, stability and other factors. As highlighted 
in  GAR13  (UNISDR,  2013a),  investment  deci-
sions rarely take into account the level of haz-
ard in these locations or else discount the risk 
excessively due to the short-term profits that 
can be made. This has led to large flows of cap-
ital into hazard-prone areas and a vast increase 
in  the  exposure  of  economic  assets  to  earth-
quakes,  tsunamis,  storm  surges,  floods  and 
other hazards. At the same time, the resulting 
risk becomes globalized as both the causes and 
impacts of disaster ripple through global sup-
ply chains and impacts in increasingly integrat-
ed sectors spill over into others.

180

Part III  

Growing risk inequality
The concentration of capital generates social and 
territorial inequalities. The richest 2 per cent of 
the world’s adult population now own over 50 per 
cent of global wealth (Davies et al., 2012), where-
as the bottom 50 per cent own less than 1 per cent 
of global wealth (Credit Suisse, 2013). This ratio 
translates into a Gini coefficient of 0.893, where 
0 is perfect equality and 1 is perfect inequality. 
In other words, the world is nearing what can be 
considered absolute levels of inequality (Davies 
et al., 2012). Sectors and territories without com-
parative advantages for capital accumulation are 
left behind. In those areas, disaster risk is associ-
ated with an absence of development character-
ized by low levels of investment in risk-reducing 
infrastructure, an absence of social and environ-
mental protection, and rural and urban pover-
ty. The geography of risk inequality occurs at all 
scales, between geographical regions and coun-
tries, within countries and even within cities and 
localities.

Segregated urban development
Urbanization  mirrors  economic  growth.  Urban 
growth per se can concentrate risk when it occurs 
in hazard-exposed locations. However, in most 
low and middle-income countries it is also usually 
characterized by unequal access to urban space, 
infrastructure, services and security, as specula-
tive urban capital is invested in modern enclaves 
while the low-income majority has access only to 
informal or sub-standard urbanization. Globally, 
about one in seven people live in overcrowded, 
low-quality housing conditions with inadequate 
access  to  services  (Mitlin  and  Satterthwaite, 
2013). This generates new patterns of both exten-
sive and intensive disaster risk, as low-income 
households are forced to occupy hazard-exposed 
areas with low land values, deficient or non-exis-
tent infrastructure and social protection, and high 
levels of environmental degradation.

Climate change
Economic  growth  requires  increasing  energy 

consumption,  which  is  still  largely  dependent 
on fossil fuels and manifests as increased green-
house gas emissions. While greenhouse gas emis-
sions by Annex I4 countries to the Kyoto Protocol 
decreased by 9.3 per cent between 1990 and 2011,5 
global emission levels rose over the same time 
period and well into 2013 (WMO, 2014b), result-
ing in atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse 
gases exceeding pre-industrial levels by around 
40 per cent (IPCC, 2013). The emissions of almost 
50 per cent of all countries exceed the currently 
established global thresholds (UNDP, 2014b). As 
a result, through changing temperatures, precip-
itation and sea levels, among other factors, glob-
al climate change feeds back into modifications 
in hazards and magnifies disaster risks. Climate 
change transfers risk as many of the territories 
most  affected  are  those  which  have  contribut-
ed least to greenhouse gas emissions. But at the 
same time, climate change is a meta-risk driver, 
as both its causes and consequences are global.

Overconsumption
Economic  growth  also  relies  on  the  increas-
ing  consumption  of  environmental  resources, 
including freshwater, forest and marine resourc-
es. Of the 140 countries for which data is avail-
able, 59 per cent show an ecological footprint 
that is above global biocapacity, and 49 out of 172 
countries withdraw more fresh water than the 
global threshold allows (UNDP, 2014b). Many eco-
systems that play vital protective and provision-
ing roles are being degraded beyond the point 
of  recovery,  which  can  magnify  hazard  levels, 
increase vulnerability and challenge resilience. 
Like climate change, the consumption of envi-
ronmental resources is a reflection of inequality. 
Many sectors and territories with high levels of 
income live beyond their means and rely on the 
consumption of environmental resources from 
other areas.

Changing demographies
Demographic  change,  including  shifts  due  to 
migration  and  displacement,  also  influences 

disaster risk patterns and trends. By 2050, the 
world’s population will have increased to 9.2 bil-
lion (Lutz et al., 2014) and the percentage of the 
ageing population (over 60) in high-income coun-
tries is expected to reach 32 per cent (UNDESA, 
2013). While the global population is expected to 
peak at 9.4 billion around 2070 and start to decline 
slowly by the end of the century (Lutz et al., 2014), 
countries and regions with rapidly growing, young 
populations  are  likely  to  see  increasing  haz-
ard exposure, particularly in urban areas. Given 
the specific disaster risks posed by demograph-
ic change, countries and regions with ageing and 
declining populations are likely to see increases in 
vulnerability and reductions in resilience.

The drive for competitiveness
Within the current development paradigm, both 
businesses and countries continuously strive to 
remain  competitive.  By  reducing  labour  costs 
in the case of businesses or spending on social 
welfare  and  protection  in  the  case  of  govern-
ments, the drive to remain competitive and to 
attract investment may increase the vulnerabili-
ty and reduce the resilience of large sectors of the 
labour force. Conversely, however, the drive to 
increase energy and resource efficiency in order 
to reduce costs spurs investment in technologies 
that can reduce greenhouse gas emissions and 
relieve ecosystems.

Non-linearity and uncertainty
These global drivers of risk are closely interre-
lated and concatenated, and they are increas-
ingly shaping local realities like the situation in 
Mumbai. The perception of increasing complex-
ity, interconnectivity and dependency of local 
realities on global processes erodes the capac-
ity of local stakeholders to manage their risks 
and increases uncertainty and unease. Given the 
multiple feedback loops between these different 
drivers and their non-linearity, even slight chang-
es in the evolution of any one driver can gener-
ate unexpected and radical changes in another. 
As uncertainty and unease replace certainty and 

181

security in the future, disaster risk  reduction may 
be entering the void.

Predicting  what  the  impact  of  global  climate 
change,  energy  consumption  or  population 
growth may look like in 20, 50 or 100 years has 
become something of a social obsession and can 
be disempowering. Ultimately, if the planetary 
system is going to collapse, why invest in man-
aging today’s risks? At the same time, however, 
economic stakeholders do not just react passive-
ly to change, but actually shape it. Understand-
ing the economic, political and social forces that 
are currently driving risk can also help to identi-
fy gaps and points of inflection where change is 
possible.

Notes

1  http://lsecities.net/media/objects/articles/maximum-city/
en-gb (accessed 11 January 2015).
2  Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai, Population Census: 
http://www.mcgm.gov.in/irj/portal/anonymous/qlvitalstatsreport.
3  Data from the World Bank Development Indicators: http://
data.worldbank.org. 
4  Annex I countries include the industrialized countries that 
were members of the OECD in 1992, plus countries with econo-
mies in transition, including the Russian Federation, the Baltic 
States, and several Central and Eastern European States. For the 
full list of Annex I countries, see http://unfccc.int/parties_and_
observers/parties/annex_i/items/2774.php.
5  http://unfccc.int/ghg_data/ghg_data_unfccc/items/4146.
php.

182

Part III  

Chapter 9
Risk inequality

183

The concentration of capital generates social and territorial ine(cid:46)ualities. The world is nearing what 
can be considered absolute levels of ine(cid:46)uality, and sectors and territories without comparative 
advantages for capital accumulation are being left behind. In those areas, disaster risk is associ-
ated with an absence of development characteri(cid:55)ed by low levels of investment in risk-reducing 
infrastructure, an absence of social and environmental protection, and rural and urban poverty. 

9.1 Multi-dimensional poverty, 

everyday risks and disasters

Multi-dimensional  poverty  experienced  in  haz-
ard-exposed areas means that conditions of ev-
eryday  risk  become  configured  as  patterns  of 
extensive disaster risk. 

In the wealthy town of Lenzie, East Dunbarton-
shire,  Scotland,  men  live  to  an  average  age  of 
82. Just 12 kilometres down the road, in Calton, 
Glasgow, they die at 54 on average (Government 
of Scotland, 2009). Male life expectancy in Cal-
ton is lower than in the Gaza Strip, where men 

can expect to live until the age of 71,1  or in Iraq, 
where after 20 years of sanctions and war, male 
life expectancy is 66 years.2 Only 12 countries in 
sub-Saharan Africa, including Sierra Leone, Chad 
and  the Democratic  Republic  of  Congo  have  a 
lower male life expectancy than Calton.3 Given 
the link between poverty and disaster risk, it may 
come as no surprise that Calton also sees regular 
flooding (Box 9.1).

The  case  of  Calton  epitomizes  how  econom-
ic poverty, together with other poverty factors 
such as powerlessness, exclusion, low literacy 
and  discrimination,  translates  into  conditions 

Box 9.1  Everyday and extensive risk in Calton

Calton is an underprivileged district in Glasgow, Scotland. Poverty, drugs and alcohol, crime 
and poor health are rampant. A full 44 per cent of its inhabitants are on incapacity benefits 
and  37  per  cent  live  in  workless  households  (Government  of  Scotland,  2009).  This  level  of 
deprivation exists within walking distance of Glasgow’s most upmarket shopping district, a 
clear reflection of high levels of inequality in close vicinity.

In Scotland, mortality due to causes such as respiratory and liver diseases, accidents, drug and alcohol-relat-
ed  disorders,  self-harm  and  assault  in  the  most  deprived  areas  like  Calton  are  higher  than  in  the  least 
deprived areas by an order of magnitude on the Scottish Index of Multiple Deprivation (SIMD; Table 9.1).

Table 9.1  Male mortality (age 0-64, per 100,000) from selected causes within each SIMD deprivation quintile, 2000-2002.

 (Source: UNISDR with data from the SIMD.4)

184

Part III - Chapter 9

The high levels of deprivation in Calton also coincide with extensive disaster risk (Lindley et al., 2011). In addi-
tion to inequality and poverty, the inadequate design of the city’s sewage systems and small urban water-
courses mean that local flooding occurs on a regular basis (Cashman, 2007). Diminishing floodplains along 
the Clyde River have further exacerbated flood hazard in the area (Figure 9.1).

Figure 9.1  Glasgow city centre at the end of the 18th century and the beginning of the 21st  century

 (Source: National Library of Scotland; Ordnance Survey.5)

In 2002, Calton and Shettleston—another district in Glasgow where an estimated 80 per cent of the popula-
tion  live  on  welfare  benefits  and  most  do  not  have  insurance  (Tufail  et  al.,  2004)—were  among  the  areas 
worst  affected  by  flooding  (Cashman,  2007).  Shettleston  also  experienced  repeated  extensive  flooding 
between 1993 and 2005 (Werritty et al., 2007). A survey on flood impacts in 2006 showed very low response 
rates  from  the  emergency  services  in  Shettleston  compared  to  other  affected  locations  (ibid.),  possibly 
reflecting the disenfranchisement of its population.

After the 2002 floods, the Metropolitan Glasgow Strategic Drainage Partnership (MGSDP, 2012a) implement-
ed  risk  reduction  measures  against  a  1-in-200-year  flood,  including  the  construction  of  4.5  km  of  flood 
defence walls, six underground pumping stations, the creation of flood storage areas in three river basins 
and the planting of thousands of trees and bushes (MGSDP, 2012b). However, in areas such as Calton and 
Shettleston, flood risk is as much about social vulnerability as it is about hazard.

of everyday risk; these are associated with poor 
health, crime, drug addiction, domestic violence 
and homelessness (Wilkinson and Marmot, 2003), 
which in turn reinforce poverty.

The correlation between poverty and life expec-
tancy is particularly pronounced in low-income 
countries.  For  example,  Lilongwe,  Conakry, 
N’Djamena, Banjul and Kigali all have life expec-
tancies at birth of less than 50 years (Mitlin and 
Satterthwaite,  2013).  In  Chad,  Sierra  Leone, 
Burundi  and  Mali,  under-five  mortality  rates 
among urban populations are staggeringly high 
at more than 150 per 1,000 live births, compared 

to below 10 per 1,000 live births in middle and 
high-income nations (ibid.). But as the case of 
Calton  shows,  low  life  expectancy  arises  from 
these conditions of high everyday risk, even in 
the world’s richest countries.

There is now a common understanding that low-
income  households  and  communities  suffer  a 
disproportionate  share  of  disaster  losses  and 
impacts (UNISDR, 2009a; Rentschler, 2013; Lewis, 
2011; Donner and Rodriguez, 2011; 6 Benson and 
Clay, 2004; DFID, 2004; UNDP, 2004; Wisner et al., 
2003; Baker, 2012; UNDP, 2014a).

185

However, as in Calton, disaster risk is shaped not 
only by income poverty but by a range of social 
and  economic  factors  that  determine  entitle-
ments and capabilities (Shepherd et al., 2013). 
Access to services, political voice, and social and 
economic status directly affect disaster risk and 
resilience (Satterthwaite and Mitlin, 2014). Key 
factors  in  underprivileged  areas  include  low-
quality and insecure housing; limited access to 
basic services such as health care, public trans-
port and communications, and to infrastructure 
such as water, sanitation, drainage and roads; a 
low asset base; and the absence of a safety net 
(ibid.).  Higher  mortality  and  morbidity  rates 
among  children,  the  elderly  and  women  are 
directly linked to these different poverty factors 
(Anderson, 1994; IASC, 2006; Benson and Bug-
ge, 2007; Aldrich and Benson, 2008; Walden et al., 
2009; UNISDR, 2009a; World Bank, 2010; Nilufar, 
2012; Shepherd et al., 2013).

People  who  are  subject  to  multi-dimensional 
poverty are more likely to live in hazard-exposed 
areas and are less able to invest in risk-reduc-
ing measures. As such, conditions of everyday 

risk  become  configured  as  patterns  of  exten-
sive disaster risk (Figure 9.2), which in turn lead 
to  accumulations  of  intensive  risk  in  regions 
exposed to earthquakes, tropical cyclones and 
other major hazards.

The lack of access to insurance and social pro-
tection mechanisms and the general difficulty 
of mobilizing assets to buffer losses then means 
that  damage  to  housing,  local  infrastructure, 
livestock and crops feeds back into a range of 
disaster impacts and poverty outcomes (UNIS-
DR, 2009a; Baez et al., 2009). Recurrent extensive 
disasters  erode  the  asset  base  of  households, 
leading to greater risk and lower resilience. In the 
case of people living at or below the poverty line, 
with a severely constrained ability to accumu-
late or mobilize assets, disaster risk will contin-
ue to be a factor that not only reflects but also 
drives poverty. For example, floods and droughts 
in Mexico make a significant contribution to low-
er human development and increased poverty. 
Between 2000 and 2005, the impact of disasters 
on human development was equal to a two-year 
loss of progress on average, and the effect on 

Figure 9.2  The disaster risk–poverty nexus

 (Source: UNISDR.)

186

Part III - Chapter 9

Figure (cid:1098).3  Annual local government expenditure per person

 (Source: United Cities and Local Government, 2010.)

poverty was equivalent to an increase of 1.5 to 
3.7 per cent (Rodriguez-Oreggia et al., 2012).

Evidence from microeconomic studies also shows 
that intensive disasters have a disproportional 
impact on the poorest households, which tend 
to lose a higher proportion of their productive 
assets. Similarly, these same households often 
have less capacity to mobilize assets to buffer 
losses and recover. As such, intensive disasters 
can lead to a broadening and deepening of pov-
erty and inequality as well as longer-run impacts 
on health, education, nutrition and productivity.

frequent deviations from normal rainfall patterns 
directly impact the welfare of poor households, 
particularly  those  in  rural  areas  with  limited 
access to markets (Safir et al., 2013).

Health effects have also been shown to be sig-
nificant, particularly for young children and the 
elderly: in the aftermath of Hurricane Mitch, the 
probability  of  undernourishment  in  children 
almost quadrupled in the regions hit by the hurri-
cane, and children were 30 per cent less likely to 
be taken to a doctor when they were sick (Baez, 
2007).

Evidence  from  the  2007  earthquake  in  Peru 
shows  that  both  measurable  poverty  as  well 
as subjective poverty (poverty as perceived by 
those affected) increased considerably in the Ica 
Region, the most severely affected area in the 
country (Lucchetti, 2011). In the Philippines, anal-
yses  of  rainfall  data  and  household  consump-
tion patterns show that even smaller but more 

In many cities in low and middle-income coun-
tries, weak and under-resourced local govern-
ments do not have the capacity to manage the 
processes  that  are  generating  and  accumulat-
ing disaster risk, nor to provide social protection 
(UNISDR, 2009a, 2011a, 2013a; Mitlin and Satter-
thwaite, 2013). While annual local government 
spending (Figure 9.3) in a high-income country 

187

like Denmark can exceed US$12,000 per inhabit-
ant, in many low-income countries it is less than 
US$5 per inhabitant (Satterthwaite and Dodman, 
2013). This implies that weak local governance is 
both a poverty factor and a driver of risk.

While the impact of disaster on poverty has been 
documented repeatedly, what is missing is the 
recognition that disaster risk, and particularly 
extensive risk, is part of the DNA of poverty and 
inequality. In other words, it is rooted within pov-
erty and not an externality.

Studies on the geography of risk often still pres-
ent disasters and climate change impacts as a 
simple function of the hazard exposure of low-
income populations. For example, a recent pro-
jection  states  that  325  million  extremely  poor 
people will be living in the 49 countries most prone 
to hazards in 2030, and therefore eliminating pov-
erty cannot be achieved without addressing disas-
ters (Shepherd et al., 2013). However, this logic 
can be explored from a different angle. If pover-
ty could be reduced, so would disaster losses and 
impacts. Disaster risk, and extensive risk in par-
ticular, is intrinsic to poverty.

living below the poverty line has decreased dra-
matically  over  the  last  10  years,  the  pover-
ty threshold for Turkey has continuously risen. 
In 2013, it was calculated at US$509 per month, 
which is significantly higher than the official pov-
erty line.8

Inequality and poverty are highest in the south-
ern  and  eastern  regions  of  the  country,  which 
are less populated than the urbanized north and 
western coast. With the exception of losses asso-
ciated with the large earthquake in Izmit in 1999, 
disaster losses in general reflect the distribution 
of inequality (Figure 9.4).

The social processes and power dynamics that 
drive the disaster risk–poverty nexus are perme-
ated with inequality. Inequality (Box 9.2) drives 

Figure (cid:478).4  Inequality and disaster losses in Turkey

9.2  

 

 

Ine(cid:46)uality and disaster risk

 

The social processes that drive the disaster risk–
poverty  nexus  are  permeated  with  inequality. 
Inequality increases income poverty and creates 
processes  of  social  and  political  exclusion.  The 
result  is  a  lack  of  social  cohesion  that  contrib-
utes  to  disaster  risk  by  eroding  accountability 
and enabling corruption.

In  Turkey,  an  upper  middle-income  country, 
income inequality has been decreasing over the 
last 30 years. However, this decrease began from 
a high starting point, and today the country still 
ranks second among OECD countries in terms of 
income inequality.7 While the number of people 

188

Part III - Chapter 9

 (Source: UNISDR with data from the Turkish Disaster 
Data Bank (TABB) and OECD.)

Box 9.2  Dimensions of inequality

Inequality has a number of dimensions that go beyond the mere unequal distribution of income. Many of 
these dimensions may have a more significant impact on disaster risk levels than income inequality alone. 
Asset inequality usually relates in particular to housing and security of tenure, but it can also refer to produc-
tive assets in farming communities or goods and savings in trading communities. Inequality of entitlements 
refers to unequal access to public services and welfare systems as well as inequalities in the application of 
the rule of law. Political inequality exists worldwide in the unequal capacities for political agency possessed 
by  different  groups  and  individuals  in  any  society.  Finally,  the  inequality  of  social  status  is  often  directly 
linked  to  space  (e.g.  informal  settlements  in  urban  settings)  and  has  a  bearing  on  other  dimensions  of 
inequality, including the ability of individuals and groups to secure regular income, to access services and to 
claim political space.

The direct impact that social status often has on the capacity of individuals or groups to manage risks and 
build resilience is regularly underestimated in research and particularly in quantitative assessments of vul-
nerability to disasters. The different dimensions of inequality that drive disaster risk at all levels need to be 
brought to the forefront of how disaster risk generation and accumulation are understood.

 (Source: Satterthwaite and Mitlin, 2014.)

disaster risk levels not just because it increases 
income poverty (UNDP, 2013b) but also through 
other processes of social and political exclusion, 
which also affect lower middle-class families in 
societies with high levels of inequality. Such lev-
els of inequality and a lack of social cohesion can 
contribute to disaster risk by eroding account-
ability,  enabling  corruption  and  dismantling  a 
social  contract  that  could  provide  incentives 
for risk-reducing behaviour. As explored in oth-
er chapters of this part of the report, inequality 
also redistributes disaster risk through process-
es such as uneven economic development, urban 
segregation and the overconsumption of resourc-
es. Disaster risk inequality is therefore an inher-
ent  characteristic  of  broader  social,  economic 
and political inequalities.

Inequality of access to infrastructure, services 
and safety nets has an influence on the resilience 
of  different  groups  and  individuals  in  society 
when affected by disaster losses. Inequality of 
access to land, income and asset bases affects 
how households and communities can manage 
their disaster risks. Finally, inequality of protec-
tion through established rights, laws and regula-
tions, and inequality in voice and accountability 

impact the capacity of countries to address the 
underlying  drivers  of  disaster  risk  (UNISDR, 
2009a, 2011a).

Globally, social and income inequality are rec-
ognized as having a direct relationship with the 
macroeconomic risks of fiscal crises and unem-
ployment  (WEF,  2014).  At  all  scales,  inequali-
ty also facilitates the transfer of disaster risks, 
through ineffective accountability and increased 
corruption, from those who benefit from taking 
the risks to other sectors and population groups 
who bear the costs (Birdsall and Londoño, 1997; 
Kawachi et al., 1997; World Bank, 2004; Hulme 
and Green, 2005; UNISDR, 2013a).

High levels of inequality thus limit both economic 
growth and social cohesion (Persson and Tabel-
lini 1991; Birdsall and Londoño, 1997; Deninger 
and Squire 1998; Easterley 2002; Piketty, 2014). 
And extreme levels of inequality can turn into a 
serious global governance issue per se, as they 
can corrode social cohesion to the point where 
issues such as disaster risk are no longer viewed 
in terms of common values and priorities (Wilkin-
son, 2005; Fajnzylber et al., 2002).

189

9.3 Addressing poverty and 

ine(cid:46)uality in the HFA?

There is evidence of success in reducing poverty 
and inequality. However, much of this progress 
has not originated in the disaster risk manage-
ment sector per se, but instead has been driven 
by  other  sectors,  notably  agriculture,  food  and 
social welfare.  

The HFA does not mention inequality as a driv-
er of disaster risk. However, under Priority for 
Action 4, the HFA includes a number of activities 
aimed directly at reducing the vulnerability and 
strengthening the social resilience of households 
and communities (Box 9.3).

Although  government  self-assessment  reports 
show an improvement in these areas between 
the 2011 and 2013 reporting cycles, they point 
to a very low overall level of achievement (Figure 
9.5) which is well below the average score across 
the different priorities for action.

As  in  other  HFA  key  activities,  the  absence  of 
consistent  output  indicators  makes  it  difficult 
to assess progress. However, there is evidence 
of improving food security in many regions and 

Figure (cid:1098).5  Progress reported in integrating disaster 
risk reduction into social development

HFA Core Indicator 4.2: Social development policies and plans 
implemented to reduce vulnerability of populations most at risk.
 (Source: UNISDR with data from the HFA Monitor.)

increasing coverage of social protection. Much of 
this progress has not originated in the disaster 
risk management sector per se, but instead has 
been driven by other sectors, notably agriculture, 
food and social welfare.

Box (cid:1098).3  Key activities related to social vulnerability and resilience in the HFA

(d) Promote food security as an important factor in ensuring the resilience of communities to hazards, particu-
larly  in  areas  prone  to  drought,  flood,  cyclones  and  other  hazards  that  can  weaken  agriculture-based 
livelihoods.

(g) Strengthen the implementation of social safety-net mechanisms to assist the poor, the elderly and the dis-
abled, and other populations affected by disasters. Enhance recovery schemes including psycho-social training 
programmes in order to mitigate the psychological damage of vulnerable populations, particularly children, in 
the aftermath of disasters.

(i) Endeavor to ensure, as appropriate, that programmes for displaced persons do not increase risk and vulnera-
bility to hazards.

(j) Promote diversified income options for populations in high-risk areas to reduce their vulnerability to hazards, 
and ensure that their income and assets are not undermined by development policy and processes that increase 
their vulnerability to disasters.

190

Part III - Chapter 9

Food security
Food security has improved in recent decades. 
Since 1990, the global rate of undernourishment 
has fallen from 18.7 to 11.3 per cent (FAO et al., 
2014) and 52 countries have managed to reach 
the hunger target of the Millennium Development 
Goals. However, current estimates indicate that 
more than 800 million people around the world 
are still chronically undernourished (ibid.), and 
there are marked differences in progress across 
regions. Sub-Saharan Africa still has higher rates 
of undernourishment than other regions, while 
the situation in West Asia has actually deteriorat-
ed (Figure 9.6).

This mixture of progress on the one hand and 
persistent  challenges  on  the  other  shows  that 
sustained political commitment, together with 
major investments in risk-sensitive food produc-
tion and consumption, will be required if global 
and sustainable food security is to be achieved 
(UNISDR, 2013a; FAO et al., 2014). In light of pro-
cesses such as ongoing land degradation, dwin-
dling fresh water supplies, loss of biodiversity 

Figure (cid:478).6  Trends in undernourishment: regional differences

and climate change, the challenges are likely to 
increase in the future.

Social protection
Social protection has received significant sup-
port from international aid budgets. For exam-
ple, the World Bank alone allocated an average 
annual budget of US$1.72 billion for social pro-
tection between 2007 and 2013 and  approved 
273 projects in 93 countries with a total value of 
US$12 billion over the same period.

There are examples of successful initiatives in 
prospective disaster risk management that have 
effectively reduced vulnerability by combining 
disaster risk management with poverty reduc-
tion (UNISDR, 2011a; Arnold et al., 2014; GFDRR, 
2014d).  One  such  example  is  the  Bangladesh 
Chars  Livelihood  Programme  (CLP)9,  in  which 
public works for flood risk reduction are com-
bined with asset transfers (both cash and in kind), 
market  development,  livelihoods  diversifica-
tion and a range of social development projects 
to build the long-term resilience and prosperi-
ty of the communities living in the hazard-prone 

 (Source: FAO et al., 2014.)

191

chars in northwest Bangladesh (GFDRR, 2013c; 
Conroy et al., 2010). The combination of inten-
sive and targeted welfare support and econom-
ic development at the individual, household and 
community level has produced real reductions in 
vulnerability (GFDRR, 2014d; Conroy et al., 2010).

 

Disabilities,  which  highlights  that  States  shall 
“ensure  the  protection  and  safety  of  persons 
with disabilities in situations of risk […] and the 
occurrence of natural disasters”.11 This premise 
has informed recent efforts to address the fact 
that persons with disabilities as well as the elder-
ly remain at high risk in disaster situations and to 
let persons with disabilities contribute to disaster 
risk reduction efforts.

However, social protection has generally been 
used more as a buffer for disaster losses than as 
a tool for prospective disaster risk management 
(Newsham et al., 2011). For example, a number 
of  community-driven  development  initiatives 
aimed at reducing poverty and vulnerability have 
successfully reduced disaster risks without origi-
nally intending to do so (World Bank, 2006); this 
was mostly achieved by strengthening resilience 
using the network and infrastructure available 
during emergencies (GFDRR, 2014d).

One area of social protection in which adequate 
progress has not been made is the protection and 
involvement of people with disabilities. Disaster 
risk reduction programmes that target people 
with disabilities remain the exception, for exam-
ple in the education sector, where disaster risk 
reduction may be taught to children in schools 
where  most  children  with  disabilities  are  not 
enrolled.10

More recent efforts to understand and address 
disability in the context of disasters and disas-
ter  risk  management  have  made  reference  to 
the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with 

Box 9.4  Key activities related to financial risk sharing in the HFA

9.4 Strengthening social and 

economic resilience through  
financial risk-sharing  
 

 
 

 
 

 
  mechanisms

Risk financing is an area where significant prog-
ress has been made. While this area has attract-
ed growing interest from governments, the pri-
vate  sector  and  international  organizations, 
the  ability  of  standard  instruments  to  ensure 
the welfare of all remains limited in many coun-
tries. 

Under Priority for Action 4, the HFA also recog-
nized the role that could be played by financial 
risk-sharing mechanisms, although this was not 
explicitly linked to inequality and vulnerability 
(Box 9.4).

Unfortunately, these key activities are not reflect-
ed in the HFA’s core indicator for social protec-
tion, nor in any of the other core indicators under 
Priority  for  Action  4.  However,  given  the  clear 
link between financial protection and resilience, 
these activities will be discussed in this chapter. 

(k)  Promote  the  development  of  financial  risk-sharing  mechanisms,  particularly  insurance  and  reinsurance 
against disasters.

(m) Develop and promote alternative and innovative financial instruments for addressing disaster risk.

192

Part III - Chapter 9

Again, the absence of consistent output indica-
tors makes it difficult to assess progress, but the 
means of verification in the HFA Monitor provide 
evidence of innovation, suggesting that this is an 
area where significant progress has been made. 
As a mechanism to protect social and econom-
ic development against exogenous threats, risk 
financing  has  attracted  growing  interest  from 
governments, the private sector and from inter-
national organizations such as the World Bank 
and the OECD.

Insuring assets and business operations against 
risks goes back to the risk faced by seafarers in 
the seventeenth century. Since its beginnings at a 
London coffee house in 1688, where marine trad-
ers bought insurance for their goods and ships, 
buying  and  selling  disaster  risk  insurance  has 
grown into a big business. In the early twentieth 
century, governments began to promote insur-
ance  as  a  way  of  strengthening resilience  and 
avoiding social pressures for compensation. The 
first government insurance scheme was the US 
Federal  Crop  Insurance  Program  of  the  1930s, 
which sought to protect farmers from the dou-
ble effects of the Great Depression and the Dust 
Bowl (GFDRR, 2014b), a period of droughts and 
dust storms combined with inappropriate farm-
ing practices that began in 1934 and the impacts 
of which lasted well into the 1940s.

By the early twenty-first century, several mature 
domestic  insurance  markets  had  evolved,  for 
example in Japan, the United States of America 
(most notably in California), Turkey and Mongolia, 
but only a limited number of high-income coun-
tries used catastrophe risk insurance to hedge 
their sovereign risk and to ensure financial liquid-
ity in the case of a large-scale emergency (GFDRR, 
2014b). Most of those countries paid insurance 
premiums  to  support  the  post-disaster  recon-
struction of damaged public infrastructure, such 
as Mexico’s Natural Disaster Fund (FONDEN), but 
more recently, national and regional sovereign 
risk pools have attempted to maintain financial 

liquidity across a range of post-disaster require-
ments, thereby ensuring fiscal stability during a 
disaster event and for years afterwards (ibid.).

Interest in using insurance both as a means to 
strengthen disaster resilience and an incentive to 
invest in disaster risk reduction has grown since 
the adoption of the HFA. In HFA progress reports, 
countries give an account of their adoption of 
specific policies to expand insurance coverage, 
for  instance  through  mandates  or  compulso-
ry protection. At the national and regional lev-
el, risk pooling schemes and catastrophe bonds 
are becoming an increasingly common tool to 
manage risk. However, only a minority of coun-
tries have fully developed mechanisms to access 
capital markets for risk financing (Figure 9.7). The 
key challenge countries report is a lack of capac-
ity in their domestic insurance sectors or limited 
awareness of the costs and benefits of catastro-
phe insurance amongst potential beneficiaries.

The key features and underlying assumptions of 
catastrophe  insurance  for  homeowners,  busi-
nesses and governments have undergone dra-
matic changes over the years, often triggered by 
innovations in low and middle-income countries 

Figure (cid:478).7  Progress in insuring and financing risk

 (Source: UNISDR.)

193

Figure (cid:1098).8  Milestone programmes in disaster risk financing and insurance since 2000

 (Source: GFDRR, 2014b.)

194

Part III - Chapter 9

that acted as milestones for the development of 
new approaches (Figure 9.8).

Since 2005, these innovations have pushed the 
boundaries of existing insurance schemes and 
enabled access to financial instruments of dif-
ferent kinds, including parametric catastrophe 
bonds,  weather  derivatives,  disaster-specific 
contingent credit, and regional risk pooling, even 
for low-income countries (UNISDR, 2011a; 2013a; 
GFDRR, 2014b). The new schemes include micro-
insurance products that are often provided by 
civil  society  organizations  and  cater  to  low-
income  communities  and  smallholders,  trad-
ers  and  small  businesses,  as  well  as  regional 
schemes such as the Caribbean Catastrophe Risk 
Insurance Facility (CCRIF) and the Pacific Catas-
trophe Risk Assessment and Financing Initiative 
(PCRAFI; GFDRR, 2014b).

A  number  of  countries  have  carried  out  insti-
tutional  reforms  to  support  the  integration  of 
disaster risk financing into a broader, strategic 
approach to disaster risk management (Ghesqui-
ere and Mahul, 2010; World Bank, 2013; GFDRR, 
2014b). Ministries of finance are increasingly tak-
ing the lead in the development of national and 
regional  insurance  and  credit  schemes,  and 
governments  are  developing  new  institutional 
arrangements such as national risk boards that 
include  insurance  supervisors,  disaster  man-
agement agencies and the relevant line minis-
tries (ibid.). National risk boards such as the one 
already implemented in Singapore are now being 
considered as a new potential arrangement for 
disaster  risk  governance  in  Jamaica,  Morocco 
and Rwanda (ibid.).

However, challenges remain. Globally, the supply 
of insurance is increasingly well capitalized, while 
only a small proportion of households in low and 
middle-income countries have catastrophe insur-
ance (Lloyd’s, 2012). Detailed risk models are still 
not available for many of these countries, mean-
ing that risk may not be properly priced, while 

competition may tend to drive premiums down 
to unsustainable levels. In parallel, risks in some 
locations and industries are increasing to levels 
that become uninsurable (The Geneva Associa-
tion, 2013). The question of who pays and who 
benefits becomes even more pronounced under 
such circumstances, as governments become the 
de facto insurers of last resort and their implicit 
liabilities mean that the risks generated become 
a public burden (UNISDR, 2013a).

9.5  

Inequality: the future

 

 

If inequality continues to rise, it may become a 
destabilizing  global  force  that  manifests  not 
only  in  increasing  disaster  risk  but  also  in  de-
creasing capacities to manage those risks. 

If  inequality  is  a  driver  of  increasing  disas-
ter risk, future projections give no reason to be 
optimistic. Instead, inequality may well contin-
ue to increase in social, economic and territorial 
terms. As financial capital flows into competitive 
sectors and locations that provide opportunities 
for short-term gain, less competitive sectors and 
locations are left behind. As in the board game 
Monopoly, where there are winners, by definition 
there are also losers. Any progress in address-
ing vulnerability and social resilience, including 
progress through risk financing, may be ineffec-
tive if inequality continues to grow.

Socially,  the  divide  between  those  who  have 
access to financial capital and those who depend 
on wage labour for their needs continues to grow. 
All over the world, wealth has become increas-
ingly concentrated since 1990 (Davies et al., 2012; 
Piketty, 2014; Credit Suisse, 2013). Wealth is dis-
tributed very differently within regions, though 
most exhibit high levels of inequality (Figure 9.9).

Increasing income inequality is closely linked to 
the race for competitiveness, in which businesses 

195

continue to depress real wages in many sectors 
while  governments  likewise  cut  spending  on 
social welfare and safety nets (ILO, 2013; UNIS-
DR, 2013a). As a result, wages for large parts of 
the population have not kept up with econom-
ic growth, the benefits of capital accumulation 
have not trickled down, and working conditions 
have become more precarious for larger num-
bers of people. For example, labour productivi-
ty increased more than twice as much as wages 
in developed countries between 1999 and 2011 
(ILO, 2013). At the same time, competitive new 
sectors in the world economy in areas like bio-
technology and nanotechnology seem unlikely to 
generate significant future demand for unskilled 
or low-skilled labour (Castells et al., 2012).

In the United States, labour productivity grew by 
75 per cent in the non-farm sector between 1980 
and 2011, while wages increased by only 35 per 
cent. In China, where wage levels have tripled 
over the past decade, GDP increased at an even 
faster rate, resulting in the labour share going 

down  (ILO,  2013).  There  has  been  a  long-term 
trend towards corporate profits rising while wag-
es fall. Income gaps between the top 10 per cent 
of earners and the bottom 10 per cent have wid-
ened (ibid.). However, what may be most impor-
tant is that global median wealth (as a proxy for 
the  wealth  of  the  middle  class)  has  decreased 
steadily since 2010 (Figure 9.10), highlighting that 
the economic recovery after the financial crisis of 
2008 has, to date, been short-lived.

This  global  trend  may  persist,  with  a  steady 
increase  in  inequality  over  decades  to  come 
(OECD, 2011; Piketty, 2014). This increase will con-
tinue as global economic output (and therefore 
income levels) is projected to continue to grow at 
a lower rate than return on capital (Figure 9.11). In 
other words, those who are dependent on income 
from labour for their well-being will struggle even 
more to create even a small asset base.

Should  inequality  continue  to  increase  in 
this  manner,  even  a  growing  middle  class  of 

Figure (cid:1098).(cid:1098)  Global distribution of wealth

 (Source: UNISDR with data from www.worldmapper.org.)

196

Part III - Chapter 9

Figure (cid:1098).10  Minimum wealth of top 50%, 10% and 1% of global wealth holders (base year 2008 = 100)

 (Source: Credit Suisse, 2014.)

professionals  will  not  be  able  to  accumulate 
wealth in the same way as those with financial 
capital (Piketty, 2014). 

Figure (cid:1098).11  Economic growth vs income from capital

At the household level, the middle class will con-
tinue to hold the majority of their assets in the 
form  of  property  (houses)  and  labour  (invest-
ments  in  education  and  skills).  This  increas-
es  their  relative  exposure  and  vulnerability  to 
hazards disproportionately compared to those 
whose wealth depends on financial capital. As a 
result, growing income inequality will manifest 
itself as growing disaster risk inequality.

For example, the home of a typical middle-class 
family in the United States of America represents 
more than 50 per cent of the total value of the 
family’s assets (Trawinski, 2013). In the absence 
of insurance, damage to or loss of this asset in 
a  disaster  could  halve  the  family’s  wealth  and 
constrain its ability to accumulate assets in the 

 (Source: Piketty, 2014.12)

future, as its members would be forced to spend 
their savings on alternative accommodation. The 
percentage of homeowners with flood insurance 
in Louisiana at the time of Hurricane Katrina was 
as low as 7.3 per cent in some of the most severely 
affected counties (Kunreuther and Pauly, 2006).

197

If  the  return  on  capital  continues  to  rise  fast-
er than economic growth, then inequality may 
become a destabilizing global force that mani-
fests not only in increasing disaster risk but also 
in decreasing capacities to manage those risks. 
Similarly, if inequality is a challenge to global gov-
ernance, it is also a challenge to disaster risk man-
agement. If successful and competitive countries 
are able to invest more in disaster risk reduction 
while unsuccessful and uncompetitive countries 
are unable to do so, then disaster risk inequality 
will continue to increase.

Notes

1  Data from 2013. Source: UNDP Human Development Report 
2014 database.
2  Data from 2012. Source: WHO Life Expectancy Indicators.
3  Data from 2012. Source: WHO Life Expectancy Indicators.
4  http://www.scotland.gov.uk/Topics/Statistics/SIMD (accessed 
11 January 2015).
5  Maps provided to UNISDR by the National Library of Scotland 
and Ordnance Survey in January 2015.
6  http://www.prb.org/Publications/Articles/2011/disaster-risk.
aspx (accessed 3 December 2014).
7  Using the Gini coefficient, World Bank data and OECD, 2011.
8  For the original data from the Turkish Union Survey, see http://
www.hurriyetdailynews.com/poverty-threshold-continues-to-
rise-in-turkey.aspx?pageID=238&nid=53256 (accessed 11 Janu-
ary 2015).
9  http://clp-bangladesh.org/work/overview (accessed 3 January 
2015).
10  http://www.eenet.org.uk/resources/eenet_newsletter/eer1/
page24.php (accessed 11 January 2015).
11  http://www.un.org/disabilities/default.asp?id=271.  
12  For the open source data underlying Piketty’s analysis, see 
http://piketty.pse.ens.fr/fr/capital21c.

198

Part III - Chapter 9

Chapter 10
For a few dollars more:
The increasing hazard
exposure of economic
assets

199

As economic investment continues to flow to locations offering comparative advantages for cap-
ital  accumulation,  there  will  be  a  continuous  increase  in  the  exposure  of  economic  assets  to 
earthquakes, tsunamis, storm surges, floods and other hazards. 

While several countries now seek to include disaster risk in their public investment planning, the 
limited availability of appropriate risk information and weak capacities at the local level still 
present serious constraints. And given the growing interconnectedness of urban systems, global 
supply chains and financial flows, disaster risk will become increasingly systemic.

10.1 Comparative advantages or 

contingent liabilities?

Disaster risk is rarely made explicit to investors 
and is often only discovered in the event of a di-
saster. This risk not only affects large business-
es, but also impacts the national economies that 
receive  investments,  small  and  medium  enter-
prises, and the labour force. Thus, hidden con-
tingent  liabilities  come  bundled  together  with 
the comparative advantages offered to business 
investors.

The Slough Trading Company Limited was found-
ed in 1920, and in 1925 it established one of the 
world’s  first  industrial  estates  on  the  western 
outskirts  of  London, United  Kingdom.  By  pro-
viding  ready-made  factory  buildings  with  art 
deco style offices on the street side, dedicated 
rail connections and its own power station, the 
Slough Trading Estate rapidly attracted business 

Figure 10.1  Art deco façade on the Berlei offices in 
Slough Trading Estate (now demolished)

 (Source: http://modernism-in-metroland.tumblr.com/ost/46923045449 
[accessed 11 January 2015].)

200

Part III - Chapter 10

investment. By 1932, high-profile companies like 
Citroen, Gillette, Johnson & Johnson, Mars and 
Berlei had set up shop on the estate, which cur-
rently accommodates 400 businesses across a 
wide  range  of  sectors,  including  automotive, 
food  processing,  engineering,  biotechnology, 
pharmaceuticals, logistics, information technol-
ogy and telecommunications. Ninety years after 
its establishment, it is still Europe’s largest indus-
trial estate under single ownership.1

In many ways, the Slough Trading Estate ushered 
in a modern era of footloose, spatially flexible, 
economic and territorial development no longer 
constrained to specific places by the availabili-
ty of raw materials, energy (especially coal), sea 
or canal transport, and labour. The estate pre-
figured a model of flexible accumulation (Har-
vey,  1989)  in  which  investment  was  attracted 
to  locations  through  a  combination  of  objec-
tive advantages, such as plug-and-play factory 
space, purpose-built power and communications 
infrastructure,  access  to  markets,  and  a  large 
skilled work force, as well as through aesthetic 
and other intangible values. The art deco design 
that characterized many industrial and residen-
tial buildings in Slough during the inter-war peri-
od certainly projected an image of unashamed 
modernity that, 90 years ago, was a perfect fit 
for the ethos of this emerging model of econom-
ic development.

In today’s globalized economy, countries and cit-
ies in all regions compete to attract foreign direct 
investment (FDI) using the same mix of objective 
advantages, including low labour costs, access to 

export markets, subsidized infrastructure, and 
intangible soft values such as quality of life and 
recreational opportunities. However, as under-
lined in GAR13 (UNISDR, 2013a), the level of disas-
ter risk in those locations is rarely made explicit 
to investors and is often disregarded in the public 
investment that creates the necessary infrastruc-
ture or in the private investment that follows.

Given the predominance of private investment, 
the way it is regulated, incentivized and moni-
tored largely determines the disaster risk asso-
ciated  with  the  growing  hazard  exposure  of 
economic assets (UNISDR, 2013a). Many of the 
locations  that  have  been  highly  successful  in 
attracting investment, such as Miami (Box. 10.1), 
are also located in hazard-prone locations. While 

Box 10.1  Sea level risk and investment in Miami

In Miami, rising sea levels and regular storm surges are already combined with exceptional 
geology and a weak sewage system, leading to recurrent flooding in parts of the city and con-
tamination of drinking water supplies. In the future, further sea level rise will mean that parts 
of the world’s busiest cruise ship port as well as the city’s waterfront and the city’s prime real 
estate will be submerged (Carter et al., 2014; WRI, 2014), as sea levels are estimated to rise by 2 feet (more 
than half a metre) by 2060 (WRI, 2014; Figure 10.2).

Figure 10.2  Rising sea levels in Miami

 (Source: Peter Harlem, Florida International University.)

201

Storm surges like the one experienced during Hurricane Wilma in 2005 are likely to happen more often. With 
only a one-foot rise in the sea level along Miami-Dade’s coast, the probability of a 7-foot storm surge such as 
the one observed in Hurricane Wilma is expected to increase from 1 in 76 years to 1 in 21 years (WRI, 2014).

However new industrial and residential developments have no trouble finding investors and the required 
political and regulatory support (Bunten and Khan, 2014; Goodell, 2013).

In addition, an ageing nuclear power plant south of Miami, built in 1972 when the effects of climate change 
were not as well understood, could be affected by a sea level rise of just a few feet in the coming years (Figure 
10.3). The construction of two new reactors was promoted by the Governor of Florida as recently as May 20142  
and is being considered by the State Senate despite the fact that the plant has already experienced weather-
related difficulties, notably during Hurricane Andrew in 1992 (Kopytko and Perkins, 2011; US Nuclear Regula-
tory Commission, 1994).

Figure 10.3  Turkey Point Nuclear Power Plant threatened by sea level rise 

 (Source: Peter Harlem, Florida International University.)

the  art  deco  architecture  in  Slough  has  gone 
largely unnoticed and unappreciated,3 in Miami 
it has been promoted as a core lifestyle value to 
project coolness and attract investment. Given 
that the imperative of earning a few dollars more 
often outweighs considerations of sustainabili-
ty, this generates increasing levels of intensive 
disaster risk.

This  model  of  economic  and  territorial  devel-
opment  increases  the  exposure  of  global  cap-
ital stock and economic flows to hazards such 
as  earthquakes,  tsunamis,  floods  and  tropical 
cyclones. But the resulting disaster risk is often 
only revealed to investors when a major disaster 
occurs, as companies like Toyota, Honda, Nissan, 
Texas Instruments and Hewlett-Packard learned 
to their cost following the 2011 floods in Thailand 

202

Part III - Chapter 10

(Airmic Technical, 2013). However, this risk does 
not affect businesses alone. It also impacts the 
national  economies  that  receive  investments 
(particularly when these are small and undiver-
sified economies as in the case of SIDS), the small 
and medium enterprise sector that services larg-
er businesses, and the labour force that may be 
affected  either  directly  or  indirectly  (UNISDR, 
2013a). In otherwise attractive but hazard-prone 
locations,  hidden  contingent  liabilities  come 
bundled together with the comparative advan-
tages offered to business investors.

Mispricing risk
Any risk offers opportunity and gain at the same 
time as it threatens to cause loss and negative 
impacts. The values assigned to disaster risk—
and hence the way it is priced into decisions—
always reflect a trade-off between opportunity 
and threat in the context of available information 
and the norms and rules societies use to social-
ize the gains or cover the costs. As such, there is 
a big difference between those who voluntarily 
bear risk in pursuit of opportunity and those who 
have to bear the costs involuntarily.

Currently, the absence of accountability in most 
societies in the face of both neglectful and delib-
erate risk generation means that consequences 
are rarely attributed to the decisions that gener-
ated the risks. At the same time, this lack of attri-
bution creates perverse incentives for continued 
risk-generating behaviour. In effect, those who 
gain from risk rarely bear the costs. These costs 
are borne involuntarily by other social sectors 
and territories or transferred to the commons, 
where, as Chapter 12 highlights, they accumu-
late as unaccounted debt which neither the plan-
et nor global society can continue to absorb.

economic growth, human and social welfare, and 
sustainable development. At the same time, the 
costs of the everyday and extensive risks faced 
by low-income households and small businesses 
are even less clearly understood than the costs 
of intensive risks. As a result, disaster risk con-
tinues to be mispriced at all levels: by small busi-
ness owners, low-income households and local 
governments as well as large corporations, inves-
tors,  high-income  communities  and  national 
governments.

Excessive discounting of risk
In general, opportunities for short-term capital 
accumulation  continue  to  outweigh  concerns 
about future sustainability, resulting in a mas-
sive discounting of all future risk, including disas-
ter risk. The inadequate pricing of disaster risk 
and of broader externalities in economic activity 
means that disaster risk is discounted excessive-
ly in order to maximize short-term gains (UNIS DR, 
2013a). Moreover, there is no accountability for 
investments that generate disaster risks and are 
made by managers of large funds, banks, busi-
nesses and insurers, increasingly in cooperation 
with local and national governments (ibid.).

When risk management measures (including reg-
ulation  and  public  investment)  are  seen  to  be 
applied inconsistently or incoherently, they can 
also act as disincentives (Burby, 2006; Bagstad 
et al., 2007). Examples can be found where local 
or  national  policies  to  attract  investment  and 
stimulate  economic  growth  generate  new  risk 
or exacerbate existing risk, thereby directly con-
tradicting policies for disaster risk reduction and 
undermining effective risk management, or vice 
versa (UNISDR, 2013a; Stehr, 2006; Berke et al., 
2014; Burby et al., 1999).

There is also a lack of counterfactual evidence. 
At  present,  the  business,  economic,  political 
and  social  case  for  disaster  risk  management 
still has to rely heavily on anecdotal substantia-
tion and proxy indicators to prove its benefits for 

In many ways, the incentives for the financial sec-
tor to misprice disaster risk or other externalities 
outweigh any incentive not to do so. In this sec-
tor, profitability is based on volatility, while sta-
bility  and  security  make  it  harder  to  generate 

203

short-term gains (UNISDR, 2013a). As such, the 
manner in which the sector contributes to risk 
accumulation is part of its very nature.

This conundrum is compounded by the fact that 
the  current  measures  of  success  for  both  pri-
vate actors and governments are not compatible 
with goals such as equity and biocapacity. Where 
short-term profit and return on investment are 
key performance indicators, the risk generated 
by high-yielding investments elsewhere in soci-
ety is ignored or discounted. If the main metric 
for  success  is  GDP  growth,  questions  of  social 
equity or the growing gap between the ecolog-
ical  footprint  and  biocapacity  recede  into  the 
background. Instead, this concern for econom-
ic  growth  often  skews  priorities,  shifting  gov-
ernment  attention  from  serving  its  citizens  to 
servicing its debt. At the end of 2010, outstand-
ing sovereign debt totalled US$41 trillion glob-
ally (UNEP and Global Footprint Network, 2012), 
severely undermining the credit ratings of many 
countries  (ibid.)  and  thus  jeopardizing  public 
spending and downward accountability.

Avoiding regulation
In addition, tax havens and financial instruments 
that allow individuals, companies and govern-
ments  to  channel  illicit  funds  or  divert  legal 
income to avoid levies, fees and taxes are beyond 
the reach of most forms of regulation. The scale 
of  illegal  financial  flows  and  corruption  is  sig-
nificant. The IMF estimates that offshore finan-
cial centres with limited jurisdiction held around 
US$5 trillion in assets and liabilities at the end 
of 2009, while in comparison the cross-border 
assets and liabilities of the United States, France 
and Germany combined amount to US$8 trillion 
(Gonzalez and Schipke, 2011). Other estimates of 
the extent to which multinational corporations 
use offshore financial centres for banking assets 
and foreign investment run as high as US$18 tril-
lion, which is roughly equivalent to a quarter of 
the  world’s  GDP  (Shaxson,  2012).  Recent  data 
shows that illicit financial flows reach significant 
levels in a number of countries (Figure 10.4).

The  130th  Assembly  of  the  Inter-Parliamenta-
ry Union unanimously adopted a resolution on 
risk-resilient development in March 2014 which 

Figure 10.4  Illegal financial flows as a percentage of consumption

 (Source: GFI, 2014.)

204

Part III - Chapter 10

explicitly called upon parliamentarians to make 
“combating corruption and illegal financial flows 
a priority, as these significantly affect the mobili-
zation and proper allocation of resources”.4

10.2  

Risk spills

 

 

 

 

The  concentration  of  economic  assets  and  ac-
tivities in hazard-prone areas, coupled with in-
creasing  economic  connectivity,  increases  the 
complexity of risks. 

At the same time, as globally connected econo-
mies depend on a range of increasingly complex 
interlinked and dependent systems, disaster loss-
es in one sector now tend to spill over into oth-
ers, causing cascading and concatenated impacts. 
The concentration of economic assets and activi-
ties in hazard-prone areas goes hand in hand with 
increasing economic connectivity, the complexi-
ty of value chains, and therefore the increasing 
complexity of risks. Due to the global integration 
of value and supply chains, the effects of relative-
ly localized disasters can spill over a country’s bor-
ders into regional and global markets, creating 
new risks and increasing the vulnerability of other 
national economies to interruptions and volatility 
(UNISDR, 2013a). For example, following the Great 
East Japan Earthquake, Merck had to stop produc-
tion in the only factory producing its Xirallic pig-
ment, which is used in automotive paint (SCOR, 
2013); this impact rippled through supply chains 
to affect the automotive industry in other regions.

Complex  and  interconnected  risks  have  been 
defined using a range of terms, such as hyper-risks 
(Beck,  2009;  Ray-Bennett  et  al.,  2014),  cascad-
ing effects (McGee et al., 2014), cascading failures 
(Buzna et al., 2007), cascading disasters (Haavis-
to et al., 2013) and synchronous failures (Kent, 
2011). Such terms are usually employed when crit-
ical infrastructure and systems break down during 
disasters, as the terms give expression to the fact 

that direct damage to and loss of physical assets 
create additional losses and downstream impacts, 
possibly  triggering  further direct  losses  in  new 
disasters.  Usually,  these  system  breakdowns 
occur across sectors, geographies and different 
time scales and present a major challenge for the 
disaster risk reduction sector (OECD, 2014a).

The rapid evolution of information and commu-
nications  technology,  which  is  a  key  factor  in 
competitiveness (Morris, 2010; Acemoglu and Rob-
inson, 2012; WEF, 2013), has also become a driver of 
the increased social and territorial concentration 
of economic activity as well as risks. For example, 
95 per cent of global equity market capitalization 
is concentrated in only 24 cities, making the finan-
cial services sector potentially more vulnerable 
than other, less concentrated sectors (Dobbs and 
Reemes, 2012). While this sector depends less on 
transport infrastructure such as ports and high-
ways,  it  is  highly  vulnerable  to  interruptions  of 
energy supply for its electronic transactions and on 
server capacity and telecommunications for data 
transmission. In response to this risk, the invest-
ment house Black Rock, which runs a platform that 
manages more than US$13 trillion in assets, has 
built multiple redundancies into their server capac-
ity, cooling systems and power supply, and is able 
to switch service and operations between the East 
and West Coast of the US in the case of disasters.5 

10.3 Addressing risks to public and 

private investment in the HFA

The way in which countries addressed rising ex-
posure  levels  as  part  of  the  HFA  has  not  been 
assessed with consistent output indicators at a 
global  scale.  As  a  result,  there  is  little  under-
standing of the level of progress, and most in-
novation seems to have occurred outside of the 
disaster risk management sector.

While the HFA does not explicitly address the chal-
lenge of increasing exposure through economic 

205

concentration and value creation in hazard-prone 
areas, Priority for Action 4 suggests a number of 
key activities that indirectly relate to managing 
risks in the productive sectors and economic devel-
opment planning, notably via infrastructure pro-
tection and public-private partnerships (Box 10.2).

As in other areas, the absence of consistent out-
put indicators makes it difficult to assess prog-
ress against these key activities systematically, 
and what little innovation can be identified has 
occurred largely outside of the disaster risk man-
agement  sector  and  has  not  been  captured  in 
HFA progress reports.

Infrastructure and critical facilities
Data on progress in ensuring that infrastructure 
and critical facilities are designed or built in a way 
that reduces disaster risk is hard to find. Major 
infrastructure  projects  normally  incorporate 
hazard resistance specifications into their design 
and construction. However, as Japan discovered 
to its cost after the Great East Japan Earthquake 
and Tsunami, these specifications may not be suf-
ficient to protect against the most severe events. 
In this way, building and safety codes can cre-
ate a false sense of security and actually encour-
age greater investment in hazard-exposed areas, 
contributing to increased intensive risks (Halle-
gatte et al., 2010).

Progress reported by governments in assessing 
the disaster risks associated with major develop-
ment projects, in particular large infrastructure 
investments, point to limited success in this area 
(Figure 10.5).

While major infrastructure projects commissioned 
to multinational construction companies are like-
ly to be built to hazard-resistant standards, the 
increasing damage to housing, local infrastructure, 
schools and health facilities in extensive disasters 
provides counterfactual evidence that land-use 
planning and building authorities in many low and 
middle-income countries do not apply policies, 
norms and standards in practice (UNISDR, 2013a). 
In their national HFA progress reports, many coun-
tries highlight the need to review and improve haz-
ard resistance codes and standards on a regular 
basis. However, Bangladesh reports a lack of skills 
and human resources to monitor compliance and 
exercise enforcement, while Argentina reports dis-
incentives to compliance due to real estate specu-
lation and corruption, and Nepal highlights stark 
discrepancies between mandatory implementa-
tion and the actual adoption of codes.

Latin  American  countries  such  as  Peru,  Costa 
Rica,  Guatemala  and  Panama  have  made  sus-
tained  efforts to include disaster risk as  a  cri-
terion in the planning and evaluation of public 
investment  projects  (Lavell,  2014;  GIZ,  2012; 
UNISDR,  2011a).  While  these  processes  are 

Box 10.2  Key activities related to economic development in the HFA

(ii) Social and economic development practices

(f) Protect and strengthen critical public facilities and physical infrastructure […] through proper design, retro-
fitting and re-building, in order to render them adequately resilient to hazards.

(iii) Land-use planning and other technical measures

(o) Mainstream disaster risk considerations into planning procedures for major infrastructure projects, including 
the criteria for design, approval and implementation of such projects and considerations based on social, eco-
nomic and environmental impact assessments.

206

Part III - Chapter 10

Figure 10.5  Progress in assessing disaster risk impacts of 
major development projects

 (Source: UNISDR with data from the HFA Monitor.)

challenged by factors such as the availability of 
appropriate risk information and weak capaci-
ties at the local level, they certainly represent an 
innovative initiative to address risk systematical-
ly in public infrastructure and facilities.

In certain sectors, there seems to be evidence of 
progress. For example, 77 countries reported on 

Box 10.3  Risk reduction investments in Germany and Mexico

the implementation of activities to make hospi-
tals safer and better prepared for emergencies 
and disasters. More than 50 of the 195 WHO Mem-
ber States in the Americas, South-East Asia, Cen-
tral Asia, the Eastern Mediterranean Region and 
Europe have implemented actions under the Saf-
er Hospitals initiative, and a large proportion of 
them have adopted safer hospitals policies and 
programmes.6  Twenty  countries  have  formally 
adopted a national policy on safe hospitals and 
17 have formally established national programs 
to this end. By the end of 2012, 32 countries in the 
Americas region had already adopted the Safe 
Hospitals initiative and  started  assessing  their 
hospitals using the Hospital Safety Index (HSI). As 
of April 2013, the WHO reported that more than 
1,800 hospitals had been assessed using this tool.

In  many  countries,  there  is  also  evidence  of 
investments  to  strengthen  or  retrofit  critical 
infrastructure to reduce disaster risk as well as 
to increase budget allocations for this purpose 
(Box 10.3). Different examples have demonstrat-
ed that investments in disaster risk reduction can 
reduce losses after major disasters, particular-
ly in countries that have the financial capacity to 
make those investments.

In hydrological terms, the 2013 floods in Germany were even more severe than 
those observed in 2002 (Merz et al., 2014). However, in some cities the construc-
tion of flood protections played a key role in reducing losses. In 2002, Dresden 
and  the  surrounding  areas  along  the  Elbe  River  experienced  losses  of  nearly 
US$300  million  in  residential  buildings  alone  (Thieken,  2009).  Following  the 
disaster, the Dresden authorities developed hazard maps for 20 and 100-year floods, implemented flood pro-
tection measures against 500-year floods and extended floodplains. As a result, the city managed to avoid 
severe losses in the 2013 spring floods. “Water volumes were managed thanks to a combination of various 
installations that protected the historic city centre” (Zurich Insurance, 2014), making the city a good example 
of disaster risk management.

Major investments in flood risk reduction were made in the State of Tabasco, Mexico, after devastating floods 
in 2007. As a result, a flood of the same magnitude in 2010 damaged and destroyed only a quarter of the num-
ber of houses affected in 2007. The overall estimated cost of damage and losses was reduced from more than 
US$2.8 billion in 2007 to only US$569 million in 2010. The reduction in loss and damage was equivalent to 7.8 
per cent of this Mexican state’s GDP.7

207

There is also evidence of major investments in 
retrofitting critical facilities such as schools in a 
number of countries on the basis of hazard and 
risk assessments and in the context of interna-
tionally supported projects (Box 10.4).

In addition, countries like Japan are now using a 
risk-layered approach to disaster risk manage-
ment  in  order  to  inform  coastal  development 
(Box 10.5)

Box 10.4  Application of seismic risk assessments for retrofitting public infrastructure in Istanbul

A series of hazard and risk assessments, including a micro-zonation study of earthquake haz-
ard and risk assessment conducted by the Istanbul Metropolitan Municipality in cooperation 
with the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA), has informed investments in seis-
mic risk reduction in Istanbul. These assessments were prompted by the devastating İzmit-
Kocaeli and Düzce earthquakes in 1999, which resulted in more than 17,000 lost lives and 
around US$20 billion in direct losses. The assessment initiative therefore had the full support of the munici-
pal authorities and the public.

The  results  of  these  assessments  were  adopted  for  the  Istanbul  Metropolitan  Municipality’s  disaster  risk 
management master plan for the city and applied to the Istanbul Seismic Risk Mitigation and Emergency Pre-
paredness Project (ISMEP). Conceived as a 14-year project, ISMEP started in 2006 with a budget of EUR 1.5 
billion. By 2014, a total of 1,162 public buildings, including 726 schools, 39 hospitals (Figure 10.6), 59 health 
centres, and 80 other public facilities identified as the highest priority, were renovated or retrofitted, and 218 
schools considered unsuitable for retrofitting (based on cost-benefit analyses) were reconstructed.8

Figure 10.6  Structural model of Marmara University 
Training and Research Hospital Retrofitting, Restoration, 
and Reinforcement Project to finish in 2014

 (Source: Government of Istanbul.9)

Box 10.5  Layered disaster risk management strategies

ISMEP and its evolvement over time show how 
hazard  and  risk  assessments  can  help  a  gov-
ernment understand the severity of risks and 
trigger  on-the-ground  risk  reduction  activi-
ties. However, seismic risk in Istanbul contin-
ues  to  increase  from  new  construction  in 
response  to  population  growth  and  internal 
migration  and  as  a  result  of  the  enforcement 
challenges associated with land-use plans and 
construction policies (GFDRR, 2014c). Retrofit-
ting  existing  structures  does  not  solve  the 
problem of new risk created on a daily basis by 
urbanization.

The Great East Japan Earthquake in March 2011 was a hazard of unprecedented scale, with a 
magnitude  9.0  earthquake  and  subsequent  tsunami  affecting  large  areas  of  the  Tōhoku 
Region. Prior to this event, risk assessments of this region had been based on limited histori-
cal  data  on  earthquakes  and  tsunamis  and  therefore  failed  to  predict  the  intensity  of  the 
earthquake and the height and extent of the tsunami. The tsunami waves flooded areas that 
were supposed to be protected by sea walls, and in several places the false sense of security provided by the 
hazard maps conspired against timely evacuation and response.

208

Part III - Chapter 10

The failure of the risk reduction strategies in place in Tōhoku prompted the formation of a technical commit-
tee within the Central Disaster Management Council. A report issued by this committee in September 2011 
ushered in a risk-layering approach to tsunami risk management (Government of Japan, 2011) which was 
swiftly translated into law, the Tsunami DRR Regional Development Act of December 2011.10 This act is already 
being enforced in several regions, including Sendai City (see Figure 10.7).

Figure 10.7  Sendai City’s tsunami preparedness and response strategy

 (Source: Sendai City, 2014 [adapted by UNISDR].)

The Level 1 tsunami management strategy targets the more extensive layer of risk (higher probability and 
lower expected loss), while the Level 2 strategy is designed for layers of intensive risk (lower probability and 
higher expected loss). Level 1 focuses on structural measures such as levees and protective forests, while 
Level 2 combines structural measures with other risk management strategies, with evacuation planning at 
the core (Table 10.1).

Table 10.1  Level 1 and Level 2 tsunami management strategies

 (Source: Government of Japan, 2011 [adapted by UNISDR].)

209

Risk-sensitive business investment
The role of the private sector in both contribut-
ing to and managing disaster risk was never ful-
ly spelled out in the HFA. However, under Priority 
for Action 4, the HFA did include a key activity 
relating to the private sector:

(l)  Promote  the  establishment  of  public-private 
partnerships to better engage the private sector 
in disaster risk reduction activities; encourage the 
private sector to foster a culture of disaster pre-
vention, putting greater emphasis on, and allocat-
ing resources to, pre-disaster activities such as risk 
assessments and early warning systems.

Unfortunately, this activity was not included in 
the  core  indicators,  meaning  that  its  achieve-
ment has not been assessed using the HFA Mon-
itor. From HFA progress reports, however, it has 
become  clear  that  businesses,  investors  and 
insurers have not been given a clear or explic-
it role in the disaster risk reduction sector at the 
national level (UNISDR, 2013b). Very few multi-
sector  national  platforms  or  committees  have 
private-sector representation.

Evidence that private companies and investors 
do take disaster risk into account when deciding 
where to invest is now starting to emerge, partic-
ularly after the Japan and Thailand disasters of 
2011 (UNISDR, 2013a; Ingirige et al., 2014). 

However,  at  the  international  level,  it  was  not 
until  2010  that  the  Private  Sector  Advisory 
Group for Disaster Risk Reduction was created11  
and even more recently that initiatives to facili-
tate risk-sensitive business investment12  or the 
encoding of disaster risks in the financial sector 
have started to take shape.13  These and other 
initiatives now indicate a growing concern in the 
private sector that increasing disaster risk threat-
ens the sustainability of their investments.

210

Part III - Chapter 10

Although the UN General Assembly had request-
ed a strengthening of responses to complex emer-
gencies as early as 1999,14 the HFA provided little 
guidance or focus on the issue of complex and 
emerging risks. Just one key activity in Priority for 
Action 2 made reference to this topic:

(o)  Research,  analyse  and  report  on  long-term 
changes and emerging issues that might increase 
vulnerabilities and risks or the capacity of authori-
ties and communities to respond to disasters.

The HFA core indicators did not make reference to 
emerging or long-term and complex risks, mean-
ing that there is no clear sense of how much prog-
ress has been made in this area. In order to shape 
policy responses, some countries are now begin-
ning to conduct exercises to identify emerging 
risks that have not been modelled (Kent, 2011).

For example, the UK uses the reasonable worst-
case  scenario  methodology  to  identify  emerg-
ing risks and potential widespread emergencies, 
including nuclear crises such as the one at Fuku-
shima Daiichi in Japan in 2011 (Government of the 
United Kingdom, 2011). The method was reviewed 
as recently as July 2014 in order to identify areas 
for improvement as part of the UK national risk 
assessment process.15 However, despite the exis-
tence of new approaches to identifying emerging 
risks, such processes are still in their infancy.

10.4  

 

 

Planning from the future?

 

As  risk  drivers  are  highly  connected,  dealing 
with  risk  in  a  hazard-specific  manner  means 
disregarding much of what may not have hap-
pened yet but will surely happen in the future.

In  2011,  Myanmar  approved  a  law  setting  up 
special economic zones (SEZs) with incentives 

that include a five-year tax holiday, 50 per cent 
income tax relief for five years on items exported 
overseas and on reinvested profits from overseas 
exports,  a  five-year  exemption  from  customs 
duties on approved products, and the granting of 
30-year land leases.

Myanmar  has  an  AAL  of  US$2  billion,  which  is 
mainly associated with tropical cyclones, floods 
and earthquakes. In 2008, Tropical Cyclone Nar-
gis  caused  major  devastation  in  areas  not  far 
from where the Thilawa Special Economic Zone 
(Figure 10.8) is being planned as a home to tex-
tile, manufacturing and high-tech industries as 
well as a deep-sea port.

Although an environmental impact assessment 
was  carried  out  as  part  of  the  planning  of  the 
SEZ, the potential disaster risks to the zone and 
the businesses that invest there are not explic-
itly described (Myanmar and Japan Consortium 
for Thilawa Special Economic Zone Development 
Project,  2013).  It  seems  that  the  lessons  from 
the Chao Phraya River floods in Thailand in 2011 
may have not been fully internalized by potential 
investors.16 

If  governments,  businesses  and  investors  con-
tinue to ignore or to discount the consequences 
of further increasing the hazard exposure of the 
global economy, the consequences are likely to 
be more shocks of the kind that occurred in Japan 
and Thailand in 2011. For example, if the global 
economy were to grow at an average of 4 per cent 
per year for the next thirty years and the distribu-
tion of capital stock between hazard-exposed and 
non-hazard-exposed areas remains unchanged, 
by  2040  the  volume  of  hazard-exposed  capital 
stock  and  thus  of  intensive  disaster  risk  would 
approximately double. If hazard and vulnerability 
also increase due to climate change and other risk 
drivers, then the risk could increase exponentially.

Most risk assessments still tend to be based on 
linear models with limited capacity to identify 

Figure 10.8  Location of the Thilawa Special Economic Zone

 (Source: UNISDR with data from UNOCHA, 2013.)

and manage complex and interconnected risks 
(OECD, 2014a). Despite the concatenated nature 
of many of the risk drivers, such assessments deal 
with hazard-specific risk in a way that ignores 
how different drivers affect each other and how 
impacts triggered by one hazard can prompt fur-
ther impacts associated with another (Shimizu 
and Clark, 2014). This means disregarding much 
of what may not have happened yet but will sure-
ly happen in the future.

While there is certainly momentum in the glob-
al private sector to begin assessing risk to sup-
ply chains when making investment decisions, 
it  is  still  unclear  whether  these  efforts  will  be 
sufficient  to  manage  the  risks  from  increasing 
exposure  due  to  economic  concentration  and 
investment. And it is even less clear whether the 
countries  competing  to  attract  foreign  direct 
investment will begin to use effective disaster 

211

risk  management  as  a  competitive  advantage 
instead  of  failing  to  disclose  risks  to  potential 
investors. The temptation to make a few dollars 
more often continues to take precedence over 
long-term planning and sustainability in areas 
with high levels of hazard exposure.

Notes

1  http://www.segro.com/Slough/About  (accessed  11  January 
2015).
2  http://www.world-nuclear-news.org/NN-Turkey-Point-
expansion-gets-Florida-state-approval-1405141.html (accessed 
11 January 2015).
3  http://www.c20society.org.uk/news/slough-town-hall-listing-
refused-dcms-overturns-english-heritages-advice-again  (ac-
cessed 11 January 2015).
4  http://www.ipu.org/conf-e/130/Res-2.htm.
5  http://www.datacenterdynamics.com/focus/archive/2014/03/
blackrock-measuring-risk-data-center  (accessed  11  January 
2015).
6  Progress presented at the 4th Session of the Global Platform 
for  Disaster  Risk  Reduction:  http://www.preventionweb.net/
globalplatform/2013/programme/sideevent/view/498. 
7  Figures from presentation given by Salvador Pérez Maldonado, 
Ministry of Finance, Mexico, at the first session of the Preparatory 
Committee of the World Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction in 
Geneva, July 2014.
8  Personal communication and figures from the Monitoring and 
Evaluation Department of the Istanbul Governorship, 26 Novem-
ber 2014.
9  Personal communication and figures from Kazim Gokhan El-
gin, Director of the Monitoring and Evaluation Department of the 
Istanbul Governorship, 26 November 2014.
10  http://www.mlit.go.jp/sogoseisaku/point/tsunamibousai.
html.
11  www.unisdr.org/partners/private-sector.
12  www.preventionweb.net/rise/home.
13  www.un.org/climatechange/summit/action-areas/resilience-
1-in-100-initiative/.
14  UN General Assembly resolution 46/182.
15  For more information on the national risk assessment process 
in  the  UK,  see  https://www.gov.uk/risk-assessment-how-the-
risk-of-emergencies-in-the-uk-is-assessed (accessed 11 January 
2015).
16  http://myanmarthilawa.com/content/three-japanese-
industrial-biggies-will-launch-special-economic-zone-myanmar 
(accessed 11 January 2015).

212

Part III - Chapter 10

Chapter 11
Segregated urban
disaster risk

213

As  urbanization  mirrors  economic  growth,  it  often  concentrates  risk  in  hazard-exposed  loca-
tions. In most low and middle-income countries it is also usually characterized by unequal access 
to urban space, infrastructure, services and security. This generates new patterns of both exten-
sive and intensive disaster risk, particularly in informal settlements with deficient or non-exis-
tent infrastructure and social protection, and high levels of environmental degradation.

While the HFA has provided ample space for countries to engage in risk-sensitive urban develop-
ment and some success stories have emerged, the rapid expansion of urban populations and 
weakly  regulated  investment  flows  remain  a  key  challenge,  particularly  in  low  and  middle-
income countries. 

11.1 Blade Runner and the  

future city

Speculative urban capital is invested in modern 
enclaves, while the low-income majority has ac-
cess only to informal or sub-standard urbaniza-
tion. The concentration of investment in urban 
centres drives intensive risk, while high levels of 
urban  income  inequality  shape  patterns  of  ex-
tensive risk.

Blade Runner is a neo-noir science fiction mov-
ie made in 1982 and set in a fictional Los Ange-
les in 2019. The movie painted a horrific portrait 
of future urban settings, with a powerful elite liv-
ing in gleaming towers while the majority live at 
ground level in a toxic, polluted, dangerous and 
collapsed  environment.  Science  fiction  is  just 
that: fiction. It is highly unlikely that Blade Run-
ner will provide an accurate portrayal of life in 
Los Angeles—or that of any other major metro-
politan area, for that matter—in 2019. However, 
reality does tend to imitate art. Current trends in 

Box 11.1  Urban futures in Africa

Figure 11.1  The 2019 Los Angeles cityscape as imagined 
in Blade Runner

 (Source: http://img.4plebs.org/boards/tg/image/1397/22/1397229362415.jpg.1)

urban development point to futures that resem-
ble elements of the imagined world of Blade Run-
ner (Figure 11.1).

For  example,  a  number  of  larger  cities  in  sub-
Saharan Africa are currently being re-imagined 
as global cities that could become magnets for 
investment (Box 11.1). Described as smart cities 

Over the last 5 to 6 years, new visions for urban futures have been driving plans for the development of sev-
eral African cities. Major projects within existing urban centres2 or entirely new satellite cities are inspired by 
high-profile city investments in Dubai, London and Singapore, with significant private-sector involvement. 
These developments and commercial centres include Hope City, a US$10 billion development to be built out-
side Accra in Ghana, and Tatu City,  a development planned on coffee-producing land outside Nairobi (Figure 
11.2). Such new hypermodern cityscapes would enable those who live and work in them to largely avoid the 
dysfunctional infrastructure, insecurity and poverty that characterizes many existing urban areas, echoing 
some of the ideas put forward for a new generation of charter cities.3 

214

Part III - Chapter 11

At present, while these new plans have created interest for developers and investors, many have been stalled 
by disputes and court cases related to land acquisition, financing and resettlement. However, the benefits to 
the  urban  population  currently  living  in  informal  settlements  in  prime  locations  near  urban  centres  are 
unclear.

Figure 11.2  Hope City, Accra, and Tatu City, Nairobi

 (Source: Watson, 2014.)

A more likely scenario is the emergence of new informal settlements outside the new cities.  Public invest-
ment in these new projects may leave less cash for basic infrastructure and services and could accelerate 
further social and spatial segregation.

 (Source: Watson, 2014.)

and eco-cities, these plans promise to modern-
ize African cities and turn them into gateways 
for international investment. The need to attract 
investment  is  without  question.  However,  it  is 
unclear how these plans will benefit the urban 
population living in informal settlements, below 
the poverty line and with minimal access to urban 
services (Watson, 2014).

Economic growth and intensive disaster risk
Economic growth and urbanization go hand in 
hand. In general, the countries with the highest 
GDP per capita are those with the largest propor-
tion of their population living in cities (Satterth-
waite and Mitlin, 2014; Figure 11.3). In low and 
middle-income countries, rapid urbanization is 
generally associated with rapid economic growth 
(IPCC, 2014).

As  such,  urban  growth  accompanies  glob-
al investment flows and increases the value of 
exposed assets in hazard-exposed areas, such as 

cyclone and tsunami-prone coastlines and river 
basins. A recent risk analysis of 616 major metro-
politan areas comprising 1.7 billion people (near-
ly 25 per cent of the world’s total population) and 
approximately half of global GDP found that flood 
risk threatens more people than any other hazard 
(Swiss Re, 2014b). River flooding poses a threat 
to over 379 million urban residents, while earth-
quake and strong winds could potentially affect 
283  million  and  157  million,  respectively  (UN-
Habitat, 2014).

This  exposes  whole  cities  and  city  regions  to 
intensive  hazards  (UNISDR,  2011a;  2013a).  As 
highlighted in Chapter 10, disaster risk is rare-
ly  taken into account in investment  decisions, 
while rapid urban development can overwhelm 
the  capacity  of  city  governments  to  manage 
growth. For example, amongst the 611 cities with 
over 750,000 inhabitants in 2010, 47 had popula-
tions that had grown twentyfold since 1960 and 
120 had populations that had grown more than 

215

Figure 11.3  Urban population (percentage of total) versus GDP per capita

 (Source: UNISDR with data from the World Bank.)

tenfold (IPCC, 2014). Many city governments in 
low and middle-income countries are no longer 
in full control of urban development (ibid.).

Urban segregation, inequality and extensive 
disaster risk
Capital has always flowed into cities to provide 
the housing, services and infrastructure required 
to support production, consumption and govern-
ment. However, urban development has become 
an increasingly important circuit for capital accu-
mulation per se. Since the 1970s, more capital 
has flowed into urban development than into any 
productive  sector  (Harvey,  1985).  Speculative 
urban development has therefore become fertile 
ground for both the generation and the transfer 
of disaster risks (UNISDR, 2013a).

Rapidly  expanding  city  regions  also  generate 
their own risks, as landscapes and ecosystems 
are degraded and poverty and inequality shape 

new extensive riskscapes. The larger populations 
and higher population density in cities not only 
mean that larger numbers of people are exposed 
to hazards, but also that the characteristics of the 
ecological system or environment are changed, 
thereby potentially increasing the level of disas-
ter risk (Donner and Rodriguez, 2008).

For example, low-density urban expansion is a 
mechanism  that  directly  or  indirectly  contrib-
utes to increased disaster risk. Expansion of the 
area of paved and impermeable surfaces increas-
es peak run-off in storms and therefore magnifies 
flood hazard. Much of the speculative develop-
ment for middle-income households reproduc-
es inefficient suburban layouts (Box. 11.2), which 
waste the available land and energy and are ulti-
mately unsustainable. Expanding cities may also 
exhaust resources such as water in the surround-
ing regions and contribute to the degradation of 
biodiversity and ecosystems (IPCC, 2014). Finally, 

216

Part III - Chapter 11

Box 11.2  The influence of urban layout on sustainability and flood risk

For any given set of social and economic requirements, there is always an optimum urban layout. Different 
urban layouts have vastly different percentages of land utilization and unit circulation lengths (Caminos and 
Goethert, 1978). This affects both the initial cost of urbanization as well as its future sustainability. Given that 
the costs of circulation and storm drainage are normally five times the cost of electricity and street lighting 
and 18 times the cost of water supply, adopting an efficient urban layout directly influences the local govern-
ment’s capacity to provide and maintain this basic element of flood risk-reducing infrastructure (ibid.).

Studies have found that the cost of infrastructure networks per hectare, including storm drainage in a typical 
modern suburban layout with square plots (see Figure 11.4), is approximately double the cost of an efficient 
grid layout with rectangular plots. At the same time, the proportion of land required for roads in the subur-
ban layout is 38 per cent, compared to 21 per cent in the grid layout. Thus the suburban layout nearly doubles 
the area of impermeable paved surfaces, which in turn has critical implications for storm run-off. The length 
of roads per hectare in the suburban layout is approximately double that in the grid layout, meaning that 
services such as waste disposal and product delivery have to travel twice the distance to achieve the same 
result, increasing both costs and carbon emissions. In addition, the wasteful use of land means that there is 
less safe, well-located land that could be made available for low-income housing.

Figure 11.4   Urban layouts

 (Source: Google Earth.)

The implication is that an efficient layout reduces the cost of land per inhabitant by making more efficient 
use of that land. It also dramatically lowers the cost of installing and maintaining infrastructure, particularly 
storm drainage, which has a critical impact on the capacity of local governments and utility providers to pro-
vide such infrastructure. Moreover, efficient layouts decrease the impermeable paved area, mitigating flood 
hazard, and they shorten the distance that vehicles have to travel to provide basic services. Unfortunately, 
the  influence  of  urban  layout  on  these  factors  is  too  often  ignored,  even  in  low-income  countries.  This 
increases costs for both residents and their local governments, reduces sustainability, increases flood risks 
and contributes to climate change.

217

sprawling urban expansion results in major addi-
tional costs: the cost of providing utilities and 
public services can increase by 10-30 per cent, 
while costs for transport and travel can increase 
by up to 50 per cent (Global Commission on the 
Economy and Climate, 2014).

The combination of speculative urban develop-
ment and weak regulatory capacity discussed in 
GAR13 (UNISDR, 2013a) leads to an increasingly 
social and spatial segregation of risk in cities, in 
particular in low and middle-income countries. 
Such conditions can contribute to the prolifera-
tion of other shocks and stresses, such as crime, 
high youth unemployment and political instabil-
ity, all of which exacerbate vulnerabilities and 
social tensions. What results is a vicious cycle of 
risk generation (UN-Habitat, 2014a).

This problem takes a number of different forms. 
The  apartheid  laws  of  South  Africa  were  an 
extreme case of large-scale, government-sanc-
tioned spatial segregation. However, other cas-
es reveal more subtle forms of segregation: One 
example is the Brazilian government’s destruc-
tion of favelas in the 1960s, when inhabitants 
were  removed  to  other  segregated  locations. 
On a smaller scale, more than 2,000 low-income 
families  were  evicted  from  high  and  middle-
income  residential  areas  in  Santiago,  Chile, 
between 1979 and 1985 with the stated objec-
tive of creating neighbourhoods that were uni-
form by socioeconomic group (Greenstein et al., 
2000).

The application of land-use and building stan-
dards that exclude low-income households is a 
common method of encoding social segregation 
into apparently technical planning criteria. For 
example, until its revision in the mid-1990s, the 
main building code system in Kenya continued 
the application of top-down colonial standards 
and paid too little attention to the affordability of 
the regulatory provisions. Prior to the enactment 
of “Code 95”, the cost of conventional building 

218

Part III - Chapter 11

materials was beyond reach for low-income and 
vulnerable groups, many of whom did not have 
access to housing finance and credit (UN-Habi-
tat, 2014a). More recently, voluntary segregation 
has become a growing force, with the prolifera-
tion of gated communities and the concentration 
of commerce in new shopping and business cen-
tres providing increased security against crime 
but  also  minimizing  the  residents’  interaction 
with other social groups in the city.

Cities have always been characterized by inequal-
ity. The Manchester of the mid-nineteenth cen-
tury (Engels, 1845) offered horrific conditions of 
everyday risk for the majority of its inhabitants. 
Nowadays, most cities in higher-income coun-
tries  are  able  to  provide  their  residents  with 
infrastructure, services and safety nets in a way 
that minimizes their disaster risk and strength-
ens their resilience (except in pockets of extreme 
deprivation like Calton, Glasgow). As cities grow 
wealthier, investments are made in infrastruc-
ture  and  services  that  reduce  extensive  risks 
and  increase  resilience.  Engels  would  certain-
ly not recognize the Manchester of the twenty-
first century. However, in many cities inequality 
is increasing rather than decreasing, and it is esti-
mated that around two-thirds of the global urban 
population now lives in cities where inequality 
has risen continuously since the 1980s (UN-Hab-
itat, 2014b).

In  many  lower-income  countries,  city  govern-
ments do not have the resource base or the polit-
ical leverage to provide land and infrastructure 
for low-income households, with the result that 
a large part of urban development occurs infor-
mally and a variable proportion of the urban pop-
ulation (from 30 per cent in most middle-income 
countries  to  90  per  cent  in  many  low-income 
countries)  live  in  unsafe  housing,  on  hazard-
exposed sites and with little or no provision of 
services  and  infrastructure.  This  significantly 
increases their risk compared to better-off areas 
in the same cities.

The  urban  population  living  in  informal  set-
tlements has actually grown over the last two 
decades, from around 650 million in 1990 to more 
than 860 million in 2012 (UN-Habitat, 2013).4 This 
growth has severely undermined the relevance of 
the related target in the Millennium Development 
Goals: “By 2020, to have achieved a significant 
improvement in the lives of at least 100 million 
slum  dwellers”.5  At  the  same  time,  local  and 
national governments often neglect to define, 
classify or quantify informal settlements and the 
corresponding risks and demands of their inhab-
itants (Sarmiento et al., 2014).

In some areas in Karachi, Pakistan (Hasan et al., 
2010), there are more than 4,000 inhabitants per 
hectare (2.4 m2 of space per inhabitant), com-
pared  to  200  persons  per  hectare  (50m2  per 
inhabitant)  in  high-income  areas.  In  Tanzania, 
around 70 per cent of Dar es Salaam’s popula-
tion lives in low-quality housing at risk of regu-
lar flooding (Kahn, 2014). In São Paulo, more than 
85 per cent of at-risk households live in informal 
settlements, with more than half lacking access 
to appropriate sanitation and more than 30 per 
cent without access to paved roads (ibid.). In fact, 
health and sanitation problems within informal 
settlements exacerbate and create new risks. In 
Tanzania, for example, the lack of clean water 
and sanitation can lead to widespread outbreaks 
of waterborne diseases and malaria during flood 
episodes in informal settlements, thus creating 
further vulnerability (World Bank, 2011).

The  implementation  of  land-use  and  building 
regulations becomes a major challenge in such 
settings  (UNISDR,  2011a;  Johnson,  2011),  par-
ticularly  where  high  population  density  exac-
erbates  existing  risks.  Under  such  conditions, 
what two innovative architects said about Cara-
cas almost a decade ago may hold true for many 
urban settings today: “Considering ideal condi-
tions is a waste of time […] The point is to avoid 
catastrophe”  (Brillembourg  and  Klumpner, 
2005).

Concatenated urban risks
The growing complexity of interconnected urban 
systems in larger cities contributes to the structur-
ing of the concatenated and potentially cascading 
disaster risks discussed in Chapter 10. These sys-
tems are directly shaped by the distinct features 
of individual cities and yet have common charac-
teristics, notably their interconnectivity (Wamsler, 
2014). For example, the increasing dependence of 
water, sewerage, waste management and health 
systems  on  electricity  supply  has  resulted  in  a 
shutdown of these critical services during pow-
er outages associated with hazard events such as 
the Akalla tunnel fire in Stockholm in 2002 or Hur-
ricane Sandy in New York in 2012 (ibid.).

In urban centres, risk is amplified by the degree 
of interdependence of sectors, utilities and infra-
structure, particularly in those cities that act as 
key nodes in the global economy and national 
markets (Airmic Technical, 2013; OECD, 2009). For 
example, in cities with little built-in redundancy, 
failures in the power grid quickly spill over into 
telecommunications and transportation, which 
in  turn  impact  production,  banking  and  other 
sectors.

In late 2012, Hurricane Sandy brought about such 
system failures at the very core of a major glob-
al economic hub. Operations in the Port of New 
York and New Jersey were interrupted, leading 
to  a  disruption  of  cargo  services  and,  crucial-
ly, maritime first responders. This had extensive 
and prolonged impacts on both the Port and the 
emergency response sector. The New York Stock 
Exchange was forced to close for two consecu-
tive days, the only time this has happened since a 
major winter storm in 1888, and more than 20,000 
flights were cancelled. Internet traffic around the 
globe was also affected due to the role of New 
York as a major hub for data traffic (National Hur-
ricane Center, 2013; Smythe, 2013).6 

219

While the direct damage from the storm depend-
ed  on  whether  buildings  or  infrastructure  had 
been designed to or above code, the indirect loss 
and impact was heavily influenced by interde-
pendence (Haraguchi and Kim, 2014). For exam-
ple,  the  health,  transportation  and  electricity 
sectors suffered significant additional indirect 
damage from interruptions in the transport and 
building sectors (Table 11.1). These interdepen-
dencies mean that certain critical sectors need 
to be factored into risk reduction measures and 
investment plans to strengthen the city’s resil-
ience (New York City Government, 2013; Haragu-
chi and Kim, 2014).

Table 11.1  Direct and indirect damage from Hurricane Sandy

 (Source: Haraguchi and Kim, 2014.)

Box 11.3  Key activities related to urban development in the HFA

11.2 Addressing urban disaster 

risks in the HFA

Much of the progress made in addressing urban 
disaster  risk  is  associated  with  strong  urban 
planning and management in itself, particularly 
in higher-income countries. Therefore, a signifi-
cant  amount  of  effort  has  been  made  in  the 
context of other frameworks, especially in cli-
mate change adaptation, rather than the disas-
ter  risk  reduction  sector.  These  efforts  have 
given  rise  to  innovative  urban  practices  with 
risk reduction co-benefits.  

Under Priority for Action 4, the HFA placed con-
siderable emphasis and gave detailed guidance 
on the role of urban planning as well as building 
standards and regulation in disaster risk reduc-
tion, including the design of infrastructure and 
critical facilities such as hospitals and schools 
(Box 11.3).

Government self-assessment reports prepared 
using the HFA Monitor highlight progress over the 
last three reporting cycles, even though the prog-
ress in this area is considerably lower than in oth-
er priorities for action (Figure 11.5). This is also 
the case in other areas of Priority for Action 4.

Much of the progress made in addressing urban 
disaster  risk  is  associated  with  strong  urban 

(n) Incorporate disaster risk assessments into the urban planning and management of disaster-prone human 
settlements, in particular highly populated areas and quickly urbanizing settlements. The issues of informal or 
non-permanent housing and the location of housing in high-risk areas should be addressed as priorities, includ-
ing in the framework of urban poverty reduction and slum-upgrading programmes.

(r) Encourage the revision of existing or the development of new building codes, standards, rehabilitation and 
reconstruction practices at the national or local levels, as appropriate, with the aim of making them more appli-
cable in the local context, particularly in informal and marginal human settlements, and reinforce the capacity 
to implement, monitor and enforce such codes, through a consensus-based approach, with a view to fostering 
disaster-resistant structures.

220

Part III - Chapter 11

Figure 11.5  Progress in managing risk in urban environments

HFA Core Indicator 4.4: Planning and management of human settlements 
incorporate disaster risk reduction elements, including enforcement of 
building codes.
 (Source: UNISDR with data from the HFA Monitor.)

planning and management in itself, particular-
ly in higher-income countries, or has occurred in 
the context of other frameworks, especially in cli-
mate change adaptation, rather than the disaster 
risk reduction sector.

Building  on  a  tradition  of  supporting  house-
hold and community efforts in informal urban 
development that began in the 1960s (Turner, 
1972), there are numerous ongoing examples of 
innovative urban practices that may have risk 
reduction  co-benefits.  For  example,  an  inno-
vative approach to social housing in northern 
Chile  provides  families  with  half  a  house  and 
lets them build the other half within a defined 
structure but according to their own priorities 
and means (Figure 11.6). In the north of Argenti-
na, the Tupac Amaru social movement mobilizes 
low-income  families  to  become  the  construc-
tion force behind their own community devel-
opments,  complete  with  their  own  brick  kilns 
and metalworking factories (McGuirk, 2014). In 
India, the National Slum Dwellers Federation has 
grown from a small, one-slum advocacy group 

to a large network of community organizations 
across the globe that successfully negotiate ten-
ancy rights and access to infrastructure and ser-
vices  for  inhabitants  of  informal  settlements 
(Patel and Mitlin, 2001).

Many governments now have policy frameworks 
in place to upgrade and regularize informal set-
tlements, which may include the installation of 
risk-reducing infrastructure such as drainage and 
slope stabilization. However, as of 2011 around 
40 per cent of low-income countries reporting 
against the HFA did not invest in reducing risk in 
vulnerable urban settlements (UNISDR, 2011b). In 
2013, only some 60 per cent of low-income coun-
tries and less than 40 per cent of middle-income 
countries provided safe land and housing for low-
income households and communities (UNISDR, 
2013a). In other contexts, policy still focuses on 
eradication or relocation (Box. 11.4), which may 
further exacerbate risks and vulnerabilities.

Figure 11.6  Social housing redefined: Quinta Monroy, 
Iquique, Chile

 (Source: Tadeus Jalocha and Christobal Palma.)

221

Box 11.4  Upgrading and eradicating informal settlements in Bangalore and Harare

Up to 20 per cent of Bangalore’s population lives in informal settlements with no 
access to basic services. Over a five-year period from 2000 to 2005, the Banga-
lore Water Supply and Sewerage Board (BWSSB) implemented a programme to 
improve  water  delivery  in  the  slums.  By  2005,  more  than  5  per  cent  of  slum 
households in the city had access to water and were fully functioning customers 
receiving bills and making payments. The programme allows shared connections between 8 and 12 house-
holds and specifically offers lower pricing for households located in the slums.

The project not only increased the number of households with access to the water network, it also reduced 
the residents’ dependency on illegal connections and decreased the BWSSB’s amount of non-revenue water 
being used.

In Harare and other major cities across Zimbabwe, a different approach was employed to deal with popula-
tions in informal settlements. For seven weeks starting in May 2005, a government-led clean-up campaign 
named Operation Murambatsvina was implemented with far-reaching impacts. Its aim was to eradicate ille-
gal housing and alleged illicit business activities.

A total of 92,460 housing structures were destroyed and 700,000 people—nearly 6 per cent of the country’s 
population—lost their homes. An estimated 2.4 million more people were indirectly affected by the cam-
paign, and the informal work sector, which accounted for 40 per cent of all employment at the time, was 
destroyed. As a result, people who had been driven out of their homes were left even more vulnerable. 

 (Source: Satterthwaite and Mitlin, 2014.)

Within the disaster risk reduction sector itself, 
through  initiatives  such  as  the  Making  Cities 
Resilient campaign, the HFA has contributed to 
a growing awareness of disaster risk in the more 
than  2,000  cities  that  have  signed  up  to  date. 
Tools such as The UN-Habitat City Resilience Pro-
filing Programme (CRPP; UN-Habitat, 2014a) or 
the UNISDR Local HFA Monitor and Ten Essentials 
now offer municipal governments the means to 
better understand the strengths and weaknesses 
of their current approaches to managing disaster 
risk. To date, 550 local government reports,7  pre-
dominantly from municipal governments, have 
been submitted and show a mixed track record 
of achievements.

Local governments in high-income countries and 
in larger cities may have the capacity to carry out 
risk assessments and apply the results in land-
use and zoning plans, in building regulations and 

222

Part III - Chapter 11

in the design and implementation of infrastruc-
ture projects. However, in many low and middle-
income countries, the institutional capacity to 
support these approaches is usually insufficient, 
and in some cases it may be completely lacking. 
Many cities and small urban centres have lacked 
the sort of risk information, particularly in infor-
mal settlements, to inform planning decisions 
and investments that could reduce risk and build 
resilience even if they had the political will to do 
so (UN-Habitat, 2014a). However, there are excep-
tions, as seen more recently in Brazil (Box 11.5).

Building  codes,  zoning  and  land-use  planning 
have been central measures to address existing 
urban risk and the accumulation of new urban 
risk. Over the last two decades, the development 
and improvement of new and existing building 
codes and standards in construction and recon-
struction have been at the centre of urban risk 
management efforts (UNISDR, 2011a; UNEP and 
PSI,  2014).  Bringing  the  private  sector  to  the 
table early in urban planning processes can have 

Box 11.5  Strengthening capacities for disaster risk management in Brazil

Within only 70 years, Brazil went from being around 30 per cent to 84 per cent urban. This rapid urbanization 
process has been characterized by highly unequal urban development and land use. Real estate speculation 
has largely excluded low-income households from existing and new residential areas, obliging them to infor-
mally occupy areas that were outside of the formal land market. This led to a social construction of disaster 
risk over time. A number of Brazil’s metropolitan areas, including Salvador, São Paulo and Rio de Janeiro, 
together contain more than one million informal households. Of those households, almost 60 per cent are 
located on moderate and steep slopes (Figure 11.7).  

Figure 11.7  Informal households situated on moderate and steep slopes in selected Brazilian cities

 (Source: UNISDR with 2010 data from IBGE.8)

223

These areas are highly susceptible to floods and landslides. During the extended rainy season that affected 
Rio de Janeiro in January 2011, landslides and floods caused more than 900 deaths, 300 people went missing 
and more than 300,000 people were directly affected in just seven municipalities. Economic losses amount-
ed to US$1.8 billion.9 

This has  led to a change in how Brazil now approaches disaster risk reduction. In 2011 a cross-sector pro-
gramme  was  initiated  to  discuss  challenges  and  present  solutions,  resulting  in  the  establishment  of  the 
National Centre for Natural Disaster Alert and Monitoring (CEMADEN). CEMADEN reports to the Ministry of 
Science, Technology and Innovation and has five priorities for action: developing early warning and monitor-
ing systems; risk knowledge; reducing the losses and impacts of disasters; communication and education; 
and support to the civil defence system to strengthen emergency response (ibid.). 

Brazil also reports that it has developed measures to manage the underlying risk drivers, such as reducing 
poverty and real estate speculation. The agenda of disaster risk management is now a priority for several 
ministries, based on the awareness that disaster is a social process, not an event.10 

 (Source: Alvalá et al., 2014.)

a direct influence on future risk levels, on com-
pliance with building codes and planning stan-
dards, and on investments in retrofitting, and it 
can also lead to an enhanced dialogue between 
the public and private sectors (Johnson et al., 
2012). However, there is only anecdotal evidence 
that this has occurred.

11.3  

 

Urban risk: the future

 

 

Ultimately, the capacity of cities to manage their 
disaster risks depends on their quality of gover-
nance.  Some  of  the  most  promising  develop-
ments in recent years are the cases of cities that 
have  been  able  to  regain  control  of  their  plan-
ning  and  management  and  to  strengthen  their 
urban  governance  through  innovative  partner-
ships  between  local  governments,  households 
and communities.

a critical impact on whether future disaster risks 
can be reduced or not. Some 60 per cent of the 
area expected to be urbanized by 2030 remains to 
be built. The projected expansion of urban land 
cover between the years 2000 and 2030 is in the 
range of 56 to 310 per cent.11 By 2030, an estimat-
ed US$25 trillion to US$30 trillion will be invest-
ed in new infrastructure, including urban road 
construction, water and sanitation, energy and 
transport systems, and buildings. It is expected 
that roughly US$700 billion a year will be spent 
on financing new urban infrastructure in low and 
middle-income countries over this period (UN-
Habitat, 2014).

Whereas in the last two centuries the largest cit-
ies were located in the wealthiest nations, low 
and middle-income countries are now home to 
three-quarters of the world’s urban population 
and have most of its largest cities (IPCC, 2014), a 
reflection of dramatic economic growth and the 
accompanying  changes  in  social,  political  and 
industrial  relations  and  structures  (Satterth-
waite, 2007; Sassen, 2012).

Given the volume of capital that will flow into the 
urban development and infrastructure sectors in 
the coming decades (UNISDR, 2013a), how disas-
ter risk is managed in urban areas will clearly have 

Urban centres have always concentrated and will 
continue  to  concentrate  business  and  oppor-
tunity  (Dobbs  and  Reemes,  2012)—as  well  as 
the  accompanying  risk.  However,  much  of  the 

224

Part III - Chapter 11

of underlying laws and regulations;13 ineffective 
administration; insufficient qualifications on the 
part of local building code officials, local design-
ers and contractors; an inadequate focus on risk 
management; opaque, bureaucratic procedures; 
and corruption (GFDRR and UN-Habitat, 2014).

For example, India is projected to see its number 
of urban dwellers increase by 404 million over the 
next 35 years, which means that around 50 per 
cent of the country’s population will live in cit-
ies by 2050 (UNDESA, 2014b). In sub-Saharan Afri-
ca, similar growth rates mean that 55 per cent of 
the region’s population will live in urban areas 
by 2050 (ibid.). This represents what has been 
described as a tsunami of urbanization.14  Unless 
planned and managed, this development is likely 
to be accompanied by an equally powerful tsuna-
mi of disaster risk.

projected growth will not take place in the mega-
cities of Asia, but in “middleweight” cities such 
as Foshan in China and Surat in India (Dobbs et 
al., 2012). These cities are projected to contribute 
two-thirds of global growth by 2025 (ibid.) and to 
host more than half of the world’s middle or “con-
suming” class (ibid.).12 

The combination of speculative urban develop-
ment for a wealthy minority with informal urban-
ization for a low-income majority in cities with 
weak capacities for urban planning and manage-
ment is likely to continue to drive urban disaster 
risk. In the coming decades, most urban growth 
is likely to occur in regions like South Asia and 
sub-Saharan  Africa  (Figure  11.8);  without  radi-
cal change, it will epitomize the growth in seg-
regated  disaster  risk.  Many  countries  in  these 
regions have relatively weak urban governance. 
Governance and system failures to support reg-
ulatory functions have undermined the quality of 
building controls and created significant vulner-
abilities.  These  include  the  insufficient  quality 

Figure 11.8  Urban growth in geographical regions

 (Source: UNDESA, 2014b.)

225

The  incapacity  of  most  low-income  and  some 
middle-income countries to provide safely locat-
ed land for low-income households means that 
the  growth  of  informal  settlements  may  con-
tinue to be the dominant model through which 
people without access to formal land and hous-
ing markets resolve their housing needs. Despite 
the  large  number  of  studies  and  publications 
on urban risk and the rapid expansion of urban 
areas, interest and investment in urban pover-
ty and risk reduction have only recently reached 
significant levels on the international stage (Sat-
terthwaite and Mitlin, 2014).

In  all  income  geographies,  one  can  find  nota-
ble exceptions of well-governed cities that have 
managed to provide infrastructure and servic-
es  for  their  inhabitants.  There  have  also  been 
numerous projects with international support, 
such as the provision of electricity to slum dwell-
ers in Mumbai and Ahmedabad in India (World 
Bank and ESMAP, 2011) and the improvement of 
sewerage systems for the urban poor in Viet Nam 
(World Bank and Australian Aid, 2013). However, 
it is highly likely that new urban growth in South 
Asia, sub-Saharan Africa and other regions will 
tend  to  magnify  and  exacerbate  disaster  risks 
(Mitlin and Satterthwaite, 2013).

Ultimately, the capacity of cities to manage their 
disaster risks depends on their quality of gov-
ernance. Some of the most promising develop-
ments in recent years are the cases of cities that 
have been able to regain control of their planning 
and management and to strengthen their urban 
governance  through  innovative  partnerships 
between  local  governments,  households  and 
communities. For example, in Medellin and Bogo-
ta in Colombia, innovative urban governance was 
able to dramatically reduce crime, improve trans-
port and the provision of services, and enhance 
the quality of urban living in general.

Through integrated urban projects, the city of 
Medellin undertook large-scale investments to 

226

Part III - Chapter 11

provide public services to informal settlements 
on  the  hills  surrounding  the  city,  particularly 
transport, education, housing and green space. 
These were presented as an investment in the 
city as a whole, stressing solidarity and the need 
to reduce inequality and promote opportunity. 
One key element of this initiative was the munic-
ipality’s ability to work with civil society orga-
nizations, which had a presence in, knowledge 
of  and  legitimacy  in  their  neighbourhoods.  A 
metro and cable car transportation system was 
built, enabling citizens in informal hillside set-
tlements to travel to work or accomplish other 
business in a matter of minutes, whereas previ-
ously the same journey took hours. Green spac-
es and bicycle lanes were built throughout the 
city.  New  “library  parks”—a  combination  of  a 
public library, park, and community centre with 
architecturally attractive structures—serve the 
purposes  of  education,  recreation  and  social 
cohesion, as well as being major tourist attrac-
tions.  In  Medellin,  homicide  rates  went  down 
from 381 per 100,000 people in 1991 to only 29 
in 2007.15 In parallel, both Bogota and Medel-
lin  made  major  investments  in  assessing  and 
reducing disaster risk.

The experience of these and other cities shows 
that probably the single most important factor 
in addressing urban risk is to strengthen urban 
governance in a way that involves and empow-
ers  citizens  and  builds  partnerships  with  civ-
il  society  and  the  private  sector.  In  contrast, 
stand-alone technical interventions to retrofit 
schools or hospitals are unlikely to be sustain-
able and may quite literally drown in a rising tide 
of risk.

Effective urban governance will have to recog-
nize the direct relationship between function-
ing infrastructure, environmental sustainability, 
productivity, equity and quality of life. By exten-
sion, this means that the social and environmen-
tal drivers of disaster risk will also have to be 
taken into account.

And yet, unfortunately, disaster risk is still rare-
ly mentioned as cities compete to attract invest-
ment. Investments in new smart or eco-cities do 
not seem to address underlying issues of inequal-
ity  in  access  to  services  and  infrastructure.  If 
these issues are not addressed, a more proba-
ble scenario is one of emerging Blade Runner cit-
ies  where  evictions  and  relocations  make  way 
for  new  enclaves  to  attract  global  investment 
against a backdrop of increasing urban inequal-
ity and disaster risk.

227

Notes

1  Accessed 11 January 2015.
2  The definition of “urban” varies according to context. For more 
information on the characteristics of urbanization in Africa, see 
Henderson et al., 2013.
3  http://www.ted.com/talks/paul_romer.
4  However, one should note that the percentage of people living 
in informal settlements has declined over the same time period in 
all regions apart from West Asia (ibid.).
5  http://www.un.org/millenniumgoals/environ.shtml. 
6  http://research.dyn.com/2012/10/hurricane-sandy-initial-
impact/ (accessed 8 December 2014).
7  Total number of online and offline local government reports 
submitted using the Local HFA Monitor as of October 2014.
8  h t t p : // w w w. s i d r a . i b g e . g o v. b r/ b d a / t a b e l a / l i s t a b l .
asp?z=cd&o=20&i=P&c=4012 (accessed 15 December 2014).
9  Source: http://www.mi.gov.br/pt/c/document_library/get_file? 
uuid=74dde46c-544a-4bc4-a6e1-852d4c09be06&groupId=10157 
(accessed 15 December 2014).
10  Personal  communication,  Ministry  of  Science,  Technology 
and Innovation, Government of Brazil.
11  Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Fifth Assessment 
Report, Working Group III, 2014.
12  The  “consuming  class”  is  defined  as  the  share  of  the 
population with disposable income of more than US$10 per day or 
US$3,600 per annum (at 2005 ppp).
13  “Quality”  has  at  least  two  broad  meanings  here:  i)  a  legal 
meaning focused on the functional effectiveness of the law in de-
livering policy objectives and ii) a technical meaning that consid-
ers the relevance of the technical standards established by law.
14  Joan Clos, Executive Director of UN-Habitat, at the opening 
of the 6th World Urban Forum in Naples, Italy, 3 September 2012: 
http://www.un.org/apps/news/story.asp?NewsID=42795  (ac-
cessed 11 January 2015).
15  http://www.iadb.org/en/topics/citizen-security/impact-
medellin,5687.html (accessed 11 January 2015).

228

Part III - Chapter 11

Chapter 12
Welcome to the
Anthropocene: 
Overconsumption
and biocapacity

229

As  overconsumption  progressively  overwhelms  the  capacity  of  planetary  systems,  risk  to  the 
world(cid:1155)s social and economic system as a whole is increasing to potentially catastrophic levels. 
(cid:6)limate  change,  declining  biodiversity  and  depleted  water  availability  will  lead  to  increasing 
disaster risks. 

While the HFA has recogni(cid:55)ed the role of climate change in driving risk, its interpretation has not 
allowed full recognition of the fact that those risks are not evenly shared. Increased ine(cid:46)uality 
transfers and concentrates those risks in low-income households, territories and economies.

rising  sea  levels  made  headlines  in  countless 
news outlets and social media posts. After the vil-
lage suffered repeatedly from heavy floods and 
storms, the government of Fiji decided on this 
radical move, and in January 2014 all residents 
of Vunidogolo were relocated to higher ground.

Vunidogolo is not alone. More than 650 commu-
nities all over Fiji are threatened by loss of coast-
al land and damage to infrastructure from sea 
level rise and storm surges, and more than 40 
communities  have  already  been  identified  for 
relocation within the next 10 years.1 The people 

12.1  

 

 

In search of a missing planet

 

 

The global ecological footprint currently exceeds 
the earth’s biocapacity by far. Current economic 
growth models rely on high levels of CO(cid:1549) emis-
sions  and  the  increasing  consumption  of  envi-
ronmental  resources,  including  freshwater,  for-
est and marine resources. 

Today, the Fijian island village of Vunidogolo is 
still relatively unknown, but it is already on its 
way to making history. The permanent relocation 
of its entire population as a precaution against 

Figure 12.1  Human demand already exceeds the planet’s capacities

 (Source: Global Footprint Network, 2013.)

230

Part III - Chapter 12

of Vunidogolo are not responsible for the green-
house  gas  emissions  that  are  contributing  to 
global climate change and rising sea levels. Those 
emissions are associated with high levels of ener-
gy consumption in other parts of the world. How-
ever, the residents of the village are quite literally 
paying the price: they contributed around one-
third of the total cost of construction, farm and 
fish pond development incurred in the course of 
relocation.

and marine habitats, clean air and rich soil (Nair, 
2014). The ecological footprint currently created 
by this overconsumption of energy and natural 
capital now exceeds the capacity of the planet to 
provide the resources used and to absorb waste, 
including greenhouse gas emissions. Somewhere 
around 1970, consumption surpassed the plan-
et’s biocapacity for the first time. It is estimated 
that consumption now exceeds the biocapacity 
of the planet by around 50 per cent (Figure 12.1).

The  current  approach  to  economic  growth 
depends  on  an  increasing  and  unsustainable 
overconsumption of energy, fresh water, forests 

As GDP per capita grows, so do consumption and 
waste (Box 12.1).

Box 12.1  Destructive consumption and distribution patterns

Current consumption and distribution patterns have a direct impact on climate, water, land and biodiversity, 
which in turn mediate disaster risk. For example, more than a quarter of global agricultural production is lost 
or wasted (FAO, 2012) along the supply chain, from production to storage, processing, distribution and con-
sumption (EIU, 2014).

As Figure 12.2 highlights, Europe, the United States of America and a group of industrialized Asian countries 
including  China,  Japan  and  the  Republic  of  Korea  are  mainly  responsible  for  food  waste  in  consumption, 
while losses in the production phase are particularly high in Latin America, Europe and sub-Saharan Africa.

Figure 12.2   Relative food loss and waste by region and by phase of the food supply chain

 (Source: FAO, 2013b.)

Only the United States of America and China emit more greenhouse gases than the estimated 3.3 gigatonnes 
of CO(cid:1549) equivalent emitted by global food waste in 2007. Food waste now accounts for up to 10 per cent of 
human-generated greenhouse gas emissions, in comparison to 35 per cent from the energy sector and 18 per 
cent from industry (UNEP, 2012; FAO, 2012; Vermeulen et al., 2012).

231

This form of waste also comes at a high cost: worldwide, the equivalent of US$750 billion, or the GDP of Swit-
zerland, is wasted every year (FAO, 2012). This type of waste contributes directly to food insecurity (EIU, 2014) 
and  consumes  large  amounts  of  scarce  ground,  surface  water  (equivalent  to  the  annual  discharge  of  the 
Volga River or three times the volume of Lake Geneva) and productive land (equal to 28 per cent of global 
agricultural land area in 2007). These two critical resources shape the vulnerability of those who depend on 
them (FAO, 2012; Mekonnen and Hoekstra, 2011).

Food waste contributes to tighter global food availability and more volatile food prices, which in turn threat-
en food security and resilience in substantial parts of the population of sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia in 
particular (EIU, 2013; UNISDR, 2013a).

(climate change, biodiversity loss and the nitro-
gen cycle) have already been breached (ibid.).3

Climate change is probably the best known of 
these planetary boundaries, and its relationship 
with increasing disaster risks has already been 
clearly established (IPCC, 2012 and 2014). Disas-
ter  risk  is  magnified  by  climate  change  (UNIS-
DR, 2009a, 2011a; IPCC, 2012; SEI, 2014). Climate 
change  is  already  altering  the  frequency  and 
intensity of many weather-related hazards (IPCC, 
2014) as well as steadily increasing the vulnera-
bility and eroding the resilience of exposed pop-
ulations that depend on arable land, access to 
water, and stable mean temperatures and rain-
fall (UNDP et al., 2013).

At the same time, breaking through other bound-
aries also has implications for disaster risk. Eco-
nomic growth is often associated with ecosystem 
destruction and degradation, for example with 
the conversion of mangrove forests into shrimp 
farms, primary forests into plantations to pro-
duce palm oil or soya, or wetlands and floodplains 
into urban developments, or with the processes 
of land degradation and aquifer exhaustion asso-
ciated with intensive agriculture.

Energy consumption increases with rising GDP per 
capita; however, as highlighted in Chapter 13, the 
relationship is non-linear. The total global primary 
energy supply more than doubled between 1971 
and 2011, while the global population grew by 86 
per cent over the same time frame (OECD and IEA, 
2013). This has contributed to significant increas-
es  in  CO2  emissions  (IEA,  2013;  OECD  and  IEA, 
2013), particularly in rapidly growing and urbaniz-
ing economies such as India and China. In 1980, for 
example, electricity consumption in India was less 
than a tenth of the world average. By the year 2010 
it had increased by 358 per cent, compared to a 
world average of 88 per cent.2 Largely based on 
coal, the country’s electricity generation accounts 
for almost half (48 per cent) of its total CO2 emis-
sions (von Hauff and Kundu, 2002).

Overconsumption now exceeds the capacity of a 
number of different planetary systems. In this con-
text, Rockström et al. (2009) identified nine differ-
ent planetary boundaries which can be grouped 
as follows: boundaries defining a safe global lev-
el of depleting non-renewable fossil resources, 
such as energy (coal, oil, gas), and fossil ground-
water; boundaries defining a safe global level of 
use of the living biosphere, including the exploita-
tion of ecosystems, protection of biodiversity and 
consuming  renewable  resources,  such  as  land 
use; and boundaries defining a safe global level 
of the planetary system’s capacity to absorb and 
dissipate human waste flows, including carbon, 
nitrogen, phosphorus, and toxic chemicals such 
as pesticides. At least three of these boundaries 

232

Part III - Chapter 12

Figure 12.3  Global trends in forest cover, 1990-2010

 (Source: OECD, 2012.)

One underlying driver of disaster risk is the loss 
of  biodiversity,  including  the  loss  of  forests 
(both in terms of size and diversity), wetlands, 
coral  reefs,  mangroves,  areas  under  sustain-
able management and protected areas, the loss 
of threatened species and marine stocks, and 
the degradation of regulatory and provisioning 
ecosystem services (IPCC, 2012; UNISDR, 2009a, 
2011a, 2013a; World Bank, 2013). In particular, 
the loss of forests, wetlands and coastal areas 
with  mangroves  and  coral  reefs  have  direct 
implications for risk (IPCC, 2014; PEDRR, 2010; 
Chatenoux and Peduzzi, 2013).

Forest cover reduces landslide and drought risk 
in particular (UNISDR, 2011a), but as in the case 
of wetlands, mangroves and coral reefs, glob-
al coverage was in decline until recently, except 
in  OECD  countries  (Figure  12.3).  For  example, 
between the adoption of the HFA in 2005 and 
2013—in a period of only eight years—the Ama-
zon  is  estimated  to  have  lost  approximately 
70,000 km2 of its rainforest, an area the size of 
Ireland or Panama.

Global data on the loss of critical regulatory eco-
system services, including forests, mangroves, 
wetlands, coral reefs and aquifers, as well as data 
on climate change highlight that many ecosys-
tems are now approaching tipping points beyond 
which  recovery  is  difficult  or  impossible,  with 
unpredictable but potentially dangerous implica-
tions for future disaster risk.

The impact of water scarcity has also been dis-
cussed extensively (UNISDR, 2013a; Erian et al., 
2012;  IPCC,  2012).  In  the  regions  most  heavi-
ly affected, it will have a direct relationship with 
disaster risk, both in terms of increasing agricul-
tural and hydrological drought hazard as well as 
increasing vulnerability. Agricultural production, 
and thus also rural incomes, will be increasing-
ly challenged, which will undermine resilience to 
drought and other hazard impacts. The increasing 
cost and declining availability of drinking water 
in urban areas will particularly affect low-income 
communities, which already have very unequal 
access to this resource. Again, this is a challenge to 
resilience and to the capacity of households and 
communities to manage disaster risks.

233

Globally, land degradation is another key driver, 
particularly when it comes to drought risk (UNIS-
DR, 2013a; Erian et al., 2012). The effects of land 
degradation  are  often  irreversible,  and  where 
land rehabilitation is attempted it is usually cost-
ly and labour-intensive (Erian et al., 2014). Already 
ten years ago, it was estimated that more than 30 
per cent of the world’s land surface was vulnera-
ble to degradation (WMO, 2005). 

In Africa, 52 per cent of land is considered degrad-
ed (Erian et al., 2014). Countries with severe land 
degradation (i.e. 75 per cent of their land) include 
Lesotho, Djibouti, Sierra Leone, the Democratic 
Republic of Congo and Zambia. Another 24 coun-
tries, including South Africa and Nigeria, as well 
as some low-income countries such as Swaziland, 
Zimbabwe and Eritrea, show severe land degrada-
tion to the tune of 50-75 per cent of their land area.

In  South America,  a  more  complex  process  of 
land degradation and change in vegetation cov-
er can be observed (Erian et al., 2014). There has 
been  significant  degradation  in  some  parts  of 
Brazil, Argentina and Peru in particular, resulting 
in a total of almost 500 million hectares of land 
degraded in South America (Figure 12.4). Of that 
area, more than 165 million hectares show mod-
erate to severe degradation, amounting to more 
than 10 per cent of the continent’s total land area 
(Erian et al., 2014). However, the dynamics of veg-
etation cover and investments in land develop-
ment  mean  that  more  than  12  per  cent  of  the 
total land area can be considered highly devel-
oped,  outweighing  the  overall  scale  of  degra-
dation. However, this figure obviously hides the 
high levels of local soil degradation that have sig-
nificant impacts on communities and local econ-
omies (ibid.).

The real cost of land degradation is difficult to 
assess. However, as an example of how significant 
the associated costs are, Table 12.1 shows the 

234

Part III - Chapter 12

Figure 12.4  Land degradation in South and Central America

 (Source: Erian et al., 2014.)

estimated loss value of land degradation in the 
Syrian Arab Republic, including cultivated, range 
and forest lands.

Given that the different planetary systems are 
concatenated,  breaching  any  one  boundary 
affects the others, and all of them have an impact 
on disaster risk. As the overconsumption of ener-
gy  and  natural  capital  breaks  through  succes-
sive  planetary  boundaries,  it  has  ushered  in  a 
new era that some scientists are now calling the 
Anthropocene: an epoch in which human activi-
ties have a significant impact on the planet’s eco-
systems  (Rockström  et  al.,  2013).  The  concept 
of the Anthropocene has still not been adopted 
as orthodox scientific nomenclature, but one of 
its salient and defining characteristics is that of 
increasing disaster loss and impacts as indicators 
of planetary systems in distress.

Given that its causes and consequences are glob-
al and that it threatens the very foundations of 

Table 12.1  Value loss of crops, land and employment from drought in the Syrian Arab Republic 

 (Source: Erian et al., 2014.)

social and economic life on the planet, overcon-
sumption could be characterized as a meta-driver 
of risk. However, as with other risk drivers, over-
consumption is also permeated with and charac-
terized by social and territorial inequality. As the 
example of Vunidogolo highlights, many of the 
disaster risks associated with the overconsump-
tion of energy and natural capital are not borne 
directly by those who benefit from the wealth 
generated, but are instead transferred to other 

sectors and geographies. Furthermore, breach-
ing  the  planetary  boundaries  then  becomes 
another driver of risk inequality by redistribut-
ing disaster risks and the associated losses and 
impacts.

Many  economically  successful  countries  have 
already exceeded their own biocapacity and have 
then become dependent on importing biocapaci-
ty from other countries (Figure 12.5).

Figure 12.5  The ecological wealth of nations

 (Source: Global Footprint Network, 2013.)

235

Disaster  risk  management  has  now  been  rel-
atively well integrated into agendas related to 
biodiversity, water, sustainability, energy and 
climate change. At the policy level, many region-
al and international frameworks and initiatives 
now make explicit reference to disaster risk and 
risk management, such as the Rio+20 outcome 
document (United Nations, 2012); the UN Con-
vention to Combat Desertification;4 the Ramsar 
Convention on Wetlands;5 and the Convention 
on  Biological  Diversity.6  In  addition,  the  Spe-
cial  Report  on  Managing  the  Risks  of  Extreme 

Figure 12.6  Progress reported in reducing disaster risk through 
environmental management

12.2 (cid:19)rogress in policy and 

planning under the HFA

The environment sector has been able to apply 
the HFA in part, and the climate change agenda 
has generated important momentum in political 
and economic terms. But while disaster risk man-
agement has now been relatively well integrated 
into agendas related to biodiversity, water, sus-
tainability, energy and climate change, environ-
mental management and climate change mitiga-
tion have not played a large enough role in the 
implementation of the HFA.

Under Priority for Action 4 (Box 12.2), the HFA 
placed considerable emphasis on environmental 
management (Box 12.2).

This  is  one  of  the  few  areas  under  Priority  for 
Action 4 where HFA progress reports highlight 
above-average  levels  of  achievement  (Figure 
12.6). While little of this progress is associated 
with the disaster risk management sector per se, 
the environmental sector has been able to use 
the HFA to strengthen international and region-
al policy and to exert an influence on practice. 
At the same time, the climate change sector has 
generated  important  additional  support  and 
momentum in political and economic terms.

HFA Core Indicator 4.1: DRR as an integral objective of environment-related 
policies and plans, land-use management and climate change adaptation.
 (Source: UNISDR.)

Box 12.2  Key activities related to environmental management in the HFA

(a) Encourage the sustainable use and management of ecosystems, including through better land-use planning 
and development activities to reduce risk and vulnerabilities.

(b) Implement integrated environmental and natural resource management approaches that incorporate disas-
ter risk reduction, including structural and non-structural measures, such as integrated flood management and 
appropriate management of fragile ecosystems.

(c)  Promote  the  integration  of  risk  reduction  associated  with  existing  climate  variability  and  future  climate 
change into strategies for the reduction of disaster risk and adaptation to climate change, which would include 
the clear identification of climate-related disaster risks, the design of specific risk reduction measures and an 
improved and routine use of climate risk information by planners, engineers and other decision-makers.

236

Part III - Chapter 12

Events and Disasters to Advance Climate Change 
Adaptation (SREX) published by the IPCC in 2012 
addressed how critical disaster risk management 
is to climate change adaptation.

In 2012, member states of the International Union 
for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) were asked to 
use HFA Priority for Action 4 as guidance on how 
to strengthen “nature-based” disaster risk man-
agement  in  their  environmental  policies  and 
practices (UNEP, 2014). At the same time, a grow-
ing number of regional frameworks highlight the 
need to take disaster risk into account in environ-
mental management and vice versa (ibid.).

There have also been successes in evaluation and 
planning. For example, the overwhelming major-
ity  of  HFA  progress  reports  for  2013  (a  total  of 
94)  confirmed  that  disaster  risk  considerations 
have been integrated into environmental impact 
assessments (EIAs; UNISDR, 2013b). New frame-
works have been developed that merge disaster 
risk considerations in practice with the applica-
tion of EIAs and strategic environmental assess-
ments (SEAs), such as the ten-step guide produced 
by the Caribbean Development Bank or the use of 
EIAs to climate-proof projects in Australia, Canada 
and the Netherlands (Agrawala et al., 2010; UNEP, 
2014). In Sri Lanka, the government used the SEA 
approach to develop a comprehensive sustainable 
development framework for the reconstruction of 
the Northern Province, taking into account major 
hazards such as storm surges, flooding, tsunami 
and sea level rise (PEDRR, 2010).

Due to the absence of consistent output indica-
tors, it is more difficult to measure how much 
of this progress at the policy level has translat-
ed into meaningful practice. However, anecdotal 
evidence paints a picture of growing momentum 
in some areas and challenges in others.

Climate change
Climate change has emerged as a sector in itself 
at the national, regional and international levels, 

with its own institutional arrangements, global 
framework and funding mechanisms. Since the 
formulation of the Nairobi Work Programme at 
the Conference of the Parties in 2006, a pletho-
ra of strategies, frameworks and funding mech-
anisms has certainly created the impression of 
convergence and coherence of climate change 
agendas with those of disaster risk reduction and 
sustainable development (UNEP, 2014).

However, this impression contrasts with a lack of 
true institutional and practical integration (SEI, 
2014). Several countries, such as the Philippines, 
Viet Nam and others in the Pacific region, have 
managed to take the opportunity to effective-
ly merge regulation and technical guidelines as 
well as national policy frameworks and budgets 
for disaster risk reduction and climate change 
adaptation. However, those countries remain the 
minority, and most national policies, while citing 
the respective other domain, maintain distinct 
boundaries in concepts, plans, methodologies, 
reporting  lines,  responsibilities,  budgets  and 
other areas (ibid.).

At  the  same  time,  a  large  number  of  climate 
change adaptation projects have strong disas-
ter risk reduction components even though they 
are not labelled as such (UNISDR, 2009a). In addi-
tion, the climate change sector has probably had 
far more political influence at all levels than the 
disaster risk reduction sector itself. In fact, it is 
likely that the disaster risk reduction sector prof-
its from the momentum generated by the climate 
change  sector,  even  if  the  two  are  still  weakly 
integrated in practice.

Environmental management
A number of approaches and tools in environ-
mental management now take explicit account 
of disaster risk. For example, integrated water 
resource  management  integrates  disaster  risk 
considerations into the management of excess 
supply  and/or  scarcity  of  water  (UNEP,  2014). 
The European Union’s Floods Directive and the 

237

Figure 12.7  Living river flood control through green-grey infrastructure, Napa Valley, California

 (Source: Conservation International, 2014.)

Mekong  River  Commission’s  Water  Resources 
Management-based Basin Development Strate-
gy are examples of such strategies with signifi-
cant spatial coverage and high levels of ambition 
(European Commission, 2007; MRC, 2010).

and non-governmental organizations at the sub-
national level. The success of this coordination 
led to replication in other municipalities and ulti-
mately to the creation of a national micro-water-
shed commission in Guatemala (ibid.).

Similarly,  national  and  regional  approaches  to 
incorporating  disaster  risk  reduction  into  envi-
ronmental management can be found in the con-
text of forest fire management (e.g. in Jamaica 
and Lebanon), coastal zone management (e.g. in 
Belize, Viet Nam and Kenya), and protected areas 
management (e.g. in Mali, New Zealand and Nepal) 
(UNEP,  2014).  The  application  of  these  tools  in 
practice would seem to be gaining momentum.

However, there are still only few examples of inte-
grated community-level approaches that have 
been scaled up with success. One exception is the 
grassroots approach to water management at the 
border between Guatemala and Mexico, where 
local initiative has turned into national strategy 
(IUCN, 2012). In the Guatemalan municipality of 
Tacaná,  14  micro-watershed  councils  success-
fully engaged with the municipal authorities to 
develop  a  coordinated  alliance  of  government 

Ecosystem approaches to disaster risk reduction
Another practice with enormous potential which 
has yet to be fully realized is that of payment for eco-
system services (UNISDR, 2009a). Though difficult 
to assess in economic terms, the regulating servic-
es of ecosystems—such as soil protection and flood 
management—may be their greatest economic val-
ue (UNEP, 2014). However, working examples are 
still few and far between, and the practice remains 
far from mainstream (UNISDR, 2011a, 2013a).

New approaches also blend grey and green infra-
structure in a way that maximizes different eco-
system services, including the reduction of flood 
risks.  For  example,  in  Napa  Valley,  California, 
green infrastructure in the form of wetlands cre-
ation and protection as well as floodplain restora-
tion is combined with a set of grey infrastructure 
investments such as conventional rock and con-
crete flood protection (Figure 12.7).

238

Part III - Chapter 12

Mangrove conservation and restoration is anoth-
er  area  where  considerable  efforts  have  been 
invested, though the results are still mixed. For 
example,  9,050  hectares  of  mangroves  were 
planted in West Bengal, India between 1989 and 
1995 with a success rate of only 1.5 per cent (Lew-
is, 2001). Mangroves can reduce flood impact by 
protecting against storm surge, reducing wave 
heights by up to 50 centimetres and reducing sur-
face waves from wind by more than 75 per cent 
(McIvor et al., 2013). However, the conditions for 
successful restoration are not found everywhere.

To address these challenges, hybrid approach-
es using mangrove reforestation in combination 
with common structural solutions have also been 
developed to reduce delta and coastal vulnera-
bility and to create socioeconomic benefits at the 
same time (Winterwerp et al., 2003). For exam-
ple, in north-central Java, Indonesia, mangrove 
belts were widely promoted but did not stabilize 
eroding coastlines and could not be restored suc-
cessfully due to the morphology of the shoreline. 

Instead,  the  coast  continued  to  degrade  at  an 
alarming rate (Winterwerp et al., 2014). Howev-
er, a combination of permeable structures on the 
one hand and engineering techniques on the oth-
er enabled enough sediment to accumulate, thus 
creating sufficient elevation for the mangroves to 
colonize naturally (ibid.).

While  anecdotal  examples  of  successful  (and 
unsuccessful)  approaches  to  ecosystem  and 
environmental  management  abound,  it  is  dif-
ficult to measure their global impact. However, 
significant investments in restoring and protect-
ing natural capital are being made, and they have 
proved to be effective in reversing the loss of bio-
diversity and ecosystem decline at the local level 
(OECD, 2012). For example, efforts in reforesta-
tion and natural forest regeneration, particular-
ly in OECD countries and emerging economies, 
are projected to show results from 2020 onwards, 
with a significant increase in overall forest cov-
er projected to continue up to 2050 (Figure 12.8).

Figure 12.8  Global forest area change, 2010-2050

Note: BRIICS = Brazil, Russia, India, Indonesia, China, South Africa.

 (Source: OECD, 2012.)

239

Figure 12.9  Estimated increase in green roof 
development in North America

There is also momentum in the adoption of local 
solutions, for example in the case of green roofs. 
Highlighted in previous editions of the GAR (UNIS-
DR, 2011a and 2013a), these roofs exemplify an 
approach to building design that: increases ther-
mal  performance,  reducing  energy  consump-
tion while providing more comfortable living and 
working conditions; reduces urban heat islands, 
improving air quality; provides additional green 
areas in cities; and at the same time regulates 
run-off during heavy rains, reducing flood risk.

The dynamism of the green roof industry is illus-
trated by the fact that in North America alone, 
approximately 20 million square feet (1.86 mil-
lion square metres) of green roofs were installed 
in 2012, up from about 5 million square feet in 
2005 (Figure 12.9). This is still a minute percent-
age of new roof area (Green Roofs for Healthy 
Cities,  2014).  But  it  does  illustrate  the  kind  of 
momentum that is now taking shape in the appli-
cation of innovative approaches which provide 
social, economic and environmental benefits as 
well as disaster risk reduction co-benefits, and 
which are being driven from the bottom up by 
households, communities, businesses and local 
governments.

240

Part III - Chapter 12

12.3  

 

Breaching the boundaries

 

 

The pursuit of economic growth depends on an 
increasing  and  unsustainable  overconsumption 
of energy, fresh water, forests and marine habi-
tats, clean air and rich soil. The ecological foot-
print currently exceeds the planet’s biocapacity 
by around 50 per cent, and future projections—
without a serious shift in thinking and practice—
look even worse.

If current projections of economic growth and 
consumption continue, by the year 2030 the bio-
capacity of the planet will have been exceeded 
by around 200 per cent. In other words, two addi-
tional  planets  will  be  required  to  sustain  con-
sumption and absorb waste. As a meta-driver, 
this poses the risk of the ultimate kata-strophe.

The planetary boundary for CO(cid:1549) emissions has 
been  set  at  350  ppm,7  but  current  levels  are 
already close to 400 ppm and rising (Figure 12.10).

Annual global CO(cid:1549) emissions rose by 54 per cent 
between 1990 and 2011 (IPCC, 2013). Emissions 

Figure 12.10  Growth in emissions results in high levels 
of CO(cid:1549) in the atmosphere  

 (Source: UNISDR with data from NOAA.8)

per capita vary greatly, with North America con-
tinuing to be far ahead of all other regions (IEA, 
2013).  Emissions  per  unit  of  GDP  decreased 
across all of the largest emitters,9 particularly in 
China and Russia, due to increasing energy effi-
ciency along the energy value chain, among other 
improvements. However, this has not been suffi-
cient to compensate for increasing emissions per 
capita: for example, India and China respective-
ly doubled and tripled their per capita emissions 
between 1990 and 2011 (OECD and IEA, 2013).

Globally, half of the emissions budget that was 
established in order to limit climate change to 
2°C had already been depleted by 2011 (IPCC, 
2013). If current emissions continue, this bud-
get will be completely exhausted by 2045, con-
sequently leading to a temperature change well 
above 2°C.

Due to processes such as changes in ice sheets, 
ocean  warming,  vegetation  change  occurring 
over  long  time  scales  and  complex  feedback, 
the climate will continue to be affected by these 
changes for hundreds or perhaps thousands of 
years even if temperatures are stabilized (ibid.). 
Therefore, even if emissions were to be capped 
today, climate change would continue to gener-
ate risk and create “reasons for concern” (see Box 
12.3).  These  include  climate-related  extremes 
such as floods, cyclones, wildfires, droughts and 
heat waves, as identified with very high confi-
dence  by  the  IPCC  (IPCC,  2014).  In  turn,  those 
extremes would alter ecosystems, the supply of 
food and water, urban systems, and ultimately 
human well-being. Climate-related hazards will 
also continue to exacerbate existing vulnerabil-
ities and exposures (IPCC, 2012, 2014). If emis-
sions continue to grow unchecked, that risk can 
become catastrophic.

Box 12.3  The five “reasons for concern” (RFCs) of the IPCC’s Fifth Assessment Report

Dangerous anthropogenic, i.e. human-induced, climate change will continue to drive risk. There are five “rea-
sons for concern” that scientists and policymakers have identified as critical to human, economic and eco-
system well-being:

1. Unique and threatened systems: Climate change will affect already threatened ecosystems and cultures 
with warming of 2°C. Arctic sea ice and coral reef systems that have particularly low adaptive capacities will 
be in severe danger.

2.  Extreme  weather  events:  Risks  from  extreme  events  are  already  moderate  and  expected  to  rise  with 
increasing temperatures. Higher levels of warming may exacerbate risks from certain types of events, such as 
heat waves.

3. Distribution of impacts: Unevenly distributed risks generally affect disadvantaged communities the most. 
Climate change impacts are already known to be regionally differentiated, with high risks of unevenly distrib-
uted impacts for warming above 2°C.

4. Global aggregate impacts: The risks of global aggregate impacts encompassing both biodiversity and the 
global economy are moderate with warming of 1°C to 2°C. Aggregate impacts increase with rising tempera-
tures, leading to high risks associated with warming of 3°C or more.

5. Large-scale singular events: The risks associated with abrupt and irreversible changes in some physical 
systems and ecosystems are moderate for warming between 0°C and 1°C, with Arctic ecosystems and coral 
reef systems already experiencing irreversible changes. Disproportionate increases in risks are expected as 
temperatures change between 1°C and 2°C, with high risks associated with 3°C or more warming due to the 
potential of sea level rise from ice sheet loss.

 (Source: IPCC, 2014.)

241

Energy  generation,  and  therefore  consump-
tion, also contribute to the depletion of natural 
resources such as water. Global water demand 
will increase dramatically even if agricultural pro-
duction practices become more water-efficient 
(OECD, 2012). This increase will be driven main-
ly by growing demand for electricity generation 
and manufacturing in emerging markets such as 
Brazil, China and India (Figure 12.11).

By 2050, it is estimated that 40 per cent of the 
global  population  will  be  living  in  river  basins 
that experience severe water stress, particular-
ly in Africa and Asia (Figure 12.12). Groundwater 
depletion is projected to become a severe chal-
lenge for agriculture and urban water supplies, 
and though water supply should improve overall, 
it appears likely that more than 240 million peo-
ple will not have access to drinking water by 2050 
(OECD, 2012). This does not bode well for disaster 
risk reduction.

Current  projections  show  that  the  speed  and 
scale at which ecosystem decline could proceed, 

Figure 12.11  Global water demand by 2050

not least due to sea level rise, may render exist-
ing efforts to manage disaster risk insufficient 
and ineffective. For example, the global reduc-
tion  of  wetland  areas—an  estimated  50  per 
cent since the beginning of the twentieth cen-
tury—will lead to a severe reduction in global 
and especially local capacity to absorb water 
during floods and to reduce peak flows (TEEB, 
2013). For coastal wetlands, i.e. wetlands in the 
world’s major river deltas, a 52 per cent decline 
was  recorded  between  the  1980s  and  early 
2000s (Coleman et al., 2008). Global estimates of 
future wetland loss are not currently available, 
but local and regional projections draw a bleak 
picture. For example, the area south of Freeport 
in Texas is projected to lose significant areas of 
wetland cover due to sea level rise by 2050 (Fig-
ure 12.13).

The cost of lost wetlands due to damage from 
lack of storm protection is potentially signifi-
cant. In the United States, the cost of losing 1 

Note: BRIICS = Brazil, Russia, India, Indonesia, China, South Africa. RoW = Rest of the world.

 (Source: OECD, 2012.)

242

Part III - Chapter 12

Figure 12.12  Population projected to be living under severe water stress by 2050

 (Source: OECD, 2012.)

Figure 12.13  Projected changes in coastal wetland cover in Texas by 2050 

 (Source: NOAA (http://coast.noaa.gov/digitalcoast/dataregistry/#.)

hectare of coastal wetlands has been estimated 
at US$33,000 (Constanza et al., 2008).

Other biodiversity hotspots such as mangrove 
forests and coral reefs are also degrading at a 
rapid pace. FAO estimates that the total coastal 

mangrove area worldwide declined from 188,000 
km(cid:1549) in 1980 to 152,000 km2 in 2005, a loss of 20 
per cent over only 25 years (2007). Coral reefs 
have been proved to act as buffers to storm surg-
es but are also on the decline. For example, it is 
estimated that 85 per cent of oyster reefs were 

243

Figure 12.14  Projections of coral reef decline

 (Source: van Hooidonk et al., 2013.)

lost  between  1930  and  2003  (Butchart  et  al., 
2010). Globally, a total of 90 per cent of reef loca-
tions are projected to experience severe bleach-
ing by 2050 (Figure 12.14).

The destruction of planetary systems promises 
the ultimate kata-strophe. Under the most stark 
projections, the planet will have lost all its gla-
ciers and have sterile oceans within just a few 
hundred years. There is no doubt that there will 
always be winners and losers in the shifting equa-
tions of overwhelmed planetary systems. But cur-
rent assumptions regarding social and economic 
development  and  urbanization  will  hold  little 
water. It is still unclear whether or not the pletho-
ra of local initiatives promoting green infrastruc-
ture, renewable energy, biodiversity restoration 
and other areas can gain traction quickly enough 
to change course. Even if it is too little, too late, 
these initiatives still provide hope. Ultimately, 
the key question is how to protect a planet that 
provides  the  basis  for  human  and  social  well-
being without simply protecting a paradigm that 
is currently destroying it.

Notes

1  http://aosis.org/reports-fiji-latest-country-to-relocate-
climate-refugees (accessed 11 January 2015).
2  World Bank data: http://data.worldbank.org. 
3  There is some debate as to the definition of the exact values that 
constitute these planetary boundaries. Moreover, researchers are 
in agreement that not all boundaries apply globally, and instead 
it is local conditions that will define when critical thresholds have 
been reached. Moreover, there is some difficulty in interpreting 
the data for policymaking, and assigning arbitrary acceptable 
limits  may  create  new  risks  (http://www.nature.com/nature/
journal/v461/n7263/full/461447b.html). Despite these caveats, 
the  debate  on  planetary  boundaries  has  been  a  useful  door-
opener  to  a  more  profound  debate  on  unsustainable  current 
consumption patterns. For more information on the discussion 
of  planetary  boundaries,  see  http://www.nature.com/news/
specials/planetaryboundaries/index.html. 
4  http://www.unccd.int/en/about-the-convention/Pages/About-
the-Convention.aspx (accessed 11 January 2015).
5  http://www.ramsar.org/cda/en/ramsar-documents-texts-
convention-on/main/ramsar/1-31-38%5E20671_4000_0__ 
6  http://www.cbd.int/sp. 
7  350 ppm has been identified as the limit if global warming is 
not to exceed 2°C, where ppm = parts per million, i.e. the ratio of 
the number of gas molecules to the total number of molecules 
of dry air.
8  http://co2now.org/Current-CO2/CO2-Now/noaa-mauna-loa-
co2-data.html. 
9  The largest emitters since 1990 are (in order of magnitude) 
China, the United States of America, the Russian Federation, India 
and Japan (IEA, 2013).

244

Part III - Chapter 12

Chapter 13
Conclusion:
Making development sustainable

As the global community moves towards establishing objectives and targets under the Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs), which for the first time will be framed for universal application, there is 
an urgent need to reinterpret disaster risk reduction so that it weaves and flows through develop-
ment  as  a  set  of  mutually  supportive  approaches  and  practices.  Without  effective  disaster  risk 
management, sustainable development will not be sustainable and the SDGs will not be achieved.

Disaster risk reduction can be achieved. Decades of experience in managing disasters and reduc-
ing climate and disaster risk have produced a wealth of knowledge and good practice which can 
be applied within social and productive sectors and which make good financial sense. 

13.1  

 

The need for change

 

 

Accumulated disaster risk now directly challeng-
es  the  capacity  of  many  countries  to  make  the 
capital  investments  and  social  expenditure  re-
quired to achieve sustainable development.

Apart from overconsumption and inequality, the 
current development paradigm also generates 
and accumulates disaster risk, which has impacts 
in three different dimensions.

Firstly, public and private investment decisions 
that fail to take hazards into account may gener-
ate risks, losses and impacts for those who made 
the  investments,  as  companies  such  as  Toyo-
ta discovered to their cost during the 2011 Chao 
Phraya River floods in Thailand.

Secondly,  and  as  multiple  examples  from  this 
report  and  previous  editions  of  the  GAR  have 
shown, those risks, losses and impacts are often 
not borne by the risk takers but are instead trans-
ferred to other social sectors or territories. This 
is  the  case,  for  example,  in  speculative  urban 

developments that may increase flood risks for 
households  in  informal  settlements  in  other 
areas of a city.

Thirdly, and as exemplified by climate change 
and the destruction of biodiversity, other risks 
are  transferred  to  the  commons.  As  a  conse-
quence,  the  different  planetary  systems  on 
which all people depend for survival are now at 
risk, a scenario in which there are ultimately no 
winners.

As such, the world is moving beyond an equilib-
rium state, be it in social, economic, political or 
environmental terms. Models of the future are 
characterized by increasing uncertainty, as outli-
ers beyond the boundaries of what can be expect-
ed are becoming the new normal. 

The worst-case implications are kata-strophe on 
a global scale, as overconsumption overwhelms 
the biocapacity of planetary systems, while rap-
idly increasing and unevenly distributed disaster 
risk erodes the resilience of those most in need 
of development. Accumulated disaster risk now 
directly challenges the capacity of many coun-
tries to make the capital investments and social 
expenditure  which  will  be  required  to  achieve 
sustainable development.

247247

As a result, if the expected outcome of the HFA, 
the substantial reduction in disaster losses, in lives 
and  in  the  social,  economic  and  environmental 
assets of countries and communities, is ever to be 
achieved, there is a growing consensus that the 
development drivers of risk, for example climate 
change, the overconsumption of natural capital, 
poverty and inequality will have to be addressed.

In order to do so, it is essential to manage disas-
ter risks more effectively. However, this in turn 
implies  reinterpreting  the  way  disaster  risk 
reduction has been approached and practised 
to date. Managing risk, and not just the disasters 
that arise from unmanaged risk, has to become 
the new normal in development practice. Oth-
erwise,  sustainable  development  will  not  be 
sustainable.

13.2  

 

No Planet B 

 

 

 

While income and energy consumption must rise 
in  low-income  countries  to  ensure  social  prog-
ress, beyond a given threshold rising income and 
energy consumption no longer correlate closely 
with  social  development.  This  shows  that  sus-
tainable development is possible.

If the entire global population were to consume 
at  the  per  capita  average  of  the United  States 
of America, the equivalent of four planets Earth 
would be required in order to provide the neces-
sary biocapacity. Unfortunately, at this point in 
time there is only one planet Earth, which makes 
a  development  paradigm  based  on  economic 
growth and which generates overconsumption 
and inequality untenable.

There is now a growing consensus about the need 
to move towards a low-carbon economy, which 
in turn implies transformation in other areas, for 
example in agriculture and urban development 
(Rockström  et  al.,  2013).  Implicit  values  about 

248

Chapter 13

development do seem to be changing, challeng-
ing and overturning deep-rooted assumptions 
about economic growth, social well-being and 
risk.

Global annual CO2 emissions are now approach-
ing  5  tons  per  capita.  Until  very  recently,  the 
orthodox view was that increases in energy con-
sumption have a positive and necessary impact 
on  social  and  human  development  (von  Hauff 
and Kundu, 2002). Similarly, it has generally been 
assumed  that  continuously  increasing  GDP  is 
necessary for countries to achieve social well-
being and human development. Both of those 
assumptions are now being overturned.

As Figure 13.1 shows, the relationship between 
increasing  energy  consumption  and  human 
development (as measured by the Human Devel-
opment Index) is non-linear. At one end of the 
curve, even slight increases in energy consump-
tion lead to major gains in human development. 
However,  beyond  a  certain  point  the  develop-
ment  gains  from  higher  energy  consumption 
are increasingly tenuous. For example, the con-
sumption of CO2 in the United States of America 
(approximately 20 tons per capita) is nearly four 
times that of Switzerland, although both coun-
tries have similar levels of human development.

This  example  shows  that  human  development 
and  low  levels  of  energy  consumption  are  not 
incompatible.  Currently  the  inflection  point  in 
the curve may be around the global average of 
5 tons of CO2 per capita. This still implies emis-
sion levels which are far too high to address cli-
mate  change  and  achieve  sustainability,  even 
though many low-income countries will still have 
to drastically increase their energy consumption 
in order to achieve viable levels of development. 
However, as energy efficiency increases and new 
technologies come on stream, it is likely that the 
inflection point will shift upward and to the left, 
offering higher levels of human development for 
lower levels of energy consumption.

(cid:22)imilar inflection points can be observed with 
respect to social progress (cid:1177)(cid:19)orter et al.(cid:1144) (cid:1091)(cid:1089)(cid:1090)(cid:1093)(cid:1178)(cid:1144) 
life e(cid:53)pectancy (cid:1177)(cid:13)ackson(cid:1144) (cid:1091)(cid:1089)(cid:1089)(cid:1098)(cid:1178) and perceptions 
of well-being or happiness. (cid:4)s with energy con-
sumption  and  human  development(cid:1144)  the  rela-
tionship between economic growth and social 
progress changes as income rises (cid:1177)(cid:9)igure (cid:1090)(cid:1092).(cid:1091)(cid:1178). 
(cid:4)t lower income levels(cid:1144) small increases in (cid:10)(cid:7)(cid:19) 
are  associated  with  large  increases  in  social 
progress. (cid:11)owever(cid:1144) as countries reach high levels 
of income(cid:1144) the (cid:46)uick wins in social progress aris-
ing from economic development are e(cid:53)hausted. 
(cid:9)or e(cid:53)ample(cid:1144) (cid:6)osta (cid:21)ica(cid:1144) an upper middle-income 
country with a (cid:10)(cid:7)(cid:19) per capita of (cid:24)(cid:22)(cid:1704)(cid:1090)(cid:1090)(cid:1144)(cid:1090)(cid:1095)(cid:1094)(cid:1144) has 
achieved a level of social progress higher than 
Italy (cid:1177)(cid:10)(cid:7)(cid:19) per capita(cid:1145) (cid:24)(cid:22)(cid:1704)(cid:1091)(cid:1095)(cid:1144)(cid:1092)(cid:1090)(cid:1089)(cid:1178).

(cid:5)oth of these e(cid:53)amples highlight that achieving 
human development and social progress is not 
dependent on continuous economic growth and 
increasing energy consumption. In other words(cid:1144) 
sustainable development is possible.

There is now increasing momentum to transform 
development practices(cid:1144) many of which direct-
ly address the underlying risk drivers and con-
tribute  to  reduced  disaster  risk.  (cid:9)or  e(cid:53)ample(cid:1144) 
reducing  energy  consumption  and  moving  to 
renewable energy reduces the risk of catastroph-
ic climate change(cid:1146) protecting and restoring regu-
latory ecosystems can reduce weather-related 
hazard(cid:1146)  and  climate-smart  agriculture  can 
enhance  food  security.  (cid:4)ll  three  previous  edi-
tions of the (cid:10)(cid:4)(cid:21) have consistently identified and 
highlighted such practices with co-benefits for 
disaster risk reduction. These practices range 
from green roofs and ecosystem approaches to 
flood management(cid:1144) to innovative approaches to 
social protection and participatory approach-
es to urban development. (cid:26)hile currently still 
seeds(cid:1144)  these  incipient  practices  do  show  how 
new approaches to development transformation 
are addressing the underlying risk drivers and 
reducing risks.

Figure 13.1  The non-linear relationship between human development and energy consumption

 (Source: Costa et al., 2011.)

249

Figure 13.2  The non-linear relationship between social progress and (cid:10)(cid:7)(cid:19)

 (Source: Social Progress Index 2014.1)

(cid:1090)(cid:1092).(cid:1092)  

 

Managing internalities

 

 

Managing  the  risks  inherent  in  social  and  eco-
nomic  activity,  rather  than  mainstreaming  di-
saster risk reduction to protect against external 
threats, is very different to the current approach 
to disaster risk reduction. 

The use of human life years as a common cur-
rency to measure disaster loss now provides a 
more  complete  picture  of  the  true  magnitude 
and impact of disaster loss. This approach high-
lights that disaster risk is now as much a threat 
to human development and social progress as 
avoidable  diseases  such  as  tuberculosis  and 
malaria in low and middle-income countries.

250

Chapter 13

The (cid:22)(cid:7)(cid:10)s are likely to feature an important health 
goal with a view to reducing the global disease 
burden(cid:1144) for e(cid:53)ample by ending epidemics of all 
communicable diseases by (cid:1091)(cid:1089)(cid:1092)(cid:1089). (cid:21)educing disas-
ter risk can now be considered e(cid:46)ually important 
if a more sustainable and e(cid:46)uitable development 
paradigm is to be achieved.

(cid:24)p to now(cid:1144) the relationship between disaster risk 
reduction(cid:1144) climate change and sustainable devel-
opment  has  been  addressed  through  the  con-
cept of mainstreaming. (cid:11)owever(cid:1144) mainstreaming 
disaster risk reduction into sustainable develop-
ment  or  into  climate  change  adaptation  or(cid:1144)  for 

that  matter(cid:1144)  mainstreaming  poverty  reduction, 
ecosystem protection or good governance are by 
definition still derived from the conception that 
disasters and climate change are e(cid:53)ternalities to 
be reduced rather than endogenous or internal 
characteristics of development.

(cid:16)anaging these internalities inside development 
is thus a very different approach to mainstream-
ing  disaster  risk  reduction  to  protect  against 
externalities.  It  implies  that  managing  risks 
should be a defining characteristic of sustainable 
development. (cid:16)anaging risks(cid:1167)rather than disas-
ters as indicators of unmanaged risk(cid:1167)now has 
to become endogenous to the (cid:7)(cid:17)(cid:4) of develop-
ment instead of an e(cid:53)otic add-on that needs to 
be mainstreamed. 

(cid:16)anaging disaster risks re(cid:46)uires three mutually 
supportive approaches or practices(cid:1145)

(cid:1173) prospective risk management: preventing or 
avoiding the accumulation of new and future risks 
by  making  risk-sensitive  development  choices(cid:1144) 
including in disaster recovery and reconstruction(cid:1146)
(cid:1173)  corrective  risk  management:  mitigating  or 
reducing e(cid:53)isting risks by investing in corrective 
measures(cid:1144) including early warning and prepared-
ness(cid:1146) and
(cid:1173) compensatory risk management: taking mea-
sures to support the resilience of individuals and 
societies in the face of residual risk that cannot be 
effectively reduced.

These three approaches support all three inter-
national  agendas  under  negotiation  in  (cid:1091)(cid:1089)(cid:1090)(cid:1094)(cid:1145) 
disaster risk reduction(cid:1144) climate change and sus-
tainable development (cid:1177)Table (cid:1090)(cid:1092).(cid:1090)(cid:1178). (cid:9)urthermore(cid:1144) 
they can facilitate the integration of these agen-
das through the understanding that both disaster 
risk and climate change are ultimately manifesta-
tions of unsustainable development.

(cid:19)rospective disaster risk management is prob-
ably most closely aligned to the notion of sus-
tainability. (cid:11)owever(cid:1144) as stressed above(cid:1144) this is 
not (cid:39)ust another way of saying mainstreaming. 
Instead(cid:1144)  it  points  to  the  need  to  develop  new 
parameters(cid:1144) principles and tools that transform 
e(cid:53)isting thought and practice from within.

(cid:16)aybe most importantly(cid:1144) while corrective and 
compensatory risk management can be interpret-
ed within the current understanding and practice 
of  disaster  risk  management(cid:1144)  prospective  risk 
management is far more disruptive of this para-
digm(cid:1144) given that its effectiveness depends more 
on political than on financial capital. 

The numbers add up
(cid:16)anaging  the  different  layers  of  disaster  risk 
through appropriate combinations of prospec-
tive(cid:1144)  corrective  and  compensatory  strategies 
is essential if the global (cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:15) of (cid:24)(cid:22)(cid:1704)(cid:1092)(cid:1090)(cid:1093) billion(cid:1144) 
associated with earth(cid:46)uakes(cid:1144) tsunamis(cid:1144) tropical 
cyclones and floods in the built environment(cid:1144) is to 
be reduced and if sustainable development is to 

Table 13.1  (cid:16)anaging disaster risks to support disaster risk reduction(cid:1144) address climate change and promote sustainable development

 (Source: UNISDR.)

251

indirect benefits of reducing risks are factored in, 
the BCR of corrective investments may be more 
attractive.

Typical BCRs for prospective disaster risk man-
agement would seem to lie in a range from 3:1 
to 15:1 (Shreve and Kelman, 2014) and a broad-
based  estimate  of  4:1  has  been  suggested 
(Mechler et al., 2014; Government of the United 
Kingdom, 2012) in order to give an order of mag-
nitude of the potential benefits of making future 
investments in a risk-sensitive manner.2  

If  this  BCR  is  applied  to  the  likely  new  invest-
ments in infrastructure, this would imply that an 
annual global investment of only US$6 billion in 
disaster risk reduction over the next 15 years3 
would result in total benefits of US$360 billion in 
terms of avoided losses over the whole lifetime of 
the investment (for example, 50 years for infra-
structure).4  This  amounts  to  an  annual  reduc-
tion of new and additional AAL by more than 20 
per cent. Such substantial reduction in expected 
losses comes at a comparably low cost when put 
in relation to current flows into climate change 
mitigation or future investment requirements for 
power, telecommunications and transport infra-
structure (UNCTAD, 2014).

Given  that  the  BCR  ratios  and  discount  rates 
applied to specific investments will vary widely, 
the above figure only indicates the likely order 
of magnitude of the required investment. How-
ever, given that new infrastructure investments 
gradually replace existing vulnerable infrastruc-
ture, this level of investment would not only pro-
tect  new  development:  the  global  AAL  would 
gradually be reduced. This highlights that disas-
ter risk reduction is not only essential to sustain-
able development, it is also a sound investment. 

be achieved. Investing in disaster risk reduction 
is thus a precondition for developing sustainably 
in a changing climate. However, it is a precondi-
tion that can be achieved and that makes good 
financial sense.

If risk is not reduced, these expected future losses 
will become a critical opportunity cost for devel-
opment. In particular, in those countries where 
disaster risk now represents a significant pro-
portion of capital investment and social expen-
diture, the capacity for future development will 
be seriously undermined. In such circumstances, 
sustained,  let  alone  sustainable,  development 
will be difficult. 

It is currently estimated that US$90 trillion will 
have  to  be  invested  in  infrastructure  (urban, 
land-use  and  energy  systems)  by  2030  (Glob-
al  Commission  on  the  Economy  and  Climate, 
2014). This amounts to an average of US$6 tril-
lion per year over the next 15 years. Additional 
investment for a transition to low-carbon infra-
structure is estimated at around US$4 trillion in 
total or another US$270 billion per year (ibid.). If 
these investments are not made in a risk-sensi-
tive way, the global AAL will continue to increase, 
even without taking into account likely increas-
es in hazard due to climate change and other fac-
tors. In many countries this increase in risk could 
make the difference between achieving sustain-
able development or not. 

Benefit-cost ratios (BCRs) of disaster risk reduc-
tion can only be assessed within specific local 
contexts and for specific disaster risk manage-
ment strategies (Shreve and Kelman, 2014), and 
as such there is no single magic number. In the 
case of corrective disaster risk management, the 
costs may exceed the purely economic benefits 
(UNISDR, 2011a; Kunreuther and Michel-Kerjan, 
2012). However, in countries with a high propor-
tion of their current capital stock at risk and low 
levels of new investment, corrective disaster risk 
management becomes very important. And if the 

252

Chapter 13

Figure 13.3  The future of disaster risk management

 (Source: UNISDR.)

13.4 The future of disaster risk 

management

Therefore,  as  the  global  community  moves 
towards  establishing  objectives  and  targets 
under the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), 
which for the first time will be framed for univer-
sal application, there is an urgent need to reinter-
pret disaster risk reduction so that it weaves and 
flows through development as a set of mutually 
supportive approaches and practices.

As discussed in Chapter 6, disaster risk reduc-
tion itself is rapidly evolving. New stakeholders, 
including city governments, businesses and the 
financial, sector are driving change. Innovations 
in areas as diverse as risk governance, risk knowl-
edge,  cost-benefit  analysis  and  accountabili-
ty are challenging old assumptions and creating 
new opportunities (Figure 13.3). 

Rather  than  a  programme  or  framework  for 
action, GAR15 presents a discussion on the future 
of disaster risk management that takes note of 
this ongoing innovation. Its purpose is to stimu-
late further reflection, debate and improved prac-
tice as countries begin to address the challenges 
posed by the new international agreements on 
disaster risk reduction, climate change and sus-
tainable development in 2015 and beyond.

253

13.5 Reforming governance to 

manage disaster risks

While countries will continue to require a dedi-
cated and specialized disaster management sec-
tor to prepare for and respond to disasters, man-
aging disaster and climate risks in development 
requires  a  new  approach.  It  requires  strength-
ened  governance  arrangements  in  sectors  and 
territories to minimize the discounting of future 
risk as well as transparency and accountability 
as risks are generated, transferred and retained.

The continued need for a specialized disaster 
management sector
The governance arrangements required to man-
age disasters are not the same as those required 
to manage risks. The management of disasters as 
events—in particular disaster warning, prepara-
tion and response—is a specialized area of gov-
ernance for which, with important caveats, many 
of the institutional and legislative arrangements 
developed  over  the  last  thirty  years  or  so  are 
appropriate.

Therefore,  countries  will  continue  to  require 
a  dedicated  and  specialized  sector  to  man-
age disasters, emergencies and other incidents, 
including maritime, aviation, industrial and envi-
ronmental accidents. To the extent that risk lev-
els continue to grow, there will be more rather 
than less demand for specialized disaster man-
agement organizations. In other words, countries 
should continue to develop their capacities for 
disaster management, including the specialized 
professional skills, institutional arrangements, 
policies and legislation required for this purpose.

Enhanced sector and territorial governance 
arrangements to manage disaster risks
In contrast, managing disaster risks makes it nec-
essary to strengthen sector and territorial gov-
ernance arrangements. Rather than specialized 
arrangements for disaster risk governance, the 
key question is how governance in general can be 

254

Chapter 13

enhanced to minimize the discounting of future 
risk as well as transparency and accountability 
as risks are generated, transferred and retained 
(Wilkinson  et  al.,  2014;  UNISDR,  2011a;  Lassa, 
2010).

This  implies  the  need  to  relax  and  dispel  the 
notion that disaster risk management has to be a 
sector and to shift the focus towards weaving risk 
management into development. Managing disas-
ter risks should cease to be seen as an exotic prac-
tice for which responsibility has been assigned to 
a specialized sector (Gall et al., 2014c). Instead, it 
should become a normal part of day-to-day devel-
opment planning and decision-making across all 
development sectors. The differentiation between 
risk governance and development governance is a 
false one and contributes to the current situation 
where the costs of risk generation and accumula-
tion are externalities that remain hidden and unac-
counted for, limiting accountability at all levels.

This has several implications. Firstly, the capaci-
ty of countries to manage their disaster risks will 
depend  on  the  overall  quality  and  strength  of 
governance. This implies that it is highly unlike-
ly that countries where corruption is rife, where 
there is no freedom of the press, where there is 
civil or military conflict, or where there is little 
respect for human rights in general will be able 
to manage their disaster risks effectively (Alex-
ander and Davis, 2012). The governance of disas-
ter risk is never autonomous from the quality of 
governance in general. Strengthening the qual-
ity of overall governance is therefore critical to 
strengthening the governance of disaster risk.

Secondly, it implies that the priority given to man-
aging disaster risk will be closely associated with 
the priority given to addressing the underlying risk 
drivers. The political priority accorded to reducing 
poverty and inequality, protecting and restoring 
biodiversity, and planning and managing sustain-
able urban development will largely determine the 
political priority assigned to reducing disaster risk.

Thirdly(cid:1144)  if  disaster  risk  is  driven  into  previous-
ly  unknown  orders  of  magnitude  and  into  new 
domains(cid:1144) the ability to manage known risks will 
be only one pillar of effective risk management. 
Instead(cid:1144)  the  general  agility  re(cid:46)uired  to  man-
age risks as they emerge by anticipating(cid:1144) adapt-
ing and continuously transforming may be more 
important(cid:1167)particularly where it builds general as 
opposed to specific resilience (cid:1177)(cid:19)elling(cid:1144) (cid:1091)(cid:1089)(cid:1090)(cid:1093)(cid:1146) (cid:6)aval-
lo and Ireland(cid:1144) (cid:1091)(cid:1089)(cid:1090)(cid:1093)(cid:1146) (cid:21)ay-(cid:5)ennet et al.(cid:1144) (cid:1091)(cid:1089)(cid:1090)(cid:1093)(cid:1178). This 
implies  that  managing  disaster  risks  should  be 
seen as part of a broader approach to managing 
risks of all kinds.

The  concept  of  social  progress  is  useful  as  it 
incorporates  many  of  the  characteristics  that 

will be re(cid:46)uired to manage risks effectively(cid:1145) basic 
human  needs(cid:1144)  foundations  of  well-being(cid:1144)  and 
opportunity.(cid:1094)

(cid:4)s such(cid:1144) countries that score highly on the (cid:22)ocial 
(cid:19)rogress Inde(cid:53) are likely to have greater capaci-
ty to manage and reduce their disaster risks. This 
is important because it implies that sound disas-
ter risk management is not only a prerogative of 
high-income countries(cid:1144) but rather of all countries 
that have achieved a certain level of social prog-
ress. (cid:9)or e(cid:53)ample(cid:1144) while (cid:16)auritius and Ira(cid:46) e(cid:53)hib-
it very similar levels of disaster risk(cid:1144) (cid:16)auritius has 
attained a far higher level of social progress and 
is therefore better positioned to manage its risks 
(cid:1177)(cid:9)igure (cid:1090)(cid:1092).(cid:1093)(cid:1178).

Figure 13.4  (cid:22)ocial progress and average annual loss

 (Source: UNISDR with data from Global Risk Assessment and the Social Progress Index.)

255

2013a; Wilkinson et al., 2014; UNDP, 2014a). This is 
partly due to the “no size fits all” issue common 
to all governance questions and partly due to the 
limited understanding of how distance and pow-
er-sharing dynamics between different tiers of 
government and co-responsibility mechanisms 
across departments play out in specific contexts.

Some countries are already taking steps to man-
age disaster risks within a broader governance 
framework. Finance and planning ministries in a 
number of countries, including Costa Rica, Pan-
ama and Peru, are working to integrate disaster 
risk management into public investment plan-
ning and evaluation. In Mexico, the sophisticat-
ed risk financing arrangements put in place for 
disaster risk management are part of a broader 
strategy to strengthen financial resilience in the 
public sector. In Peru, a new institutional frame-
work has been put in place to manage disaster 
risks, while new legislation in Colombia strength-
ens accountability not just for disasters but also 
for disaster risk generation. Another recent inno-
vation  has  been  the  introduction  of  chief  risk 
officers at both the city and national levels as a 
mechanism to ensure coherence in risk manage-
ment efforts.6 

How  effective  these  emerging  governance 
arrangements turn out to be will only be seen 
with  time.  However,  they  do  highlight  that 
reforming disaster risk reduction is not merely a 
theoretical construct. Driven by their own experi-
ences, countries are already experimenting with 
new forms of risk governance.

Change is in the air
Many of the required governance reforms have 
already been described in detail in previous edi-
tions of the GAR (UNISDR, 2009a, 2011a, 2013a). 
Managing  disaster  risks  requires  strong  local 
governance and the willingness and capacity of 
local authorities to work in partnership with low-
income households and communities and civil 
society. Strong political authority at the national 
level is required to ensure that policies, strategies 
and legislation are implemented across sectors 
and in regional and local governments. It is like-
wise necessary to fully engage the private sector 
at the national, city and local levels. 

The management of disaster risks needs to be 
part of a broader approach to risk management 
that also looks at biological, technological, finan-
cial  and  other  risks.  In  addition,  robust  social 
accountability  can  be  strengthened  through 
public  information  and  transparency.  Great-
er synergy needs to be generated between the 
management of disaster risk and that of climate 
change, and between those two areas and sus-
tainable development.

These general principles will need to be inter-
preted  in  the  light  of  constitutional,  political 
and administrative arrangements in each coun-
try. While models may exist for disaster manage-
ment, no single model can exist for disaster risk 
reduction. The specific configuration of regula-
tion and incentives and of central policies and 
local implementation will vary immensely from 
country to country (Gall et al., 2014c). Success will 
depend on the adoption of appropriate policies, 
strategies, norms and standards in each sector 
and at each level of territorial government.

The question of where the locus of responsibili-
ty for disaster risk reduction should reside within 
government remains unresolved (UNISDR, 2011a, 

256

Chapter 13

13.6 From risk information to 

risk knowledge

Risk awareness and knowledge must be expand-
ed and enhanced. To this end, the social produc-
tion  of  risk  information  has  to  be  transformed 
and  the  provision  of  information  has  to  be 
turned  into  a  social  process  of  producing  risk 
knowledge.

Transforming the social production of risk 
information
A first step towards the enhanced management 
of disaster risk is through greater risk awareness 
and  knowledge.  The  social  production  of  risk 
information itself needs to be transformed, with 
a shift in focus from the production of risk infor-
mation per se towards information that is under-
standable and actionable for different kinds of 
users:  in  other  words,  risk  knowledge  (CDKN, 
2014; GFDRR, 2014a). Risk information needs to 
be embedded as risk knowledge in all develop-
ment decision-making processes. For example, 
while  finance  ministers  require  numbers  that 
depict risks to the national economy, develop-
ment sectors or global businesses will require 
information  on  the  risks  to  specific  portfolios 
of assets, while land-use planners will require 
geographic  information  on  hazard  levels.  This 
implies the need to move from the kind of global 
risk information presented in this report towards 
far more granular information relevant to specif-
ic users, sectors and territories.

This transition will require change in the way risk 
data and information are currently produced and 
transformed. On the one hand, it will require gov-
ernments to invest in the collection, management 
and dissemination of risk information, including 
disaster loss and impact statistics, hazard mod-
els, exposure databases and vulnerability infor-
mation. At the same time, governments need to 
put standards and mechanisms in place to ensure 
openness  and  transparency  so  that  users  not 
only have access to the information they need 

but are aware of its underlying assumptions and 
limitations.

A change of perspective in the production of risk 
information is also required, from measuring risk 
as an objective externality that can be reduced 
towards a deeper understanding, identification 
and estimation of the causes and consequences 
of risk generation and accumulation in a way that 
reveals risk as both an opportunity and a threat.

Sensitivity to extensive risk
An increasing sensitivity to extensive risk is crucial 
to strengthening overall risk awareness. Because 
of its pervasiveness in time and space, extensive 
risk relates directly to the day-to-day concerns of 
households, communities, small businesses and 
local governments and can therefore stimulate 
and leverage social demand for disaster risk man-
agement. Extensive disasters provide real-time 
and locally specific indicators of how risk is gen-
erated inside poverty in everyday life. As a result, 
disasters of this sort provide a window to under-
stand risk in the here and now, rather than in an 
abstract future.

At the same time, precisely because it is the risk 
layer  that  most  internalizes  social,  economic 
and environmental vulnerability, extensive risk 
is the most susceptible to effective management 
through an appropriate combination of prospec-
tive,  corrective  and  compensatory  measures. 
Understanding how extensive risk is generated 
from  conditions  of  everyday  concerns,  includ-
ing fragile employment markets and livelihood 
options as well as limited access to health care 
and education, not only reaffirms and demon-
strates how risks are socially constructed but can 
also facilitate practical action to reduce them. A 
focus on extensive risk and local development 
may hold the key to incremental and sustainable 
changes in development practices in a way that 
weaves  the  management  of  disaster  risks  into 
the creation of social and economic opportunity. 
Visualizing patterns and trends in extensive risk 

257

is empowering precisely because most extensive 
risks  are  “manageable”  and  can  be  addressed 
through  relevant  and  effective  public  policies 
and private action.

Awareness of extensive risk does not in itself lead 
to  transformation.  Citizens,  households,  small 
businesses and local governments often accept 
and retain high levels of disaster risk because 
of highly constrained access to the assets and 
resources required to reduce those risks. How-
ever, a message that centres on aspects of pros-
perity, choice and quality of life rather than on 
notions of avoided deaths, vulnerability reduc-
tion and cost savings may be able to link sub-
stantive individual desires and social needs to 
the management of risk, even in contexts where 
development choices are highly constrained.

Risk knowledge and changing values
This perspective also has implications for cur-
rent efforts to boost public awareness, educa-
tion and risk information, which tend to reflect 
and reinforce the orthodox conception of disas-
ters as external threats to development. Rath-
er than revealing opportunities or empowering 
actions to change development practices, these 
efforts actually dissimulate the drivers that gen-
erate and accumulate risk in the first place. Shift-
ing the emphasis from awareness of disasters as 
external events towards the process of risk gen-
eration  and  accumulation  in  development  is 
therefore critical.

The importance of incorporating this approach 
into formal and informal education and into pub-
lic awareness campaigns with a particular focus 
on  children  and  young  people  as  well  as  tak-
ing advantage of social media and new technol-
ogies for visualization cannot be overstated. As 
awareness gradually shifts from disaster losses 
and impacts to the underlying drivers of risk, a 
vision of a different way of practising develop-
ment could gradually emerge, as could effective 
ways and means of addressing the risk drivers.

258

Chapter 13

13.7 Assessing the costs and 

benefits of managing  
disaster risks

 

 

 

 

Understanding the costs and benefits of manag-
ing  disasters  will  become  a  key  tool  for  future 
success. This means understanding and measur-
ing the trade-offs implicit in decisions; their ben-
efits in terms of reduced poverty and inequality, 
environmental  sustainability,  economic  devel-
opment and social progress; and who retains the 
risks,  who  bears  the  costs  and  who  reaps  the 
benefits.

Encoding disaster risk metrics into public and 
private investment
Disaster  risk  management  always  weighs  risk 
against opportunity and future threats against 
current needs. A second way in which the man-
agement of disaster risks can be enhanced is by 
ensuring that the associated costs and benefits 
are fully encoded into public and private invest-
ment at all levels, into the financial system and 
into the design of risk-sharing and social protec-
tion mechanisms.

All  development  decisions,  whether  they  are 
related to capital investment, social expenditure 
or environmental protection, have the potential 
to either reduce or increase risks. Risk metrics are 
critical to inform such decisions and to identify 
the costs, benefits and trade-offs implicit in each 
decision.

 If demand were led by governments, business-
es and a financial sector concerned with sustain-
ability and competitiveness, risk metrics could 
then cease to be an exotic commodity generated 
inside a self-contained risk assessment commu-
nity. These metrics could become integrated as 
a normal part of government, business planning 
and decision-making processes.

Accessible and transparent probabilistic risk esti-
mates  are  critical  for  assessing  the  costs  and 

benefits  of  public  and  private  investments  in 
development. In the case of countries and nation-
al governments, reliable and resilient critical infra-
structure then becomes an integral component of 
strategies to enhance competitiveness and sus-
tainability and to attract investment (UNISDR, 
2011a). In business, reliable and resilient supply 
chains are also critical to competitiveness, sus-
tainability and reputation (UNISDR, 2013a).

At present, the application of cost-benefit analy-
sis in disaster risk management is usually limited 
to considering the avoided replacement costs of 
damaged buildings or infrastructure versus the 
additional costs of reducing risks. This analysis 
needs to be expanded to highlight the trade-offs 
implicit  in  each  decision,  including  the  down-
stream benefits and avoided costs in terms of 
reduced poverty and inequality, environmental 
sustainability, economic development and social 
progress as well as a clear identification of who 
retains the risks, who bears the costs and who 
reaps the benefits.

This approach will not only provide a much more 
compelling case for disaster risk reduction but 
also  help  to  clarify  questions  of  accountabili-
ty, namely who exploits and benefits from the 
opportunities represented by risk, who suffers 
the consequences if risks are not managed, and 
who bears the costs. Currently ongoing work to 
measure the costs and benefits of ecosystem ser-
vices (TEEB, 2013) may provide guidance for the 
development of new risk metrics that can enable 
disaster risk reduction to play such a transforma-
tional role.

Adequate risk metrics produced in this way could 
enable both public-sector and business invest-
ment  decisions  to  take  a  layered  approach  to 
managing risk. 

Fundamentally,  this  involves  determining  the 
optimum balance in terms of how much to invest 
in  prospective,  corrective  and  compensatory 

disaster  risk  management  strategies  (UNIS-
DR, 2011a). Normally it is more cost-effective to 
reduce than to retain the more extensive layers 
of risk and to use compensatory mechanisms to 
address those risks which cannot be reduced in 
a cost-effective manner. Similarly, it is generally 
more cost-effective to avoid the creation of new 
risk than to reduce existing risk.

If the definition of costs and benefits is expand-
ed to include not only those applicable to busi-
ness  and  to  government  but  a  shared  value 
approach that includes the value of wider soci-
etal and environmental costs and benefits, then 
risk layering can dramatically change the charac-
ter and impact of public and private investment 
decisions.

Encoding disaster risks into the financial 
system
Disaster risk metrics can and should also be ful-
ly encoded into the financial system. New initia-
tives such as the 1-in-100 Initiative7 have already 
begun to point in that direction, recommending 
that disaster risk metrics should be available to 
institutional  investors,  including  pension  and 
sovereign  wealth  funds.  These  metrics  should 
be used to measure not only the potential risks 
inherent in portfolios of assets, which can rep-
resent a risk to those investing in these instru-
ments, but also the broader risks posed by the 
investments.

For example, if a given investment portfolio is 
excessively concentrated in urban development 
in highly hazard-exposed locations, then it pos-
es risks to investors themselves that need to be 
made explicit (e.g. by measuring the AAL as a per-
centage of the exposed portfolio). At the same 
time,  the  risks  posed  by  these  investments  to 
the regional economies and urban centres where 
they are made also need to be stated explicitly.

Risk metrics can also make it possible to iden-
tify  the  risk  financing  gaps  that  governments 

259

may face when confronted with large disasters. 
As highlighted in Chapter 5, many governments 
lack the financial resilience to absorb the impact 
and recover from a 1-in-100-year loss. Similarly, 
disaster risks need to be considered in a broader 
view of the risks associated with lending to gov-
ernments, businesses or households in hazard-
exposed countries. This encoding of disaster risk 
into financial decision-making should be regard-
ed as a basic principle of sound risk management.

If the broader benefits of strengthened resilience 
and rapid recovery could be calculated, then it is 
likely that the benefit-cost ratio of investments in 
social protection and accessible insurance cov-
er would become more attractive. Currently, the 
fact that disaster impacts such as deteriorating 
health and nutrition or lost educational opportu-
nities are not considered part of the opportuni-
ty cost arising from a lack of social protection is 
an obstacle to increasing coverage substantially.

Disaster  risk  metrics  also  need  to  be  consid-
ered in the formulation of credit and debt rat-
ings, in indices that measure the attractiveness 
of sectors and countries for investment, and in 
performance forecasts for both businesses and 
countries. Disaster risks should also be disclosed 
by way of statutory reporting on the part of busi-
nesses, financial institutions and governments. 
Encoding risk metrics into these broader invest-
ment  metrics  is  critical  to  changing  investor 
behaviour and increasing awareness of disaster 
risks in a broader risk perspective.

Expanding offers of risk financing and social 
protection
At the same time, this broader approach to cal-
culating the costs and benefits of risk manage-
ment may also provide a better rationale for the 
expansion of risk financing and social protection 
measures to low-income households, small busi-
nesses and weak local governments.

Many innovative mechanisms for insurance and 
social  protection  have  been  piloted.  Howev-
er,  unless  the  parameters  for  calculating  their 
costs and benefits change, it is unlikely that there 
will be a significant shift in the current situation 
where the insurance and reinsurance sector is 
overcapitalized while a vast majority of house-
holds and businesses in low and middle-income 
countries have no access to insurance or other 
forms of risk financing.

260

Chapter 13

Extensive risk and social demand
Everyday risk and extensive disaster risk are not 
externalities to poverty reduction; they are cen-
tral characteristics of poverty. National and inter-
national poverty reduction, access to education 
and improvements in health cannot be achieved 
if the accelerating loss of schools, health facili-
ties,  housing  and  local  infrastructure  through 
extensive disasters continues to be ignored and 
discounted.

Social demand for clean water, waste disposal, 
security, employment, adequate housing, trans-
port and access, education and health does not 
need to be promoted because it already exists in 
forms that reflect the specificity of local contexts. 
In contexts with high levels of (mainly) extensive 
risk, this social demand often includes protection 
from loss and damage. As such, the satisfaction 
of basic needs and the creation of opportunities 
for local social and economic development can 
become a vehicle and an opportunity to address 
disaster risks at their source.

If awareness extends from extensive risk to the 
underlying  risk  drivers,  then  the  link  to  trans-
forming local development becomes explicit and 
obvious. The conservation of a local watershed 
may improve the quality and availability of drink-
ing water and reduce flood risk. Developing sys-
tems to collect and recycle household waste may 

improve the quality of the environment, gener-
ate  employment  and  income,  and  reduce  the 
risk  of  flooding  due  to  garbage-choked  drain-
age channels. Regenerating mangroves may also 
help regenerate fish stocks, enhance local fish-
ing activities and protect coasts from erosion and 
storm surges. Providing well-sited land for new 
housing may reduce the cost of providing infra-
structure and services as well as reducing disaster 
risk. Terracing hillsides may increase agricultural 
production and reduce landslide hazard.

This approach is very powerful because it lever-
ages the underlying risk drivers themselves as 
instruments of sustainability. The energy present 
in floods, landslides and other local disasters can 
be transformed and used constructively as ener-
gy for sustainable development. 

13.8 Strengthening accountability 

for risk management

As societies become more sensitive to the causes 
and consequences of disaster risk, responsibility 
for disaster losses and impacts can be subjected 
to  social  discourse  and  negotiation.  Standards 
and transparent monitoring frameworks for risk 
accumulation and reduction can play an impor-
tant role in this context.

Accountability for risk generation
It will only be possible to encode the full costs and 
benefits of disaster risk management into invest-
ment decisions, the financial sector, risk financ-
ing,  social  protection  and  local  development  if 
those responsible can be held to account for their 
decisions. If societies become more sensitive to 
both  the  causes  and  consequences  of  disaster 
risk, responsibility for the subsequent losses and 
impacts will become a societal issue that can be 
subjected to social discourse and negotiation. This 
can lead to strengthened accountability not only 
for realized disaster loss and impacts, but also for 
the generation and accumulation of future risks.

Accountability mechanisms of any kind depend 
on agreement regarding who should be account-
able for what. Currently, the fact that disasters 
are still seen as exogenous shocks rather than 
unresolved development problems means that 
losses and impacts are attributed to the physical 
hazards or forces of nature rather than those who 
generate and accumulate risks. At the same time, 
accountability is rarely a straightforward issue. 
Responsibilities for risk generation may be com-
plex or diffuse, involving actions by both public 
and private stakeholders over a number of years 
and including non-decisions and non-actions.

Due diligence
At  the  core  of  the  issue  of  accountability  is 
the  question  “Accountable  for  what?”  Should 
accountability  for  disaster  risks  and  losses  be 
measured according to what was known and act-
ed on, or should the corresponding responsibili-
ties rather be judged on the basis of what could 
and should have been known? The latter is an 
understanding  of  accountability  based  on  the 
principle of due diligence, and it has important 
implications for the use of risk metrics in public 
and private investment planning.

If the due diligence principle is applied, risk met-
rics not only become a tool for evaluating the 
costs and benefits of managing disaster risks, but 
can also serve as a form of indemnity in the case 
of disasters. This principle may have the poten-
tial to support a new framework for the rights of 
citizens and businesses with respect to disaster 
loss and risk.

However, it is necessary to ensure better access 
to the risk information used by those who make 
investment  decisions,  as  this  information  can 
enable  others,  including  citizens  and  local 
authorities, to make sense of the decisions tak-
en.8 Currently, severe asymmetries in the gen-
eration and availability of risk information are 
associated with a lack of accountability at all lev-
els. However, social media as well as other new 

261

and disruptive technologies and communication 
tools have the potential to break down barriers 
and drive social demand for accountability in risk 
generation and accumulation.

Globally, due diligence is a sensitive topic because 
it touches on issues of national sovereignty. The 
problem of ownership of accountability mech-
anisms for disaster risk at the global scale has 
not been tackled to date. Implicitly, each state 
is responsible for the security of its citizens, but 
responsibility for the creation of risks that affect 
other countries (e.g. through climate change or 
risk-generating investments) is not spelled out.

Accountability and social demand
Social  demand  and  accountability  go  hand  in 
hand: without bottom-up demand, even high lev-
els of political support for disaster risk reduc-
tion will fail to create the type of accountability 
mechanisms required to effectively address fac-
tors such as corruption and the preference for 
short-term profit over long-term sustainability. 
However, experience shows that social demand 
is unlikely to be a response to national policies, 
laws  or  new  administrative  mechanisms,  but 
rather to experience with disasters themselves.

As social media continues to develop rapidly, it 
becomes more difficult to hide or dissimulate the 
causality of risk generation and accumulation. 
Social  demand  for  accountability  can  become 
a critical transformer, as it in itself represents a 
key reputational risk for politicians and business 
leaders alike. Online petition platforms such as 
Avaaz.org now regularly “name and shame” gov-
ernments, companies and business leaders.9 For 
example, when a garment factory in Bangladesh 
collapsed in April 2013, burying numerous under-
paid workers under the rubble, public outrage 
spread rapidly via websites, blog posts and online 
communities. Within days, a number of high-pro-
file online campaigns had been launched against 
popular clothing brands, and within a matter of 
weeks  those  campaigns  succeeded  in  getting 

262

Chapter 13

more than 75 large companies to sign the Accord 
on Fire and Building Safety in Bangladesh in sup-
port of an enforceable worker safety plan.10

Normative frameworks for accountability
To date, the normative frameworks that could 
provide the basis for accountability mechanisms 
are  mostly  limited  to  disaster  management 
(IFRC and UNDP, 2014). Developing accountabil-
ity mechanisms for risk generation is more chal-
lenging, especially with regard to setting targets 
and determining roles and responsibility. Howev-
er, this approach has begun to emerge in recent 
laws, such as those passed in Colombia (Govern-
ment of Colombia, 2012) and in India (IFRC and 
UNDP, 2014). For example, a public interest law-
suit was filed with the Supreme Court of India 
in 2013 against the governments of six states, 
claiming that the national Disaster Management 
Act of 2005 had not been implemented properly 
(ibid.). More recently, and as highlighted in Chap-
ter 6, local authorities in France have been indict-
ed for permitting the urbanization of flood-prone 
areas.

The different powers within a state will have dif-
ferent roles to play: while the executive branch 
may  have  the  ability  to  set  goals  and  targets, 
several  countries  are  currently  experimenting 
with oversight bodies in the form of parliamen-
tary committees, entire parliaments or ombuds-
men.  However,  the  strengthening  or  adoption 
of accountability mechanisms ultimately needs 
to be appropriate to different local and national 
contexts. These mechanisms may include actions 
by national control or audit offices to ensure that 
disaster  risk  management  policies  are  being 
applied by sectors or local governments; actions 
by the judicial branch of government to investi-
gate cases of negligent or malicious risk gener-
ation; assessments by the legislative branch of 
government, for example through parliamenta-
ry  committees,  regarding  the  implementation 
of disaster risk management policies and strate-
gies; and potentially new functions such as a risk 

ombudsman to assist in resolving conflicts.

Voluntary standards
Voluntary  standards  have  the  potential  to 
become a transformational force in strengthen-
ing accountability. They can help raise awareness 
and engagement in risk management by offering 
simple and agreed metrics put forward in a lan-
guage and formats familiar to businesses, local 
governments  and  communities  (UNECE,  2014). 
The consistency and interoperability of risk and 
loss information are particularly critical to adopt-
ing and applying disaster risk metrics, but they 
require  voluntary  standards  to  achieve  those 
ends.

Currently risk management standards use tools, 
indicators and language that can enable diverse 
stakeholders to pool expertise and resources and 
effectively ground both business strategies and 
policy-making  objectives.  But  promoting  and 
widening the reach of the transformative ener-
gy of voluntary standards requires investment 
by  both  governments  and  the  private  sector 
(UNECE, 2014), for example in the quality infra-
structure required to monitor and provide cred-
ible evidence of compliance as well as quality, 
reliability and dependability.

These investments will allow a meaningful com-
parison across geographies and time frames on 
the basis of agreed and clear metrics. Even with-
out a formal certification process, their success-
ful implementation can generate not just a sense 
of shared responsibility but also real shared value 
(UNECE, 2014). In this way, national and interna-
tional standards can contribute to transforming 
concrete  practice  in  communities,  businesses 
and governments, as well as promoting a change 
in the culture of accountability from a business-
savvy one of cutting costs by circumventing reg-
ulation to one where compliance with voluntary 
standards is seen as an investment with a poten-
tially high rate of return.

In order to harness the power of voluntary stan-
dards, governments can play a crucial role in pro-
moting and widening their reach by making them 
available to and encouraging their application 
in  small  and  medium  enterprises,  universities 
and  vocational  institutions,  and  by  convening 
the standardization community for disaster risk-
related consultations and decision-making pro-
cesses  (UNECE,  2014).  The  infrastructure  that 
would be required to successfully support the 
spread  and  further  development  of  standards 
requires investment in skilled professionals who 
can  audit  infrastructure  and  industrial  plants 
on the basis of cross-sector and sector-specific 
standards.

Setting targets and monitoring progress
Accountability  also  depends  on  some  form  of 
monitoring, evaluation and reporting as well as 
benchmarking and target-setting. Another criti-
cal means of transformation, therefore, would be 
to strengthen the monitoring of progress in a way 
that increases transparency and accountability. 
There are a number of ways in which this could 
happen.

The first is to set global and national targets for 
the  reduction  of  disaster  risks,  together  with 
understandable and measurable indicators. As 
disaster  losses  are  only  indicators  of  develop-
ment failures, monitoring trends in those losses 
can be a powerful tool for measuring the trans-
formation of development. Measuring whether 
disaster losses and impacts are trending up or 
down can provide insight not only into the prog-
ress of disaster risk reduction, but also into the 
implementation of the Sustainable Development 
Goals (SDGs) and the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC).

Secondly, in order to capture the full scope of 
progress,  it  is  necessary  to  monitor  risk  man-
agement  outputs  not  just  across  the  disaster 
risk reduction sector but across all development 
sectors  with  respect  to  whether  the  different 

263

underlying risk drivers are being addressed or 
not.

In  order  to  ensure  that  monitoring  supports 
national planning and decision-making, the indi-
cators themselves need to be appropriate, tied to 
specific public policies and assigned clear own-
ership  among  different  ministries  or  depart-
ments. Ideally, key performance indicators for 
key  management  and  government  positions 
should  include  risk  management  deliverables, 
which  would  promote  a  better  understanding 
of  the  risk-related  consequences  of  everyday 
decision-making.

Monitoring  must  explicitly  embrace  actions  at 
the local government level, where most disaster 
risk management implementation actually takes 
place, and it needs to be flexible enough to adapt 
to national planning cycles and maximize the use 
of nationally generated data as well as locally rel-
evant information from communities at risk.

Finally, the monitoring process needs to be tied to 
an explicit accountability mechanism, be it a par-
liamentary review or a national audit body. Oth-
erwise it would have no incisive power and may 
serve to legitimize symbolic actions to manage 
and reduce disaster risks rather than becoming 
a critical mechanism to transform development 
and address the underlying risk drivers.

13.9  

 

 
 A different future?

 

 

If managing disaster risks can enable societies to 
learn from the past in order to change the future, 
it may hold the key to sustainable development.

Currently, surveys indicate waning confidence in 
the political classes and business leaders, as the 
benefits of economic growth are becoming more 
concentrated and less evenly distributed.11 While 
direct disaster losses of up to US$300 billion do 

264

Chapter 13

not seem to have been sufficient to change the 
way risk is valued and priced, the threat of a col-
lapse of the planet’s systems, particularly through 
climate change, does now seem to be catalysing a 
growing social demand for approaching develop-
ment in a different way.

There  is  evidence  of  increasing  momentum  to 
transform development practices from the pri-
vate sector, citizens and cities in some sectors, 
such as renewable energy, water and waste man-
agement, natural resource management, green 
building and infrastructure, and sustainable agri-
culture.  This  is  being  driven  by  a  combination 
of citizens’ concern for the planet, particularly 
among the young, the opportunity for business-
es to improve their competitiveness and value 
proposition by reducing their energy consump-
tion and other costs, and the rapid roll-out of 
new technologies in these areas, which in turn is 
spurring the emergence of dynamic new business 
sectors.

Importantly, this kind of transformation is no lon-
ger restricted to Europe or North America. For 
example, China, India and other rapidly growing 
economies are now taking the lead in both the 
development and adoption of the technologies 
required to transform the energy economy.

While citizens, communities or businesses may 
stimulate  new  development  practices,  change 
ultimately needs to be encoded in law and regu-
lation: a complex process mediated by a range of 
politically and socially contentious issues, such 
as land rights or corruption. 

However, at least these new development prac-
tices may now be starting to receive political and 
financial support from governments, businesses 
and the financial sector at the global level. The 
UN Climate Summit held in New York in Septem-
ber 2014 highlighted a long series of pledges and 
commitments (Box 13.2) which, if fulfilled, may 
catalyse further change.

Box 13.2  Principal commitments from the UN Climate Summit

In September 2014, 120 Heads of State and thousands of representatives from the private sec-
tor, academia, multilateral development organizations and NGOs convened in New York and 
made a number of high-visibility statements and commitments in support of climate change 
mitigation and adaptation.

For example, the investment and asset management community made commitments to increase climate-smart 
investment to US$500 billion by 2020 and to report on progress in the context of the post-2015 framework for 
disaster risk reduction, while the finance industry committed to integrating disaster and climate risk into finan-
cial regulation beyond insurance and across public and private accounting through 1-in-100-year stress tests.

These commitments were made jointly and were fully endorsed by groups of governments, development 
banks, insurers, investors, regulators and relevant science institutions.  The ambition of these pledges is sig-
nificant because a number of them address critical nodes in the global financial and economic system that 
have the potential to become game changers. 

 (Source: United Nations.12 )

What is less clear is how much of this change will 
really  address  inequality,  which,  as  discussed 
in Part III, permeates the underlying drivers of 
disaster risk. For example, globally it will be polit-
ically challenging to agree on equitable and sus-
tainable levels of consumption. However, without 
such a consensus the risks of worsening inequali-
ty, disasters and conflict can only increase (Rock-
ström et al., 2013).

Does this mean that sustainable development is 
unlikely to be achieved or even prove useful as 
a concept? Not necessarily. It may depend on a 
number of factors, including scale.

Risk  is  an  integral  part  of  human  action  and 
development, and it represents a potential threat 
as well as an opportunity. The social processes 
involved in its construction are directly related to 
past and existing development paradigms. Col-
lective and individual perceptions and reactions 
to hazard and risk contexts as well as the values 
attached to disaster risk are constructed in these 
paradigms. To a large extent, values also deter-
mine the direction of future pathways that coun-
tries  and  societies  take.  These  values  and  the 
associated assumptions shift constantly, some-
times  overtly  and  abruptly,  but  mostly  slowly, 

usually  remaining  implicit  rather  than  explicit 
and immediately visible.

At the global scale, change can be accelerated by 
massive shocks to the system that ripple across 
a  significant  number  of  countries  and  inter-
est groups. The 2008 financial crisis and its fall-
out in the years since may be such a shock, even 
though some of the longer-term effects are yet to 
be seen. At the local scale, change may be more 
incremental but ultimately meaningful (Pelling, 
2014). 

From that perspective, disasters themselves are 
powerful agents of change given that they liber-
ate huge quantities of accumulated risk and ener-
gy. They have extraordinary power to reveal the 
multiple dimensions of past development mal-
practice and the underlying drivers of risk as well 
as potential levels of future loss and damage. 

The existential importance of disasters, there-
fore,  may  be  their  ability  to  help  people  learn 
from the past to change the future. They can point 
to transformational principles to be incorporated 

265

in development practice that will include not just 
quantitative values, but qualitative indicators of 
fundamental changes in ethics, morality, equi-
ty, efficiency, participation and accountability. 
From  that  perspective,  disaster  risk  reduction 
has the potential to become a truly transforma-
tional force.  

The reduction of poverty, the improvement of 
health  and  education  for  all,  the  achievement 
of sustainable and equitable economic growth 
and  the  protection  of  the  health  of  the  plan-
et now depend on the management of disaster 
risks in the day-to-day development decisions 
of governments, companies, investors, civil soci-
ety organizations, households and individuals. 
Strengthened disaster risk reduction, therefore, 
is essential to make development sustainable.

Notes

1  http://www.socialprogressimperative.org/data/spi. 
2  For more information on the limitations of CBA and BCRs as 
well as an analysis of recent studies, see Shreve and Kelman, 2014; 
Mechler et al., 2014.
3  There is little information available on how to reasonably es-
timate the costs of disaster risk reduction activities that span 
structural and non-structural approaches and include direct and 
indirect costs as well as those arising from integrating risk consid-
erations in development practice (Vorhies, 2012). However, based 
on similar estimates for climate change adaptation (IPCC, 2014; 
IBRD and World Bank, 2011), this estimate can be considered to 
be conservative.
4  If the discount rate were changed to 10 per cent, total savings 
by 2030 would still be US$2.4 trillion. While it is common to use a 
discount rate of 3-5 per cent when assessing the BCRs of social 
development investments (see http://cbkb.org/toolkit/discount-
ing/), the majority of CBAs for disaster risk reduction projects use 
a single discount rate of 10-12 per cent or a range of rates between 
0 and 10 or 0 and 20 per cent (Shreve and Kelman, 2014). 
5  http://www.socialprogressimperative.org/data/spi. 
6  http://www.emergencymgmt.com/disaster/Chief-Resilience-
Officers.html (accessed 11 January 2015).
7  http://www.un.org/climatechange/summit/wp-content/
uploads/sites/2/2014/09/RESILIENCE-1-in-100-initiative.pdf 
(accessed 11 January 2015).
8  Chris Lavell, commentary during UNISDR-UNDP-FLACSO meet-
ing in San José, GAR15 meeting series on the Future of Disaster 
Risk Management, March 2014.
9  www.avaaz.org. 
10  http://bangladeshaccord.org. 
11  For example, see the results of recent surveys such as the 
Edelman Trust Barometer 2014, which states that “Overall, trust 
in leadership has plateaued. […] CEOs and government leaders 
remain at the bottom of the list for both Informed and General 
Publics, with extremely low trust levels on key metrics” (http://
www.edelman.com/insights/intellectual-property/2014-
edelman-trust-barometer). 
12  http://www.un.org/climatechange/summit. 

266

Chapter 13

267

Glossary

GAR15 uses a set of terms and definitions that 
build  on  those  included  in  the  previous  three 
GAR.

Disaster risk is considered to be a function of 
hazard, exposure and vulnerability. Disaster risk 
is normally expressed as the probability of loss of 
life, injury or destroyed or damaged capital stock 
in a given period of time. Generic definitions of 
these and other terms are available in the UNIS-
DR Glossary.i The way these terms are used in 
GAR15 is explained below.

GAR15 uses the term physical (rather than natu-
ral) hazard to refer to hazardous phenomena such 
as  floods,  storms,  droughts  and  earthquakes. 
Processes such as urbanization, environmental 
degradation and climate change shape and con-
figure hazards; therefore, it is becoming increas-
ingly  difficult  to  disentangle  their  natural  and 
human attributes. Exposure is used to refer to 
the location of people, production, infrastruc-
ture, housing and other tangible human assets in 
hazard-prone areas. Vulnerability is used to refer 
to the susceptibility of these assets to suffer dam-
age and loss due to socially constructed factors 
that result in unsafe and insecure conditions in 
the built and human environments. Resilience is 
used to refer to the capacity of systems (ranging 
from national, local or household economies to 
businesses and their supply chains) to anticipate, 
absorb or buffer losses, and to recover.

Extensive  risk  is  used  to  describe  the  risk  of 
low-severity,  high-frequency  disasters,  mainly 
but not exclusively associated with highly local-
ized hazards. Intensive risk is used to describe 
the  risk  of  high-severity,  mid  to  low-frequen-
cy disasters, mainly associated with major haz-
ards. Emerging risk is used to describe the risk 

cclxviii

Glossary

of extremely low-probability disasters associat-
ed with new patterns of hazard and vulnerability. 
Geomagnetic storms, for example, have always 
occurred, but the associated risks are now mag-
nified  by  the  growing  dependence  of  modern 
societies on vulnerable energy and telecommu-
nications networks. Underlying risk drivers are 
processes such as badly planned and managed 
urban and regional development, environmental 
degradation, poverty, climate change and weak 
governance, which directly shape risk patterns 
and trends. Risk inequality is used to describe 
the uneven social, economic and territorial distri-
bution of disaster risk. 

Direct disaster losses refer to damage to human 
lives,  buildings,  infrastructure  and  natural 
resources. Economic direct losses are calculat-
ed using proxies for replacement costs. Indirect 
disaster losses are declines in output or revenue, 
as  a  consequence  of  direct  losses  or  owing  to 
impacts on a supply chain. Wider impacts include 
longer-terms  social  and  economic  effects,  for 
example in education, health, productivity or in 
the macro economy. 

The Global Risk Assessment uses a probabilis-
tic approach. Probability is defined as the like-
lihood  of  a  loss  occurring  compared  to  all  the 
possible losses that might occur. The exceedance 
probability is the likelihood of a loss of a given 
magnitude occurring or being exceeded within 
a defined time span. Frequency is the expected 
number of times that a particular loss occurs in a 
defined time span. Return period is the average 
frequency with which a particular loss is expect-
ed to occur. It is usually expressed in years, such 
as 1 in X number of years. This does not mean that 
a loss will occur once every X numbers of years, 
but rather that it will occur once on average every 

X number of years. It is another way of express-
ing the exceedance probability: a 1 in 200 years 
loss has a chance of 0.5 percent to occur or be 
exceeded every year. Annual average loss (AAL) 
is the estimated average loss annualised over a 
long time period considering the full range of loss 
scenarios relating to different return periods. The 
probable maximum loss (PML) is the maximum 
loss  that  could  be  expected  for  a  given return 
period, for example of 250 years.

Capital stock as referred to in GAR15, and in par-
ticular in its risk assessments, is the total value 
of commercial and residential buildings, schools 
and hospitals in each country. This excludes infra-
structure such as roads, telecommunications and 
water supply. Capital investment is measured as 
the total investment by the private and public 
sectors in a given year, using the metric of gross 
fixed capital formation (GFCF). Social expen-
diture relates to government spending on edu-
cation, health and social protection. In GAR15, 
relative disaster risk is estimated by comparing 
the AAL or PML with capital stock, capital invest-
ment, social expenditure or other economic met-
rics, such as savings or reserves. 

Bio-capacity stands for biological capacity both 
to  produce  useful  biological  materials  as  well 
as to absorb waste, such as carbon dioxide. It is 
related to the concept of ecological footprint, 
which is calculated by considering all of the bio-
logical  materials  consumed  and  all  of  the  car-
bon dioxide emissions generated by a person in 
a given year. Together the two concepts provide 
a common basis on which to compare the bio-
logical  capability  of  the  environment  with  the 
demand placed by human populations on this 
capacity. Planetary boundaries refer to the lim-
its to critical planetary systems which if crossed 
could lead to dangerous or irreversible change in 
the Earth system. 

reducing existing exposure, vulnerability or haz-
ard, and strengthening resilience. Disaster risk 
management (DRM) describes the actions that 
aim to achieve this objective including prospec-
tive  risk  management,  such  as  better  plan-
ning, designed to avoid the construction of new 
risks;  corrective  risk  management,  designed 
to  address  pre-existing  risks;  and  compensa-
tory risk management, such as insurance that 
shares and spreads risks. Disaster (or emergen-
cy) management is used to refer to the cluster 
of measures, including preparedness and con-
tingency planning, business continuity planning, 
early warning, response and immediate recovery 
to deal with disasters once they are imminent or 
have occurred. 

Governance refers to the different ways in which 
governments, the private sector and in general 
all individuals and institutions in a society orga-
nize themselves to manage their common affairs.  
Within this broader governance concept, disaster 
risk governance refers to the specific arrange-
ments that societies put in place to manage their 
disaster risk. 

Earthquake

Tropical cyclone

Tsunami

Flood

Volcano

Drought

Rain

Capital investment

Capital stock

Social expenditure

 

Disaster risk reduction (DRR) describes the pol-
icy objective of anticipating future disaster risk, 

i  See UNISDR, 2009. Terminology on Disaster Risk Reduction. 
Geneva, Switzerland: UNISDR.

cclxix

Acronyms

AAL 

BCR

CBA

CBDRM

CBDRR

CCA

CEPAL

CO2

DALY

DRM

DRR

EIA

ENSO

FAO

FDI

GAR

GAR09

GAR11

GAR13

GAR15

GDP

GFCF

GFDRR

GfT

GIS

GNI

HDI

HFA

Average Annual Loss

Benefit-Cost Ratio

Cost-Benefit Analysis

Community-Based Disaster Risk Management

Community-Based Disaster Risk Reduction

Climate Change Adaptation

Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean

Carbon Dioxide

Disability Adjusted Life Year

Disaster Risk Management

Disaster Risk Reduction

Environmental Impact Assessment

El Niño Southern Oscillation

United Nations Food and Agriculture Organisation

Foreign Direct Investment

Global Assessment Report

2009 Global Assessment Report

2011 Global Assessment Report

2013 Global Assessment Report

2015 Global Assessment Report

Gross Domestic Product

Gross Fixed Capital Formation

Global Facility for Disaster Risk Reduction

GAR for Tangible Earth

Geographic Information System

Gross National Income

Human Development Index

Hyogo Framework for Action

IDNDR

International Decade for Natural Disaster Reduction

International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies

International Labour Organisation

International Monetary Fund

International Organisation for Migration

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change

IFRC

ILO

IMF

IOM

IPCC

cclxx

Acronym

IRDR

IRP

ISDR

JICA

LAC

LDCs 

MDGs 

NASA

NGO

NOAA

OECD

PML

ppm

ppp

SDGs

SIDS

UN

UNAIDS

UNCTAD

UNDAC

UNDESA

UNDHA

UNDMTP

UNDP

UNDRO

UNECE

UNEP

Integrated Research on Disaster Reduction

International Recovery Platform

International Strategy for Disaster Reduction

Japanese International Cooperation Agency

Latin America and the Caribbean

Least Developed Countries

Millennium Development Goals

National Aeronautics and Space Administration

Non-Governmental Organisation

National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration

Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development

Probable Maximum Loss

Parts Per Million

Purchasing Power Parity

Sustainable Development Goals

Small Island Developing States

United Nations

Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS

United Nations Conference on Trade and Development

United Nations Disaster Assessment and Coordination 

United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs

United Nations Department of Humanitarian Affairs

United Nations Disaster Management Training Programme

United Nations Development Programme

United Nations Disaster Relief Coordinator

United Nations Economic Commission for Europe

United Nations Environment Programme

UNEP-GRID

United Nations Environment Programme - Global Resource Information Database

UNESCO

UNFCCC

UNICEF

UNISDR

UNOCHA

USD

WFP

WHO

WMO

United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation

United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change

United Nations Children’s Fund

United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction

United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs

United States Dollars

World Food Programme

World Health Organisation

World Meteorological Organisation

cclxxi

Acknowledgements

Advisory Board
Chair
Margareta  Wahlstrom,  Special  Representa-
tive of the Secretary-General for Disaster Risk 
Reduction

Members
Laura  Alfaro,  Professor,  Harvard  Business 
School,  Harvard  University,  Cambridge,  MA; 
Wadid  Erian,  Head  of  Land  Resource  Stud-
ies, The Arab Center for the Study of Arid Zones 
and Dry Lands, Damascus; Priyanthi Fernando, 
Executive  Director,  Centre  for  Poverty  Analy-
sis,  Colombo;  Virginia  Garcia  Acosta,  Direc-
tor,  Centre  for  Research  and  Advanced 
Studies in Social Anthropology, CIESAS, Mexico 
DF; Michelle Gyles-McDonnough, United Nations 
Resident Coordinator for Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur; 
Michel Jarraud, Secretary General, World Meteo-
rological Organization, Geneva; Randolph Kent, 
Director, Planning from the Future Programme, 
King’s College, London;  Allan Lavell, Coordinator, 
Programme for Environmental and Disaster Risk, 
Latin America Social Science Faculty (FLACSO), 
San José;  Anthony Oliver-Smith, Professor, Uni-
versity of Florida, Gainsville, FL; Ibrahim Osman, 
Former Deputy Secretary-General, Internation-
al  Federation  of  Red  Cross  and  Red  Crescent 
Societies, Geneva;  Aromar Revi, Director, Indi-
an Institute for Human Settlements, New Delhi;  
Johan Schaar, Head of Development Coopera-
tion, Consulate General of Sweden, Jerusalem; 
Cecilia  Ugaz,  United  Nations  Resident  Coordi-
nator  for  Paraguay,  Asunción;  Dennis  Wenger, 
Programme  Director,  Element  1638,  National 
Science Foundation, Arlington, TX;  Sandra Wu, 
Chief Executive Officer, Kokusai Kogyo Corpora-
tion, Tokyo.

cclxxii

Acknowledgements

Coordinating Lead Authors
Bina Desai and Andrew Maskrey, United Nations 
Office  for  Disaster  Risk  Reduction  (UNISDR), 
Geneva.

UNISDR team
Marc  Gordon  and  Rhea  Katsanakis,  coordi-
nation  of  HFA  Thematic  Review;  Julio  Serje, 
Sylvain Ponserre and Vicente Anzellini, nation-
al  disaster  loss  data  and  analysis,  online 
tools,  graphs  and  maps;  Sahar  Safaie  and 
Mabel  Marulanda  Fraume,  global  risk  assess-
ment; Kazuko Ishigaki, economic analysis and 
research;  Vicente  Anzellini  and  Lucy  Foggin, 
research, references and case studies; Matthieu 
Meerpoel and Julian Templeton, research assis-
tance; Frédéric Delpech, production coordina-
tion and administrative support.

Collaborators
Global Risk Assessment
CIMNE  and  associates  and  INGENIAR  (Alex 
Barbat,  Omar  Dario  Cardona,  Gabriel  Bernal, 
Diana  Gonzalez,  Miguel  Mora,  Mario  Salgado, 
Liliana Carreno, Mabel Marulanda Fraume, Cesar 
Velasquez,  Claudia  Villegas,  Daniela  Zuloaga); 
The Arab Center for the Study of Arid Zones and 
Dry Lands – ACSAD (Wadid Erian, Sanaa Ibrahim, 
Bassem  Kataln,  Naji  Assad);  Beijing  Normal 
University  (Penjung  Shi,  Saini  Yaing);  CIMA 
Foundation (Roberto Rudari, Lorenzo Campos, 
Francesco  Gaetani,  Giorgio  Boni);  FEWS  NET 
(Harikishan  Jayanthi,  Greg  Husak,  Chris  Funk, 
James Verdin);  Geoscience Australia (Adele Bear-
Crozier, Ken Dale, Gareth Davis, Mark Edwards, 
Jonathan Griffin, Nick Horspool, Andrew Jones, 
Tariq  Maqsood,  Steve  Newey,  Victoria  Miller,  
Hyeuk  Ryu,  John  Schneider,  R.  Weber,  Martin 
Wehner); Joint Research Centre – JRC (Tom De 
Groeve,  Sergio  Freire,  Daniele  Erlich,  Martino 

Pesaresi);  Kokusai Kogyo (Noritoshi Kamagata, 
Junko  Tomita);  Norwegian  Geotechnical 
Institute – NGI (Farrokh Nadim, Carl Harbist, Finn 
Løvholt, Sylfest Glimsdal, Helge Smebye, Jose 
Cepeda); UNAM (Mario Ordaz and Krishna Singh); 
UNEP-GRID (Pascal Peduzzi,  Andrea de Bono, 
Christian Herold, Bruno Chatenoux); WAPMERR 
(Max Wyss, Philippe Rosset, Stavros Tolis). Other 
contributors: Maria Ana Baptista (IPMA Lisbon); 
Eric Geist (U.S. Geological Survey); Stefano Lorito 
and Roberto Basili (INGV Roma); Rui Pinho and 
Helen Crowley (GEM Foundation); Hong Kie Thio 
(URS Corporation).

Scientific peer reviewers:
WMO  coordinated:  James  Douris  (WMO);  Bob 
Stefanski  (WMO);  Michael  J.  Hayes  (Universi-
ty  of  Nebraska-Lincoln);  Fumin  Ren  (Chinese 
Academy  of  Meteorological  Sciences  –  CAMS).  
UNESCO coordinated:  Pauline Galea (Universi-
ty of Malta); Ren Jinwei (Institute of Earthquake 
Science, China); Christina Magill (Macquarie Uni-
versity); Alexandros Makarigakis (UNESCO); G.A. 
Papadopoulos  (National  Observatory  of  Ath-
ens); Kenji Satake (University of Tokyo); Roberto 
Scarpa (Universita degli Studi dell’Aquila, Italy); 
Mehdi Zare (International Institute of Earthquake 
Engineering and Seismology – IIEES). GNS Science 
coordinated:  Kelvin  Berryman  (GNS  Natural 
Hazards Research Platform) with experts from 
Arup,  Cankaya University, FM Global, Hannover 
Re,  ETH  Zurich,  NORSAR,  and  Schneider  Geo-
hazards. Other contributors: Robert Muir-Wood 
(Risk Management Solutions - RMS).

Global volcano hazard and risk: 
GVM and IAVCEI (Susan C. Loughlin, British Geo-
logical Survey; Sarah. K. Brown, Steve Sparks, 
and  Susanna  Jenkins,  University  of  Bristol; 
Charlotte  Vye-Brown,  British  Geological  Sur-
vey; Thomas Wilson, University of Canterbury; 
Christina Magill, Macquarie University; Victoria 
Miller,  Geoscience  Australia;  C.  Stewart,  Joint 
Center  for  Disaster  Research,  GNS  Science, 
Massey University).

Reviewers:  Jenni  Barclay  (University  of  East 
Anglia); Russle Blong (Aon Benfield); Costanza 
Bonadonna  (Université  de  Genève);  Antonio 
Costa (Instituto Nazionale di Geofisica e Vulcano-
logia); Charlie Mandeville (U.S. Geological Sur-
vey); Christopher Newhall  (Earth  Observatory 
of Singapore); Jose Palma (University of Concep-
cion); Sally Potter (GNS Science); Greg Valentine 
(University at Buffalo).

Content, country data, and case study contrib-
utors: S. Andreastuti (Geological Agency of Indo-
nesia); W. Aspinall (University of Bristol; Aspinall 
&  Associates);  G.  Atici  (General  Directorate  of 
Mineral  Research  and  Exploration);  M.  Auker 
(University of Bristol); B. Baptie (British Geolog-
ical Survey); S. Barsotti (Icelandic Meteorological 
Office); R. Basili (National Institute of Geophys-
ics and Volcanology, Italy – INGV); P. Baxter (Uni-
versity of Cambridge); M. Boulton (University of 
Bristol); M. Camejo (Seismic Research Center); 
E.  Calder  (University  of  Edinburgh);  G.  Chigna 
(INSIVIMEH);  V.  Cloud  (Smithsonian  Institu-
tion);  A.  Costa  (Istituto  Nazionale  di  Geofisica 
e Vulcanologia, Italy); E. Cottrell (Smithsonian 
University);  S.  Crosweller  (University  of  Bris-
tol);  C.  Dessert  (Observatoire  Volcanologique 
et Sismologique de Guadeloupe), S. Daud (Civ-
il Contingencies Secretariat, Cabinet Office, UK); 
H.  Delgado-Granados  (Universidad  Nacional 
Autónoma de México); N.Deligne (GNS Science, 
New Zealand); C.D. Escobar (Ministerio de Medio 
Ambiente y Recursos Naturales); J. Ewert (U.S. 
Geological Survey); B. Faria (National Institute 
for Meteorology and Geophysics, Cape Verde); 
C. Felton (Civil Contingencies Secretariat, Cabinet 
Office, UK); A. Garcia (Institute IGEO, CSIC-UCM), 
J. Gottsman (University of Bristol); E. Guttierez, 
(National  Institute  for  Meteorology  and  Geo-
physics,  Cape  Verde);  Thea  Hincks  (Universi-
ty of Bristol); C. Horwell (University of Durham); 
E. Ilyinskaya (British Geological Survey); R. Iriat, 
(Universidad  Mayor  de  San  Andres);  Gill  Jolly 
(GNS Science, New Zealand); R. Kamanyire (Pub-
lic  Health  England);  K.  Karume  (Observatoire 

cclxxiii

Volcanologique de Goma); M. Kelman (Natural 
Resources Canada); C. Kilburn (University Col-
lege London); J.C. Komorowski, (Institut de Phy-
sique  du  Globe  de  Paris,  France);  G.  Leonard 
(GNS  Science);  J.  Lindsay  (GNS  Science); 
Kristianto (Center for Volcanology and Geological 
Hazard Mitigation); P. Kyle (New Mexico Institute 
of Mining and Technology); L.E. Lara (SERNAGEO-
MIN); C.-H. Lin (Taiwan Volcano Observatory at 
Tatun);  C.  Lombana-Criollo  (Universidad  Mar-
iana,  Colombia);  O.  Macedo  (Instituto  Geofisi-
co del Peru); G. Macedonio (Istituto Nazionale 
di Geofisica e Vulcanologia, Italy); C. Magill (GVM 
/  Risk  Frontiers);  C.  Mandeville  (U.S.  Geologi-
cal Survey); J.M. Marrero (Volcanic consultant); 
J.  Marti  (Consejo  Superior  de  Investigaciones 
Científicas, Spain); W. Marzocchi (Istituto Nazi-
onale di Geofisica e Vulcanologia, Italy); K. Mee 
(British  Geological  Survey);  V.  Miller  (Geosci-
ence  Australia);  P.  Mothes  (Instituto  Geofísico 
EPN, Ecuador); A. Mruma (Geological Survey of 
Tanzania);  F.  Nadim  (Norwegian  Geotechnical 
Institute); B. Oddsson (Department of Civil Pro-
tection and Emergency Management, Iceland); 
S. Ogburn (University at Buffalo); R. Ortiz (Insti-
tute IGEO, CSIC-UCM); N. Ortiz Guerrero (Univer-
sidad Nacional Autónoma de México; Universidad 
Mariana, Colombia); L. Ottemoller (University of 
Bergen); J. Pallister (Volcano Disaster Assistance 
Program,  U.S.  Geological  Survey);  M.  Poland 
(Hawaiian  Volcano  Observatory,  U.S.  Geologi-
cal  Survey);  M.  Pritchard  (Cornell  University); 
P.  Ramon  (Instituto  Geofísico  EPN,  Ecuador); 
R. Robertson (Seismic Research Centre); L. Sandri 
(Istituto Nazionale di Geofisica e Vulcanologia, 
Italy); D. Sayudi (Geological Agency of Indonesia); 
E. Scourse (University of Bristol); J. Selva (Istitu-
to Nazionale di Geofisica e Vulcanologia, Italy); 
L. Siebert (Smithsonian Institution); H. Smebye 
(Norwegian Geotechnical Institute); R. Solidum 
(Philippine Institute of Volcanology and Seismol-
ogy); R. Stewart (Montserrat Volcano Observa-
tory); R. Stewart (Massey University); J. Stone 
(University of East Anglia);  Subandriyo (Geolog-
ical Agency of Indonesia); S. Sumarti (Geological 

cclxxiv

Acknowledgements

Agency of Indonesia);  Surono (Geological Agen-
cy  of  Indonesia);  S.  Takarada (Geological  Sur-
vey  of  Japan);  R.  Tonini  (Istituto  Nazionale  di 
Geofisica  e  Vulcanologia,  Italy);  A.  Turkecan 
(General  Directorate  of  Mineral  Research  and 
Exploration);  G.E.  Vougioukalakis  (Institute  of 
Geology  and  Mineral  Exploration);  N.  Varley 
(Universidad de Colima); E. Venzke (Smithson-
ian Institution); V. Villeneuve (Observatoire Vol-
canologique du Piton de la Fournaise); G. Wadge 
(University of Reading); K. Wagner (University at 
Buffalo); P. Webley (Alaska Volcano Observatory, 
USA); R.E. Wolf (INSIVUMEH).

HFA Thematic Review
Background Papers
GFDRR  (Prashant;  Rob  Reid;  Alanna  Simpson; 
Margaret Arnold; Ayez Parvez; Laura Boudreau; 
Sergio  de  Cosmo);  International  Recovery 
Platform  (Sanjaya    Bhatia;  Gulzar  Keyim; 
Damon  P.  Coppola);  OECD  (Rachel  Scott;  Jack 
Radisch; Cathérine Désiree Gamper); Save The 
Children (Johara Bellali; Briony Towers; Nick Ire-
land; John Handmer); Stockholm Environment 
Institute (Richard J.T.  Klein;  Frank Thomalla;  
E. Lisa F. Schipper; Karlee Johnson; Gregor Vul-
turius); UNDP (Kamal Kishore; Angelika Planitz; 
Allan  Lavell;  Yasemin  Aysan);  UNECE  (Lorenza 
Jachia); UNEP (Muralee Thummarukudy; Shalini 
Sharma Kanwar); UN-Habitat (Dan Lewis; Patri-
cia Holly Purcell); UNICEF and UNESCO (Antony  
Spalton; Julia Heiss; Aisling Falconer); UNISDR 
(Craig  Duncan;  Sarah  Wade-Apicella;  Sophia 
Scherer); University of Huddersfield (Bingunath 
Ingirige; Dilanthi  Amaratunga; Mohan Kumaras-
wamy; Champika Liyanage; Aslam Perwaiz; Peer-
anan  Towashiraporn;  Gayan  Wedawatta);  WFP 
(Anthony Craig; Randolph Kent; Joanne Burke); 
WMO (Maryam Golnaraghi; Lynn Maximuk; James 
C. Douris). 

Input Papers  
A.  Aguiar  (Universidade  Vila  Velha);  S.  Ahn 
(Applied  Systems  Thinking  Institute  –  AsysT); 
F. Amelung  (University  of  Miami); O. Anikeeva 

(Torrens Resilience Institute); P. Arbon (Torrens 
Resilience  Institute);  A.  Attolico  (Provincia  di 
Potenza); F. Atun (Politecnico di Milano); S. Baas 
(FAO); H. Baba (Japan International Cooperation 
Agency); C. Bach (UNU-EHS); B. Balgos (Center 
for  Disaster  Preparedness  Foundation,  Inc.); 
F. Ballio (Politecnico di Milano); J. Barnard (Inde-
pendent Consultant); C. Bartels (European Cen-
tre  for  Disease  Prevention  and  Control); 
M. Batistella (Center of Environment Studies and 
Research – NEPAM/UNICAMP; Embrapa Monito-
ramento por Satélite); J. Beauté (European Cen-
tre  for  Disease  Prevention  and  Control); 
M. Bengoubou-Valerius (Bureau de Recherches 
Géologiques et Minières – BRGM); N. Berni (Civil 
Protection, Italy); J. Birkmann (United Nations 
University – UNU-EHS); R.  Black (FAO); E. Brink 
(Lund  University);  J.  Bruce  (FAO);  P.  Bubeck 
(Adelphi); J. Burnside-Lawry (RMIT University); 
C. Cabot-Venton (UNDP); J. Ćalić (Serbian Acade-
my of Sciences and Arts); A. Caravani (Overseas 
Development Institute); L. Carvalho (Civil Protec-
tion Municipal Service, Portugal); A. Cavallo (Uni-
versity of Adelaide); P. Chakrabarti (Independent 
Consultant); S. Chang-Rundgren (Karlstad Uni-
versity); T. Chelidze (Ivane Javakhishvili Tbilisi 
State University); I. Christoplos (Danish Institute 
for  International  Studies);  V.  Chub  (Centre  of 
Hydrometeorological  Service,  Uzbekistan); 
M. Ciotti (European Centre for Disease Preven-
tion and Control); E. Comba (Overseas Develop-
ment Institute); J. Cools (Milieu Ltd); A. Coskun 
(Turkish Court of Accounts); A. Cottrell (James 
Cook  University);  N.  Curosu  (State  Enterprise 
Basin Water Management Authority of Moldova);  
L. Cusack (Torrens Resilience Institute); S. Cutter 
(University  of  South  Carolina);  M.  da  Penha 
Smarzaro  Siqueira  (Universidade  Vila  Velha); 
T. da Silva Rosa (Universidade Vila Velha); B. de 
Groot  (Natural  Resources  Canada  –  Canadian 
Forest Service); L. de la Cruz (Center for Disaster 
Preparedness  Foundation,  Inc.);  M.  Di  Prisco 
(Politecnico di Milano); A. Di  Ruocco (Analisi e 
Monitoraggio del Rischio Ambientale – AMRA); 
N.  Dufty  (Molino  Stewart  Pty  Ltd);  M.  Egener 

(FAO); C. Emrich (University of South Carolina); 
S. Erbay (Government of Turkey); M. Evers (Bonn 
University;  Karlstad  University);  N.  Fassina 
(World  Society  for  the  Protection  of  Animals); 
N. Fernando (University of Colombo); L. Ferreira 
(Center of Environment Studies and Research – 
NEPAM/UNICAMP);  F.  Ferreira  Pedroso  (World 
Bank);  A.  Firdaus  (James  Cook  University); 
C. Fitzgibbon (UNDP); K. Fleming (GFZ,); M. Florin 
(International  Risk  Governance  Council); 
J. Frittman (Applied Systems Thinking Institute – 
ASysT);  S.  Frye  (NASA);  F.  Gaetani  (Group  on 
Earth Observations); J.C. Gaillard (University of 
Auckland); M. Gall (University of South Carolina); 
A. Garcia-Aristizabal (Analisi e Monitoraggio del 
Rischio Ambientale – AMRA); P. Gasparini (Analisi 
e Monitoraggio del Rischio Ambientale – AMRA, 
Italy); K. Gebbie  (Torrens  Resilience  Institute); 
S. Giovanazzi (Resilient Organisations); P. Girot 
(CARE  International);  Y.  Gurtner  (James  Cook 
University); B. Guru (Tata Institute of Social Sci-
ences,  India);  R.  Haigh  (University  of  Salford); 
F. Hamdan (Disaster Risk Management Centre); 
N.  Harada  (National  Defence  Medical  College, 
Japan);  M.  Haraguchi  (Columbia  University); 
C. Harbitz (Norwegian Geotechnical Institute); 
S. Hardjosuwarno  (Government  of  Indonesia); 
S. Harwood (James Cook University); K. Hayashi 
(Barefoot Doctors Okinawa); M. Hosseini (Inter-
national Institute of Earthquake Engineering and 
Seismology); M. Huang (National Graduate Insti-
tute for Policy Studies); G. Huertas (World Soci-
ety for the Protection of Animals); F. Imamura 
(Tohoku University); D. Innocenti (University of 
Antwerp);  V.  Ireland  (University  of  Adelaide); 
A.  Iwama  (Center  of  Environment  Studies  and 
Research – NEPAM/UNICAMP); Y. Izadkhah (Inter-
national Institute of Earthquake Engineering and 
Seismology); P. Jackson (University of Leicester); 
M. Johansson (Karlstad University); F. Kagawa 
(Sustainability Frontiers); K. Kalula (Independent 
Consultant); S. Kanwar (UNEP); J. Kellett (Over-
seas Development Institute); G. Keyim (Interna-
tional  Recovery  Platform);  S.  Kim  (Columbia 
University);  D.  King  (James  Cook  University); 

cclxxv

N. Komendantova (Institute for Environmental 
Decisions  –  ETHZ;  International  Institute  for 
Applied Systems Analysis – IIASA); J. Kovačević-
Majkić (Serbian Academy of Sciences and Arts); 
H. Kreibich (GFZ); S. Kundak (Istanbul Technical 
University);  Y.  Kurauchi  (UNDP);  K.  Kuterdem 
(Government of Turkey); Y. Lee (Dongguk Univer-
sity); N. Leitão (Universidade Nova de Lisboa); 
F.  Lindsay  (NASA);  M.  Liu  (Asian  Development 
Bank Institute); L. Longoni (Politecnico di Milano, 
Italy); F. Løvholt (Norwegian Geotechnical Insti-
tute);  K.  Maripe  (University  of  Botswana); 
S. Marsh (GeoHazards Community of Practice); 
A. Masys (Centre for Security Science Defence 
R&D); S. McGee (Applied Systems Thinking Insti-
tute  –  ASysT);  Q.  Mejri  (Politecnico  di  Milano); 
S. Menoni (Politecnico di Milano); D. Miljanović 
(Serbian  Academy  of  Sciences  and  Arts); 
M. Milošević (Serbian Academy of Sciences and 
Arts);  D.  Molinari  (Politecnico  di  Milano); 
D. Montfort (Bureau de Recherches Géologiques 
et Minières – BRGM); E. Morales (World Society 
for  the  Protection  of  Animals);  R.  Mrzyglocki 
(German  Committee  for  Disaster  Reduction  – 
DKKV); A. Muhari (Tohoku University); S. Murray 
(Applied  Systems  Thinking  Institute  –  ASysT); 
F.  Nadim  (Norwegian  Geotechnical  Institute); 
N. Ngoy (WHO); M. Nurlu (Government of Turkey); 
L. Nyberg (Karlstad University); E. Ochoa (Nation-
al Secretary for the Management of Risks – SNGR); 
J.  Odongo  (Independent  Consultant);  O.  Olu 
(WHO); F. Opiyo (UNDP); R. Otoni de Araújo (Uni-
versidade Vila Velha); C. Pandolfo (Civil Protec-
tion,  Italy);  M.  Panić  (Serbian  Academy  of 
Sciences and Arts); C. Pathirage (University of 
Salford);  A.  Patt  (Institute  for  Environmental 
Decisions  –  ETHZ;  International  Institute  for 
Applied  Systems  Analysis);  F.  Pedroso  (World 
Bank); H. Peter-Plag (GeoHazards Community of 
Practice); K. Peters (Overseas Development Insti-
tute);  I.  Petiteville  (European  Space  Agency); 
A. Pharris (European Centre for Disease Preven-
tion and Control); F. Pichon (Overseas Develop-
ment Institute); M. Pittore (GFZ); N. Ray-Bennett 
(University of Leicester); C. Réboli (Universidade 

cclxxvi

Acknowledgements

Vila  Velha);  M.  Reis  (Universidade  Vila  Velha); 
C. Renschler (The State University of New York); 
E. Roberts (King’s College London); T. Rosa (Uni-
versidade Vila Velha); S. Santha (Tata Institute of 
Social Sciences); A. Scolobig (Institute for Envi-
ronmental Decisions – ETHZ; International Insti-
tute  for  Applied  Systems  Analysis);  G.  Seguin 
(Independent Consultant); J. Semenza (Europe-
an Centre for Disease Prevention and Control); 
K. Seneviratne (University of Salford); N. Setiadi 
(UNU-EHS); E. Seville (Resilient Organisations); 
H.  Shiroshita  (Kansai  University;  University  of 
Leicester); R. Sinkamba (University of Botswana); 
M.  Siqueira  (Universidade  of  Vila  Velha); 
E. Skelton (PricewaterhouseCoopers); K. Soojun 
(Georgia  Tech);  M.  Stal  (Global  Risk  Forum); 
M.  Steenkamp  (Torrens  Resilience  Institute); 
J. Suk (European Centre for Disease Prevention 
and Control); B. Sukatja (Government of Indone-
sia); A. Tabacaru (State Enterprise Basin Water 
Management Authority of Moldova); M. Tarande 
(WHO); L. Teixeira (Center of Environment Stud-
ies and Research – NEPAM/UNICAMP; Brazilian 
Institute of Environment and Renewable Natural 
Resources – IBAMA); B. Tekin (Government of Tur-
key); J. Teo (Kyoto University); M. Trujillo (FAO); 
S. Tsolova (European Centre for Disease Preven-
tion and Control); A. Usman (WHO); V. Valenzuela 
(Center for Disaster Preparedness Foundation, 
Inc.); T. Van Cangh (European Centre for Disease 
Prevention and Control); D. van Niekerk (UNDP); 
J.  Vargo  (Resilient  Organisations);  C.  Vinchon 
(Bureau de Recherches Géologiques et Minières – 
BRGM); E. Visconti (Natural Disasters Fund, FON-
DEN);  C.  Walch 
(Uppsala  University); 
C. Wamsler (Lund University); M. Wieland (GFZ); 
E. Wilkinson (Overseas Development Institute); 
J.  Xu  (International  Risk  Governance  Council); 
M. Yasumiishi (The State University of New York); 
T. Yunita (Government of Indonesia); D. Zupka 
(Centre for Education and Research in Humani-
tarian Action). 

Peer review of background papers
Dilanthi  Amaratunga 

(Global  Disaster 

Resilience  Centre,  University  of  Huddersfield), 
Richard Haigh (Global Disaster Resilience Cen-
tre, University of Huddersfield), Naveed Ahmad 
(University  of  Engineering  and  Technology), 
Sisith Arambepola (Asian Disaster Preparedness 
Centre),  Massimo  Bianchi  (University  of  Bolo-
gna),  Alice  Chang-Richards  (The  University  of 
Auckland), Aguinaldo dos Santos (Federal Uni-
versity of Parana), Thayapran Gajendran (Uni-
versity of Newcastle), Paolo Gasparini (AMRA), 
Ashantha Goonetilleke (Queensland University 
of Technology), Makarand Hastak (Purdue Uni-
versity),  Samantha  Hettierachichi  (University 
of Moratuwa), Siri Hettige (University of Colom-
bo),  Yamuna  Kaluarachchi  (Kingston  Univer-
sity),  Arturas  Kaklauskas  (Vilnius  Gediminas 
Technical  University),  Kaushal  Keraminiyage 
(University of Huddersfield), Udaya Kulatunga 
(University of Salford), Bingunath Ingirige (Uni-
versity of Salford), Skevi Lees (Frederick Univer-
sity), Andrew Lees (Frederick University), Irene 
Lill (Tallinn University of Technology), Champika 
Liyange  (University  of  Central  Lancashire), 
Roshani  Palliayaguru  (Heriot-Watt  Universi-
ty), Chaminda Pathirage (University of Salford), 
Srinath Perera (Northumbria University), Kurt 
Petersen (Lund University), Joachim Post (DLR), 
Harkunti  Rahayu  (Institute  of  Technology 
Bandung),  James  O.  B.  Rotimi  (AUT  Universi-
ty), Janaka Ruwanpura (University of Calgary), 
Sujeeva Setunge (RMIT University), Siti Uzairiah 
Mohd  Tobi  (Technological  University  Malay-
sia), Clive Warren,  (University  of  Queensland), 
Gayan Wedawatta (Aston University), Suzanne 
Wilkinson (The University of Auckland).

The Future of Disaster Risk Management 
seminar series  
Osman Alhassan (University of Ghana); Naomi 
Aoki  (Lee  Kuan  Yew  School  of  Public  Poli-
cy);  Tarekegn  Ayalwe  (Bahir  Dar  University); 
Sophie Baranes (UNDP); Roy Barboza (CEPREDE-
NAC); Djillali Benouar (University of Science and 
Technology Houari Boumediene); Gautam Bhan 
(Indian Institute for Human Settlements – IIHS); 

Sarah Bradshaw (Middlesex University); Caroline 
Brassard  (Lee  Kuan  Yew  School  of  Public  Pol-
icy,  National  University  of  Singapore);  Alonso 
Brenes  (FLACSO);  Ian  Burton  (Independent); 
Terry Cannon (Institute of Development Stud-
ies); Gilles Carbonnier (The Graduate Institute, 
Geneva – IHEID); Christo Coetzee (African Cen-
tre for Disaster Studies); Rui da Maia (University 
of Eduardo Mondlane); Mateugue Diack (Gaston 
Berger University); David Dodman (IIED); Mike 
Douglas (National University of Singapore); Jean 
Christophe  Gaillard  (University  of  Auckland); 
Sumetee Pahwa Gajjar (IIHS); Rachel Gallagher 
(United States Agency for International Develop-
ment – USAID); Luis Gamarra (UNDP); Christopher 
Garimpoi  Orach  (Makerere  University);  Pascal 
Girot  (Care  International);  Michelle  Gyles 
McDonnough (UNRC, Malaysia); Kenneth Hewitt 
(Wilfried Laurier University); Gabriela Hoberman 
(Florida International University); Ailsa Holloway 
(University of Stellenbosch); Edwin Iguisi (Ahma-
du Bello University); Ronald Jackson (CDEMA); 
Garima Jain (Indian Institute for Human Settle-
ments – IIHS); Sanny Jegillos (UNDP); Benjamin 
William Jeyaraj (Singapore Red Cross); Jyotsna 
Jha  (Centre  for  Budget  and  Policy  Studies  – 
CBPS); Rohit Jigyasu (Indian Institute for Human 
Settlements  –  IIHS);  Ase  Johanessen  (Stock-
holm  Environment  Institute);  Anup  Karanth 
(Technical  Assistance  Response  Unit  –  TARU); 
Gabriel  Roderick  Kassenga  (Ardhi  University); 
Ilan Kelman (University College London); Kamal 
Kishore (UNDP); Shefali Lakhina (Independent); 
Andrea Lampis (National University of Colombia); 
Jonatan  Lassa  (Nayang  Technological  Univer-
sity); Allan Lavell (FLACSO); Chris Lavell (Inde-
pendent); Donald Low (Lee Kuan Yew School of 
Public Policy, National University of Singapore); 
Tiana  Mahefosa  Randrianalijaona  (University 
of Antananarivo); Roché Mahon (Lincoln Univer-
sity); Elisabeth Mansilla (Universidad Nacional 
Autonoma  de  Mexico);  Adolfo  Mascarhenas 
(University of Dar es Salaam); Peninah Masibo 
(Moi  University);  David  Matyas  (Save  the  Chil-
dren); Franklin McDonald (University of the West 

cclxxvii

Indies); Imen Meliane (The Nature Conservancy); 
Lilian Mercado Carreon (ASEAN); Jessica Mercer 
(Secure Futures); James Morissey (University of 
Oxford); Ilan Noy (Victoria University of Welling-
ton); Richard Olson (Florida International Uni-
versity);  Edmund  Penning-Rowsell  (University 
of Oxford); Robyn Pharoah (University of Stel-
lenbosch);  Jean  Michel  Piedagnel  (Woodseer 
Resources);  Angelika  Planitz,  (UNDP);  Aromar 
Revi  (IIHS);  Dominic  Sam  (UNDP);  Neha  Sami 
(IIHS); Juan Pablo Sarmiento (Florida Interna-
tional  University);  David  Satterthwaite  (IIED); 
Jo Scheuer (UNDP); Lisa F. Schipper (Stockholm 
Environment  Institute);  Antony  Oliver  Smith 
(University  of  Florida);  David  Smith  Wiltshire 
(National University Costa Rica); Jacob Songsore 
(University of Ghana); Marcela Tarazona (Oxford 
Policy  Management);  Daniel  Toole  (UNICEF); 
Marco Toscano (UNISDR); Emily Wilkinson (Over-
seas  Development  Institute);  Scott  Williams 
(PricewaterhouseCooper); Ben Wisner (Universi-
ty College London).

Additional research:
Felipe  Baritto  (Geohidra  Consultores);  Amir 
Bazaz (IIHS); Susan Cutter (University of South 
Carolina); Melanie Gall (University of South Car-
olina); Terry Gibson (GNDR); Stefan Hochrainer 
(IIASA);  Garima  Jain  (IIHS);  David  Johnston 
(Massey University); Reinhard Mechler (IIASA); 
Junko Mochizuki (IIASA); Khai Nguyen (Univer-
sity of South Carolina); Ilan Noy (Victoria Univer-
sity of Wellington); Mark Pelling (King’s College 
London); Ayisha Siddiqi (King’s College London); 
Bill Solecki (City University of New York); Keith 
Williges (IIASA).
 
National disaster loss data
Albania: Civil Defense of Albania (Emanuela Toto, 
Marco  Massabo);  Antigua  and  Barbuda:  NODS 
(Philmore Mullin); Argentina: CENTRO (Alejandra 
Celis); Bolivia: Vice Ministerio de la Defensa Civ-
il – VIDECI (Carlos Mariaca Ceballos, Omar Pedro 
Velazco);  Cambodia:  National  Committee  for 
Disaster Management Cambodia (Sophal Sam); 

cclxxviii

Acknowledgements

Chile:  Universidad  de  Chile  (Alejandro  León, 
Carolina  Clerc);  Colombia:  Corporación  OSSO 
(Andres Velásquez, Natalia Diaz, Nayibe Jiménez, 
Cristina  Rosales,  Unidad  para  la  Gestión  del 
Riesgo de Desastres); Comoros: Protection Civ-
il  Comores  (Abdillahi  Maoulida  Mohamed); 
Costa  Rica:  Programa  Integral  de  Gestión  de 
Riesgos de Desastres de la Universidad Nacional 
– PRIGD UNA (Alice Brenes Maykall, David Smith); 
Djibouti: Centre d’Etudes et de Recherches de 
Djibouti  CERD  (Samatar  Abdi  Osman,  Ahmed 
Madar);  Dominica:  Office  of  Disaster  Manage-
ment, Dominica (Don Corriette); Ecuador: Sec-
retaría Nacional de Gestión de Riesgos – SNGR 
(Dalton Andrade Rodríguez); El Salvador: Univer-
sidad de El Salvador,  Dirección General del Obser-
vatorio Nacional DGOA del Ministerio del Medio 
Ambiente y Recursos Naturales – MARN  (Edgar 
Armando Peña, Ivonne Jaimes); Ethiopia: Minis-
try of Agriculture and World Food Programme – 
WFP (Animesh Kumar, Workneh Hundessa, Edget 
Tilahun, Getnet Kebede); Grenada: NEMO Gre-
nada (Terence Walters); Guatemala: La Red de 
Estudios Sociales en Prevención de Desastres LA 
RED (Gisela Gellert); Guyana: Civil Defence Com-
mission – CDC (Kester Craig, Sherwin Felicien); 
Honduras: Instituto Hondureño de Ciencias de la 
Tierra IHCIT de la Universidad Nacional Autóno-
ma  de  Honduras  UNAH  (Nabil  Kawas,  Oscar 
Elvir);  India:  Tamil  Nadu,  State  Disaster  Man-
agement  Authority  (Ganapathy  Pattukandan); 
Indonesia:  Indonesian  National  Board  for 
Disaster  Management  BNPB  (Ridwan  Yunus); 
Islamic Republic of Iran: Ministry of Interior and 
UNDP (Amin Shamseddini); Jamaica: Office for 
Disaster  Preparedness  and    Emergency  Man-
agement – ODPEM (Leiska Powell, Anna Tucker, 
Rashida Green, Sherese Gentles, Sashekia Powell, 
Fredene Wilson); Jordan: Jordanian Civil Protec-
tion (Waleed Al-So’ub); Kenya: National Disaster 
Operations Center (Oliver Madara, Isabel Njihia, 
Faith Langat); Laos: National Disaster Manage-
ment  Organization  –  NDMO,  Laos  (Sisomvang 
Vilayphong,  Bouasy  Thammasack,  Thitiphon 
Sinsupan, Hang Thi Thanh Pham, Thanongdeth 

Insisiengmay, Somvath); Lebanon: Office of the 
Prime Minister and UNDP (Nathalie Zaarour, Lama 
Tabbara,  Bilal  El-Ghali);  Madagascar:  Protec-
tion Civil Madagascar, (Mamy Nirina Razakanai-
vo, Regis Andrianaivo); Mali: Protection Civil du 
Mali (Mamadou Traore, Diawoye Konte, Aboudra 
Koungoulba, Savane Foulematou SY); Mauritius: 
IOC, Ministry of Environment Mauritius (Venetia 
Bellers, Bhye Muslim Heetun); Mexico: La Red de 
Estudios Sociales en Prevención de Desastres – LA 
RED (Elizabeth Mansilla); Mozambique: Instituto 
Nacional de Gestão de Calamidades – INGC and 
UNDP (Dulce Chilundo, Eunice Mucache, Antonio 
Queface); Nepal: National Society for Earthquake 
Technology  –NSET  (Amod  Dixit,  Gopi  Bashal); 
Nicaragua: Sistema Nacional para la Prevención, 
Mitigación y Atención de Desastres – SINAPRED 
(Ana Isabel Izaguirre, Mercedes Martínez, Gisela 
Guevara,  Carlos  Olivares,  Noé  Ubau,  Ernesto 
González);  Orissa:  State  Disaster  Management 
Authority  (Kalika  Mohapatra,  Ambika  Prasad); 
Pacific Islands:  SPC/SOPAC  (Jutta  May,  Nicole 
Daniels, Litea Biukoto); Pakistan: NDMA Nation-
al Disaster Managment Authority (Nasir Hussain); 
Palestine: Civil Defense Palestine (Issa Zboun); 
Panama: Sistema Nacional de Protección Civil – 
SINAPROC (Yira Marisol Campos Barranco); Perú: 
Centro de Estudios de Prevención de Desastres – 
PREDES (José Sato Onuma, Alfonso Diaz Calero, 
Julio  Meneses  Bautista,  Yeselín  Díaz  Toribio, 
Ingrid  Azaña  Saldaña);  Saint  Kitts  and  Nevis: 
NDMO Saint Christopher and Nevis (Carl Herbert); 
Saint Lucia: NEMO Saint Lucia (Nelda Joseph); 
Saint Vincent & the Grenadines: NEMO Saint Vin-
cent and the Grenadines (Howie Prince); Senegal: 
Protection Civil/UNDP (Sophie Baranes); Serbia: 
Sector  for  Emergency  Management  –  Serbia 
(Selena Markovic, Dragana Djokovic Papic, Zoran 
Jancic); Seychelles: Division of Risk and Disaster 
Management, Ministry of Environment and Ener-
gy (Divina Sabino); Sierra Leone: Disaster Man-
agement Dept, Office of  National Security/UNDP 
(Mary Mye, Mohamed Abchir); Solomon Islands: 
NDMO,  Ministry  of  Environment  (Jonathan 
Tafiariki); Spain: Direccion de Protección Civil de 

España (Gregorio Pascual Santamaría, Almudena 
Bustamante  Gil);  Sri  Lanka:  Ministry  of  Disas-
ter  Management  (Anoja  Seneviratne,  Dinesh 
Rajapaksha); Syrian Arab Republic: Ministry of 
Local  Administration  (Kinda  Muhanna,  Claude 
Amer);  Timor  Leste:  National  Disaster  Opera-
tion Centre – NDOC, Ministry of Social Solidar-
ity  (Lourenco  Cosme  Xavier,  Maarten  Visser); 
Trinidad  and  Tobago:  Office  of  Disaster  Pre-
paredness  and  Management  ODPM    (Candice 
Ramkissoon,  Shelly  Bradshaw);  Tunisia:  Min-
istry  of  Environment  (Hédi  Shili,    Hazar  Belli); 
Turkey: METU (Koray Kuruoğlu, Burcak Basbug 
Erkan);  Uganda:  Office  of  the  Prime  Minister, 
Department of Disaster Preparedness and Man-
agement (Martin Odong, Charles Odok, Samuel 
Akera); Uruguay: Sistema Nacional de Emergen-
cias de la Presidencia de la República – SINAE 
(Pablo  Brugnoni,  Virginia  Fernandez,  Sabrina 
Pose, Soledad Camacho, Ana Maria Games, Pablo 
Capurro); Venezuela: Dirección Nacional de Pro-
tección  Civil  y  Administración  de  Desastres  – 
DNPCAD (Jesús Riobueno, José Scire); Viet Nam: 
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development 
and  UNDP  (Miguel  Coulier,  Oanh  Luong  Nhu, 
Nguyen Thi Thu Thuy); Yemen: Ministry of Water 
& Environment (Majed Alrefai).

Zero-order draft peer reviewers: 
Jonathan Abrahams (WHO); Adele Bear-Crozier 
(Geoscience  Australia);  Johara  Bellali  (Adel-
phi);  Lee  Boscher  (University  of  Loughbor-
ough);  Sarah  Brown  (University  of  Bristol); 
Antonella  Cavallo  (University  of  Adelaide); 
Jan  Cools  (Milieu  Ltd);  Luis  Rolando  Duràn 
Vargas (Independent Consultant); Sergio Freire 
(Joint Research Centre); J.C. Gaillard (Universi-
ty of Auckland); Terry Gibson (GNDRR); Michael 
Gordy  (Independent  Consultant);  Tim  Haney 
(Mount Royal University); Ilan Kelman (Univer-
sity  College  London);  Susan  Loughlin  (British 
Geological Survey); Shuaib Lwasa (Makerere Uni-
versity); Roché Mahon (Lincoln University); David 
Matyas (Save The Children); Jared Mercadente 
(GFDRR); Robert Muir-Wood (Risk Management 

cclxxix

Solutions – RMS); Kenji Okazaki (Kyoto Universi-
ty); Toshio Okazumi (Government of Japan); Aris 
Papadopolous (Titan America); Patrick Pigeon 
(University of Savoie); Angelika Planitz (UNDP); 
Nibedita  Ray-Bennett  (University  of  Leices-
ter); Robert Reid (World Bank); John Schneider 
(Schneider  Geohazards);  Alanna  Simpson 
(GFDRR); Xu Tang (WMO); Jennifer Trivedi (Uni-
versity  of  Iowa);  Jerry  Velasquez  (UNISDR); 
Christine  Wamsler  (Lund  University);  Emily 
Wilkinson  (Overseas  Development  Institute  – 
ODI); Scott Williams (PwC); Ben Wisner (Univer-
sity College London & Oberlin College); Jianping 
Yan (UNDP).

Design Concept
Earth Literacy Program (NPO).

Design and Production (printed GAR)
Editing: Christopher Anderson; Maps and graphs: 
Sylvain  Ponserre  (UNISDR)  and  Stéphane  Kluser  
  Design  concept,  cover  and  style  
(Komplo); 
guide:  Mitsuhiro  Miyazaki  and  Masashi  Tomura 
(AXIS),  Shin’ichi  Takemura  (Earth  Literacy  Pro-
gramme  -  ELP),  Taku  Satoh  (Taku  Satoh  Design 
Office);  Inverted  umbrella  symbol:  Taku  Satoh 
and Shin’ichi Takemura, , inspired by the work of 
Makoto Murase and the Institute on Sky Water Har-
vesting; Design realization: Mitsuhiro Miyazaki et 
Masashi Tomura (AXIS), Shin’ichi Takemura (ELP) ;  
Traduction : Euroscript Luxembourg S.à r.l. (Luxem- 
bourg),  Development  Works  (Le  Caire)  ;  Revi-
sion  :  Valentina  Ermolovich  (Moscou),  Kazuko 
Ishigaki 
(UNISDR),  Fernando  Ramírez  Gómez 
(Bogotá),  Sandrine  Revet  (Paris),  Saini  Yang  (Bei-
jing); Layout: Takae Ooka, Euroscript Luxembourg  
S.à  r.l,  Imprimerie  Gonnet;  Printing:  Imprimerie 
Gonnet  (Belley,  France);  Procurement:    UNOPS 
(Bangkok);    Production  Coordination:  Frédéric 
Delpech (UNISDR).

Online GAR and risk information platforms
Julio Serje, Sylvain Ponserre, Joel Margate and 
Hugo Jacquet (UNISDR).

Tangible Earth (TE) and GAR for Tablet (GfT)
TE platform design and GfT scenario develop-
ment: Shin’ichi Takemura; TE systems architec-
ture: Takahiro Shinkai; GfT systems architecture: 
Jun  Nishimura;  GfT  scenario  development: 
Yoshiyuki  Inaba;  Production  management: 
Kensuke Arakawa; Case studies for GfT: Sylvain 
Ponserre,  Vicente  Anzellini  and  Lucy  Foggin 
(UNISDR); GfT interface design: Masashi Tomura 
(AXIS), Kensuke Arakawa; Administration: Shoko 
Takemura.

Financial resources 
European Commission (DG ECHO and DG Develop-
ment), United Nations Development Programme 
(BCPR) and the Government of the United States 
of America  (USAID-OFDA).   

In-kind resources and coordination support:  
Florida  International  University  –  FIU;  Geo-
science Australia; Global  Facility for Disaster 
Risk Reduction – GFDRR; Global Volcano Mod-
el – GVM; IAVCEI: Integrated Institute for Applied 
Systems  Analysis  –  IIASA;  Indian  Institute  for 
Human Settlements – IIHS; Integrated Research 
on  Disaster  Risk  –  IRDR;  Kokusai  Kogyo;  Lat-
in American Faculty of Social Sciences – FLAC-
SO; Lee Kuan School of Public Policy – LKYSPP, 
National University of Singapore; United Nations 
Development Programme – UNDP; University of 
Ghana; University of Huddersfield; Victoria Uni-
versity of Wellington.

cclxxx

Acknowledgements

References

Acemoglu, Daron and James Robinson. 2012. Why 
Nations Fail: The Origins of Power, Prosperity 
and Poverty. New York: Crown Business.

ACTED  (Agency  for  Technical  Cooperation  and 
Development).  2012.  ACTED  2012  Annual  Re-
port. Paris.

ADPC (Asian Disaster Prevention Center). 2008. 
Monitoring and Reporting Progress on Commu-
nity-Based  Disaster  Risk  Management  in  Viet 
Nam.  Partnerships  for  Disaster  Reduction  – 
South East Asia Phase 4. April.

Agarwal,  Siddharth.  2011.  The  state  of  urban 
health in India; comparing the poorest quartile 
to the rest of the urban population in selected 
states and cities. Environment and Urbaniza-
tion, Vol. 23, No. 1, pp. 13-28.

Agrawala, Shardul, Arnoldo Matus Kramer, Guil-
laume Prudent-Richard and Sainsbury, Marcus. 
2010. Incorporating climate change impacts and 
adaptation  in  Environmental  Impact  Assess-
ments: Opportunities and Challenges. OECD En-
vironmental Working Paper No. 24. Paris: OECD 
Publishing.

AIFDR (Australia-Indonesia Facility for Disaster 
Reduction). 2013. Key Disaster Management Suc-
cesses: January 2012 – February 2013. Jakarta.

Airmic Technical. 2013. Supply Chain Failures: A 
study of the nature, causes and complexity of 
supply chain disruptions. A report by Dr. Alan 
Punter on behalf of Airmic - Sponsored by Al-
lianz Global Corporate & Specialty & Lockton. 
London.

AIS (Asociación Colombiana de Ingeniería Sísmi-
ca). 2014. Historia. Available from http:// www.
asosismica.org.co/?idcategoria=1052. Accessed 
30 September 2014.

Albala-Bertrand,  José  Miguel.  1993.  Political 
Economy of Large Natural Disasters With Special 
Reference to Developing Countries. Oxford: Clar-
endon Press.

Albala-Bertrand, José Miguel. 2006. The Unlikeli-
ness of an Economic Catastrophe. Working Pa-
per No. 576. October 2006. Queen Mary Univer-
sity of London.

Aldrich,  Nancy  and  William  Benson.  2008.  Di-
saster Preparedness and the Chronic Disease 
Needs of Vulnerable Older Adults. Preventing 
Chronic Disease. Public Health Research, Prac-
tice and Policy, Vol. 5, No. 1 (January).

Alexander, David and Ian Davis. 2012. Disaster 
risk reduction: An alternative viewpoint. Inter-
national Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction, Vol. 
2, pp. 1-5.

Alvalá,  Regina.,  Nobre,  Carlos  and  Marckezini, 
Víctor. 2014. Lições aprendidas com os desastres 
naturais: a criação de uma estrategia nacional 
de gestão de riscos no Brasil.

Ambraseys,  Nicholas  and  Roger  Bilham.  2011. 

Corruption kills. Nature, Vol. 469, 13 January.

AMDI (Asian Management and Development In-
stitute). 2013. Final Evaluation Report – Project: 
Joint partnership to support scale up of the Na-
tional Community-based Disaster Risk Manage-
ment Program in vulnerable provinces in Viet-
nam. Hanoi.

Amnesty International. 2010. Un-Natural Disaster: 
Human Rights in the Gulf Coast. Amnesty Inter-
national Demand Dignity Campaign. Washing-
ton, D.C.

Anderson,  Mary.  1994.  Disaster  Prevention  for 
Sustainable Development. Economic and pol-
icy issues. Ch. 3. In Vulnerability to Disaster and 
Sustainable Development: A General Framework 
for Assessing Vulnerability. Mohan Munasinghe 
and Caroline Clarke, eds. Washington, D.C.: The 
International Decade for Natural Disaster Re-
duction (IDNDR) and The World Bank.

Aon  Benfield.  2013. Annual Global Climate and 
Catastrophe Report. Impact forecasting 2013. 
Chicago, Illinois.

cclxxxi

Aragón-Durand,  Fernando  de  Jesús.  2009. Un-
packing  the  Social  Construction  of  ´Natural´ 
Disaster Through Policy Discourses and Institu-
tional Responses in Mexico: The Case of Chalco 
Valley’s Floods, State of Mexico. Thesis submit-
ted in partial fulfilment of the requirements for 
the degree of Doctor of Philosophy. Develop-
ment Planning Unit. The Bartlett, University 
College London.

Arnold, Margaret, Robin Mearns, Kaori Oshima 
and Vivek Prasad. 2014. Climate and Disaster 
Resilience: The Role for Community-Driven De-
velopment. Social Development Department. 
The World Bank and GFDRR. Washington, D.C.

Arnold, Margaret. 2008. The Role of Risk Transfer 
and Insurance in Disaster Risk Reduction and Cli-
mate Change Adaption. Commission on Climate 
Change and Development. March 2008.

Aspinall,  W.,  M.  Auker,  T.K.  Hincks,  S.  Mahony, 
F. Nadim, J. Pooley, R.S.J. Sparks and E. Syre. 
2011.  Volcano hazard and exposure in GFDRR 
priority countries and risk mitigation measures. 
GFDRR Volcano Risk Study. Bristol University 
Cabot Institute and NGI Norway for the World 
Bank: NGI Report 20100806, Bristol, 3 May 2011.
Auker, M.R., R.S.J. Sparks, L. Siebert, H.S. Cro-
sweller and J.A. Ewert. 2013. A statistical anal-
ysis of the global historical volcanic fatalities 
record. Journal of Applied Volcanology, 2:2 (Feb-
ruary).

Baez, Javier, Alejandro de la Fuente and Indhira 
Santos. 2009. Do Natural Disasters Affect Hu-
man Capital? An Assessment Based on Existing 
Empirical Evidence. IZA Discussion Paper No. 
5164.

Baez, Javier and Indhira Santos. 2007. Children’s 
Vulnerability to Weather Shocks: A Natural Di-
saster as a Natural Experiment. April 2007.

Bagstad,  Kenneth.,  Stapleton,  Kevin  and 
D’Agostino, John. 2007. Taxes, subsidies, and 
insurance as drivers of United States coastal 
development.  Ecological  Economics,  Vol.  63: 
285-298.

Baird, A., P. O’Keefe, K. Westgate and B. Wisner. 
1975. Towards an Explanation and Reduction of 

cclxxxii

References

Disaster Proneness. University of Bradford Di-
saster Research Unit. Occasional papers: Num-
ber 11, August 1975. Bradford.

Baker, Judy L. (Ed). 2012. Climate Change, Disas-
ter Risk and the Urban Poor. Cities Building Re-
silience for a Changing World. The World Bank, 
Washington, D.C.

Bamidele, Oluwaseun. 2011. Climate Change and 
Conflicts in Sub-Saharan Africa: Trends, Chal-
lenges and Policies Sustainability. Journal of 
Sustainable Development in Africa, Vol. 13, No. 
7: 35-45.

Bartholomew, J.G. 1908. City of Bombay. Impe-
rial gazetteer of India. New edition, published 
under the authority of His Majesty’s Secretary 
of State for India in Council. Oxford: Clarendon 
Press, 1907-1909. Vol. 8. Available from http://
dsal.uchicago.edu/maps/gazetteer/.

Baudrillard, Jean. 1994. Simulacra & Simulation. 
The Precession of Simulacra. University of Mich-
igan Press.

BEC (Business Environment Council) and CCBF 
(Climate Change Business Forum). 2014. 2013 
Hong Kong Business Survey on Energy Efficiency 
& Climate Change. Executive Summary.

Beck, Ulrich. 2009. Critical Theory of World Risk 
Society: A Cosmopolitan Vision. Constellations, 
Vol. 16, No. 1, pp. 3-22.

Benson, Lynne and Jon Bugge. 2007. Child-Led 
Disaster Risk Reduction: A Practical Guide. Save 
the Children.

Benson, Charlotte and Edward J. Clay. 2004. Un-
derstanding the Economic and Financial Im-
pacts of Natural Disasters. Disaster Risk Man-
agement Series, No. 4. Washington, D.C.: World 
Bank.

Berke, Philip R., Jack Kartez and Dennis Wenger. 
1993. Recovery After Disaster: Achieving Sus-
tainable Development, Mitigation and Equity. 
Disasters, Vol. 17, No. 2: 93-109.

Bertaud, Alain. 2011. Starving Mumbai from infra-
structure investments and new floor space: A cri-
tique of Mumbai’s Malthusian urban policy over 
the last 40 years. Mumbai FAR/FSI Consortium.
Birdsall, Nancy and Juan Luis Londoño. 1997. As-

set Inequality Matters: An Assessment of the 
World Bank’s Approach to Poverty Reduction. 
The American Economic Review, Vol. 87, No. 2, 
Papers and Proceedings of the Hundred and 
Fourth Annual Meeting of the American Eco-
nomic Association (May, 1997): 32-37.

Bishaw,  Alemayehu.  2012.  Poverty:  2010-2011. 
American  Community  Survey  Briefs.  Issued: 
September 2012. United States Census Bureau.
Bomlitz, Larisa J. and Mayer Brezis. 2008. Mis-
representation of health risks by mass media. 
Journal of Public Health, Vol. 30, No. 2: 202-204.
Botha,  Doret  and  Dewald  van  Niekerk.  2013. 
Views from the Frontline: A critical assessment 
of local risk governance in South Africa. Jàmbá: 
Journal of Disaster Risk Studies 5 (2). Art. #82.

Brillembourg,  Alfredo  and  Hubert  Klumpner. 

2005. Informal City. Prestel Publishing.

Brookings Institution. 2008. Protecting Internally 
Displaced Persons: A Manual for Law and Policy-
makers. University of Bern. October 2008.

Buchanan-Smith, Margaret and Simon Maxwell. 
1994. Linking Relief and Development: An intro-
duction and overview.

Bunten, Devin and Matthew Kahn. 2014. The Im-
pact of Emerging Climate Risks on Urban Real 
Estate Price Dynamics. Working Paper 20018. 
National Bureau of Economic Research Work-
ing Paper Series. March 2014. Cambridge, MA.

Burby,  Raymond  J.,  Timothy  Beatley,  Philip  R. 
Berke,  Robert  E.  Deyle,  Steven  French,  Da-
vid  R.  Godschalk,  Edward  J.  Kaiser,  Jack  D. 
Kartez, Peter J. May, Robert Olshansky, Rob-
ert G. Paterson and Rutherford H. Platt. 1999. 
Unleashing  the  Power  of  Planning  to  Create 
Disaster-Resistant Communities. Journal of the 
American Planning Association, Vol. 65, Issue 3: 
247-258.

Burby,  Raymond.  2006.  Hurricane  Katrina  and 
the Paradoxes of Government Disaster Policy: 
Bringing About Wise Governmental Decisions 
for  Hazardous  Areas.  Annals  of  the  American 
Academy  of  Political  and  Social  Science,  Vol. 
604, No. 1: 171-191.

Butchart, S.H.M. et al. 2010. Global Biodiversity: 

Indicators  of  Recent  Declines.  Science,  Vol. 
328, No. 5982, pp. 1164-1168. doi: 10.1126/sci-
ence.1187512.

Buzna, L., K. Peters and D. Helbing. 2007. Opti-
mized response to cascading failures in com-
plex networks. In Risk, Reliability and Societal 
Safety, Aven & Vinnem, eds. London.

Caminos, Horacio and Reinhard Goethert. 1978. 
Urbanization Primer: Project assessment, site 
analysis, design criteria for site and services of 
similar dwelling environments in developing ar-
eas. Collection of photographs on urbanization. 
MIT Press.

Cannon, Terry. 2008. Reducing People’s Vulner-
ability to Natural Hazards. Research Paper No. 
2008/34. UNU-WIDER.

Cardona,  Omar  Darío.,  Lavell,  Allan.,  Mansilla, 
Elizabeth and Moreno, Álvaro. 2005. Avances en 
las estrategias de desarrollo institucional y sos-
tenibilidad financiera de la gestión del riesgo de 
desastres en América Latina y el Caribe. Banco 
Interamericano  de  Desarrollo  y  Diálogo  Re-
gional de Política. Mayo de 2005. Washington, 
D.C.

Carpenter,  Guy.  2006.  Natural  Hazards  Review 

2005. Instrat Briefing. February 2006.

Carter, Lynne M., James W. Jones, Leonard Ber-
ry, Virginia Burkett, James Murrley, Jayantha 
Obeysekera, Paul J. Schramm and David Wear. 
2014. Southeast and the Caribbean. Chapter 17. 
In Climate Change Impacts in the United States: 
The  Third  National  Climate  Assessment,  J.M. 
Melillo, Terese (T.C.) Richmond and G. W. Yohe, 
eds.,  U.S.  Global  Change  Research  Program, 
pp. 396-417. doi:10.7930/J0NP22CB.

Cashman,  Adrian.  2007.  Sustainable Flood Risk 
Management: A Glasgow Case Study – from pa-
ralysis to praxis? Flood Risk Management Re-
search Consortium (FRMRC). June 2007.

Castells, M., J. Caraça and G. Cardoso. 2012. Af-
termath. The Cultures of the Economic Crisis. Ox-
ford: Oxford University Press.

Castillo, Rosa Cordillera A. 2011. When Fishing is 
No Longer Viable: Environmental Change, Unfair 
Market Relations, and Livelihood in a Small Fish-

cclxxxiii

ing Community in the  Philippines. Paper  pre-
sented at the ESF-UniBi-ZiF research confer-
ence on ‘Environmental Change and Migration: 
From Vulnerabilities to Capabilities’, Bad Sal-
zuflen, Germany, December 5-9, 2010. COMCAD 
Arbeitspapiere - Working Papers No. 105, 2011 
Series on Environmental Degradation and Mi-
gration. Editors: Jeanette Schade and Thomas 
Faist.

Cavallo, Antonella and Vernon Ireland. 2014. Pre-
paring for Complex Independent Risks: A System 
of Systems Approach to Building Disaster Resil-
ience. Input Paper prepared for the 2015 Global 
Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction. 
Geneva, Switzerland: UNISDR.

Cavallo, Eduardo., Galiani, Sebastian., Noy, Ilan 
and Pantano, Juan. 2009. Natural Disasters and 
Economic Growth. November 10, 2009.

CDKN  (Climate  and  Development  Knowledge 
Network). 2014. Risk-informed decision-making: 
An agenda for improving risk assessments under 
HFA2. CDKN Guide, April 2014.

CDP (Carbon Disclosure Project). 2013. Reducing 
Risk  and  Driving  Business  Value.  CDP  Supply 
Chain Report 2012-13. London.

CEO  Risk  Forum.  2012.  CEO Risk Forum. Spring 

2012.

CEPAL (Comisión Económica para América Latina 
y el Caribe). 1973. Informe sobre los daños y re-
percusiones del terremoto de la ciudad de Mana-
gua en la economía nicaragüense. Comité Ple-
nario, Séptima Reunión extraordinaria. Nueva 
York.

CEPAL (Comisión Económica para América Latina 
y el Caribe). 1976. Daños causados por el terre-
moto de Guatemala y sus repercusiones sobre el 
desarrollo económico y social del país. Febrero 
de 1976.

CEPAL (Comisión Económica para América Latina 
y el Caribe). 2010. Terremoto en Chile: Una prim-
era mirada al 10 de marzo de 2010.

Ceres. 2013. Insurer Climate Risk Disclosure Sur-
vey: 2012 Findings & Recommendations. March 
2012. Authored by Sharlene Leurig and Andrew 
Dlugolecki. Boston.

cclxxxiv

References

Chatenoux, B. and P. Peduzzi. 2013. Biomass fires: 
preliminary  estimation  of  ecosystems  global 
economic losses. Background Paper prepared 
for the 2013 Global Assessment Report on Di-
saster  Risk  Reduction.  Geneva, Switzerland: 
UNISDR.

Chelidze, T. 2013. Real Time Telemetric Monitor-
ing/Early Warning System of Large Dams. Input 
Paper  prepared  for  the  2015  Global  Assess-
ment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction. Ge-
neva, Switzerland: UNISDR.

Children in a Changing Climate Coalition. 2011. 
Children and Disasters: Understanding Impact 
and  Enabling  Agency.  Research  Report  au-
thored  by  Fran  Seballos,  Marcela  Tarazona, 
Jose Gallegos and Thomas Tanner. May 2011. 
Brighton: Institute of Development Studies.

Chohan, Faisal, Vaughn Hester and Robert Mun-
ro. 2011. Pakreport: Crowdsourcing for Multipur-
pose and Multicategory Climate-related Disas-
ter Reporting. Case study: ICTs, Climate Change 
and  Disaster  Management.  Climate  Change, 
Innovation & ICTs Project: Centre for Develop-
ment Informatics (CDI), University of Manches-
ter, UK, with the support of the International 
Development Research Centre (IDRC).

Christakos, G., R.A. Olea and H.-L Yu. 2007. Re-
cent results on the spatiotemporal modelling 
and comparative analysis of Black Death and 
bubonic plague epidemics. Public Health, Vol. 
121, pp. 700-720.

CIMNE-INGENIAR  (International  Centre  for  Nu-
merical Methods in Engineering and INGENIAR 
Ltda.). 2014a. Update on the Probabilistic Model-
ling of Natural Risks at Global Level: Global Risk 
Model. Global earthquake and tropical cyclone 
hazard assessment. Disaster risk assessment of 
countries for seismic, cyclonic (wind and storm 
surge) and flood. Background Paper prepared 
for the 2015 Global Assessment Report on Di-
saster  Risk  Reduction.  Geneva, Switzerland: 
UNISDR.

CIMNE-INGENIAR  (International  Centre  for  Nu-
merical Methods in Engineering and INGENIAR 
Ltda.). 2014b. Selection of Local Case Studies 

With Fully Probabilistic Hazard and Risk Assess-
ments.  Background  Paper  prepared  for  the 
2015  Global  Assessment  Report  on  Disaster 
Risk Reduction. Geneva, Switzerland: UNISDR.
Coleman, James, Oscar Huh and DeWitt Braud, 
Jr. 2008. Wetland Loss in World Deltas. Coastal 
Studies Institute, Louisiana State University. 
Available from http://www.geol.lsu.edu/WDD/
PUBLICATIONS/CH&B04/wetland_loss.htm Ac-
cessed 08 December 2014.

Conroy, K., A.R. Goodman and S. Kenward. 2010. 
Lessons from the Chars Livelihoods Programme, 
Bangladesh (2004-2010). Paper  presented  to: 
Ten Years of ‘War Against Poverty’: What Have 
We Learned Since 2000 & What Should We Do 
2010-2020?  CPRC  International  Conference, 
8-10 September 2010. Government of Bangla-
desh and UKAID.

Constanza, R., O. Perez-Maqueo, M.L. Martinez, P. 
Sutton, S.J. Anderson and K. Mulder. 2008. The 
value of coastal wetlands for hurricane protec-
tion. Ambio, Vol. 37, No. 4: 241-248.

Cools, Jan and Demetrio Innocenti. 2014. Flood 
early warning in practice: Lessons learned from 
a comparative analysis. Input Paper prepared 
for the 2015 Global Assessment Report on Di-
saster  Risk  Reduction.  Geneva, Switzerland: 
UNISDR.

Coskun, Arife. 2013. The expansion of accountabil-
ity framework and the contribution of supreme 
audit institutions. Input Paper prepared for the 
2015  Global  Assessment  Report  on  Disaster 
Risk Reduction. Geneva, Switzerland: UNISDR.
Costa, Luís, Diego Rybski and Jürgen P. Kropp. 
2011. A Human Development Framework for CO2 
Reductions. Potsdam: Potsdam Institute for Cli-
mate Impact Research.

Crawford,  A.T.  1908.  The  Development  of  New 

Bombay: A Pamphlet. Bombay.

Credit Suisse. 2013. Global Wealth Report 2013. 
October 2013. Zurich: Credit Suisse Research 
Institute.

Credit Suisse. 2014. Global Wealth Report 2014. 
October 2014. Zurich: Credit Suisse Research 
Institute.

Cuéllar, Armando, Samuel Maldonado, and J.M. 
Espinoza Aranda. 2010. Sistema de Alerta Sís-
mica para la Ciudad de México. Revista Digital 
Universitaria, Vol. 11, No. 1, ISSN: 1067-6079.

Cummins, J. David and Oliver Mahul. 2009. Catas-
trophe Risk Financing in Developing Countries: 
Principles  for  Public  Intervention.  The  World 
Bank, Washington, D.C.

Cuny, Frederick C. 1983. Disasters and Develop-

ment. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Cutter, Susan. 2014. Building Disaster Resilience: 
Steps Toward Sustainability. Challenges in Sus-
tainability, Vol. 1, Issue 2: 72-79.

Davies, James, Rodrigo Lluberas and Anthony F. 
Shorrocks. 2012. Measuring the Global Distribu-
tion of Wealth. 2012 OECD World Forum New 
Delhi. 17 October 2012.

Davis, Ian. 1978. Disasters and Settlements: To-
wards an Understanding of the Key Issues. Di-
sasters, Vol. 2, No. 2/3: 105-117.

de Sherbinin, Alex, Andrew Schiller and Alex Pul-
sipher. 2007. The vulnerability of global cities 
to climate hazards. Environment and Urbaniza-
tion, Vol. 19, No. 1: 39-64.

Degrossi, L.C., J.P. Albuquerque, M.C. Fava, and 
E.M. Mendiondo. 2014. Flood Citizen Observa-
tory: a crowdsourcing-based approach for flood 
risk management in Brazil. In Proceedings of 
the 26th International Conference on Software 
Engineering and Knowledge Engineering (Van-
couver, July 1-3, 2014). SEKE ‘14. Knowledge 
Systems Inst. Graduate School, 1-6.

Deloitte and GSMA. 2012. Sub-Saharan Africa Mo-
bile  Observatory  2012.  Available  from  http://
www.gsma.com/publicpolicy/wp-content/
uploads/2012/03/SSA_FullReport_v6.1_clean.
pdf.

Deininger, Klaus and Lyn Squire. 1998. New ways 
of looking at old issues: inequality and growth. 
Journal  of  Development  Economics,  Vol.  57 
(1998): 259-287.

DFID  (Department  for  International  Develop-
ment). 2004. Disaster risk reduction: a develop-
ment concern. A scoping study on links between 
disaster  risk  reduction,  poverty  and  develop-

cclxxxv

ment. Overseas Development Group, Decem-
ber 2004.

Dobbs, Richard and Reemes, Jaana. 2012. Trends. 
The Shifting Urban Economic Landscape: What 
Does it Mean for Cities? McKinsey Global Insti-
tute. October 2012.

Dobbs, Richard, Jaana Reemes, James Manyika, 
Charles  Roxburgh,  Sven  Smit  and  Fabian 
Schaer. 2012. Urban World: Cities and the rise of 
the consuming class. McKinsey Global Institute. 
June 2012.

Donner,  William  and  Rodríguez,  Avidán.  2008. 
Population  Composition,  Migration  and  In-
equality: The Influence of Demographic Chang-
es  on  Disaster  Risk  and  Vulnerability.  Social 
Forces, Vol. 87. No. 2 (Dec. 2008): 1089-1114.

Dossal, Mariam. 2005. A Master Plan for the City: 
Looking  at  the  Past.  Economic  and  Political 
Weekly, Vol. 40, No. 36 (Sep. 3-9, 2005): 3897-
3900.

DSWD (Government of the Philippines, Depart-
ment of Social Welfare and Development), IDMC 
(Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre), IOM 
(International Organization for Migration) and 
SAS. 2014. The Evolving Picture of Displacement 
in  the  Wake  of  Typhoon  Haiyan.  An  Evidence-
Based Overview. May 2014. Government of the 
Philippines, Department of Social Welfare and 
Development (DSWD), International Organiza-
tion for Migration (IOM).

Easterly, William. 2002. Inequality does Cause Un-
derdevelopment: New evidence. Working Paper 
No. 1. January 2002 (revised June 2002). Center 
for Global Development.

Eco, Umberto. 1986. Travels in Hyper Reality. New 

York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.

European  Environment  Agency.  2013.  Late les-
sons from early warnings: science, precaution, 
innovation. European Environment Agency Re-
port No. 1. Chapter 15: Floods: Lessons about 
Early Warning Systems.

EIU (The Economist Intelligence Unit). 2013. Glob-
al food security index 2013: An annual measure 
of  the  state  of  global  food  security.  Available 
from http://foodsecurityindex.eiu.com/.

cclxxxvi

References

The  Economist  Intelligence  Unit.  2014.  Global 
food security index 2014 special report: Food loss 
and its intersection with food security. Available 
from http://foodsecurityindex.eiu.com/.

Engels, Friedrich. 1845. The Condition of the Work-
ing Class in England. First published in Germa-
ny, 1845. English translation first published in 
1886; republished with some revisions, and ed-
ited by Victor Kiernan. New York, NY: Penguin 
Books, 1987: 171-184.

Enia, Jason. 2013. The spotty record of the Hyogo 
Framework for Action: Understanding the in-
centives of natural disaster politics and policy 
making.  The  Social  Science  Journal,  Vol.  50 
(2013): 213-224.

Erian, W., B. Katlan, B. Ouldbedy, H. Awad, E. Za-
ghtity and S. Ibrahim. 2012. Agriculture Drought 
in Africa and Mediterranean. Background paper 
prepared for the 2013 Global Assessment Re-
port on Disaster Risk Reduction. Geneva, Swit-
zerland: UNISDR.

Erian, Wadid, Bassem Katlan, Naji Assad and Sa-
naa Ibrahim. 2014. Effects of Drought and Land 
Degradation on Crop Losses in Africa and the 
Arab Region with Special Case Study on: drought 
and  conflict  in  Syria.  Background  Paper  pre-
pared for the 2015 Global Assessment Report 
on Disaster Risk Reduction. Geneva, Switzer-
land: UNISDR.

ERN America Latina (Evaluación de Riesgos Na-
turales - América Latina). 2010. Belize. Central 
America Probabilistic Risk Assessment. Task IV: 
Hazard, Risk Maps and Risk Management Ap-
plications. Technical Report, Subtask 4.2b - Di-
saster Risk Assessment for Belize City.

European Commission and Comunidad Andina. 
2006.  Pérdidas  por  desastres  en  Perú  entre 
1970-2006. . Lima: PREDECAN and Comunidad 
Andina.

European Commission. 2007. Directive 2007/60/
EC  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the 
Council of 23 October 2007 on the assessment 
and management of flood risks. Official Journal 
of the European Union. L 288/27, 6 November 
2007.

Fajnzylber, Pablo., Lederman, Daniel and Loayza, 
Norman. 2002. What causes violent crime? Eu-
ropean Economic Review, Vol. 46: 1323-1357.

FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization), IFAD (In-
ternational Fund for Agricultural Development) 
and WFP (World Food Programme). 2014. The 
State of Food Insecurity in the World. Strength-
ening the enabling environment for food security 
and nutrition. Rome.

FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization). 2007. 
The World’s Mangroves 1980-2005. FAO Forestry 
Paper 153. A thematic study prepared in the 
framework of the Global Forest Resources As-
sessment 2005. Rome.

FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization). 2010. 
On Solid Ground: Addressing land tenure issues 
following natural disasters. Bangladesh: Erod-
ing rivers, eroding livelihoods. Early Recovery, 
Global  Land  Tool  Network,  UN-HABITAT  and 
FAO.

FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization). 2012. 
World Agriculture Towards 2030/2050. The 2012 
Revision. ESA Working Paper No. 12-03, June 
2012.  Agricultural  Development  Economics 
Division, Food and Agriculture Organization of 
the United Nations.

FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization). 2013a. 

Drought. FAO Land & Water.

FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization). 2013b. 
Food wastage footprint: Impact on natural re-
sources. Summary Report.

FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization). 2014. 
The State of Food and Agriculture: Innovation in 
family farming. Rome.

FEMA (US Federal Emergency Management Agen-
cy). 1998. History and Principles of Seismic De-
sign. Appendix A: 33-42.

Ferreira Pedroso, Federico, Joel Teo, Erica Se-
ville, Sonya Giovanazzi and John Vargo. 2013. 
Post-Disaster  Challenges  and  Opportunities: 
Lessons from the 2011 Christchurch Earthquake 
and Great Eastern Japan Earthquake and Tsu-
nami. Input Paper prepared for the 2015 Global 
Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction. 
Geneva, Switzerland: UNISDR.

Frost, A.R, C.P. Schofield, S.A. Beaulah, T.T. Mot-
tram, J.A. Lines and C.M. Wathes. 1997. A re-
view of livestock monitoring and the need for 
integrated systems. Computers and Electronics 
in Agriculture, Vol. 17, Issue 2: 139-159.

Gall,  Melanie,  Susan  Cutter  and  Khai  Nguyen. 
2014a.  Governance  in  Disaster  Risk  Manage-
ment. 2015 Global Assessment Report on Di-
saster Risk Reduction. Section on the Future 
of  Disaster  Risk  Management.  Hazards  and 
Vulnerability Research Institute, University of 
South Carolina, July 2014.

Gall,  Melanie,  Susan  Cutter  and  Khai  Nguyen. 
2014b. Incentives for Disaster Risk Management. 
2015  Global  Assessment  Report  on  Disaster 
Risk Reduction. Section on the Future of Di-
saster Risk Management. Hazards and Vulner-
ability Research Institute, University of South 
Carolina, May 2014.

Gall,  Melanie,  Susan  Cutter  and  Khai  Nguyen. 
2014c. Transformative Development and Disas-
ter Risk Management. 2015 Global Assessment 
Report on Disaster Risk Reduction. Section on 
the Future of Disaster Risk Management. Haz-
ards and Vulnerability Research Institute, Uni-
versity of South Carolina, May 2014.

Gandy, Matthew. 2008. Landscapes of disaster: 
water, modernity, and urban fragmentation in 
Mumbai. Environment and Planning A, 40 (1): 
108-130.

Gharbero, A. and R. Muttarak. 2013. Impacts of 
the 2010 droughts and floods on the commu-
nity welfare in rural Thailand: differential ef-
fects of village educational attainment. Ecol-
ogy and Society, Vol. 18, No. 4. Available from 
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol18/
iss4/art27/.

Gellert-de  Pinto,  Gisela-Irene.  2012.  El  cambio 
de paradigma: de la atención de desastres a la 
gestión del riesgo. Boletín Científico Sapiens Re-
search, Vol. 2, No. 1 (2012): 13-17. ISSN-e: 2215- 
9312.

Gemenne, François. 2010. Climate-induced pop-
ulation displacements in a 4°C+ world. Philo-
sophical  Transactions  of  the  Royal  Society  A, 

cclxxxvii

(2011) 369: 182-195.

Geneva Declaration. No date. Chapter 5: What’s 
in a Number? Estimating the Economic Costs of 
Armed Violence.

GFDRR (Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and 
Recovery) and UN-HABITAT (United Nations Hu-
man Settlements Programme). 2014. Improving 
Building Code Implementation and Compliance 
for More Resilient Buildings in Developing Coun-
tries: Considerations for Policy Makers. Concept 
Note. October 2014.

GFDRR  (Global  Facility  for  Disaster  Reduction 
and Recovery), EU (European Union) and UN 
(United Nations). 2013. Post-Disaster Needs As-
sessment. Joint Declaration on Post-Crisis As-
sessments and Recovery Planning. Volume A: 
Guidelines. The World Bank, Washington, D.C.

GFDRR  (Global  Facility  for  Disaster  Reduction 
and Recovery), EU (European Union) and UNDP 
(United  Nations  Development  Programme). 
2014.  Guide  to  developing  disaster  recovery 
frameworks. World Reconstruction Conference 
Version.  September  2014.  The  World  Bank, 
Washington, D.C.

GFDRR (Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and 
Recovery). 2012a. The Great East Japan Earth-
quake:  Learning  From  Megadisasters.  Knowl-
edge  Notes.  Executive  Summary.  The  World 
Bank, Washington, D.C.

GFDRR (Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and 
Recovery). 2012b. Managing Disaster Risks for a 
Resilient Future: A Strategy for the Global Facility 
for Disaster Reduction and Recovery 2013 – 2015. 
The World Bank, Washington, D.C.

GFDRR (Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and 
Recovery). 2013a. Stories of Impact: Big Disaster 
Planning Pays Off in Odisha, India. The World 
Bank, Washington, D.C.

GFDRR (Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and 
Recovery). 2013b. Building Resilient Communi-
ties in Vietnam. Project Highlights. GFDRR. The 
World Bank, Washington, D.C.

GFDRR  (Global  Facility  for  Disaster  Reduction 
and Recovery). 2013c. Bangladesh’s Chars Live-
lihoods  Programme  (CLP).  Case  Study.  June 

cclxxxviii

References

2013. The World Bank, Washington, D.C.

GFDRR (Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and 
Recovery). 2014a. Understanding Risk: The Evo-
lution of Disaster Risk Assessment since 2005. 
Background Paper prepared for the 2015 Glob-
al Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduc-
tion. Geneva, Switzerland: UNISDR.

GFDRR (Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and 
Recovery). 2014b. Financial Protection Against 
Natural Disasters. Background Paper prepared 
for the 2015 Global Assessment Report on Di-
saster  Risk  Reduction.  Geneva, Switzerland: 
UNISDR.

GFDRR  (Global  Facility  for  Disaster  Reduction 
and  Recovery).  2014c.  Resilient  Recovery:  An 
Imperative  for  Resilient  Development.  Back-
ground Paper prepared for the 2015 Global As-
sessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction. 
Geneva, Switzerland: UNISDR.

GFDRR (Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and 
Recovery). 2014d. Building Social Resilience of 
the  Poor:  Protecting  and  Empowering  Those 
Most at Risk. Background Paper prepared for 
the 2015 Global Assessment Report on Disaster 
Risk Reduction. Geneva, Switzerland: UNISDR.
GFDRR (Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and 
Recovery). No date. Disaster Risk Management 
in Central America: GFDRR Country Notes. Costa 
Rica. The World Bank, Washington, D.C.

GFI  (Global  Financial  Integrity).  2014.  Illicit  Fi-
nancial Flows from Developing Countries: 2003- 
2012. Authored by Dev Kar and Joseph Span-
jers. December 2014.

Ghesquiere, Francis and Olivier Mahul. 2010. Fi-
nancial Protection of the State against Natural 
Disasters.  A  Primer. Policy  Research  Working 
Paper 5429. September 2010. The World Bank, 
Washington, D.C.

Gibson, Terry. 2014. Local level Monitoring: ‘Front-
line’ – building on the experience of Views from 
the Frontline. Input Paper prepared for the 2015 
Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Re-
duction. Geneva, Switzerland: UNISDR.

GIZ  (Deutsche  Gesellschaft  für  Internationale 
Zusammenarbeit). 2012. Disaster risk manage-

ment and adaptation to climate change. Expe-
rience from German development cooperation. 
Edited by Wolfgang Lutz, Michael Siebert and 
Eva  Wuttge.  November  2012.  Frankfurt  am 
Main.

Glantz,  Michael.  1999.  Creeping  Environmental 
Problems and Sustainable Development in the 
Aral Sea Basin. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.

Global Commission on the Economy and Climate. 
2014. Better Growth, Better Climate: The New 
Climate  Economy  Report.  Washington,  D.C.: 
World Resources Institute.

GNDR (Global Network for Disaster Reduction). 
2013.  Views  from  the  Frontline:  Beyond  2015. 
Findings from VFL 2013 and recommendations 
for  a  post-2015  disaster  risk  reduction  frame-
work to strengthen the resilience of communities 
to all hazards.

GNOCDC (Greater New Orleans Community Data 
Center). 2013. The New Orleans Index at Eight: 
Measuring Greater New Orleans’ Progress To-
ward Prosperity. August 2013.

Gonzalez, Maria and Alfred Schipke. 2011. Bank-
ers on the Beach. Finance & Development, June 
2011: 42-45.

Goodell,  Jeff.  2013.  Goodbye  Miami.  Rolling 

Stone, 20 June 2013.

Government of Australia. No date. Natural Disas-
ter  Relief  and  Recovery  Arrangements.  Emer-
gency Management Australia.

Government of Bhutan. 2013. Disaster Manage-

ment Act of Bhutan 2013.

Government  of  Burkina  Faso.  2014.  Loi  No. 
012/2014, Portant Loi d’Orientation relative à la 
prévention et à la gestion des risques, des crises 
humanitaires et des catastrophes. Assemblée 
Nationale.

Government of Colombia. 1988. Ley 46 de 1988 
(Noviembre 2) Diario Oficial No 38.559, del 2 de 
noviembre de 1988 Por la cual se crea y organiza 
el Sistema Nacional para la Prevención y Aten-
ción de Desastres, se otorga facultades extraor-
dinarias al Presidente de la República, y se dic-
tan otras disposiciones. Congreso de Colombia, 

1988.

Government of Colombia. 2010. Reglamento co-
lombiano de construcción sismo resistente NSR-
10. Ministerio de Ambiente, Vivienda y Desar-
rollo Territorial. Marzo de 2010, Bogotá.

Government of Colombia. 2012. Ley No. 1523 del 
24 de Abril de 2012. Por el cual se adopta la políti-
ca nacional de gestión del riesgo de desastres y 
se establece el sistema nacional de gestión del 
riesgo de desastres y se dictan otras disposicio-
nes.

Government of France. 1990. Environnement et 
prévention  des  risques  technologiques  et  na-
turels majeurs. Décret No. 90-918 du 11 octobre 
1990. Journal Officiel de la République Fran-
çaise.

Government of France. 2004. Loi n°87-565 du 22 
juillet 1987 relative à l’organisation de la sécurité 
civile, à la protection de la forêt contre l’incendie 
et à la prévention des risques majeurs.

Government of India. 2004. Disaster Management 
in India. Government of India Ministry of Home 
Affairs.

Government of Japan. 2011. Report of the Com-
mittee for Technical Investigation on Counter-
measures for Earthquakes and Tsunamis Based 
on the Lessons Learned from the “2011 off the 
Pacific coast of Tohoku Earthquake”.  28  Sep-
tember  2011.  Central  Disaster  Management 
Council.

Government of Japan. 2012. Floods in Thailand 
that caused a significant impact on trade envi-
ronment, etc. of neighbouring nations/regions, 
including Japan. Section 3.

Government of Myanmar. 2012. Myanmar Action 
Plan on Disaster Risk Reduction (MAPDRR). The 
Republic of The Union of Myanmar. Supported 
by ADPC.

Government of Nicaragua. 2005. Informe Nicara-
gua - CMRD-Japón 2005. Secretaría Ejecutiva 
del Sistema Nacional para la Prevención, Mitig-
ación y Atención de Desastres (SE-SINAPRED).
Government of Odisha. 2013. Disaster Manage-
ment Plan. Government of Odisha Housing & 
Urban Development Department.

cclxxxix

Government of Paraguay. 2013. Política Nacional 
de Gestión y Reducción de Riesgos. Secretaría 
de Emergencia Nacional y Gobierno Nacional.

Government of Scotland. 2009. National Forum on 
Drug Related Deaths in Scotland Annual Report 
2008-09. Edinburgh: The Scottish Government.
Government of the Republic of Haiti. 2010. Haiti 
Earthquake PDNA: Assessment of damage, loss-
es, general and sectoral needs. Annex to the Ac-
tion Plan for National Recovery and Develop-
ment of Haiti.

Government of the Republic of Serbia. 2014. Ser-
bia  Floods  2014.  United  Nations  Serbia,  The 
World Bank and The European Union. Belgrade.
Government of the United Kingdom. 2011. Japa-
nese earthquake and tsunami: Implications for 
the UK nuclear industry. Final report. HM Chief 
Inspector  of  Nuclear  Installations.  Office  for 
Nuclear Regulation. September 2011.

Government of the United Kingdom. 2012. Reduc-
ing Risks of Future Disasters: Priorities for Deci-
sion Makers. Final Project Report. Government 
Office for Science and Foresight. London.

Gow,  Gordon  and  Nuwan  Waidyanatha.  2011. 
Mobile Phones and the Challenge of Sustain-
able  Early  Warning  Systems:  Reflections  on 
HazInfo Sri Lanka and opportunities for future 
research. In Mobile Communication: Dimensions 
of Social Policy, James E. Katz, ed.: 63-74. New 
Brunswick, New Jersey: Transaction Publish-
ers.

Green Roofs for Healthy Cities. 2014. 2013 Annual 

Green Roof Industry Survey. April 2014.

Greenstein,  Rosalind,  Francisco  Sabatini  and 
Martim Smolka. 2000. Urban Spatial Segrega-
tion:  Forces,  Consequences,  and  Policy  Re-
sponses. Land Lines, Vol. 12, No. 6 (November).
GSMA  (Groupe  Speciale  Mobile  Association). 
2013. Mobile Network Public Warning Systems 
and the Rise of Cell-Broadcast. January 2013. 
London.

Gundecha, Pritam and Huan Liu. 2012. Mining So-
cial Media: A Brief Introduction. INFORMS Tutori-
als in Operation Research.

GVM (Global Volcano Model). 2014a. Global Volca-

ccxc

References

nic Hazards and Risk. Summary background pa-
per. Background Paper prepared for the 2015 
Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Re-
duction. Geneva, Switzerland: UNISDR.

GVM (Global Volcano Model). 2014b. Global Volca-
nic Hazards and Risk. Technical background pa-
per. Background Paper prepared for the 2015 
Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Re-
duction. Geneva, Switzerland: UNISDR.

Haavisto, Ira, Ruth Banomyong, Gyöngyi Kovàcs 
and Karen Spens. 2013. Supply Chain Co-ordi-
nation in Cascading Disasters. Paper presented 
at the International Symposium on Marketing, 
Logistics, and Business (MLB), Nagoya, Japan. 
September 2013.

Hagman, G. 1984. Prevention better than cure: re-
port on human and environmental disasters in 
the Third World. Stockholm: Swedish Red Cross.
Hallegatte,  Stéphane,  Nicola  Ranger,  Sumana 
Bhattacharya,  Murthy  Bachu,  Satya  Priya, 
K.  Dhore,  Farhat  Rafique,  P.  Mathur,  Nicolas 
Naville, Fanny Henriet, Anand Patwardhan, K. 
Narayanan, Subimal Ghosh, Subhankar Karma-
kar, Unmesh Patnaik, Abhijat Abhayankar, San-
jib Pohit, Jan Corfee-Morlot and Celine Herwei-
jer. 2010. Flood Risks, Climate Change Impacts 
and Adaptation Benefits in Mumbai: An Initial 
Assessment  of  Socio-Economic  Consequences 
of Present and Climate Change-Induced Flood 
Risks and of Possible Adaptation Options. OECD 
Environment  Working  Papers  No.  27.  Paris: 
OECD Publishing.

Hannigan, John. 2012. Disasters Without Borders: 
The International Politics of Natural Disasters. 
Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.

Haraguchi, Masahiko and Kim, Soojun. 2014. Criti-
cal Infrastructure Systems: A case study of the 
interconnectedness of risks posed by Hurricane 
Sandy for New York City. Input Paper prepared 
for the 2015 Global Assessment Report on Di-
saster  Risk  Reduction.  Geneva, Switzerland: 
UNISDR.

Harbitz, C.B., S. Glimsdal, S. Bazin, N. Zamora, F. 
Løvholt, H. Bungum, H. Smebye, P. Gauer and 
O. Kjekstad. 2012. Tsunami hazard in the Ca-

ribbean: Regional exposure derived from cred-
ible worst case scenarios. Continental Shelf Re-
search, Vol. 38, 15 April 2012: 1-23.

Harvey, David. 1985. The Urbanization of Capital. 
First Edition (US), First Printing edition (Novem-
ber 1, 1985). Johns Hopkins University Press.

Harvey,  David.  1989.  The  Condition  of  Postmo-
dernity: An enquiry into the origins of cultural 
change. Cambridge and Oxford, UK: Blackwell 
Publishers.

Harvey, David. 2010. The Enigma of Capital and 
the Crises of Capitalism. New York: Oxford Uni-
versity Press.

Hasan,  Arif,  Asiya  Sadiq  and  Suneela  Ahmed. 
2010. Planning for high density in low-income 
settlements:  Four  case  studies  from  Karachi. 
Human Settlements Working Paper Series. Ur-
banization and emerging population issues - 3. 
UNFPA, IIED, March 2010.

Helliwell, John, Richard Layard and Jeffrey Sachs, 
eds. 2013. World Happiness Report 2013. Avail-
able  from  http://unsdsn.org/wp-content/up-
loads/2014/02/WorldHappinessReport2013_
online.pdf

Henderson, J. Vernon, Mark Roberts and Adam 
Storeygard. 2013. Is Urbanization in Sub-Saha-
ran Africa Different? Policy Research Working 
Paper 6481. The World Bank Development Re-
search Group, Environment and Energy Team. 
June 2013. The World Bank, Washington, D.C.

Hewitt, Kenneth, ed. 1983. Interpretations of Ca-
lamity  from  the  Viewpoint  of  Human  Ecology. 
The Risks and Hazard Series I. Allan & Unwin.

Hewitt,  Kenneth.  2013.  Disasters  in  ‘develop-
ment’  contexts:  Contradictions  and  options 
for a preventive approach. Jàmbá: Journal of 
Disaster Risk Studies 5(2), Art. #91.

Hochrainer, Stefan. 2009. Assessing the Macroeco-
nomic Impacts of Natural Disasters: Are there 
any? Policy Research Working Paper 4968. The 
World Bank, Washington, D.C.

Hochrainer-Stigler,  Stefan,  Reinhard  Mechler, 
Georg Pflug and Keith Williges. 2014. Funding 
public adaptation to climate-related disasters. 
Estimates for a global fund. Global Environmen-

tal Change 25 (2014): 87-96.

Holley, Cameron, Neil Gunningham and Clifford 
Shearing. 2011. The New Environmental Gover-
nance. Earthscan, Routledge.

Holloway, Ailsa. 2014.  Strategic mobilization of 
higher education institutions in disaster risk re-
duction capacity-building: Experience of Perip-
eri U. Input Paper prepared for the 2015 Global 
Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction. 
Geneva, Switzerland: UNISDR.

Hulme, David and Green, Maia. 2005. From Cor-
relates and Characteristics to Causes: Thinking 
About Poverty from a Chronic Poverty Perspec-
tive. World Development, Vol. 33, No. 6: 867-879.
IANSA  (International  Action  Network  on  Small 
Arms), Oxfam International and Safer World. 
2007.  Africa’s  missing  billions:  International 
arms flows and the cost of conflict. Briefing Pa-
per 107.

IASC (Inter-Agency Standing Committee). 2006. 
Women, Girls, Boys and Men: Different Needs, 
Equal Opportunities. IASC Gender Handbook in 
Humanitarian Action. December 2006.

IASC (Inter-Agency Standing Committee). 2009. 
Initial  Strategy  Paper:  Meeting  Humanitarian 
Challenges  in  Urban  Areas.  11-13  November 
2009, Conference Room 10, UN-HABITAT Head-
quarters. Nairobi.

IASC-WFP  (Inter-Agency  Standing  Committee 
and World Food Programme). 2014. Prepared-
ness action in present and future context, les-
sons learned and to be learned. Background Pa-
per prepared for the 2015 Global Assessment 
Report  on  Disaster  Risk  Reduction.  Geneva, 
Switzerland: UNISDR.

ICSU-LAC (International Council for Science, Re-
gional Office for Latin America and the Carib-
bean). 2010. Understanding and Managing Risk 
Associated with Natural Hazards: A Comprehen-
sive Approach for Latin America and the Carib-
bean. Science for a better life: Developing Re-
gional Scientific Programmes in Priority Areas 
for Latin America and the Caribbean.

IDMC (Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre). 
2014. Global Estimates 2014: People displaced 

ccxci

by disasters. September 2014.

UNISDR.

IEA  (International  Energy  Agency).  2013.  CO2 
Emissions from fuel combustion. Highlights. IEA 
Statistics. Paris.

IFRC (International Federation of Red Cross and 
Red Crescent Societies) and UNDP (United Na-
tions Development Programme). 2014. Effective 
law and regulation for disaster risk reduction: a 
multi-country report. New York.

IFRC (International Federation of Red Cross and 
Red Crescent Societies). 2011. International Di-
saster Response Law (IDRL) in Nepal: A study on 
strengthening legal preparedness for interna-
tional disaster response. Nepal Red Cross and 
IFRC. Geneva.

IFRC (International Federation of Red Cross and 
Red Crescent Societies). 2014. Emergency ap-
peal operation update Philippines: Typhoon Hai-
yan. Emergency appeal n° MDRPH014, GLIDE n° 
TC-2013-000139-PHL, Operation update n°8, 4 
September 2014.

ILO  (International  Labour  Office).  2013.  Global 
Wage  Report  2012/13:  Wages  and  equitable 
growth. Geneva: International Labour Office.

IMF (International Monetary Fund). 2009. Global 
Financial  Stability  Report:  Responding  to  the 
Financial Crisis and Measuring Systemic Risks. 
World Economic and Financial Surveys. April 
2009. Washington, D.C.

INGENIAR. 2010. Programa de Reducción de la Vul-
nerabilidad Fiscal del Estado ante Desastres Na-
turales. Apoyo al Fortalecimiento de las Políticas 
e Instrumentos Financieros del Sistema Nacio-
nal para la Prevención y Atención de Desastres 
(SNPAD)  de Colombia  -DGR-. Documento  con 
bases de formulación de la política (Documen-
to técnico síntesis de soporte para la propuesta 
normativa). Diciembre de 2010.

Ingirige, Bingunath, Dilanthi Amaratunga, Mohan 
Kumaraswamy,  Champika  Liyanage,  Aslam 
Perwaiz, Peeranan Towashiraporn and Gayan 
Wedawatta. 2014. Private investment in Disaster 
Risk Management. Background Paper prepared 
for the 2015 Global Assessment Report on Di-
saster  Risk  Reduction.  Geneva, Switzerland: 

ccxcii

References

Ingram, Jane, Guillermo Franco, Cristina Rum-
baitis-del  Rio  and  Bjian  Khazai.  2006.  Post-
disaster  recovery  dilemmas:  challenges  in 
balancing short-term and long-term needs for 
vulnerability reduction. Environmental Science 
and Policy, Vol. 9, Issues 7-8: 607-613.

International Law Commission. 2013. Sixth report 
on the protection of persons in the event of disas-
ters. Sixty-fifth session Geneva, 6 May-7 June 
and 8 July-9 August 2013, by Eduardo Valencia-
Ospina,  Special  Rapporteur.  Geneva:  United 
Nations.

Inter-Parliamentary Union. 2014. 130th Assembly 

of the Inter-Parliamentary Union.

IOM (International Organization for Migration). 
No date. Human mobility: shaping vulnerability 
and resilience to disasters. Background paper 
to the HFA2 dialogue.

IPCC  (Intergovernmental  Panel  on  Climate 
Change). 2012. Managing the Risks of Extreme 
Events and Disasters to Advance Climate Change 
Adaptation. Full Report. (Field, C.B., V. Barros, 
T.F. Stocker, D. Qin, D.J. Dokken, K.L. Ebi, M.D. 
Mastrandrea, K.J. Mach, G.-K. Plattner, S.K. Al-
len, M. Tignor and P.M. Midgley, eds.). A Special 
Report of Working Groups I and II of the Inter-
governmental Panel on Climate Change. Cam-
bridge  and  New  York:  Cambridge  University 
Press.

IPCC  (Intergovernmental  Panel  on  Climate 
Change). 2013. Climate Change 2013: The Physi-
cal Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group 
I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergov-
ernmental Panel on Climate Change. Full Report. 
Stocker, T.F., D. Qin, G.-K. Plattner, M. Tignor, 
S.K. Allen, J. Boschung, A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex 
and  P.M.  Midgley,  eds.  Cambridge  and  New 
York: Cambridge University Press.

IPCC  (Intergovernmental  Panel  on  Climate 
Change). 2014. Climate Change 2014: Impacts, 
Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Working Group II. 
Cambridge and New York: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.

IRDR  (Integrated  Research  on  Disaster  Risk). 

2013. Strategic Plan 2013-2017. Beijing.

IRP (International Recovery Platform). 2014. The-
matic Summary Report. Background Paper pre-
pared for the 2015 Global Assessment Report 
on Disaster Risk Reduction. Geneva, Switzer-
land: UNISDR.

Ishiwatari, Mikio. 2013. Disaster Risk Management 
at the National Level. ADBI Working Paper Se-
ries. No. 448 November 2013. Tokyo: Asian De-
velopment Bank Institute.

International Telecommunications Union. 2013. 
The World in 2013: ICT Facts and Figures. Febru-
ary 2013. Geneva.

IUCN  (International  Union  for  Conservation  of 
Nature). 2012. Tacaná Watersheds Guatemala & 
Mexico: Transboundary water governance and 
implementation of IWRM through local commu-
nity action. IUCN Water Programme. Demon-
stration Case Study No. 5. Water and Nature 
Initiative.

Jackson, Tim. 2009. Prosperity Without Growth: 
Economics for a Finite Planet. London, UK and 
Sterling, VA: Earthscan Publishing.

Jayanthi, Harikishan. 2014. Assessing the agricul-
tural  drought  risks  for  principal  rainfed  crops 
due to changing climate scenarios using satellite 
estimated rainfall in Africa. Background Paper 
prepared for the 2015 Global Assessment Re-
port on Disaster Risk Reduction.

Jenkins,  Alan,  Juhu  Thukral,  Kevin  Hsu,  Ner-
issa Kunakemakorn and Megan Haberle. 2012. 
Promoting Opportunity through Impact State-
ments: A Tool for Policymakers to Assess Equity. 
American Constitution Society Issue Brief. April 
2012. Washington, D.C.

Johnson, C., I. Adelekan, F. Arefian, L. Bosher, H. 
Jabeen, S. Kataria, W.A. Marome and B. Zerjav. 
2012.  Private  Sector  Investment  Decisions  in 
Building and Construction: Increasing, Manag-
ing and Transferring Risks. Background Paper 
prepared for the 2013 Global Assessment Re-
port on Disaster Risk Reduction. Geneva, Swit-
zerland: UNISDR.

Johnson,  Cassidy.  2011.  Creating  an  enabling 
environment for reducing disaster risk: Recent 

experience of regulatory frameworks for land, 
planning and building in low and middle-income 
countries. Background Paper prepared for the 
2011  Global  Assessment  Report  on  Disaster 
Risk Reduction. Geneva, Switzerland: UNISDR.
Kahn, Matthew E. 2014. Sustainable and Smart 
Cities.  Policy  Research  Working  Paper  6878. 
The World Bank Sustainable Development Net-
work, Urban and Disaster Management Depart-
ment. May 2014. Washington, D.C.

Kawachi,  Ichiro,  Bruce  P.  Kennedy,  Kimberly 
Lochner  and  Deborah  Prothrow-Stith.  1997. 
Social Capital, Income Inequality, and Mortal-
ity. American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 87, 
No. 9 (September).

K.C.,  Samir.  2013.  Community  Vulnerability  to 
Floods and Landslides in Nepal. Ecology and 
Society,  Vol.  18,  No.  1:  8.  doi:  http://dx.doi.
org/10.5751/ES- 05095-180108.

Keim, Mark E. and Eric Noji. 2011. Emergent use 
of social media: a new age of opportunity for 
disaster resilience. American Journal of Disas-
ter Medicine, Vol. 6, No. 1 (January/February): 
47-54.

Kellett, Jan and Alice Caravani. 2013. Financing 
Disaster Risk Reduction: A 20 year story of inter-
national aid. Overseas Development Institute 
and the Global Facility For Disaster Reduction 
and Recovery. September 2013.

Kellet, Jan and Dan Sparks. 2012. Disaster Risk Re-
duction: Spending where it should count. Global 
Humanitarian Assistance Briefing Paper. Devel-
opment Initiatives, United Kingdom.

Kelman, Ilan. 1998. Role of Technology in Manag-
ing Vulnerability to Natural Disasters, With Case 
Studies of Volcanic Disasters on Non-Industrial-
ized Islands. A thesis submitted in conformity 
with the requirements for the degree of Master 
of Applied Science. Graduate Department of 
Civil Engineering, University of Toronto.

Kent, Randolph. 2011. Disaster risk reduction and 
changing  dimensions  and  dynamics  of  future 
drivers.  Background  Paper  prepared  for  the 
2011  Global  Assessment  Report  on  Disaster 
Risk Reduction. Geneva, Switzerland: UNISDR.

ccxciii

Khan, Himayatullah, Laura Giurca Vasilescu and 
Asmatullah Khan. 2008. Disaster Management 
Cycle: A Theoretical Approach. Available from 
http://www.mnmk.ro/documents/2008/20 
08-6.pdf (last accessed 11 December 2014).

Kim, Chul Kyu. 2010. The Effects of Natural Disas-
ters on Long-Run Economic Growth. University 
of Michigan.

Kopytko, Natalie and John Perkins. 2011. Climate 
change, nuclear power, and the adaptation–
mitigation  dilemma.  Energy Policy 39  (2011): 
318-333.

Kunreuther, H. and E. Michel-Kerjan. 2012. Policy 
Options  for  Reducing  Losses  from  Natural  Di-
sasters: Allocating $75 billion. Challenge Paper: 
Natural  Disasters.  Copenhagen  Consensus 
2012.

Kunreuther, H. and Pauly, M. 2006. Rules rather 
than discretion: Lessons from Hurricane Ka-
trina. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, Vol. 33, 
Issue 1-2: 101-116.

Lall, Somik and Uwe Deichmann. 2011. Density 
and Disasters: Economics of Urban Hazard Risk. 
The World Bank Research Observer Advance 
Access. Published July 7, 2011.

Lassa, Jonatan A. 2010. Institutional Vulnerability 
and Governance of Disaster Risk Reduction: Mac-
ro, Meso and Micro Scale Assessment (With Case 
Studies  from  Indonesia).  Dissertation  zur  Er-
langung des Grades Doktor Ingenieur (Dr.Ing.) 
der Hohen Landwirtschaftlichen Fakultät der 
Rheinischen Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universität zu 
Bonn. Vorgelegt am 24 November 2010.

Lavell, Alan and Eduardo Franco, eds. 1996. Es-
tado,  sociedad,  y  gestión  de  los  desastres  en 
América Latina: en busca del paradigma perdi-
do. Red de Estudios Sociales en Prevención de 
Desastres en América Latina.

Lavell, Allan and Andrew Maskrey. 2014. The fu-
ture of disaster risk management. Environmen-
tal Hazards, Vol. 13, Issue 4, 2014.

Lavell, Allan. 2003. Regional Programme for Risk 
Management in Central America. Ideas and no-
tions relating to concept and practice. With the 
collaboration of CEPREDENAC and UNDP.

ccxciv

References

Lavell, Allan. 2004. La red de estudios sociales en 
prevención de desastres en América Latina, La 
Red: Antecedentes, formación y contribución al 
desarrollo de los conceptos, estudios y la prác-
tica  en  el  tema  de  los  riesgos  y  desastres  en 
América Latina: 1980-2004.

Lavell, Allan. 2014. Disaster Risk Reduction and 
Public Investment Decisions: The Peruvian Case. 
Technical  Note.  First  edition,  August  2014. 
Lima.

Leeson,  Peter  T.  and  Russell  S.  Sobel.  2008. 
Blame  the  Weather?  Natural  Disasters,  FEMA, 
and Corruption in America. Article containing 
material from: Peter T. Leeson and Russell S. 
Sobel, 2008. Weathering Corruption, Journal of 
Law and Economics, Vol. 51, No. 4: 667-681.

Levitt, Jeremy I. and Whitaker, Matthew C. 2009. 
Truth Crushed to Earth Will Rise Again. Katrina 
and its Aftermath. Introduction. In Hurricane 
Katrina,  America’s Unnatural Disaster. Edited 
and with an introduction by Jeremy I. Levitt 
and Matthew C. Whitaker. University of Nebras-
ka Press.

Lewis, James and Ilan Kelman. 2012. The Good, 
The Bad and The Ugly: Disaster Risk Reduction 
(DRR) Versus Disaster Risk Creation (DRC). PLOS 
Currents Disasters. 21 June 2012. Edition 1. doi: 
10.1371/4f8d4eaec6af8.

Lewis, Roy R. 2001. Mangrove Restoration – Costs 
and Benefits of Successful Ecological Restora-
tion. In review, Proceedings of the Mangrove 
Valuation Workshop, Universiti Sains Malaysia, 
Penang,  4-8  April  2001.  Beijer  International 
Institute of Ecological Economics, Stockholm, 
Sweden.

Lewis, James. 2011. Corruption: The hidden per-
petrator of under-development and vulnerabil-
ity to natural hazards and disasters. Jàmbá: 
Journal of Disaster Risk Studies, Vol. 3, No. 2, 
May 2011.

Lindley,  Sarah,  John  O’Neill,  Joseph  Kandeh, 
Nigel  Lawson,  Richard  Christian  and  Martin 
O’Neill. 2011. Climate change, justice and vul-
nerability. Joseph Rowntree Foundation. No-
vember 2011.

Lloyd’s. 2012. Lloyd’s Global Underinsurance Re-

port. October 2012.

Longhurst,  Richard.  1994.  Conceptual  Frame-
works for Linking Relief and Development. IDS 
Bulletin, Vol. 25, No. 4: 17-23.

López, Juanita. 2009. La construction sociale du 
risque à Medellin (Colombie): Gouvernance lo-
cale et représentations. Thèse pour l’obtention 
du grade Docteur en EHESS. Paris.

Løvholt,  Finn,  Daniela  Kühn,  Hilmar  Bungum, 
Carl B. Harbitz and Sylfest Glimsdal. 2012. His-
torical tsunamis and present tsunami hazard 
in eastern Indonesia and the southern Philip-
pines. Journal of Geophysical Research, Vol. 117, 
B09310. doi:10.1029/2012JB009425.

Løvholt,  Finn,  Carl  B.  Harbitz,  Farrokh  Nadim, 
Joern Birkmann, Neysa Setiadi, Claudia Bach 
and Fernando Nishara. 2014. Tsunami Risk Re-
duction: Are we better prepared today than in 
2004? Input Paper prepared for the 2015 Global 
Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction. 
Geneva, Switzerland: UNISDR.

Lucchetti, Leonardo. 2011. Three Essays on House-
hold Welfare. Submitted in partial fulfillment 
of the requirements for the degree of Doctor 
of  Philosophy  in  Economics  in  the  Graduate 
College of the University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign.

Lutz,  W.,  W.P.  Butz  and  Samir  K.C.,  eds.  2014. 
World  Population  and  Human  Capital  in  the 
Twenty-first Century. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.

Maplecroft. 2014. Natural Hazards Risk Atlas 2014. 
Available from http://maplecroft.com/portfo-
lio/new-analysis/2014/02/19/natural-hazards-
risk-atlas-2014/.

Marino, Elizabeth. 2011. The long history of en-
vironmental migration: Assessing vulnerability 
construction and obstacles to successful relo-
cation in Shishmaref, Alaska. Global Environ-
mental Change 22 (2012): 374-381.

Marulanda, Mabel C., Omar D. Cardona, Miguel G. 
Mora and Alex H. Barbat. 2014. Design and im-
plementation of a voluntary collective earth-
quake  insurance  policy  to  cover  low-income 

homeowners in a developing country. Nat Haz-
ards, Vol. 74, Issue 3. doi: 10.1007/s11069-014-
1291-4.

Maskrey,  Andrew.  1989.  Disaster  Mitigation:  A 
Community-Based  Approach.  Development 
Guidelines No. 3. Oxfam.

Maskrey, Andrew. 1996. Terremotos en el trópico 
húmedo.  La  gestión  de  los  desastres  del  Alto 
Mayo,  Perú  (1990  y  1991),  Limón,  Costa  Rica 
(1991) y Atrato Medio, Colombia (1992). LA RED: 
Red de Estudios Sociales en Prevención de De-
sastres en América Latina. Colombia.

Maskrey, Andrew. 1997. Report on National and 
Local  Capabilities  for  Early  Warning.  Interna-
tional Decade for Natural Disaster Reduction.

Maskrey, Andrew. 1999. Reducing Global Disas-
ters. In Natural Disaster Management, J. Ingle-
ton, ed. Leicester.

Maskrey, Andrew. 2011. Revisiting community-
based disaster risk management. Environmen-
tal Hazards, Vol. 10, Issue 1: 42-52.

Masozera, Michel, Melissa Bailey and Charles Ker-
chner. 2007. Distribution of impacts of natural 
disasters across income groups: A case study 
of New Orleans. Ecological Economics 63 (2007): 
299-306

McGee, Sibel, Jaime Frittman, Seongjin “James” 
Ahn and Susan Murray. 2014. Risk Relationships 
and Cascading Effects in Critical Infrastructures: 
Implications for the Hyogo Framework for Ac-
tion. Input Paper prepared for the 2015 Global 
Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction. 
Geneva, Switzerland: UNISDR.

McGuirk, Justin. 2014. Radical Cities: Across Latin 
America in Search of a New Architecture. Verso 
Books.

McIvor, A.L., T. Spencer, I. Möller and M. Spalding. 
2013. The response of mangrove soil surface el-
evation to sea level rise. Natural Coastal Protec-
tion Series: Report 3. The Nature Conservancy 
and Wetlands International.

Meadows, Donella H., Dennis L. Meadows, Jor-
gen Randers and William W. Behrens III. 1972. 
The Limits to Growth. A report for The Club of 
Rome’s  Project  on  the  Predicament  of  Man-

ccxcv

kind. New York: Universe Books.

Mekonnen, M.M. and A.Y. Hoekstra. 2011. Nation-
al Water Footprint Accounts: The green, blue 
and  gray  water  footprint  of  production  and 
consumption. Value of Water Research Report 
Series  No.  50.  Volume  1:  Main  Report.  Delft, 
Netherlands: UNESCO-IHE Institute for Water 
Education.

Menon-Sen, K. and K. Bhan. 2008. Swept off the 
Map:  Surviving  Eviction  and  Resettlement  in 
New Delhi. New Delhi: Yoda Press.

Merz, Bruno, Florian Elmer, Michael Kunz, Bern-
hard Mühr, Kai Schröter and Steffi Uhlemann-
Elmer. 2014. The extreme flood in June 2013 in 
Germany. La Houille Blanche, No. 1 (2014): 5-10.
MGSDP  (The  Metropolitan  Glasgow  Strategic 
Drainage Partnership). 2012a. Successful part-
nership working: 10 years on. Briefing Note 10 
- Winter 2012/13.

MGSDP  (The  Metropolitan  Glasgow  Strategic 
Drainage Partnership). 2012b. White Cart Wa-
ter Flood Prevention Scheme. White Cart Water 
Project.

Miller, Martin. 1909. The World’s Greatest Disaster: 
The Complete Story of the Italian Earthquake 
Horror. Washington, D.C.: National Geographic 
Society.

Mitlin, Diana and David Satterthwaite. 2013. Ur-
ban Poverty in the Global South. Scale and Na-
ture. USA and Canada: Routledge Publishing.

Mochizuki, Junko, Stefan Hochrainer, Keith Wil-
liges  and  Reinhard  Mechler.  2014.  Fiscal  and 
Economic Risk of Natural Disasters in Comoros, 
Mauritius, Seychelles and Zanzibar. CATSIM As-
sessment (Preliminary Result). Risk Policy and 
Vulnerability Program, International Institute 
for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA).

Molinari, Daniela, Francesco Ballio, Nicola Berni 
and Claudia Pandolfo. 2013. Towards more ef-
fective Early Warning Systems: The Italian Ex-
perience.  Input  Paper  prepared  for  the  2015 
Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Re-
duction. Geneva, Switzerland: UNISDR.

Molinari, D., S. Menoni, G.T. Aronica, F. Ballio, N. 
Berni, C. Pandolfo, M. Stelluti and G. Minucci. 

ccxcvi

References

2014. Ex post damage assessment: an Italian 
experience. Natural Hazards and Earth System 
Sciences, Vol. 14: 901-916.

Morris, I. 2010. Why the West Rules – For Now: The 
Patterns of History, and What They Reveal About 
the Future. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
Moullier, Thomas. 2014. Improving Building Code 
Implementation and Compliance for More Resil-
ient Buildings in Developing Countries: Consider-
ations for Policy Makers. Concept note. October 
2014.

Moynihan, Donald P. 2009. The Response to Hur-
ricane Katrina. In International Risk Governance 
Council  report  “Risk  Governance  Deficits:  An 
analysis and illustration of the most common 
deficits in risk governance”. Geneva.

MRC (Mekong River Commission). 2010. Mekong 
Integrated Water Resources Management Proj-
ect. Inception Report. Final Version Prepared 
by: Mekong Integrated Water Resources Man-
agement  Project,  Mekong  River  Commission 
Secretariat. September 2010.

Muir-Wood, Robert. 2011. Designing Optimal Risk 
Mitigation and Risk Transfer Mechanisms to Im-
prove  the  Management  of  Earthquake  Risk  in 
Chile. OECD Working Papers on Finance, Insur-
ance and Private Pensions, No. 12. OECD Pub-
lishing.

Munich  Re.  2014.  After  the  floods.  Topics  Geo: 
Natural catastrophes 2013. Analyses, assess-
ments, positions. 2014 Issue. Munich.

Munich Re. 2013. 2013 Natural Catastrophe Year in 

Review. January 2014. Munich.

Muttarak, Raya and Wolfgang Lutz. 2014. Is Edu-
cation a Key to Reducing Vulnerability to Natu-
ral Disasters and hence Unavoidable Climate 
Change? Ecology and Society 19 (1): 41.

Myanmar  and  Japan  Consortium  for  Thilawa 
Special Economic Zone Development Project. 
2013. Environmental Impact Assessment Report. 
September 2013.

Nair, Ramachandran. 2014. Grand challenges in 
agroecology and land use systems. Frontiers in 
Environmental Science, Vol. 2 (January).

National Audit Office. 2014. Strategic flood risk 

management. Report by the Comptroller and 
Auditor General. Department for Environment, 
Food & Rural Affairs and Environment Agency. 
5 November 2014.

National Hurricane Center. 2013. Tropical Cyclone 
Report: Hurricane Sandy. Authored by Eric S. 
Blake, Todd B. Kimberlain, Robert J. Berg, John 
P. Cangialosi and John L. Beven II. 12 February 
2013.

NDRRMC (National Disaster Risk Reduction and 
Management Council of the Philippines). 2014. 
NDRRMC  Update  on  the  Effects  of  Typhoon 
Yolanda (Haiyan). 17 April 2014.

Neumayer,  Eric  and  Fabian  Barthel.  2010. Nor-
malizing economic loss from natural disasters: 
a global analysis. Centre for Climate Change 
Economics and Policy Working Paper No. 41. 
Munich  Re  Programme  Technical  Paper  No. 
6.  Grantham  Research  Institute  on  Climate 
Change and the Environment Working Paper 
No. 31. November 2010.

Neumayer,  Eric.,  Thomas  Plümper  and  Fabian 
Barthel. 2012. The Political Economy of Natural 
Disaster Damage. February 2012.

New  York  City  Government.  2013.  A  Stronger, 

More Resilient New York. 11 June 2013.

Newsham, Andrew, Mark Davies and Christophe 
Béné. 2011. Making Social Protection Work for 
Pro-Poor  Disaster  risk  Reduction  and  Climate 
Change Adaptation. Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, 14-
17 March 2011. Background Paper.

Nguyen, Thi Puch Hoa. 2011. Disaster Risk Reduc-
tion - A Viet Nam Context. World Conference on 
Drowning Prevention 2011.

NIDM  (National  Institute  of  Disaster  Manage-
ment).  2012a.  Village  Disaster  Management 
Plan. Authored by Ajinder Walia and Sushma 
Guleria. Ministry of Home Affairs, Government 
of India.

NIDM  (National  Institute  of  Disaster  Manage-
ment). 2012b. Flood Risk Mitigation and Man-
agement: A Training of Trainers (TOT) Module. 
Authored  by  Dev  Ashutosh,  PhD.  Ministry  of 
Home Affairs, Government of India.

NIDM  (National  Institute  of  Disaster  Manage-

ment).  2013.  Annual  Report  2012-2013.  Com-
piled and edited by Anil K. Gupter. Ministry of 
Home Affairs, Government of India.

NIDM  (National  Institute  of  Disaster  Manage-
ment).  2014.  Training  Module  on  Urban  Risk 
Mitigation. Authored by Chandrani Bandyopad-
hyay. Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of 
India.

Nilufar, Ahmad. 2012. Gender and Climate Change 
in Bangladesh: The Role of Institutions in Reduc-
ing Gender Gaps in Adaptation Program. A sum-
mary of ESW Report no. P125705, Paper No. 
126/March 2012. Social Development Papers. 
Social Inclusion.

NOAA (National Oceanic and Atmospheric Admin-
istration). 2005. Hurricane Katrina. National Cli-
matic Data Center. Updated 29 December 2005.
NOAH  (Nationwide  Operational  Assessment  of 
Hazards). 2014. Devastating Storm Surges of Ty-
phoon Yolanda, Vol. 3 (2014): 82-95. ISSN: 2362 
7409.

Noy,  Ilan.  2009.  The  macroeconomic  conse-
quences of disasters. Journal of Development 
Economics 88 (2009): 221-231.

Noy, Ilan. 2014. A New Non-Monetary Global Mea-
sure of the Direct Impact of Natural Disasters. 
Background Paper prepared for the 2015 Glob-
al Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduc-
tion. Geneva, Switzerland: UNISDR.

Noy, Ilan. 2015. A New Non-Monetary Global Mea-
sure of the Direct Impact of Natural Disasters: 
country case studies. Input Paper prepared for 
the 2015 Global Assessment Report on Disaster 
Risk Reduction. Geneva, Switzerland: UNISDR.
ODI (Overseas Development Institute). 2013. Di-
saster as opportunity? Building back better in 
Aceh, Myanmar and Haiti. Lilianne Fan, ed. HPG 
(Humanitarian Policy Group) Working Paper. 
November 2013.

OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation 
and Development) and IEA (International En-
ergy Agency). 2013. World Energy Outlook 2013. 
Executive Summary. Paris.

OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation 
and Development). 2009.  Privatisation in the 

ccxcvii

21st Century: Recent Experiences of OECD Coun-
tries Report on Good Practices. Paris.

OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation 
and Development). 2011b. Divided We Stand: 
Why inequality keeps rising. Paris: OECD Pub-
lishing.

OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation 
and Development). 2012. OECD Environmental 
Outlook to 2050: The consequences of Inaction. 
Paris: OECD Publishing.

OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation 
and  Development).  2014a.  Interconnected, 
Inter-dependent Risks. Background Paper pre-
pared for the 2015 Global Assessment Report 
on Disaster Risk Reduction. Geneva, Switzer-
land: UNISDR.

OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation 
and Development). 2014b. Disasters Derail De-
velopment. So why aren’t we doing more about 
them?  How  better  incentives  could  help  over-
come barriers to disaster risk reduction in devel-
opment programming. Background Paper pre-
pared for the 2015 Global Assessment Report 
on Disaster Risk Reduction. Geneva, Switzer-
land: UNISDR.

Olson, Richard Stuart, Juan Pablo Sarmiento and 
Gabriela Hoberman. 2011. Establishing public 
accountability, speaking truth to power and in-
ducing political will for disaster risk reduction: 
‘Ocho Rios + 25’. Environmental Hazards, Vol. 
10, No. 1: 59-68.

Oteros-Rozas, E., J.A. Gonzales, B. Martin-Lopez, 
C.A.  Lopez,  and  C.  Montes.  2012.  Ecosystem 
services  and  social-ecological  resilience  in 
transhumance  cultural  landscapes:  learning 
from the past, looking for a future. In Resilience 
and the cultural landscape: Understanding and 
managing  change  in  human-shaped  environ-
ments, T. Plieninger and C. Bieling, eds. Cam-
bridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Otoni de Araújo, Raquel, Teresa Da Silva Rosa, 
Maria  da  Penha  Smarzaro  Siqueira,  Márcio 
Reis, Camila Réboli and Arthur Aguilar. 2013. 
Communicability between the National, State 
and Municipal Governments in the Integration of 

ccxcviii

References

the Principles of the Hyogo Framework for Action 
to Reduce Risks and Disasters. Input Paper pre-
pared for the 2015 Global Assessment Report 
on Disaster Risk Reduction. Geneva, Switzer-
land: UNISDR.

Oxfam International. 2006. Disaster Management 
Policy & Practice: Lessons for Government, Civil 
Society, & the Private Sector in Sri Lanka. Oxfam 
Humanitarian Field Studies. October 2006.

Pandey, Bishnu and Kenji Okazaki. 2005. Commu-
nity Based Disaster Management: Empowering 
Communities to Cope with Disaster Risks. United 
Nations Centre for Regional Development. Ja-
pan.

Parry, W. 2013. Why disasters like Sandy hit the el-
derly hard. 8 March 2013. Available from http://
www.livescience.com/27752-natural-disas-
ters-hit-elderly-hard.html.

Patel, Sheela and Diana Mitlin. 2001. SPARC, the 
National Slum Dwellers Federation and Mahila 
Milan. IIED Working Paper 5 on Poverty Reduc-
tion in Urban Areas.

Peary,  Brett,  Rajib  Shaw  and  Yukiko  Takeuchi. 
2012. Utilization of Social Media in the East Ja-
pan Earthquake and Tsunami and its Effective-
ness. Graduate School of Global Environmental 
Studies, Kyoto University.

PEDRR (Partnership for Environment and Disaster 
Risk Reduction). 2010. Demonstrating the Role 
of Ecosystems-based Management for Disaster 
Risk Reduction. Background Paper prepared for 
the 2011 Global Assessment Report on Disaster 
Risk Reduction. Geneva, Switzerland: UNISDR.
Pei, Minxin. 2007. Corruption Threatens China’s 
Future. Carnegie Endowment for International 
Peace. Policy Brief 55. October 2007.

Pelling, Mark (ed.). 2014. Pathways for Transfor-
mation: Disaster risk management to enhance 
development  goals.  Background  Paper  pre-
pared for the 2015 Global Assessment Report 
on Disaster Risk Reduction. Geneva, Switzer-
land: UNISDR. 

Penning-Rowsell,  Edmund  C.  2014.  A  realistic 
assessment of fluvial and coastal flood risk in 
England and Wales. Transactions of the Institute 

of British Geographers, Vol. 40. Issue 1: 44-61 
(published online: March 2014).

PeriPeri U (Partners Enhancing Resilience, People 
Exposed to Risks). No date. An African Partner-
ship: Building Capacity, Reducing Risk.

Persson,  Torsten  and  Guido  Tabellini.  1991.  Is 
inequality harmful for growth? Theory and Evi-
dence. National Bureau of Economic Research 
Working Paper Series. Cambridge, MA.

Pichler, Adelheid and Erich Striessnig. 2014. Dif-
ferential Vulnerability to Hurricanes in Cuba, 
Haiti, and the Dominican Republic: The Contri-
bution of Education. Ecology and Society, Vol. 
18, No. 3: 31. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.5751/ES-
05774-180331.

Piketty, Thomas. 2014. Capital in the Twenty-First 

Century. First Edition edition. Belknap Press.

Porter, M. and M. Kramer. 2011. Creating Shared 
Value. Harvard Business Review, Vol. 89, No. 1/2: 
62-77.

Porter, Michael E., Scott Stern and Michael Green. 
2014. Social Progress Index 2014. Social Prog-
ress Imperative. Washington, D.C.

Procuraduría General de la Nación. 2005. Veinte 
años vigentes. Procurando No. 37. Octubre de 
2005. Gobierno de Colombia.

Purasinghe,  Harsha.  2014.  DEWN  -  Disaster  & 
Emergency Warning Network. GSM Based Disas-
ter Alerting. University of Moratuwa.

Quarantelli, Enrico Louis. 1978. Disasters: Theory 

and Research. Sage.

Quarantelli,  Enrico  Louis.  1986.  Disaster  Crisis 
Management. Preliminary Paper #113. Disaster 
Research Center, University of Delaware.

Ragona, M., F. Hannstein and M. Mazzocchi. 2011. 
The Financial Impact of the Volcanic Ash Crisis 
on the European Airline Industry. Chapter 3. In 
Governing  Disasters:  The  Challenges  of  Emer-
gency  Risk  Regulation,  A.  Alemanno,  ed.  Ed-
ward Elgar Publishing.

Ramsar Convention on Wetlands. 1971. Conven-
tion  on  Wetlands  of  International  Importance 
especially as Waterfowl Habitat. Ramsar, Iran, 
2 February 1971 as amended by the Protocol of 

3 December 1982 and the Amendments of 28 
May 1987.

Randers, Jorgen. 2008. Global collapse—Fact or 

fiction? Futures, Vol. 40, Issue 10: 853-864.

Ranger,  Nicola,  Stéphane  Hallegatte,  Sumana 
Bhattacharya,  Murthy  Bachu,  Satya  Priya, 
K.  Dhore,  Farhat  Rafique,  P.  Mathur,  Nicolas 
Naville, Fanny Henriet, Celine Herweijer, Sanjib 
Pohit and Jan Corfee-Morlot. 2011. An assess-
ment of the potential impact of climate change 
on flood risk in Mumbai. Climatic Change, Vol. 
104, Issue 1: 139-167.

Rathnaweera,  T.  D.,  M.P.  Palihawadana,  H.L.L. 
Rangana and U.P. Nawagamuwa. 2012. Effects 
of climate change on landslide frequencies in 
landslide prone districts in Sri Lanka; Overview. 
Civil Engineering Research Exchange Sympo-
sium 2012.

Ray-Bennett, N.S., A.J. Masys, H. Shiroshita and 
P. Jackson. 2014. Hyper-risks in a hyper connect-
ed world: A call for critical ‘reflective response’ to 
develop organisational resilience. Input Paper 
prepared for the 2015 Global Assessment Re-
port on Disaster Risk Reduction. Geneva, Swit-
zerland: UNISDR.

Reeves, Andrew. 2010. Political Disaster: Unilat-
eral  Powers,  Electoral  Incentives,  and  Presi-
dential Disaster Declarations. The Journal of 
Politics, Vol. 73. No. 4 (October): 1142-1151.

Renn, Ortwin. 2008. Risk Governance: Coping with 
Uncertainty in a Complex World. UK and USA: 
Earthscan.

Rentschler, Jun E. 2013. Why Resilience Matters: 
The  Poverty  Impacts  of  Disasters.  Policy  Re-
search Working Paper 6699. November 2013. 
The World Bank GFDRR, Washington, D.C.

Revi, Aromar. 2005. Lessons from the Deluge Pri-
orities  for  Multi-Hazard  Risk  Mitigation. Eco-
nomic and Political Weekly (September 3, 2005): 
3911-3916.

Reyes, Lilian and Allan Lavell. 2012. Extensive and 
every day risk in the Bolivian Chaco: Sources of 
crisis and disaster. Journal of Alpine Research, 
100-1 (2012): Montagne, marginalité et catas-
trophe.

ccxcix

RMS (Risk Management Solutions). 2013. The 2012 

UK Floods. RMS White Paper.

Rockström, Johan, Jeffrey D. Sachs, Marcus C. 
Öhman and Guido Schmidt-Traub. 2013. Sus-
tainable Development and Planetary Boundar-
ies. Background Paper submitted to the High 
Level  Panel  on  the  Post-2015  Development 
Agenda. May 2013.

Rockström,  Johan,  Will  Steffen,  Kevin  Noone, 
Åsa Persson, F. Stuart Chapin III, Eric F. Lambin, 
Timothy M. Lenton, Marten Scheffer, Carl Fol-
ke, Hans Joachim Schellnhuber, Björn Nykvist, 
Cynthia A. de Wit, Terry Hughes, Sander van der 
Leeuw, Henning Rodhe, Sverker Sörlin, Peter K. 
Snyder,  Robert  Costanza,  Uno  Svedin,  Malin 
Falkenmark, Louise Karlberg, Robert W. Corell, 
Victoria J. Fabry, James Hansen, Brian Walker, 
Diana  Liverman,  Katherine  Richardson,  Paul 
Crutzen and Jonathan A. Foley. 2009. A safe 
operating space for humanity. Nature, Vol. 461 
(September): 472-475.

Rodriguez-Oreggia,  Eduardo,  Alejandro  De  La 
Fuente,  Rodolfo  De  La  Torre  and  Hector  A. 
Moreno. 2012. Natural Disasters, Human De-
velopment and Poverty at the Municipal Level 
in Mexico. The Journal of Development Studies, 
Vol. 49, No. 3: 442-455.

Safir,  Abla,  Sharon  Faye  Piza  and  Emmanuel 
Skoufias. 2013. Disquiet on the Weather Front: 
The Welfare Impacts of Climatic Variability in the 
Rural Philippines. Policy Research Working Pa-
per 6579. World Bank, Washington, D.C.

Salgado,  Mario  A.,  Daniela  Zuloaga,  Gabriel  A. 
Bernal,  Miguel  G.  Mora  and  Omar-Darío  Car-
dona. 2014a. Fully probabilistic seismic risk as-
sessment considering local site effects for the 
portfolio of buildings in Medellín, Colombia. 
Bulletin of Earthquake Engineering, Vol. 12. Is-
sue 2 (April): 671-695. doi: 10.1007/s10518-013- 
9550-4.

Salgado, Mario A., Daniela Zuloaga, Cesar A. Ve-
lásquez, Martha. L. Carreño, Omar-Darío Car-
dona  and  Alex  Barbat.  2014b.  Urban  Seismic 
Risk for Medellín, Colombia: A Probabilistic and 
Holistic  Approach. Second  European  Confer-

ccc

References

ence on Earthquake Engineering and Seismol-
ogy, Istanbul, 25-29 August 2014.

Sarmiento Prieto, Juan Pablo, Gabriela Hober-
man  and  Richard  Stuart  Olson.  2014.  Urban 
Development and Disaster Risk: Formality and 
Informality. Working Paper. Disaster Risk Re-
duction in the Americas Project. Latin Ameri-
can and Caribbean Center, Florida Internation-
al University, Miami. November 2010.

Sassen, Saskia. 2012. Cities in a World Economy. 

Thousand Oaks, CL: Sage Publications.

Satapathy,  Sujata  and  Bhadra  Subhasis.  2009. 
Disaster Psychosocial and Mental Health Sup-
port in South & South-East Asian Countries: A 
Synthesis. Journal of South Asia Disaster Stud-
ies, Vol. 2, No.1 (June).

Satterthwaite, David and David Dodman. 2013. 
Towards resilience and transformation for cit-
ies within a finite planet. Environment and Ur-
banization, Vol. 25, No. 2: 291-298.

Satterthwaite, David and Diana Mitlin. 2014. Re-
ducing Urban Poverty in the Global South. USA 
and Canada: Routledge Publishing.

Satterthwaite,  David.  2007.  The  transition  to  a 
predominantly urban world and its underpin-
nings. IIEE Human Settlements Discussion Pa-
per Series. Theme: Urban Change –4.

Schensul, D. and D. Dodman. 2013. Populating 
Adaptation: Incorporating population dynam-
ics  in  climate  change  adaptation  policy  and 
practice. In The demography of adaptation to 
climate  change,  G.  Martine  and  D.  Schensul, 
eds. New York, London and Mexico City: United 
Nations Population Fund, International Insti-
tute for Environment and Development and El 
Colegio de Mexico.

Schumacher, Ingmar and Eric Strobl. 2008. Eco-
nomic Development and Losses due to Natural 
Disasters: The Role of Risk. Ecole Polytechnique, 
Cahier No. 2008-32, December 2008.

SCI (Save the Children International). 2014. The 
cultural dimension of Disaster Risk Reduction. 
Background Paper prepared for the 2015 Glob-
al Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduc-
tion. Geneva, Switzerland: UNISDR.

SCOR. 2013. Supply Chain and Contingent Busi-
ness Interruption (CBI). A perspective on Prop-
erty and Casualty. Focus December 2013. SCOR 
Global P&C.

Scott, Zoë and Marcela Tarazona. 2011. Study on 
Disaster Risk Reduction, Decentralization and 
Political Economy. Background Paper prepared 
for the 2011 Global Assessment Report on Di-
saster  Risk  Reduction.  Geneva, Switzerland: 
UNISDR.

SEI (Stockholm Environment Institute). 2014. Cli-
mate Change and Disaster Risk Reduction. Back-
ground Paper prepared for the 2015 Global As-
sessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction. 
Geneva, Switzerland: UNISDR.

Sendai City. 2014. Sendai Reconstruction (Fukkou). 

Report, Vol. 21.

Shaw, Rajib, ed. 2013. Community-Based Disaster 
Risk Reduction. Community, Environment and 
Disaster Risk Management Series, Volume 10. 
Emerald Group Publishing Limited.

Shaxson, Nicholas. 2012. Treasure Islands: Tax Ha-
vens and The Men Who Stole The World. Vintage 
Publisher.

Shepherd, Andrew, Tom Mitchell, Kirsty Lewis, 
Amanda Lenhardt, Lindsey Jones, Lucy Scott 
and Robert Muir-Wood. 2013. The geography of 
poverty, disasters and climate extremes in 2030. 
Overseas  Development  Institute,  MetOffice 
and RMS. October 2013.

Shimizu,  M.  and  A.  Clark.  2014.  Interconnected 
Risks,  Cascading  Disasters  and  Disaster  Man-
agement Policy: A Gap Analysis. Input Paper for 
the 2015 Global Assessment Report on Disaster 
Risk Reduction. Geneva, Switzerland: UNISDR.
Shreve, C.M. and I. Kelman. 2014. Does mitiga-
tion save? Reviewing cost-benefit analyses of 
disaster risk reduction. International Journal of 
Disaster Risk Reduction, Vol. 10, Part A (Decem-
ber): 213-235.

Singh,  Shri  Karishna  and  Xyoli  Pérez-Campos. 
No date. Una iniciativa para alerta temprana 
de tsunami en México. Departamento de Sis-
mología,  Instituto  de  Geofísica,  Universidad 
Nacional Autónoma de México.

Sisk, Blake and Carl L. Bankston. 2014. Hurricane 
Katrina, a Construction Boom, and a New Labor 
Force: Latino Immigrants and the New Orleans 
Construction  Industry,  2000  and  2006–2010. 
Population Research and Policy Review, Vol. 33, 
Issue 3: 309-334.

Skidmore, Mark and Hideki Toya. 2002. Do Natu-
ral Disasters Promote Long-Run Growth? Eco-
nomic Inquiry, Vol. 40, Issue 4 (October): 664-
687.

Slim, Hugo.  2012. IASC Real-Time Evaluation of 
the Humanitarian Response to the Horn of Africa 
Drought Crisis in Somalia, Ethiopia and Kenya. 
Inter-Agency  Standing  Committee  Synthesis 
Report. June 2012.

Smythe, Tiffany C. 2013. Assessing the Impacts 
of  Hurricane  Sandy  on  the  Port  of  New  York 
and New Jersey’s Maritime Responders and Re-
sponse Infrastructure. Quick Response Report 
No. 238: Final Report to the University of Colo-
rado Natural Hazards Center Quick Response 
Grant Program (National Science Foundation 
grant CMMI1030670), 31 May 2013.

Stehr, Steven. 2006. The Political Economy of Ur-
ban Disaster Assistance. Urban Affairs Review, 
Vol. 41, No. 4 (March): 492-500.

Striessnig, E., W. Lutz and A.G. Patt. 2013. Effects 
of educational attainment on climate risk vul-
nerability. Ecology and Society 18(1), p. 16. doi: 
http:// dx.doi.org/10.5751/ES-05252-180116.

Subbaraman, Ramnath, Jennifer O’Brien, Tejal 
Shitole, Shrutika Shitole, Kiran Sawant, David 
E. Bloom and Anita Patil-Deshmukh. 2012. Off 
the map: the health and social implications of 
being a non-notified slum in India. Environment 
and Urbanization, Vol. 24, No. 2 (October): 642-
643.

Surono, Philippe Jousset, John Pallister, Marie 
Boichu, M. Fabrizia Buongiorno, Agus Budisan-
toso, Fidel Costa, Supriyati Andreastuti, Fred 
Prata, David Schneider, Lieven Clarisse, Hanik 
Humaida, Sri Sumarti, Christian Bignami, Julie 
Griswold, Simon Carn, Clive Oppenheimer and 
Franck Lavigne. 2012. The 2010 explosive erup-
tion  of  Java’s  Merapi  volcano—A  ‘100-year’ 

ccci

event. Journal of Volcanology and Geothermal 
Research, Vols. 241-242 (October): 121-135.

Swiss Re. 2012. Flood – an underestimated risk: In-

spect, inform, insure. Zurich.

Swiss Re. 2014a. Natural catastrophes and man-
made disasters in 2013: large losses from floods 
and hail; Haiyan hits the Philippines. No 1/2014. 
Zurich.

Swiss Re. 2014b. Mind the risk: A global ranking of 
cities under threat from natural disasters. Zu-
rich.

Talberth, John, Clifford Cobb and Noah Slattery. 
2007.  The  Genuine  Progress  Indicator  2006:  A 
Tool for Sustainable Development. Redefining 
Progress. February 2007.

TEC (Tsunami Evaluation Coalition). 2006. Joint 
Evaluation of the international response to the 
Indian Ocean tsunami: Synthesis Report. J. Tel-
ford, J. Cosgrave and R. Houghton, eds. July 
2006. London.

TEC (Tsunami Evaluation Coalition). 2007. Joint 
Evaluation of the international response to the 
Indian  Ocean  tsunami:  Synthesis  Report.  Ex-
panded Summary. John Cosgrave, ed. January 
2007. London.

TEEB (The Economics of Ecosystems and Biodi-
versity). 2013. The Economics of Ecosystems and 
Biodiversity for Water and Wetlands.

The  Geneva  Association.  2013.  Warming of the 
Oceans and Implications for the (Re)insurance 
Industry. A Geneva Association Report. The Ge-
neva Association (The International Associa-
tion for the Study of Insurance Economics).

Thieken, Annegret H. 2009. Floods, flood losses 
and flood risk management in Germany. Habili-
tationsschrift zur Erlangung des akademischen 
Grades  doctor  rerum  naturalium  habilitatus 
(Dr. rer. nat. habil.) venia legendi: Geoökologie 
vorgelegt  der  Mathematisch  -  Naturwissen-
schaftlichen Fakultät der Universität Potsdam.
Tierney, Kathleen. 2006. Social Inequality, Haz-
ards  and  Disasters.  Ch.  8.  In On  Risk  and  Di-
saster: Lessons from Hurricane Katrina, Ronald 
J.  Daniels,  Donald  F.  Kettl  and  Howard  Kun-
reuther, eds. University of Pennsylvania Press.

cccii

References

Tierney, Kathleen. 2008. Hurricane Katrina: Cat-
astrophic Impacts and Alarming Lessons. Ch. 
7. In Risking House and Home: Disasters, Cities, 
Public  Policy,  John  M.  Quigley,  and  Larry  A. 
Rosenthal, eds. Berkeley, California: Berkeley 
Public Policy Press. Institute of Governmental 
Studies Publications.

Transparency International. 2005. Global Corrup-
tion Report 2005: Special focus - Corruption in 
Construction and Post-Conflict Reconstruction. 
Foreword by Francis Fukuyama. London: Pluto 
Press.

Trawinski, L. 2013. Assets and debt across genera-
tions: the middle-class balance sheet 1989-2010. 
Washington, DC: AARP Public Policy Institute.

Tufail,  Sadia,  Gaye  McKissock  and  Harry  Ads-
head. 2004. Urban Watercourses in Glasgow’s 
East End: study to end flooding, improve envi-
ronment & amenities. Case Study. Wastewater 
Treatment & Sewerage.

Turnbull, Shann and Michael Pirson. 2011. Corpo-
rate Governance, Risk Management, and the Fi-
nancial Crisis: An Information Processing View. 
Corporate Governance: An International Review, 
Vol. 19, Issue 5 (September): 459-470.

Turner, John. 1972. Freedom to Build: Dweller Con-
trol of the Housing Process. New York: Macmil-
lan.

Turner,  Graham  M.  2008.  A  comparison  of  The 
Limits to Growth with 30 years of reality. Global 
Environmental Change, Vol. 18, Issue 3 (August): 
397-411.

UNAIDS. 2014. Financing the Response to HIV in 
Low- and Middle-Income Countries: Internation-
al Assistance from Donor Governments in 2013. 
July 2014. Prepared by Jennifer Kates & Adam 
Wexler (Kaiser Family Foundation) and Eric Lief 
(Consultant).

UNCTAD  (United  Nations  Conference  on  Trade 
and Development). 2014. World Investment Re-
port 2014 - Investing in the SDG’s: An Action Plan. 
Printed in Switzerland.

UNDESA (United Nations Department of Econom-
ic and Social Affairs). 2013. World Population 
Prospects: The 2012 Revision. Volume I: Com-

prehensive Tables. United Nations, New York.

land: UNISDR.

UNDESA (United Nations Department of Econom-
ic and Social Affairs). 2014a. Partnerships Briefs 
for  Small  Island  Developing  States.  Climate 
Change & Disaster Risk Management. UN Con-
ference on Small Island Developing States. UN-
DESA Division for Sustainable Development.

UNDESA (United Nations Department of Econom-
ic and Social Affairs). 2014b. World Urbanization 
Prospects. 2014 Revision. Highlights. United Na-
tions, New York.

UNDP  (United  Nations  Development  Pro-
gramme), UNEP (United Nations Environment 
Programme), UN-ESCAP (United Nations Eco-
nomic  and  Social  Commission  for  Asia  and 
Pacific), UNFCCC (United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change), UNISDR (Unit-
ed Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction) 
and  WMO  (World  Meteorological  Organiza-
tion).  2013.  TST  Issues  Brief:  Climate  Change 
and Disaster Risk Reduction. Prepared by UNDP, 
UNEP, UN-ESCAP, UNFCCC, UNISDR and WMO 
with contributions from FAO, IFAD, ITU, OCHA, 
PBSO, UNCCD, UNDESA, UN-ESCWA, UNFF, UN-
FPA, UN-HABITAT, UNIDO, UNOOSA, UN-Wom-
en, WFP, WHO, and the World Bank.

UNDP (United Nations Development Programme). 
2004. Reducing Disaster Risk: A Challenge for De-
velopment. A Global Report. UNDP Bureau for 
Crisis Prevention and Recovery.

UNDP (United Nations Development Programme). 
2010. A guide to UNDP Democratic Governance 
Practice. Bureau for Development Policy, Dem-
ocratic Governance Group. New York.

UNDP (United Nations Development Programme). 

2013a. Issue Brief: Disaster Risk Governance.

UNDP  (United  Nations  Development  Pro-
gramme). 2013b. Integrated Community-based 
Early Recovery Framework. Disaster Risk Reduc-
tion. UNDP Myanmar.

UNDP (United Nations Development Programme). 
2014a. Disaster Risk Governance During the HFA 
Implementation Period. Background Paper pre-
pared for the 2015 Global Assessment Report 
on Disaster Risk Reduction. Geneva, Switzer-

UNDP (United Nations Development Programme). 
2014b. Human Development Report. Sustaining 
Human Progress: Reducing Vulnerabilities and 
Building Resilience. New York.

UNDRO (Office of the United Nations Disaster Re-
lief Co-ordinator). 1980. Natural Disasters and 
Vulnerability Analysis. Report of Expert Group 
Meeting, 9-12 July 1979. United Nations, Ge-
neva.

UNECE (United Nations Economic Commission 
for  Europe).  2014.  Standards  and  Normative 
Mechanisms  for  Disaster  Risk  Management. 
Background Paper prepared for the 2015 Glob-
al Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduc-
tion. Geneva, Switzerland: UNISDR.

UNEP (United Nations Environment Programme) 
and Global Footprint Network. 2012. A New An-
gle on Sovereign Credit Risk E-RISC: Environmen-
tal Risk Integration in Sovereign Credit Analysis. 
Geneva.

UNEP (United Nations Environment Programme) 
and PSI (Principles for Sustainable Insurance). 
2014. The PSI Global Resilience Project: Building 
disaster-resilient communities and economies. 
Part one of a research series by the UNEP FI 
Principles  for  Sustainable  Insurance  Initia-
tive.  UNEP  Finance  Initiative  and  PSI  Global 
Resilience Project (led by Insurance Australia 
Group). Geneva.

UNEP (United Nations Environment Programme). 
2012. The Emissions Gap Report 2012. A UNEP 
Synthesis Report. UNEP, Nairobi.

UNEP (United Nations Environment Programme). 
2013. Cyclone Phailin in India: Early Warning and 
Timely Actions Save Lives. UNEP, Global Envi-
ronmental Alert Service. November 2013.

UNEP (United Nations Environment Programme). 
2014. Disaster risk reduction is an integral objec-
tive of environment related policies and plans, 
including for land use natural resource manage-
ment and adaptation to climate change. Back-
ground Paper prepared for the 2015 Global As-
sessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction. 
Geneva, Switzerland: UNISDR.

ccciii

UN-HABITAT  (United  Nations  Human  Settle-
ments Programme). 2009. Shelter Situation in 
Ratnapura Municipal Council Area. An Overview. 
Compiled by Management Resources for Good 
Governance (MaRGG) for The Ratnapura Munic-
ipal Council. November 2009.

UN-HABITAT (United Nations Human Settlements 
Programme). 2010. State of the World’s Cities 
Report  2010-2011:  Bridging  the  Urban  Divide. 
Overview and Key Findings. United Nations.

UN-HABITAT (United Nations Human Settlements 
Programme). 2013. State of the World’s Cities 
Report 2012-2013: Prosperity of Cities. United 
Nations, Nairobi.

UN-HABITAT (United Nations Human Settlements 
Programme). 2014a. From Disaster Risk Reduc-
tion to Resilience. A New Urban Agenda for the 
21st Century. Background Paper prepared for 
the 2015 Global Assessment Report on Disaster 
Risk Reduction. Geneva, Switzerland: UNISDR.
UN-HABITAT  (United  Nations  Human  Settle-
ments Programme). 2014b. Urban Equity in De-
velopment - Cities for Life. Concept Paper. World 
Urban Forum 7. 5-11 April 2014. Medellin, Co-
lombia.

UNICEF  (United  Nations  Children  Fund)  and 
UNESCO (United Nations Educational, Scien-
tific and Cultural Organization). 2014. Advances 
and continuing challenges towards HFA2 AND 
Post-2015:  Background  chapter.  Background 
Paper  prepared  for  the  2015  Global  Assess-
ment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction. Ge-
neva, Switzerland: UNISDR.

UNISDR (United Nations Office for Disaster Risk 
Reduction) and Government of Germany. 2006. 
Developing Early Warning Systems: A Checklist. 
EWC III: Third International Conference on Early 
Warning. From concept to action. 27-29 March 
2006, Bonn.

UNISDR,  The  German  Committee  for  Disaster 
Reduction and EUROPA Major Hazards Agree-
ment.  2009.  Implementing  the  Hyogo  Frame-
work for Action in Europe: Advances and Chal-
lenges. Report for the period 2007- 2009. Geneva.
UNISDR, ITC-ILO (International Training Center 

ccciv

References

-  International  Labour  Organization),  UNDP 
(United  Nations  Development  Programme). 
2010. Local Governments and Disaster Risk Re-
duction, Good practices and Lessons Learned: 
A contribution to the “Making Cities Resilient” 
Campaign. Contribution to the “Making Cities 
Resilient” Campaign 2010-2011. Geneva.

UNISDR. 2005. Hyogo Framework for Action 2005-
2015:  Building  the  Resilience  of  Nations  and 
Communities to Disasters. Extract from the final 
report of the World Conference on Disaster Re-
duction (A/CONF.206/6). Geneva, Switzerland: 
UNISDR.

UNISDR. 2007. Disaster Risk Reduction: Global Re-

view. Geneva, Switzerland: UNISDR.

UNISDR.  2009a.  Global  Assessment  Report  on 
Disaster Risk Reduction: Risk and Poverty in a 
Changing Climate. Geneva, Switzerland: UNIS-
DR.

UNISDR. 2009b. UNISDR Terminology on Disaster 

Risk Reduction. Geneva, Switzerland: UNISDR.
UNISDR. 2011a. Global Assessment Report on Di-
saster Risk Reduction: Revealing Risk, Redefin-
ing Development. Geneva, Switzerland: UNIS-
DR.

UNISDR. 2011b. Hyogo Framework for Action 2005-
2015 Building the Resilience of Nations and Com-
munities  to  Disasters:  Mid-Term  Review  2010-
2011. Geneva, Switzerland: UNISDR.

UNISDR. 2011c. HFA Progress in Asia Pacific Re-
gional  Synthesis  Report  2009-2011.  Geneva, 
Switzerland: UNISDR.

UNISDR.  2013a.  Global  Assessment  Report  on 
Disaster  Risk  Reduction:  From  Shared  Risk  to 
Shared Value: the Business Case for Disaster Risk 
Reduction. Geneva, Switzerland: UNISDR.

UNISDR.  2013b.  Implementation  of  the  Hyogo 
Framework  for  Action.  Summary  of  Reports 
2007-2013. Geneva, Switzerland: UNISDR.

UNISDR. 2013c. Findings of the Review of National 
Platforms for Disaster Risk Reduction 2012-2013. 
Final Report. Including comments, feedback 
and  recommendations  from  National  Plat-
forms Consultation on a Post-2015 Framework 
for Disaster Risk Reduction held at the Fourth 

Session of the Global Platform for Disaster Risk 
Reduction (19-23 May 2013, Geneva). Septem-
ber 2013.

UNISDR. 2014. Progress and Challenges in Disaster 
Risk Reduction: A contribution towards the de-
velopment of policy indicators for the Post-2015 
Framework on Disaster Risk Reduction. Geneva, 
Switzerland: UNISDR.

UNISDR. 2014b. Annual Report 2013. Final Report 
on 2012-2013 Biennium Work Programme. Ge-
neva, Switzerland: UNISDR.

UNISDR. 2014c. HFA Thematic Review: Research 
Area 2. Priority for Action 3 - Core Indicator 1: 
Relevant information on disasters is available 
and accessible at all levels, to all stakeholders 
(through networks, development of information 
sharing systems etc.). Background Paper pre-
pared for the 2015 Global Assessment Report 
on Disaster Risk Reduction. Geneva, Switzer-
land: UNISDR.

United Nations and World Bank. 2007. Stolen As-
set Recovery (StAR) Initiative: Challenges, Op-
portunities, and Action Plan. June 2007. Wash-
ington, D.C.

United Nations. 2012. Resolution adopted by the 
General Assembly on 27 July 2012. 66/288: The 
Future we want. UN General Assembly, Sixty-
Sixth Session, Agenda Item 19. A/RES/66/288* 
11 September 2012.

United Nations. 2014a. The Millennium Develop-

ment Goals Report 2014. New York.

United  Nations.  2014b.  Resilience:  Integrating 
Risks into the Financial System: The 1-in-100 Ini-
tiative Action Statement. Climate Summit 2014. 
New York.

University  of  South  Carolina.  2014. Who  needs 
loss data? Background Paper prepared for the 
2015  Global  Assessment  Report  on  Disaster 
Risk Reduction. Geneva, Switzerland: UNISDR.
UNOCHA (United Nations Office for the Coordina-
tion of Humanitarian Affairs). 2013. Myanmar: A 
Country Prone to a Range of Natural Disasters. 
Infographic from OCHA September 2013.

UNOCHA (United Nations Office for the Coordina-
tion of Humanitarian Affairs). 2014a. An Over-

view of Global Humanitarian Response 2014.

UNOCHA (United Nations Office for the Coordina-
tion of Humanitarian Affairs). 2014b. Humani-
tarian Bulletin Philippines. Issue 27. 01 – 31 Au-
gust 2014.

UNU (United Nations University). 2013. The Role 
of Ecosystems in Disaster Risk Reduction. Edited 
by Fabrice G. Renaud, Karen Sudmeier-Rieux 
and Marisol Estrella. Tokyo.

US Nuclear Regulatory Commission. 1994. Infor-
mation Notice No. 93-53, Supplement 1: Effect of 
Hurricane Andrew on Turkey Point Nuclear Gen-
erating Station and Lessons Learned.

US Nuclear Regulatory Commission. 1994. Effect 
of  Hurricane  Andrew  on Turkey  Point  Nuclear 
Generating Station. NRC Information Notice 93-
53, Supplement 1.

USGAO (United States Government Accountabil-
ity Office). 2009. Alaska Native Villages: Limited 
Progress Has Been Made on Relocating Villages 
Threatened by Flooding and Erosion. USGAO Re-
port to Congressional Requesters. June 2009.

van  Hooidonk,  Ruben,  Jeffrey  Allen  Maynard, 
Derek  Manzello  and  Serge  Planes.  2014.  Op-
posite latitudinal gradients in projected ocean 
acidification and bleaching impacts on coral 
reefs. Global Change Biology, Vol. 20, Issue 1: 
103-112.

van Niekerk, Dewald. 2014. Retrospective Assess-
ment of Progress in Disaster Risk Governance 
against the HFA. Input Paper prepared for the 
2015  Global  Assessment  Report  on  Disaster 
Risk Reduction. Geneva, Switzerland: UNISDR.
Vermeulen, Sonja J., Bruce M. Campbell and John 
S.I.  Ingram.  2012.  Climate  Change  and  Food 
Systems. Annual Review of Environment and Re-
sources, Vol. 37: 195-222.

Virginia Polytechnic Institute. 1985. Proceedings 
of the International Conference on Disaster Miti-
gation Program Implementation. Ocho Rios, Ja-
maica, November 12-16, 1984.

von Hauff, Michael and Amitabh Kundu. 2002. En-
ergy Strategy for Sustainable Development Use 
of Renewable Resources and its Implications in 
India.

cccv

Vorhies, Francis. 2012. The economics of investing 
in disaster risk reduction. Working paper based 
on a review of the current literature commis-
sioned by the Secretariat to the UN Interna-
tional Strategy for Disaster Reduction (UNIS-
DR). Geneva.

Walden, Daniel, Nick Hall and Kelly Hawrylyshyn. 
2009. Participation and Protection: Children’s 
Involvement in Climate Change Debates. IDS In 
Focus Policy Briefing 13.4. November 2009. In-
stitute of Development Studies.

Wamsler, Christine and Ebba Brink. 2014. The Ur-
ban Domino Effect: A Conceptualization of Cities’ 
Interconnectedness  of  Risk. Input  Paper  pre-
pared for the 2015 Global Assessment Report 
on Disaster Risk Reduction. Geneva, Switzer-
land: UNISDR.

Wamsler,  Christine.  2006.  Mainstreaming  Risk 
Reduction in Urban Planning and Housing: A 
Challenge for International Aid Organisations. 
Disasters, Vol. 30, No. 2: 151-177.

Wamsler, Christine. 2014. Urban focus in climate 
change adaptation and risk reduction. Klimat 
Fokus, No. 12 (2014). Lund University.

Ward,  Christopher,  Claudia  Ringler,  Raphael 
Torquebiau and Tom Watson. 2014. Improving 
resilience in SSA drylands: the contribution of 
agricultural water management.

Warner,  Koko,  Tamar  Afifi,  Kevin  Henry,  Tonya 
Rawe, Christopher Smith and Alex de Shebinin. 
2012. Where the rain falls: climate change, liveli-
hood security, and migration. Paris and Bonn: 
CARE France and UNU.

Watson, Vanessa. 2014. African urban fantasies: 
dreams  or  nightmares?  Environment  and  Ur-
banization, Vol. 26, No. 1: 215-231.

Watts, Michael. 1983. On the poverty of theory: 
natural hazards research in context. In Interpre-
tations of Calamity from the Viewpoint of Human 
Ecology,  Hewitt,  Kenneth,  ed.  The  Risks  and 
Hazard Series I. Allan & Unwin.

Weber,  Elke.  2006.  Experience-based  and  de-
scription-based perceptions of long-term risk: 
Why global warming does not scare us (yet). Cli-
matic Change, Vol. 77, Issue 1-2 (July): 103-120.

cccvi

References

WEF (World Economic Forum). 2013. The Global 
Competitiveness  Report  2013–2014.  Full  Data 
Edition.

WEF (World Economic Forum). 2014. Global Risks 
2014.  Ninth  Edition.  Insight  Report.  Geneva, 
Switzerland.

Werritty, Alan, Donald Houston, Tom Ball, Amy 
Tavendale and Andrew Black. 2007. Exploring 
the Social Impacts of Flood Risk and Flooding in 
Scotland. Social Research Environment Group. 
Research Findings No.32/2007.

Wilkinson, Richard and Michael Marmot. 2003. 
Social  determinant  of  health:  The  solid  facts. 
Second Edition. The World Health Organiza-
tion. Copenhagen, Denmark.

Wilkinson, E., E. Comba and K. Peters. 2014. Di-
saster Risk Governance: Unlocking Progress and 
Reducing Risk. UNDP, BCPR and ODI.

Wilkinson, Richard. 2005. The Impact of Inequal-
ity: How to Make Sick Societies Healthier. 1 edi-
tion (9 Jun 2005). Routledge.

Williges, Keith, Stefan Hochrainer-Stigler, Junko 
Mochizuki and Reinhard Mechler. 2014. Mod-
eling the indirect and fiscal risks from natural 
disasters: Emphasizing resilience and “building 
back better”. Background Paper prepared for 
the 2015 Global Assessment Report on Disaster 
Risk Reduction. Geneva, Switzerland: UNISDR.
Winterwerp  J.C.,  William  G.  Borst  and  M.B.  de 
Vries. 2005. Pilot study on the erosion and re-
habilitation of a mangrove mud coast. Journal 
of Coastal Research, Vol. 21, Issue 2: 223-231.

Winterwerp, Han, Bregje van Wesenbeeck, Jan 
van Dalfsen, Femke Tonneijck, Apri Astra, Ste-
fan Verschure and Pieter van Eijk. 2014. A sus-
tainable solution for massive coastal erosion in 
Central Java - Towards Regional Scale Applica-
tion of Hybrid Engineering. Discussion paper. 
Deltares and Wetlands International.

Wirtz, A., W. Kron, P. Löw and M. Steuer. 2014. The 
Need For Data. Natural Disasters and The Chal-
lenges of Database Management. Natural Haz-
ards, Vol. 70, Issue 1: 135-157.

Wisner, Ben, Piers Blaikie, Terry Cannon and Ian 
Davis. 2003. At Risk: Natural Hazards, People’s 

vulnerability and disasters. 2nd Edition.

WMO (World Meteorological Organization). 2005. 

Climate and Land Degradation. Geneva.

WMO (World Meteorological Organization). 2011. 
Institutional Partnerships in Multi-Hazard Early 
Warning Systems. A Compilation of Seven Na-
tional  Good  Practices  and  Guiding  Principles. 
Golnaraghi, Maryam, ed. Springer.

WMO  (World  Meteorological  Organization). 
2014a. Synthesis of the Status and Trends With 
the  Development  of  Early  Warning  Systems. 
Background Paper prepared for the 2015 Glob-
al Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduc-
tion. Geneva, Switzerland: UNISDR.

WMO  (World  Meteorological  Organization). 
2014b. WMO Greenhouse Bulletin. The State of 
Greenhouse Gases in the Atmosphere Based on 
Global  Observations  through  2013.  No.  10,  9 
September 2014.

World Bank and Australian Aid. 2013. Socialist Re-
public of Vietnam Performance of the Wastewa-
ter Sector in Urban Areas: A Review and Recom-
mendations for Improvement. Vietnam Urban 
Wastewater Review. The World Bank, Washing-
ton, D.C.

World Bank and ESMAP (Energy Sector Manage-
ment  Assistance  Program).  2011.  Improving 
Energy Access to the Urban Poor in Developing 
Countries. The World Bank, Washington, D.C.

World  Bank,  RMSI,  IFPRI  and  GFDRR.  No  date. 
Economic Vulnerability and Disaster Risk Assess-
ment  in  Malawi  and  Mozambique:  Measuring 
Economic Risks of Droughts and Floods.

World Bank. 2004. Inequality and Economic Devel-
opment in Brazil. A World Bank Country Study. 
The World Bank, Washington, D.C

World  Bank.  2006.  Hazards  of  Nature,  Risks  to 
Development. An IEG Evaluation of World Bank 
Assistance for Natural Disasters. Independent 
Evaluation Group. The World Bank, Washing-
ton, D.C

World  Bank.  2010.  World  Development  Report 
2010:  Development  and  Climate  Change.  The 
World Bank, Washington, D.C.

World Bank. 2011. Dar es Salaam Case Study Over-

view. Climate Change, Disaster Risk and the Ur-
ban Poor: Cities Building Resilience for a Chang-
ing World. The World Bank, Washington, D.C.

World Bank. 2012. Analysis of Disaster Risk Man-
agement  in  Colombia:  A  Contribution  to  the 
Creation  of  Public  Policies.  Coordinators  and 
Editors: Ana Campos G., Niels Holm-Nielsen, 
Carolina Díaz G., Diana M. Rubiano V., Carlos R. 
Costa P., Fernando Ramírez C. and Eric Dickson. 
The World Bank and GFDRR, Washington, D.C.

World Bank. 2013. Building Resilience: Integrating 
Climate and Disaster Risk into Development. The 
World Bank Group Experience. The World Bank, 
Washington, D.C.

WRI (World Resources Institute). 2014. Sea-Level 
rise and its impact on Miami Dade County. Fact 
sheet. By Forbes Tompkins and Christina Dec-
oncini.

WWF (World Wildlife Fund for Nature). 2002. Turn-
ing the tide on flooding. A WWF Scotland report. 
WWF Scotland, November 2002.

Yodmani, Suvit. 2001. Disaster Risk Management 
and  Vulnerability  Reduction:  Protecting  the 
Poor. Paper Presented at The Asia and Pacific 
Forum on Poverty Organized by the Asian De-
velopment Bank.

Zeiderman,  Austin  and  Laura  Astrid  Ramírez 
Elizalde. 2010. “Apocalipsis anunciado”: un vi-
raje en la política de riesgo en Colombia a par-
tir de 1985. # 31 Revista de Ingeniería: 119-131. 
Universidad de Los Andes. Bogotá.

Zobler, Leonard. 1976. Review of Natural Hazards: 
Local, National, Global by Gilbert F. White. Geo-
graphical Review, Vol. 66, No. 2, pp. 247-249.

Zurich Insurance. 2014. Risk Nexus: Central Euro-
pean floods 2013: a retrospective. Flood resil-
ience review 05.14.

cccvii

Index

UN list of country names and territories

A
Afghanistan 

Albania

Algeria 

American Samoa 

Angola

Anguilla

64, 66

92, cclxxvi 

iv, 76, 107

77, 81

84

vi, 75, 77, 79

Antigua and Barbuda 

75, 76,77,  78, cclxxvi

Chile 
 
 

China

 

 

 

Colombia  
 
 

 

 

 

iv, 65, 66, 70, 102, 152, 155, 157, 168, 169, 
174, 218, 221, cclxxviii

41, 49, 55, 65, 70, 71, 72, 104, 105, 127, 166, 
196, 225, 231, 232, 239, 241, 242, 244, 264, 
cclxxiii, ccxcviii

 

 

28, 29, 33, 34, 66, 70, 71, 80, 88, 118, 123, 
146, 148, 152, 226, 256, 262, cclxxiv, cclxxvii, 
cclxxviii

152, 206, 221, 234, cclxxvi

Comoros

81, 92, 103, cclxxviii, ccxcvi

66, 81

75, 78 

 

Congo, Democratic 
Republic of

73, 74, 84, 184, 234 
 

 

67, 68, 70, 71, 82, 88, 140, 148, 155, 170, 171, 
237, cclxx, cclxxi, cclxxii, cclxxvii, cclxxviii

Costa Rica

Cuba

81, 206, 249, 256, cclxxviii

46, 78, 139, 161, ccxcix

Czech Republic

50

D
Djibouti

Dominica

234, cclxxviii

75, 76, 77, 81, cclxxviii

Dominican Republic 

65, 78, 139, ccxcix

E
Ecuador

Egypt

El Salvador

Eritrea

Ethiopia

F
Fiji

France

64, 66, 152, 161, 169, cclxxii, cclxxvi

70,  158

65, 66, 81, 97, 106, cclxxvi

73, 74, 84

80, 83, 84, 159, cclxxvi, ccxcvi, ccc

75, 76, 77, 230

ii, 102, 126, 140, 148, 204, 262, cclxxiv

French Guiana

French Polynesia  

73  

77

G
Gabon

Georgia

Germany

Ghana

Greece

Grenada

64, 74

66, 157, cclxxvi

50, 102, 154, 155, 174, 204, 207 

214, cclxxvii, cclxxviii, cclxxx 

v, 65, 66, 100, 101

75, 81, 92, 127, 128, cclxxviii

Guadeloupe

75, 77, 78, cclxxiii

 

 

Argentina 

Armenia

Aruba 
Australia   

 

Austria

Azores  

B
Bahamas
Bangladesh  

Barbados

Belgium

Belize

Benin

Bermuda

Bhutan

Bolivia

ii, 50

81

75, 76, 77, 78

29, 35, 46, 47, 48, 64, 65, 68, 72, 73, 74, 155, 
161, 191, 192, 206, 262

75, 78, 92, 154

158

68, 69, 75, 76, 104, 105, 238, cclxxxvi

84 

75, 78 

64, 72, 73, 74,  120

102, 152, 159, cclxxv

Bolivia (Plurinational State of)

cclxxv 

 

 

 

Brazil

71, 152, 171, 222, 223, 224, 228, 234, 239, 242

British Virgin Islands

75, 77, 78

Burkina Faso

Burundi 

120

84, 185

C
Cambodia

Canada

Canary Islands

Cape Verde

Cayman Islands

62, 64, 66, 72, 73, 74, 92, 103, 140, cclxxviii

102, 237, cclxxiv, cclxxv, ccxcvi, ccc

81

cclxxiii

76, 77, 78, 104, 105

Central African Republic

Chad

74

84

cccviii

Index

Guatemala

Guinea   

 

H

Haiti 

Honduras

Hong Kong

Hungary  

I

Iceland
India 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

Indonesia 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

Iraq

Ireland
Italy  
 

J

Jamaica

Japan 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 

Iran, Islamic Republic of

65, 66, 102, cclxxviii, ccxcix 

68, 70, 71,135

73

79, 80, cclxxii

23, 32, 44, 55, 68, 70, 71, 72, 92, 98, 124, 151, 
155, 161, 164, 172, 221, 225, 226, 232, 239, 
241, 242, 244, 262, 264, cclxxv, cclxxviii

iv, 23, 32, 41, 70, 71, 79, 80, 81, 82, 88, 91, 102, 
147, 148, 164, 165, 172, 239, 242, cclxxiii-cclxxvi, 
cclxxviii 

73, 184, 255

233, 255, cclxxiv, cclxxv

65, 80, 157, 228, 249, cclxxiii, cclxxiv, cclxxv 
cclxxvi

ii, iii, xiii, xvi, 27, 31, 58, 65, 66, 67, 68, 70, 71, 
79, 80, 81, 82, 88,  110, 122,  125,  127, 128, 
129, 132, 134, 156, 167, 171, 193, 205, 206, 
208, 209, 210, 211, 231, 244, cclxxiv, cclxxv, 
cclxxx 

Jordan  

cclxxviii

K

Kenya

Kiribati

Korea, Republic of

Korea (DPR)

Kyrgyzstan 

vi, 85, 86, 87, 159, 218, 238, cclxxviii

71, 77 

231 

68

66

L
Lao People’s Democratic 
Republic

Lebanon

Lesotho

Liberia

64, 72, 73, 74  
 

238, cclxxvii

66, 73, 234

84

29, 62, 64, 65, 66, 79, 80, 81, 206, 238, cclxxviii

M

74, 84

Macao (Special Administrative 
Region of China)

70, 71 

 

 

 

 

Madagascar  

iv, 64, 68, 74, 76, 84, 92, 97, 100, 102, 103, cclxxix

47, 48, 58, 75, 78, 100, 127, 128, 139, 143, 157, 
168, 169

Malawi

Maldives

vi, 64, 66, 73, 74, 83, 85, 86, cccvii

105

58, 62, 64, 65, 66,68, 78, 100, 104, 164, cclxxviii

Mali

84, 158, 185, 238, cclxxix

v, 31, 75, 78, 100, 114, 195, 238, cclxxviii, cccv

New Caledonia

77

Netherlands

71, 237, ccxcvi

Marshall Islands

77

Martinique

Mauritius
Mexico 
 

 

 

 

 

 

Micronesia,   
Federated States of  

Moldova, Republic of

Mongolia

Montserrat

Morocco

Mozambique

Myanmar 
 
N

 

Nepal

75, 78,  81, 88

92, 103, 104, 144, 154, 255, cclxxix, ccxcvi

 

 

vi, 52, 68, 78, 79, 80, 104, 105, 122, 156, 157, 
165, 186, 193, 207, 212, 238, 256, cclxxii, 
cclxxiv, cclxxvii, cclxxix

 

 

 

 

71, 77 
  

73

193

75, 77, 81 

92, 195

46, 68,  84,102, 161, 172, cclxxix, cccvii

45, 48, 62, 64, 68, 72, 73, 74, 163, 164, 210, 211 

65, 73, 74, 138, 206, 238, cclxxix, ccxcii, ccxcii

New Zealand

Nicaragua

Niger

Nigeria  

P

Pakistan

Palau

Palestine

Panama

Papua New Guinea
Peru  

 

 

Philippines   

41, 55, 67, 68, 70, 71, 82, 171, 238, cclxxiii

29, 32, 66, 81, cclxxix

vi, 55, 85, 86, 92 

94, 234

iv, 74, 92, 102, 143, 157, 169, 172, 219, cclxxix

71, 76, 77

92, cclxxix

90, 206, 233, 256, cclxxix

68, 71,77,  81, 82

 

 

iv, 23, 29, 30, 64, 65, 66, 67, 70, 123, 148, 152, 
187, 206, 234, 256, cclxxiv

v, 31, 62, 64, 65, 68, 70, 71, 76, 79, 80, 82, 100, 
101, 122, 130, 155, 165, 166, 187, 237

 

 

Puerto Rico 

75, 76, 77, 78

R

Russian Federation

82, 182, 244

Rwanda 

195

cccix

S

Saint Kitts and Nevis

75, 76, 78, 81, 92, cclxxix 

Saint Lucia

75, 76, 77, 81, 92, cclxxix

Saint Vincent and  

75, 76, 77, 81  

 

 

the Grenadines

Samoa

81  

  

Sao Tome and Principe

81

Senegal

Serbia

Sierra Leone

Slovenia

84, 92, cclxxvix

58, 73, 92, cclxxvix

84, 92, 184, 185, 234, cclxxvix

66  

Solomon Islands

71, 76, 77, 82, cclxxvix

Somalia

South Africa

Spain

Sri Lanka

State of Palestine

Sudan

Swaziland

Sweden

Switzerland

73

123, 218, 234, 239, 242

92, cclxxiv, cclxxix

23, 32, 132, 155, 156, 237, cclxxix 

66, 92

84

73, 234

cclxxii, ccxciv

ii, 232, 248, cclxx

Syrian Arab Republic

66, 234, 235, cclxxix

T

Taiwan (Province of China)

68, 70, 82, 166, cclxxiv

Tajikistan

Tanzania

Togo

Tonga

Trinidad and Tobago

Tristan da Cunha, 
Nightingale Island and 
Ascension 

Tunisia 
Turkey 

 

 

Turks and Caicos Islands 

Tuvalu   

U

Uganda 

Ukraine

United Arab Emirates

65, 66, 73

84,  92, 98, 219, cclxxiv

92

71, 75, 76, 77

vi, 67, 75, 78, 79, 92, cclxxix
81 

 

 

 

 

92, cclxxix

 

 

41, 47, 92, 188, 193, 202, 212, cclxxv, cclxxvi, 
cclxxix, cccv

77  

41

84, 148, cclxxix

73

64  

United States Virgin Islands

77, 78

Uruguay
U.S.A. 
 

 

Uzbekistan  

152, cclxxix

24, 29, 31, 55, 58, 65, 68, 72, 155, 193, 197, 
231, 244, 248, cclxxix

cclxxv

V

Vanuatu
Venezuela,    
Bolivarian Republic of

Viet Nam   

 

71, 75, 76, 77, 81, 82, 97, 104, 105

78, 152, 164, cclxxix 

 

 

 

73, 74, 163, 166, 226, 237, 238, cclxxix, 
cclxxxi, ccxcvii

Y

Yemen

Z

Zambia 

Zimbabwe 

cclxxix

234

222, 234

average annual loss (AAL)  

 

 

agriculture

biocapacity

ix,  xiv, 54-70, 72-79, 81-82, 85, 87-88, 
100-101, 127, 144, 146, 149, 211, 251, 252, 
255, 259, cclxix

vi, xvi, 40, 58, 70, 79, 83-84, 169, 190, 232, 242

iv, xv-xvi, 181, 204, 229-244

business continuity

129, 135, 145, cclxix

capital stock

climate change

corrective risk management
cyclone 

 

 

iv, xviii, 56, 58, 59, 60-61, 65- 67, 70-77, 
100-101, 104, 202, 211, 252, cclxviii, cclxix

iii, vi, xiii-xiv, xvi-xvii, xix, 33, 56, 69, 71, 
78-79, 83- 87, 106-107, 115-116, 124, 129, 
135-136, 140, 143-144, 179, 181-182, 188, 191, 
202, 211, 217, 220-221, 230- 233, 236-237, 
241, 247-253, 256, 262, 264-266, cclxviii

ix, xviii, 60, 121, 251, cclxix

iv, vi, xiv, xix, 29, 32, 35, 44-46, 48-49, 
54-56, 58, 64, 67-69, 71, 76- 79, 88, 90, 
103-104, 110,  143-144, 148, 156, 163-165, 
170, 178, 186, 190, 202, 211, 215

United Kingdom

29, 30, 71, 72, 143, 200, 210, 252, ccxc, ccxciii

direct losses

58, 104, 205, 208, cclxviii

United States of America
 

24, 29, 31, 55, 58, 65, 68, 70, 72, 155, 193, 
197, 231, 244, 248, cclxxx

drought  
 

 

vi, xix, 54, 56, 83, 84, 86, 88, 148, 159, 172, 
178, 190, 233, 234, 235 

cccx

Index

earthquake   

 

 

 

 

economic resilience
extensive risk 
 
 

 

 

financing gap 

fire 

flood 
 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

23, 27, 30-32, 34, 36, 41, 47- 49, 52, 56, 58, 
65-67, 70, 75, 88, 90, 103-104, 118, 124, 
127-128, 135-136, 143, 146-149, 156-157, 
163, 169, 171-172, 178, 187-188, 208, 215

58, 100, 103, 192

iv, xiv, xviii, xix, xx, 26, 58, 90, 91, 93, 94, 95, 
96, 97, 98, 125, 132, 159, 160, 170, 184, 188, 
214, 257, 258, 260

iv, 102, 167, 169, 170

47, 83, 90, 151, 219, 238, 241

xiv, 24-25, 41, 44, 49, 56, 58, 70-74, 110, 121, 
124-126, 128, 132, 143, 145, 147, 157-158, 
160, 172, 185, 190-191, 197, 201, 207, 215-217, 
219, 236, 238-240, 247, 249, 260, 262

 

 

 

 

resilience  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

return period 
 

risk financing 
 

 

risk governance 
 

risk transfer

river flood

iii-iv, vi, ix, xi, xiv-xv, xviii, xx, 26, 28, 30, 35, 
58, 83, 86, 96, 100, 101, 103-104, 108, 131, 133, 
138, 145, 147, 150-151, 160, 163, 169, 172, 181, 
186, 189, 190- 193, 195, 212, 218, 220, 222, 

232-233, 247, 251, 255-256, 260, cclxix

48, 50, 57, 84, 86, 90, 102-103,  108-109, 144, 
169-170, cclxviii-cclxix

xviii, 25, 34, 55, 58, 103, 129, 137, 144, 169, 
193, 194, 195, 256, 259, 260, 261

xi, xvii, 29, 33, 117, 118, 119, 121, 124, 126, 
128, 129, 130, 134, 195, 253, 254, 256, cclxix

34, 150

xiv, 41, 56, 70-74, 2011, 215, 238

small and medium 

151, 200, 203  

 

 

enterprise (SME)
small island developing 
states (SIDS)

 

tsunami    
 

underlying risk drivers  
 

urban development 
 

 

 

 

 

 

vulnerability 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

iv, xiv, xvi, 58, 74-77, 80, 100, 102, 104, 203 

23-24, 32, 36, 52, 56, 58, 65, 68-70, 76, 110, 
143, 147, 148
xiii, 33, 35, 90, 97, 116, 121, 162, 179, 224, 249, 
254, 260, 261, 264

vii, viii, xiii, 33, 35, 47, 90, 125, 128, 133, 137, 
180, 214, 215, 216, 218, 220, 221, 223, 224, 
225, 248, 249, 254, 259

xviii, 25, 26, 27, 33, 44, 45, 47, 49, 56, 57, 58, 64, 
65, 67, 78, 88, 90, 96, 106, 108, 126, 127, 138, 
141, 147, 148, 150, 158, 159, 164, 172, 181, 185, 
189, 190, 191, 192, 195, 197, 205, 211, 219, 232, 
233, 239, 257, 258, cclxviii, cclxix

food security 

xvi, 158, 159, 190, 191, 232, 249 

GFCF 

60, 88, 98, cclxix

global risk assessment

xix, xx, 55-57, 70, 88, cclxxii

gross fixed capital 

60, 88, cclxix  

 

 

formation (GFCF)

Hyogo Framework for 
Action (HFA) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

inequality 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

intensive risk 

International Decade for 
Natural Disaster Reduction 
(IDNDR)

land degradation 

landslides
Millennium Development 
Goals (MDGs)

natural capital
probability   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

viii, xiii, xv-xvi, xx, 26, 27-29, 32, 35-36, 40, 
44-45, 47, 90, 97, 100, 104, 114-116, 
118-121, 123-124, 126, 130, 133-134, 137, 

139-145, 147-148, 154-155, 160-169, 

171,173, 179, 190, 192-193, 205-207, 210, 

214, 220-222, 230, 233, 236-237, cclxxiv

vii, xi, xiii, xv-xvi, xviii, 25, 33, 36, 90, 96, 
178, 180-181, 183-185, 187- 190, 192, 
195-198, 214, 216, 218, 226-227, 230, 235, 
247-248, 254, 258-259, 265, cclxviii

xv, 26, 49, 90, 151, 186, 209, 214

xiv, 27, 29, 31, 32, 40, 44, 45, 114, 120, 134, 
137, 161 

 

 

 

 

 

83, 84, 191, 232, 234

70, 132, 178, 233, 261, ccxcviii
xvi, 45, 46, 191, 219, cccv   

 

vi, vii, xv, xvi, 180, 231, 234, 235, 239, 248

57, 66-67, 70, 75, 81, 84, 87, 133, 156, 167, 
187, 202, 209, cclxviii, cclxix

probable maximum loss 
(PML)

56-57, 66-67, 70-71, 75, 77, 84, 86, 144, 146, 
149, cclxix

prospective (disaster) risk 
management 

public-private partnership 
(PPP)

ix, xviii, 34, 61, 65, 68, 71-72, 120-121, 128, 
163, 168, 173, 191-192, 251, cclxix  

206, 210 

 

 

 

 

cccxi

UNISDR is grateful to the organizations whose logos are shown below for their contributions to the pro-
duction of the 2015 Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction. In addition, financial resourc-
es were also generously made available by the European Commission (Directorate-General for Humani-
tarian Aid and Civil Protection, and Directorate-General for Development and Cooperation), the United 
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and by the Government of the United States of America.

GAR15 products

• The Pocket GAR summarizes the main evidence and messages of the report in a concise, easy-
to-read format.
• The main report contains further enhanced content links which provide access to dynamic 
maps, videos, photos, and case studies for users with smartphones and tablets. 
• Tablet computer and smartphone users can also enjoy the free GAR for Tangible Earth (GfT) 
application. The GfT (or “gift”) is a fully interactive stand-alone application which features a 
3D globe interface with decades of dynamic earth science data sets, including disaster events 
from all GARs. These data sets are illustrated with interactive risk scenarios, maps and photos, 
and can be searched by time (including real-time), place, risk driver, hazard, disaster event, and 
more. 
• GAR15 is also available as a web version, with much of the functionality available in products 
such as: 

Interactive main report in English
Main report in Arabic, Chinese, French, Russian and Spanish
The Pocket GAR in Arabic, Chinese, French, Japanese, Russian and Spanish
Appendices
Background papers
Interim national progress reports on the implementation of the Hyogo 
Framework for Action
Access to disaster loss and risk databases
All GAR15 products can be accessed via:

www.preventionweb.net/gar/

Making Development Sustainable:
Making Development Sustainable:
Making Development Sustainable:
The Future of Disaster Risk Management
The Future of Disaster Risk Management
The Future of Disaster Risk Management

ISBN 978-92-1-132042-8

