From Shared Risk to Shared Value: 
The Business Case for Disaster Risk Reduction 

UNISDR is grateful to the organisations whose logos are shown below for their financial and material 
contributions to the production of the 2013 Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction. In 
addition,  financial  resources  were  also  generously  made  by  the  European  Commission  (Directorate-
General  for  Humanitarian  Aid  and  Civil  Protection,  and  Directorate-General  for  Development  and 
Cooperation), and by the Governments of Australia, Japan, Norway, and the United States of America.

From Shared Risk to Shared Value: 
The Business Case for Disaster Risk Reduction

The Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction (GAR) 2013 has augmented reality (AR) icons 
sprinkled throughout it, which facilitate connection with its companion application GAR for Tangible 
Earth (GfT). To use them, first point the camera of your GfT-installed tablet computer or smartphone at 
these icons, then press the AR button as it appears, and a variety of dynamic information functions 
designed to enrich the reading experience will play in your device. 

Thailand floods

U.S. droughts

Extensive disasters

The  Earth  Icon:  Links  the  user  to  a  dynamic  3D  globe,  enabling 
geospatial data relevant to the subject in the text. 

The Tablet Icon: Opens dynamic animations and additional information 
on the static print charts in GAR. 

The Researcher Icon: Links to data about the researchers behind the 
article being read, their reports, web links, and videos.

To download the application, use the Qbarcode provided at the end of this document or visit www.
preventionweb.net/gar.

ISBN 978-92-1-132038-1
© United Nations 2013. All rights reserved.

Disclaimer
The views expressed in this publication do not necessarily reflect the views of the United Nations Secretariat. The designations employed 
and the presentation of the material do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the United Nations Secretariat 
concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area, or of its authorities, or concerning the delineation of its frontiers or 
boundaries.

This publication may be freely quoted but acknowledgement of the source is requested.
Citation:  UNISDR (2013) From Shared Risk to Shared Value –The Business Case for Disaster Risk Reduction. Global Assessment Report on 
Disaster Risk Reduction. Geneva, Switzerland: United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction (UNISDR).

Design and layout: AXIS and ELP, Tokyo, Japan
Editing: Martha Bonilla
Printing: Imprimerie Nouvelle Gonnet Belley, France

This paper contains 60% post-consumer recycled fibre and 40% FSC certified virgin fibre sourced from well managed forests.

ii

Foreword

The third edition of the United Nations Global As-
sessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction warns 
that the worst is yet to come.

This worrying news follows three consecutive years 
in which direct economic losses from disasters have 
soared past $100 billion. If uninsured losses were in-
cluded, the figure would be even more staggering.

Based on a new state-of-the art global risk model, 
the report’s findings should raise concern among 
policymakers and businesses. In a world of on-go-
ing population growth, rapid urbanization, climate 
change  and  an  approach  to  investment  that  dis-
counts disaster risk, the potential for future losses 
is enormous. The global community continues to 
mix a destructive ‘cocktail of disaster risk’ despite 
catastrophic losses in recent years from the Japan 
earthquake  and  tsunami,  floods  in  Pakistan  and 
Thailand and the destructive Super Storm Sandy.

At the same time, the report documents encourag-
ing  signs  of  progress.  Public-private  partnerships 
in risk management have proven their worth dur-
ing several disasters, including the 2010 and 2011 
earthquakes in Christchurch, New Zealand.

Disaster  risk  management  reduces  uncertainty, 
builds  confidence,  cuts  costs  and  creates  value.  
More  private  sector  senior  executives  are  coming 
to  recognize  this.    But  growing  recognition  must 
be  translated  into  a  more  systematic  approach  to 
disaster risk management that will make tomorrow’s 
world a safer place. 

As we move towards building a new, more inclusive 
and ambitious post-Hyogo Framework for Disaster 
Risk Reduction for the period following 2015, I call 
on governments, civil society and, in particular, the 
private sector to strengthen their partnerships for 
a safer future.

I commend this report to leaders from the public 
and  private  sectors  as  well  as  civil  society  in  the 
hopes that it will inspire all to redouble our collec-
tive  efforts  to  create  and  maintain  resilient  com-
munities and nations. 

Ban Ki-moon
Secretary-General of the United Nations

iii

Direct  disaster  losses  are  at  least  50  percent  higher  than 
internationally reported figures: Total direct losses in 40 low and middle 
income countries amount to US$305 billion over the last 30 years; of these more 
than 30 percent were not internationally reported (Part I-Intro). 

Disasters  directly  affect  business  performance  and  undermine 
longer-term competitiveness and sustainability: When business leaves 
it may never return. Prior to the 1995 earthquake, the port of Kobe was the world’s 
sixth-busiest. Despite a massive investment in reconstruction and efforts to improve 
competitiveness, by 2010, it had fallen to 47th place (Chapter 1).  

Globalised supply chains create new vulnerabilities: Toyota lost 
$1.2 billion in product revenue from the 2011 Japan earthquake and tsunami 
due  to  parts  shortages  that  caused  150,000  fewer  Toyota  automobiles  to  be 
manufactured in the USA, and reductions in production of 70% in India 
and 50% in China (Chapter 1, Box 1.4). 

Businesses loses its lifeline when critical infrastructure is hit: Most 
of the 1,300 businesses surveyed in disaster prone cities in the Americas noted 
disruptions in power and water supply and telecommunications 
as top concerns (Chapter 15). Over 90% of damage to these lifelines occurs in 
local disasters (Chapter 1).

GAR at a Glance
The “wake-up call”- disasters 
are even costlier than we thought

iv

Small  and  medium  enterprises  are  particularly  at  risk:  A  single 
disaster may wipe out all or large parts of business capital of small 
enterprises, in turn affecting large companies relying on local suppliers. Yet, less 
than 15 percent of companies with less than 100 employees in disaster prone 
cities in the Americas have a business continuity or crisis management 
plan in place (Chapter 11).

Disaster risk is a new multi-trillion dollar asset class: Global capital 
flows have transformed the landscape of disaster risk, creating a new pile of toxic 
assets for businesses and governments that do not currently appear on balance 
sheets  (Chapter  2).  Globally,  US$71  trillion  of  assets  would  be  exposed  to  one-
in-250  year  earthquakes.  In  Honduras,  already  a  one-in-33  year  disaster  would 
create a significant financing gap for the government with impacts on future GDP 
(Chapter 5).

Most  disasters  that  could  occur  haven’t  happened  yet:  Total 
expected annual global loss from earthquakes and cyclone wind damage 
alone now amounts to US$180 billion per year (Chapter 3). This figure does 
not include the significant cost of local disasters from floods, landslides, fires and 
storms (Chapter 4) or the cost of business interruption. Agriculture is also at risk: 
in Mozambique a one-in-10 year drought would lower maize yields by 6 percent 
and GDP by 0.3 percent (Chapter 6).

Risks  to  natural  capital  compromise  future  wealth:  Disaster  risks 
include the loss and erosion of natural capital with serious consequences for 
business,  households  and  a  country’s  wealth.  For  example,  wild-land  fires 
now affect all continents with global annual losses to tropical ecosystems alone 
potentially reaching US$190 billion per year (Chapter 6). Land degradation 
increases agricultural drought risk; in Africa, the total area with high degradation 
and high drought hazard is almost 260,000 square km.

v

It’s  no  longer  “business  as  usual”:  Recent  major  disasters  such  as 
Hurricane Sandy in 2012 and the 2011 floods in Thailand focused attention on the 
growing  impact  of  disasters  on  the  private  sector  (Chapter  1).  Many  large 
global businesses are now strengthening their risk management capacities. Yet, 
businesses  still  display  a  ‘blind-spot’  to  disaster  risk,  which  is  largely 
ignored in economic forecasts and growth projections (Chapter 12).

Private investment largely determines disaster risk: In most economies 
70–85  percent  of  overall  investment  is  made  by  the  private  sector, 
including  annual  institutional  investments  worth  more  than  US$80 
trillion  globally.  Both  regulators  and  investors  are  increasingly  demanding  that 
businesses disclose their hidden risks, including disaster risks (Chapter 12).

Insurance is critical to business resilience. Yet insurance pricing often 
does  not  reflect  risk  levels  or  provide  an  adequate  incentive  for  risk  sensitive 
business  investment,  particularly  in  low  and  middle  income  countries  with  low 
penetration rates but rapidly growing markets (Chapter 13).  In China, for example, 
only 3 percent of properties are insured against earthquake and 5 
percent against typhoons and floods.

Governments report significant progress in developing more effective disaster 
response and preparedness strategies and are investing more to address 
risks.  Yet,  the  required  shift  to  anticipate  risks  in  public  and  private 
investment remains a challenge for most (Chapter 14). The number of export 
oriented  Special  Economic  Zones  has  expanded  from  176  zones  in  47 
countries  in  1986  to  3,500  zones  in  130  countries  in  2006.  Many  such  zones  are 
located in hazard-exposed areas increasing disaster risks.

vi

A new wave of urbanisation is unfolding in hazard-exposed countries and 
with it, new opportunities for resilient investment emerge. In India alone, the urban 
population is expected to grow from 379 million in 2010 to 606 million in 2030 and 
875 million in 2050.  Private construction company Mori Building has successfully 
invested  in  earthquake  resistant  housing  developments  in  Japan, 
where earthquake resistance is the most important criteria for choosing new offices 
for 92% of businesses (Chapter 8).

Tourism investment in small island developing states comes with 
high levels of disaster risk – but also with large potential benefits 
from  investment  in  disaster  risk  management:  6  of  the  top  10 
countries  with  the  greatest  proportion  of  assets at  risk  to  cyclone  wind 
damage are small islands (Chapter 7). The competitiveness of these countries, 
and  businesses  invested  in  them  will  depend  on  effective  disaster  risk 
management,  through  for  example  certification  programmes  and  voluntary 
rating systems (Chapter 9).

Current agribusiness practice feeds global food insecurity: Over 2 
million  hectares  of  land  have  been  acquired  through  international 
agribusiness  investment  in  drought  prone  countries  like  Ethiopia 
(Chapter 10).  Commodity markets, bio-fuel production, increasing demand and 
low stocks, can transform production shortfalls due to drought into global food 
price spikes, affecting low-income households, who buy most of the food they 
consume.  But new partnerships between small-holder farmers and businesses 
show potential for a more resilient agriculture.

The business case for 
disaster risk reduction

vii

The business case for stronger disaster risk management is three-
fold:  It  reduces  uncertainty  and  strengthens  confidence:  Orion  invested US$6 
million  in  seismic  protection  in  New  Zealand  that  saved  the  company 
US$65  million  (Chapter  8).  It  opens  the  door  to  cost  savings:  preventive 
investments by fishermen in Mexico saved each individual entrepreneur 
US$35,000  during  Hurricane  Wilma  in  2005  (Chapter  11).  And  it  provides  an 
avenue for value creation: an Economist Intelligence Unit survey records that 63 
percent of businesses see opportunities to generate value from disaster risk 
reduction (Chapter 16).  Businesses that have invested the most in risk management 
may financially outperform their peers. 

Business attitudes are changing: Embedding disaster risk management in 
business processes is increasingly seen as a key to resilience, competitiveness and 
sustainability  -  a  business  survival  kit  in  an  increasingly  unpredictable 
world.  One business survey now lists disaster risk as the 16th most important 
out  of  the  top  50  risks,  and  as  the  6th  most  important  driver 
strengthening risk management (Chapter 16).

A  new  paradigm  for  disaster  risk  governance  will  include  the 
private sector: Only half the countries assessing progress against the UN 
framework  for  disaster  risk  reduction  (Hyogo  Framework  for  Action)  report  on 
active  engagement  with  business  on  disaster  risk  management.  Canada  is  a 
notable  exception  with  20  private  sector  bodies  represented  on  its 
national platform (Chapter 15).

From managing “disasters” 
to managing “risks”

viii

Creating  shared  value  through  disaster  risk  management:  Most 
businesses  are  currently  addressing  disaster  risk  through  the  paradigm  of 
business continuity planning. While essential, this is only one part of 
building  resilient  investments  to  disaster  risk  management.  Important  further 
steps are integrating disaster risk information into investment decisions; 
building public-private risk governance and disclosing disaster risks and 
costs on business balance sheets (Chapter 15). Innovative companies are beginning 
to  move  in  this  direction,  identifying  disaster  hot  spots  in  their  supply  chains, 
reporting  on  risk  reduction  measures  and  forging  partnerships  with  municipal 
governments.

Disaster  risk  management  is  a business  opportunity:  The  development  of 
new crop-insurance products or more disaster resilient infrastructure expands 
existing and opens up new markets, particularly in emerging economies 
(Chapter  16).  Companies  are  recognizing  this  and  beginning  to  invest  in  the 
development of products and services in support of disaster risk management.

As we now approach 2015, international efforts are intensifying to formulate a 
new framework for disaster risk reduction. Ensuring that the business 
case  for  disaster  risk  reduction  is  explicitly  included  in  that  framework  will 
provide a critical incentive for the constructive engagement by business 
on  which  future  resilience,  competitiveness  and  sustainability 
depend. 

ix

The GAR 2013 brand iconography is based on an image of a person holding an inverted 
umbrella. The inverted “A” in the GAR 2013 logo is a resonance of this motif.

The  person  holding  an  inverted  umbrella  is  about  seeing  something  from  a  new 
perspective, a call for creative responsiveness to change. A simple ubiquitous tool, 
proposed in a new way... the grandest breakthroughs often come from such humble 
beginnings.

The image represents acting to overturn a legacy of apathy and ignorance. GAR 2013 
provides clear and actionable information about the risks and rewards of disaster 
risk reduction, as well as a wealth of information about how we unwittingly generate, 
and exacerbate, risks.

The icon also represents the key message of GAR 2013: “Creating Shared Value.” This 
is nowhere more evident than in the power that each of us has to work together to 
make our societies more resilient, to reduce disaster risks and enable responsible use 
of resources. Rain drops, one at a time, may seem insignificant, but given a platform 
to become pooled resources, they can quickly become a powerful force for good.

Thus, the inverted umbrella is an icon of positive empowerment, advocating disaster 
risk management as an opportunity rather than a cost, something which makes you 
— your city, your business, your supply chain, and yourself — more sustainable and 
more competitive.

xii

Preface

The Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk 
Reduction: a retrospective
This  2013  Global  Assessment  Report  on  Disaster 
Risk Reduction, From Shared Risk to Shared Value: 
The  Business  Case  for  Disaster  Risk  Reduction 
(GAR13), is the third biennial report coordinated by 
the  United  Nations  Office  for  Disaster  Risk  Reduc-
tion (UNISDR).   

The  first  Global  Assessment  Report  on  Disaster 
Risk Reduction, Risk and Poverty in a Changing Cli-
mate (GAR09), as well as the second, Revealing Risk 
– Redefining Development (GAR11), focused primar-
ily on public policy and the role of national and local 
governments in disaster risk reduction. The key mes-
sage  of  GAR09  was  that  addressing  the  underlying 

risk drivers is critical not only to the achievement of 
the Hyogo Framework of Action (HFA)i,  but also the 
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) and climate 
change  adaptation.  GAR11  built  on  that  evidence 
to  provide  guidance  to  governments  on  how  to 
effectively manage their disaster risk. 

GAR09  highlighted  how  intensive  disaster  risk  is 
disproportionally  concentrated  in  lower-income 
countries with weak governance.  Within countries, 
it  showed  how  underlying  drivers—such  as  poor 
urban governance, vulnerable rural livelihoods and 
declining  ecosystems—concentrate  extensive  di-
saster risk in low-income communities and house-
holds and drive further the depth and breadth of 
poverty, undermining development (Figure 0.1).

Figure 0.1  GAR09 - Risk drivers and poverty outcomes

(Source: UNISDR, 2009)

xiii

It  also  found  that,  although  progress  was  being 
made  to  strengthen  capacities  for  disaster  pre-
paredness  and  response,  governments  were  chal-
lenged to tackle underlying risk drivers. 

GAR11  provided  further  evidence  on  why  disaster 
risk was increasing and why existing efforts in its re-
duction were failing to address underlying risk driv-
ers.  The  report  provided  an  updated  analysis  of 
global disaster risk and loss trends and a second bi-
ennial  review  of  progress  against  the  HFA.  It  then 
identified political and economic imperatives for in-
creased public investment in disaster risk reduction.  
A  cost-effective  strategy  for  layering  disaster  risk 
management  was  proposed—which  layers  of  risks 
to reduce; which to insure; and which to retain. 

GAR11  described  the  mechanisms  through  which 
governments  can  deliver  responsible  and  consis-
tent  policies  for  risk  reduction,  integrate  disaster 
risk  management 
into  existing  development 

instruments, and build and strengthen risk gover-
nance capacities (Figure 0.2).  

In  most  economies,  public  investment  represents 
only 15–30 percent of gross fixed capital formation.ii  
How the other 70–85 percent of investment is made, 
therefore, has far-reaching consequences on disas-
ter  risk  accumulation  and  on  the  underlying  risk 
drivers identified in GAR09.  In future, trillions of dol-
lars of new business investment will pour into haz-
ard-exposed regions, largely determining the future 
of disaster risk.  

importance,  business 

investment 
Despite  their 
practices  were  neither  highlighted  in  the  HFA  nor 
have  interactions  between  business  investment 
and disaster risk and the factors that mediate those 
interactions been seriously examined.  Like the HFA, 
research and literature on this topic has concentrat-
ed  on  the  role  of  governments,  communities  and 
households rather than of businesses.   

Figure 0.2   GAR11- Key elements for successful disaster risk management (DRM) across governance scales and development sectors 

(Source: UNISDR, 2011)

xiv

PrefaceBuilding on the findings of GAR09 and GAR11, this 
third  Global  Assessment  Report  on  Disaster  Risk 
Reduction seeks to fill that gap. It explores why in-
creasing  disaster  risks  represent  a  growing  prob-
lem for the economic and business community at 
different  scales.  The  report  examines  how  para-
doxically  business 
investments  that  aimed  to 
strengthen competitiveness and productivity may 
have inadvertently contributed to increasing risk. 

GAR13  explores  how  businesses,  by  investing  in 
disaster risk management, can reduce costs and in-
terruptions represented by disaster losses and im-
pacts; how performance and reputation can also be 
enhanced by minimising uncertainty and unpredict-
ability;  why  effectively  managing  disaster  risks 
should be the hallmark of a competitive, sustainable 
and resilient business; and why a broader approach 
to business value creation that also addresses un-
derlying drivers of risk is required. 

GAR13 highlights the interdependence of the public 
and private sectors and why business competitive-
ness, sustainability and resilience will also depend 
on  governments’  ability  to  manage  disaster  risk 
through effective policies.  Governments depend on 
business investment to generate employment and 
the wealth required to provide public services.  Like-
wise,  businesses  depend  on  reliable  public  infra-
structure  and  utilities,  on  efficient  urban  systems, 
on  an  educated  and  healthy  workforce  and  on  a 
range  of  ecosystem  services.    Reducing  disaster 
risks in business and in public investment presents 
a win-win situation for both.  

The principal of shared value involves creating eco-
nomic value that also benefits society by address-
ing  its  needs  and  challenges  (Porter  and  Kramer, 
2011). Risk drivers, such as badly planned and man-
aged urban development, environmental degrada-
tion, climate change and poverty and inequality, are 
key  societal  challenges  that  also  negatively  affect 
business  performance.  Thus  they  create  shared 
risks  to  both  public  and  private  sectors.    Disaster 
risk  reduction  can  and  should  transform  these 

shared risks into shared value for business, govern-
ments and civil society. 

Why do disasters challenge business? 
The major disasters that struck Japan and Thailand 
in 2011 and the United States of America in 2012 re-
vealed how disasters can impact businesses.  Earth-
quakes,  floods  and  storms  can  damage  exposed 
and vulnerable factories, offices and other facilities 
and  resources,  interrupting  and  paralysing  output 
and business processes.  

But disaster risk does not stop at the factory gate. 
Businesses depend on infrastructure and urban sys-
tems run by utilities and the public sector.  Damage 
to  transport  and  energy  networks,  ports  and  air-
ports  or  to  neighbourhoods  where  employees  live 
interrupts  business  and  imposes  additional  costs.  
And in today’s globalised world, even businesses in 
safe locations may be affected by disasters that hit 
suppliers and partners on the other side of the globe.  

Extended insurance coverage may enable business-
es to compensate for both direct loss as well as sup-
ply chain interruption.  But disasters have broader, 
more  pervasive  effects  on  business  competitive-
ness.  When business is interrupted, skilled workers 
may leave, market share may be lost to competitors, 
relationships  with  key  suppliers  and  partners  may 
be severed and confidence and reputation may be 
eroded.  Once business is lost, it may never come 
back.  

Businesses,  of  course,  come  in  many  shapes  and 
sizes.    And  different  sizes  are  exposed  to  different 
kinds  of  risk.    Small  businesses,  for  example,  that 
serve  local  markets  are  affected  directly  by  local-
ised extensive disasters, as associated with flooding 
or  landslides.    And  these  businesses  also  depend 
heavily  on  local  public  infrastructure.    Destruction 
of a bridge in a flash flood, for example, may isolate 
a  local  smallholder  farm,  workshop  or  restaurant 
from  markets  and  suppliers  for  days.    And  many 
such businesses go bankrupt because they lack the 
cash flow or reserves to be resilient.

xv

Large  global  corporations,  at  the  other  end  of  the 
spectrum and owing to their diversity and scale, are 
largely buffered from local impacts in any particular 
place.  However, a major intensive disaster may criti-
cally disrupt their supply chains and global opera-
tions; for example, if a major transhipment hub or 
key supplier is affected. And the recurrent impact of 
smaller  disaster  events  in  regions  where  corpora-
tions seek to establish effective clusters of suppliers 
and vibrant consumer markets may result in equally 
significant losses in the medium to long term. Medi-
um-sized  enterprises  and  national  industries  simi-
larly face different kinds of disaster risk as they may 
be affected by both relatively small-scale localised 
events and larger disasters.

Creating shared risks
Although  hazards  such  as  earthquakes,  cyclones 
and tsunamis are natural in origin, there is nothing 
natural about the way disaster risk has become em-
bedded  in  the  contemporary  business  landscape.  
Decades of businesses decentralising and outsourc-
ing  production  to  facilities  located  in  areas  with 
comparative advantages, such as low labour costs 
and easy access to export markets, has been critical 
to  enhancing  business  competitiveness  and  pro-
ductivity.    However,  because  many  of  these  areas 
are hazard prone, it has dramatically increased the 
exposure  of  businesses  and  their  supply  chains  to 
devastating hazards.   

Investors  have  paid  insufficient  attention  to  this 
growing hazard exposure and its threat to business 
resilience,  competitiveness  and  sustainability. 
Country  briefings,  analysts’  reports,  competitive-
ness indices and business forecasts rarely mention 
disaster  risk,  even  in  high-risk  regions.  Cities  and 
countries,  competing  to  attract  investment,  have 
generally  downplayed  the  risks,  in  some  cases 
even offering incentives to businesses to locate in 
hazard-exposed areas.  And the pricing of risk in in-
surance markets has yet to act as an effective dis-
incentive to investment in hazard-exposed areas. 

In other words, economic globalisation has enabled 

xvi

critical gains in business productivity and efficiency, 
but those gains have been at the expense of an over-
accumulation of disaster risk in many business sec-
tors and in the global economy as a whole.  

Many  of  these  risks  and  costs  are  externalised, 
transferred to and shared with governments, soci-
ety at large and future generations. As GAR09 high-
lighted, disasters disproportionately affect lower-in-
come countries, communities and households, and 
those who benefit least from wealth creation owing 
to economic globalisation.  

However, from the perspective of shared value, this 
process of risk transfer is far from external to busi-
ness. Losses to public infrastructure and services, to 
the  workforce  and  to  ecosystems  also  ultimately 
threaten  the  sustainability  of  all  businesses—large 
and  small—and  thus  in  the  medium  to  long  term, 
become a shared risk.  

The business case for disaster risk reduction
In  today’s  global  economic  and  political  turmoil, 
rapid  technological  change  and  increasing  inter-
connectedness  of  global  trade,  financial  markets 
and supply chains, larger businesses perceive an in-
creasingly riskier world.  For businesses, this means 
an array of complex, unpredictable events and sud-
den change in which risks can manifest swiftly and 
unexpectedly, with far-reaching ramifications.  

Within this landscape, the reduction of disaster risks 
is  taking  on  new  significance  and  urgency  for  all 
global players.  Investments in disaster risk manage-
ment are increasingly being seen less as a cost and 
more  of  an  opportunity  to  strengthen  resilience, 
competitiveness and sustainability. 

Larger  businesses  are  investing  to  secure  and 
strengthen their capacities and strategies for risk 
management.  Institutional  investors,  with  a  fidu-
ciary responsibility to their shareholders to ensure 
prudence  and  sustainability,  are  now  exploring 
regulatory  and  voluntary  actions  to  increase  the 
visibility  of  all  risks,  including  those  associated 

Prefacewith disasters and climate change.  

More  important,  if  business  investment  becomes 
more  risk-sensitive,  governments  will  be  encour-
aged  to  invest  more  heavily  in  disaster  risk  reduc-
tion.    Effective  disaster  risk  management  will  be-
come a basic requirement for competitive countries 
and cities that are successful in attracting business 
investment.  

A growing convergence of public and private initia-
tives to model and estimate disaster risks is begin-
ning to underpin these efforts.  Disaster risk man-
agement platforms and applications are now being 
developed to allow businesses to incorporate these 
data into their investment decisions.  Accurate risk 
data,  in  turn,  facilitate  the  development  of  insur-
ance markets, with appropriate pricing that encour-
ages risk-sensitive investment.  

But above all, businesses now begin to perceive in-
vestments  in  disaster  risk  management  as  a  com-
pelling proposition to create  shared value.  Invest-
ments  in  climate  change  mitigation,  sustainable 
water  management  and  green  cities  directly  ad-
dress underlying risk drivers and at the same time 
become increasingly important in value creation for 
businesses of all types.  

Businesses are finding huge opportunities in disas-
ter proofing new and existing infrastructure, build-
ings and supply chains, which are also critical to risk 
reduction and global sustainability.  Investing to re-
duce the vulnerability and strengthen the resilience 
of  smaller  businesses  that  are  suppliers  and  part-
ners of larger businesses not only strengthens the 
latter’s  business  sustainability  but  also  generates 
shared value in securing local employment, increased 
productivity, tax revenue and welfare.  

ed in 2015,iii  as well as for future international nego-
tiations  around  the  challenge  of  climate  change,  if 
the world is to achieve a socially inclusive, low-car-
bon  and  resilient  economy  laid  out  by  the  Secre-
tary-General of the United Nations (United Nations 
Secretary-General, 2012).

A new and advanced GAR13
The previous two editions of the Global Assessment 
Report were predominantly written for an audience 
of  policy-  and  decision-makers  in  government  de-
partments.    GAR09  laid  out  key  recommendations 
for  governments  as  well  as  civil  society  actors  en-
gaged in disaster risk management; GAR11 sought 
to reach beyond this traditional audience and tar-
geted its analysis and findings particularly at finance 
and planning ministries of national governments. 

In expanding its analysis to include and focus on the 
role of private investment, GAR13 aims at business 
leaders and private investors, on the one hand, and 
at local and national regulators, on the other hand. 
This report seeks to engage businesses in a dialogue 
on disaster risk management that goes beyond the 
current  emphasis  on  response  and  preparedness 
and instead identifies opportunities for the creation 
of shared value for business and society.

As with previous Global Assessment Reports on Di-
saster Risk Reduction, GAR13 has been developed 
on  the  basis  of  original  research  commissioned  to 
and contributed by a wide range of partners, includ-
ing  academic,  scientific  and  technical  organisa-
tions, governments and regional organisations, in-
ternational and non-governmental bodies and most 
importantly by the private sector on a global scale.  
This report offers businesses as well as investors for 
the first time a review of practices that can reduce 
their risk of disaster loss.  

Disaster  risk  reduction,  therefore,  is  a  compelling 
shared value proposition for business. This compo-
nent needs to be recognised in the formulation of 
the  revised  international  frameworks  for  develop-
ment and disaster risk reduction that will be adopt-

Key features of GAR13 include:
A global assessment of economic disaster risk
A  completely  new  probabilistic  multi-hazard  GAR 
global risk model is being developed in collabora-
tion with scientific and technical partners to replace 

xvii

the  earlier  model  used  in  GAR09  and  GAR11.  This 
major modelling initiative will provide a unique vi-
sion of global disaster risk, generating information 
and  metrics  for  risk-sensitive  investment  planning 
for  governments  and  business,  as  well  as  for  ana-
lysts and forecasters. An overview of the methodol-
ogy is provided in Annex 1 of the online version of 
GAR13. 

from Asia, Europe and North America to understand 
current  approaches  to  disaster  risk  management, 
challenges and opportunities.  Based on an innova-
tive risk management framework, these workshops 
provide  lessons  learned  and  unique  insights  into 
how  large  global  businesses  assess  disaster  risks 
and how this information is used to inform risk man-
agement. 

GAR13 also explores the resilience of national econ-
omies to these risks through a number of different 
models, indexes and simulations, including the de-
velopment of hybrid loss exceedance curves, build-
ing on the pioneering work in GAR11.

A more complete estimation of disaster losses
The number of countries developing national disas-
ter  loss  databases  continues  to  grow.    GAR13  fea-
tures detailed national disaster loss data from a to-
tal of 56 countries, including new data from Djibouti, 
Ethiopia, Guyana, Honduras, Jamaica, Kenya, Leba-
non,  Laos,  Mali,  Nicaragua,  Timor  Leste,  Uganda, 
Uruguay and a regional database for the Pacific Is-
land nations.  

A new approach to modelling direct economic loss-
es  from  these  data  permits  most  likely  the  most 
complete estimation to date of the real cost of di-
sasters.  This approach combines internationally re-
ported economic losses from intensive disasters, as 
recorded  in  the  EM  DAT  database,  with  modelled 
economic losses in the housing, infrastructure and 
agriculture  sectors  from  extensive  disasters  cap-
tured  in  national  disaster  databases.  The  detailed 
methodology and summary of results are available 
in Annex 2 of the online version of GAR13.

Understanding how businesses manage disas-
ter risk
A  centrepiece  of  GAR13  is  an  in-depth  analysis  of 
how businesses are currently managing their disas-
ter risks.  

In partnership with a major consultancy company, 
workshops  were  held  with  14  global  corporations 

xviii

A  survey  of  about  1,200  businesses  in  six  disaster-
prone cities in the Americas (Bogota, Kingston, Mi-
ami,  San  Jose,  Santiago  and  Vancouver)  provides 
valuable  information  on  another  perspective,  in 
particular, on the capacities of small and medium-
sized businesses to manage disaster risks.  This sur-
vey also examines the enabling environment for pri-
vate sector involvement in disaster risk reduction. 

Reviewing progress in disaster risk reduction
At  the  time  of  writing,  131  countries  are  reviewing 
their progress against the HFA for 2012–2013, and 94 
countries  have  submitted  reports  that  provide 
unique insights into the implementation of the HFA.  
Governments have reviewed their progress against 
each of the priority areas of the HFA, and provided 
supporting evidence on challenges in critical areas 
such  as  public  investment  and  risk  assessment.  
GAR13 highlights these developments, and a fuller 
analysis of all national reports is presented in Annex 
3 of the online version.

In addition, governments in eight countries in Asia 
and  Latin  America  have  provided  detailed  case 
studies  of  their  investments  in  disaster  risk  reduc-
tion and how these are measured.  As new invest-
ments  flood  into  emerging  economies,  results  re-
ported in these case studies provide useful context.  

In  partnership  with  a  major  global  social  research 
organisation, 30 senior officials in national finance 
and planning ministries, regional and international 
organisations were interviewed, providing addition-
al insight into how policy- and decision-makers view 
the risk landscape.

PrefaceA focus on the urban development, tourism 
and agribusiness sectors
GAR13 also commissioned research to examine the 
challenges and opportunities to risk-sensitive busi-
ness  investment  in  three  sectors:  urban  develop-
ment; tourism; and agribusiness.  These sectors are 
not  only  some  of  the  most  dynamic  in  the  world 
economy, but also play a key role in the configura-
tion of disaster risks.  In each sector, GAR13 exam-
ines  the  interactions  between  business  and  the 
public sector and the incentives and constraints for 
disaster risk reduction. 

Finance, insurance and public regulation 
Business  investment  decisions  in  these  and  other 
sectors are mediated by the availability of finance, 
insurance pricing as well as public sector regulation 
and incentives.

In  partnership  with  the  insurance  industry,  and 
through a set of case studies, GAR13 examines the 
challenges  faced  in  the  development  of  insurance 
markets that contribute towards risk-sensitive busi-
ness investment.  It also looks at the role of capital 
markets and financial institutions in providing incen-
tives or disincentives for risk-sensitive investment. 

Public  regulation  has  traditionally  been  privileged 
as a means to avoid the externalisation of risks and 
costs by business investments to the public sector 
and community.  But GAR13 also examines how the 
incentives  provided  by  countries  and  cities  to  at-
tract  foreign  direct  investment  (FDI)  may  actually 
encourage investment in hazard-prone areas.  Fur-
ther, it seeks to identify examples where it has been 
recognised  that  the  costs  of  the  resulting  shared 
risks  are  becoming  untenable  for  both  business 
competitiveness and the sustainability of societies. 

Nascent business practices in disaster risk 
management
GAR13  also  identifies  and  describes  nascent  busi-
ness practices that are starting to positively trans-
form the landscape of disaster risk management.  

These practices include efforts to strengthen cor-
porate  risk  management  strategies;  new  ap-
proaches  to  supply  chain  resilience;  initiatives  to 
increase the accessibility and usability of risk infor-
mation; investors’ growing appetite for risk disclo-
sure and transparency; and new opportunities for 
creating shared value by investing in disaster risk 
management in partnership with the public sector. 

How to use this report
GAR13 has been structured around a set of contrib-
uted  and  commissioned  Background  Papers,  as 
well  as  risk  and  disaster  data.  More  in-depth  re-
search and case studies than ever before have been 
developed  for  this  edition  of  the  GAR,  including 
studies submitted in response to a Call for Papers 
issued  to  relevant  academic  institutions  and  net-
works in early 2012.  GAR13 is available in a number 
of different formats. 

•	 The Augmented Reality print GAR13 contains en-
hanced content that provides access to addition-
al  digital  information,  such  as  dynamic  maps, 
videos,  photos  and  case  studies,  for  users  with 
smartphones and tablets.   

•	 The Pocket GAR provides the main evidence and 
messages  of  the  report  in  a  short  and  easy-to-
use format. 

•	 GAR13 is also a feature on Tangible Earthiv  – the 
world’s  first  interactive  digital  globe  that  allows 
users to view and understand the condition of our 
planet. Global risk and disaster data that under-
pin  the  report,  as  well  as  case  studies  and  in-
depth  analysis  of  particular  disaster  events,  are 
presented in a format that offers readers a unique 
way to visualise disaster risk and its reduction.  

•	 Tablet computer and smartphone users can also 
enjoy the GAR for Tangible Earth (GfT) free appli-
cation.  GfT,  or  “gift”,  is  a  fully  interactive  stand-
alone application, which features a 3D globe in-
terface that contains decades of dynamic earth 
science data sets, including disaster events from 

xix

all GARs. These data sets are illustrated with in-
teractive  risk  scenarios,  maps,  and  photos  and 
are  searchable  by  time  (including  real-time), 
place,  risk  driver,  hazard,  disaster  event,  and 
more.

•	 Finally, GAR13 is also available as an interactive 
web  version,  including  all  Annexes  and  Back-
ground  Papers  with  much  of  the  functionality 
available in all the above products.

Notes

i 
The World Conference on Disaster Reduction, held from 18–22 
January 2005, in Kobe, Hyogo Prefecture, Japan, adopted the Hyogo 
Framework for Action 2005–2015:  Building the Resilience of Nations 
and Communities to Disasters.
ii 
In OECD countries, the share of private sector investment in total 
fixed capital formation was 85 percent in 2010 (OECD, 2013). In low 
and  middle-income  countries,  the  share  of  private  sector  invest-
ment is lower (almost 70 percent in low and lower middle-income 
countries and about 64 percent in upper middle-income countries 
in 2009), but has increased steadily, significantly contributing to to-
tal GFCF growth. Especially the share in lower middle-income econ-
omies increased by almost 10 percent since 1996 (based on World 
Development  Indicators:  http://data.worldbank.org/data-catalog/
world-development-indicators). 
iii  2015 is the year in which three major international development 
processes will be reviewed and efforts towards sustainable develop-
ment renewed in the form of the reviewed Millennium Development 
Goals, the follow-up to Rio+20 in the form of Sustainable Develop-
ment Goals, and the successor agreement to the Hyogo Framework 
for Action. To which degree these processes will converge or remain 
distinct has to be seen.
iv  Tangible Earth was first conceived by Shinichi Takemura in 2001. 
For more information, see: http://www.tangible-earth.com/en.

xx

PrefaceContents

Foreword

GAR at a Glance

Preface

iii

iv

xiii

Chapter 1 

Introduction: Risky Business

023

Part I  The Globalised Landscape of Disaster Risk

037

Chapter 2 

The Hidden Risks of Economic Globalisation 

 

 

Chapter 3 

Intensive Riskscapes

Chapter 4 

Invisible Risks 

 

 

Chapter 5 

The Resilience Challenge

Chapter 6 

Natural Capital Risk

Chapter 7 

Small Islands, Big Opportunities

041
 

051

067

077

089

105

x

Part II  Private Investment and Disaster Risk

117

Chapter 8         Urbanising Risk

Chapter 9         Hazardous Leisure

Chapter 10       No Free Lunch: Agribusiness and Risks to Food Security

121

141

151

Part III  Business Strategies and Risk Governance 

177

Chapter 11       From Managing Disasters to Managing Risks 

 

Chapter 12      Risk Blind Investment

Chapter 13       Securing Investment:  Insurance Revisited

Chapter 14       Risk Governance:  In Search of the Missing Paradigm

Chapter 15      Anticipating Risk

181

191

199

209

223

Chapter 16      Conclusion: From Shared Risk to Shared Value

235

Glossary
Acknowledgements
References
Index

ccxlviii
ccl
cclviii
cclxxx

xi

Introduction: Risky Business

Chapter 1   

Disasters can seriously undermine business competitiveness and longer-term economic sustain-
ability. In the last two years, many businesses experienced direct losses or impacts in the supply 
chain affecting their profitability. If critical infrastructure such as transport networks and power sup-
ply are affected, businesses suffer. But business is affected not only as a consequence of direct and 
indirect losses but also owing to wider impacts and macroeconomic effects. 
Market share may be lost as clients transfer their business to competitors; skilled workers may 
move or find other jobs; and relationships with suppliers and retailers can be severed. Consequently, 
business image and reputation may be permanently damaged, affecting longer-term sustainability. 
Critically, global trade, financial markets and supply chains have become increasingly interconnect-
ed.  When local disasters occur in globally integrated economies, the impacts ripple through re-
gional and global supply chains causing indirect losses to businesses on the other side of the globe.  

1.1 Like pouring water into a 

bamboo basket

The 1990s were what they call a “lost decade” 
for the Japanese economy as a whole, and the 
Port of Kobe was already losing its comparative 
advantage.  However, it was the 1995 Great Han-
shin-Awaji  Earthquake  that  drastically  acceler-
ated its decline. 

During the 1960s and 1970s, the Port of Kobe, Ja-
pan,  was  the  principal  transport  hub  between 
Asian manufacturers and markets in North Ameri-
ca.  In the 1980s, however, its market share began 

to  fall  owing  to  high  costs,  inflexible  operations 
and  powerful  labour  unions  (Containerisation  In-
ternational, 1998a).

Prior to the 1995 earthquake, Kobe was the world’s 
sixth-busiest port. After the quake, it failed to recov-
er that prominence (see Box 1.1 below).   Following 
two  years  of  rebuilding,  in  March  1997,  Kobe  had 
fallen  to  17th  place  worldwide  (Chang,  2000b);  by 
2000, it fell further to 23rd place; and by end-2010, it 
ranked  47th  (Nagamatsu,  2007).    During  the  port’s 
reconstruction  period,  a  big  boost  in  trans-ship-
ping  business  was  given  to  other  Asian  ports, 
which  provided  lower  costs,  a  large  productive 

Box 1.1  The Great Hanshin-Awaji Earthquake

At 5:46 am on 17 January 1995, a 7.3 Mw earthquake in the southern part of Japan’s Hyogo Prefecture killed 
6,437  people  (Government  of  Japan,  2011).  Direct  damage  was  estimated  at  US$100  billion  (Chang,  2000a; 
Nagamatsu, 2007) and damage to Kobe’s port accounted for 10 percent of that total, affecting all 35 container 
shipping berths; 177 out of 186 non-container shipping berths; and all gantry cranes, warehouses, bridges and 
utility lines (Chang, 2000a).

When the port shut down, devastating impacts rippled outward—the port had provided 39 percent of Kobe’s 
income and employed 17 percent of its population (City Government of Kobe, 2010). Disruption of port services 
cost US$300 million per month—the equivalent of income loss for 40,000 employees in port-related businesses, 
manufacturing, wholesale and retail trade (Chang, 2000a). Businesses absorbed higher transportation costs, 
and only from March to December 1995, these secondary costs amounted to approximately US$4 billion.

(Source: UNISDR)

23

hinterland  and  growing  consumer  markets  (Con-
tainerisation International, 1998a).  Busan, Repub-
lic  of  Korea’s  second  largest  city,  in  particular, 
stood to gain substantially (OECD, 2009). 

Great East Japan Earthquake
 

 

1.2  

Dimensions of  disaster

Booming  business  never  returned  to  the  port  de-
spite  efforts  to  improve  competitiveness—efforts 
included reducing harbour dues, wharfage and land 
rental fees, and operating around the clock.  It was 
like  “pouring  water  into  a  bamboo  basket”  said 
Rinnosuke Kondoh, former deputy secretary gener-
al  of  the  Tokyo-based  International  Association  of 
Ports and Harbours (Containerisation International, 
2003).  Even without the earthquake, the port would 
have  most  likely  gradually  lost  market  share;  but 
there is no doubt that its competitiveness was fatal-
ly weakened by the quake. 

The increasing frequency and scale of disasters 
is demonstrated by how businesses today suffer 
direct and indirect losses and a series of wider 
impacts and macroeconomic effects. 

Businesses  are  increasingly  concerned  with  disas-
ter-related  direct  losses  to  their  assets  or  indirect 
losses in their supply chain causing a fall in output 
and  revenue,  thereby  affecting  profitability.  But 
business  is  affected  not  only  as  a  consequence  of 
these  losses  but  also  owing  to  wider  impacts  and 
macroeconomic effectsi (Figure 1.1). 

An  investment  of  US$163  billion  in  rebuilding 
Kobe meant that its damaged infrastructure was 
quickly  reconstructed.  But  this  did  not  lead  to 
sustainable  economic  recovery.  Until  1995,  Hyo-
go Prefecture was growing roughly in line with Ja-
pan  as  a  whole.    Except  during  the  post-earth-
quake  stimulus,  when  reconstruction  spending 
gave  a  temporary  boost,  its  economy  then  slid 
into a long decline (Hayashi, 2011).

Businesses suffer direct losses when they have in-
vested  in  locating  factories,  offices,  plant,  ware-
houses and other facilities in locations exposed to 
hazards  such  as  floods,  cyclones,  earthquakes  or 
tsunamis and without adequate investments to re-
duce risks. 

But  there  are  critical  differences  regarding  how 
these losses affect business, depending on the kind 

Figure 1.1  The different dimensions of disaster losses, impacts and effects on businessii

(Source: UNISDR, adapted from PwC)

24

Chapter 1of disaster and size of business.  Large global busi-
nesses are rarely at risk from smaller extensive di-
sasters, but may be severely affected by major in-
tensive  events  such  as  the  2011  Great  East  Japan 
Earthquake or the 2011 Chao Phraya river floods in 
Thailand.  Such intensive disasters often cause mas-
sive  direct  capital  losses  to  factories,  plant  and 
stock  as  well  as  to  critical  infrastructure  such  as 
ports,  airports,  power  stations  and  urban  mass 
transit systems. 

For example, on 11 March 2011, the Great East Ja-
pan Earthquake and tsunami generated direct loss-
es  of  about  US$206  billion,iii  representing  approxi-
mately  20  percent  of  average  annual  gross  fixed 
capital formation from 2008 to 2012.iv  Similarly, di-
rect losses from the Chao Phraya river floods were 
approximately  US$45.7  billion,  which  equals  more 
than 60 percent of Thailand’s average annual gross 
fixed capital formation from 2006 to 2010.v  Because 
so many businesses suffered simultaneously, the re-
spective national economies were severely impact-
ed.  For example, at the beginning of 2011, Japan’s 
projected annual GDP growth was 1.5 percent.  Fol-
lowing the Great East Japan Earthquake, GDP fell by 
3.1 percent in the first quarter of 2011 and by 2.1 per-
cent in the second quarter of 2011 (Funabashi and 

Takenaka, 2012).  In Thailand, owing to damage to 
industrial estatesvi by the Chao Phraya river floods, 
GDP fell by 9.0 percent in the fourth quarter of 2011 
compared with the same quarter in 2010. 

Following intensive disasters large global business-
es may be less hard-hit owing to diversified facilities 
and operations spread over many countries and re-
gions and to insurance coverage; often only a small 
percentage of such companies’ global capital stock 
is affected at any given time.

Micro  and  small  and  medium  enterprises  (SMEs)vii  
play an important role in low, middle and high-in-
come  economies.    They  account  for  one-third  of 
low-income countries’ employment, and estimates 
of their contribution to total employment in high-in-
come  countries  range  from  more  than  50  percent 
(IFC, 2012) to 65 percent in OECD countries (UNDP, 
2004) and 70 percent globally (ILO, 2012).  In addi-
tion,  they  contribute  between  51  percent  and  55 
percent of GDP in high-income countries (UNCTAD, 
2005; Dalberg, 2011) and play a fundamental role in 
community dynamics (UNDP, 2013).

The informal business sector also plays a key role 
in  employment  in  many  economies.  Smallholder 

Figure 1.2  Share of wage and non-wage employment across the globe

(Source: World Bank, 2012a)

25

farmers and informal small and micro-enterprises 
occupy the bulk of the labour force in many parts 
of Asia and Africa (Figure 1.2). 

1.3 When business loses its 

_                  infrastructure damage

lifelines: indirect losses and       

Compared  with  global  businesses,  informal  sector 
producers and SMEs are far less resilient, particular-
ly  in  low  and  middle-income  countries.    Smaller 
businesses are at risk to recurrent localised exten-
sive  disasters,  such  as  landslides,  fires,  floods  and 
storms.   More likely to be located in hazardous ar-
eas,  with  evolving  extensive  risk,  these  businesses 
are less likely to have invested in protective risk-re-
ducing schemes. 

Infrastructure—such  as  road,  power  and  water 
networks, and health and primary education fa-
cilities—is a basic requirement of a competitive 
economy.  Businesses  rely  on  functioning  utili-
ties  and  communications  networks,  which  are 
provided by a range of public and private actors. 
It is therefore vital for competitiveness and sus-
tainability of an enterprise to ensure that critical 
infrastructure is resilient to shocks.

A single disaster may wipe out all or a large part of 
businesses’ capital; and only a small percentage of 
these smaller businesses have insurance coverage.  
In Pakistan, for example, uninsured SMEs took lon-
ger  to  recover  from  the  major  floods  in  2010  than 
larger businesses; a good majority of SMEs did not 
survive (Asgary et al., 2012).  

These  losses  may  result  in  poverty  outcomes.    In 
normal times, asset holdings in small businesses—
ranging, for example, from fishing boats, carpentry 
and  welding  equipment  and  tools  to  farm  imple-
ments—increase the income generating potential of 
poor households, leading to higher welfare and less 
poverty.  Asset holdings also offer a crucial means 
to buffer disaster losses (UNISDR, 2009).  In the ab-
sence of formal and informal credit and insurance 
markets or safety nets and social security, however, 
the loss of asset holdings can reduce consumption 
in the short term and lead to an observable deterio-
ration in health, nutritional and educational status 
and other welfare problems in the longer term.  Di-
sasters for business thus translate into disasters for 
households and communities. 

26

When infrastructure fails, businesses experience in-
direct losses, as production, distribution and supply 
chains  are  interrupted;  consequently,  production, 
output  and  throughput  are  reduced.    Even  when 
businesses do not experience direct losses, they de-
pend on publicly managed or regulated roads and 
transportation lines, energy and water networks as 
well as on a workforce that in turn depends on hous-
ing, education and health facilities.   

In  New  York  and  New  Jersey,  for  example,  many 
businesses that did not suffer direct losses caused 
by  Super-storm  Sandy  (Box  1.2)  were  affected  by 
transport  and  power  network  failures,  airport  clo-
sures  and  difficulties  faced  by  employees  whose 
homes were damaged or unable to get to work.

Intensive  disasters  such  as  Super-storm  Sandy  or 
the 2011 East Japan Earthquake can damage major 
infrastructure  facilities  such  as  mass  transit  sys-
tems, power stations, ports and airports. However, 
most  damage  to  local  infrastructure  is  associated 
with extensive disasters.  In Figure 1.4, disaster loss 
data from 56 countries show that more than 90 per-
cent of damage to roads, power and water supplies 
and telecommunications is associated with  exten-
sive risk.
 
This example highlights the critical interdependence 
between  business  and  the  public  sector.    Although 
public investment may be no more than 15 percent 

Chapter 1Box 1.2  ‘Super-storm’ Sandyviii

Super-storm Sandy

In October 2012, sub-tropical storm Sandy triggered the evacuation of thousands from the East Coast of the 
United States of America, leading to the shut-down of national and local transport systems and severely dis-
rupted electricity and communication supplies, with power cuts affecting an estimated 8.5 million homes and 
businesses (RMS, 2012). Of the refineries in the East Coast of the United States of America, 70 percent had to be 
shut  down  for  days;  many  New  York  City  metro  line  subways  were  flooded;  and  about  15,000  flights  were 
grounded across the Northeast (Time, 2012).  Equity trading on all markets was cancelled for two days—the first 
two-day shutdown since 11 September 2001 (IHS Global Insight, 2012).

As Figure 1.3 shows, the event confirmed results from existing models that showed how New York would be at 
risk of severe losses from storm surges and flooding. 

Figure 1.3  Extent of flooding in New York City due to Super-storm Sandy (top) compared with a hazard map showing areas 
that could be expected to be flooded due to storm surges (bottom)

(Source: Swiss Re Hurricane Storm Surge Model)

Soon after the storm passed, it was clear that indirect losses to business activity caused by disruption to public 
transport and energy supplies were likely to be greater than direct losses  (EqCat, 2012; IHS Global Insight, 
2012).  The disaster revealed the dependency of businesses on publicly managed or regulated infrastructure.  

(Source: UNISDR)

27

Figure 1.4  Proportion of infrastructure damaged in extensive disasters in 56 countries and 2 Indian states, between 1970 and 2011

(Source: UNISDR, based on National Disaster datasets for 56 countries and 2 states)

Box 1.3  La Niña in Colombia

La Niña in Colombia

Between 2010 and 2012, a very strong, though not exceptional, La Niña affected Colombia.  Of the country’s 
1,041 municipalities, 93 percent were affected, mainly by flooding (OSSO, 2012) over a 14-month period.

Direct economic loss was estimated at about US$6 billion, representing nearly 6 percent of the country’s gross 
capital formation (CEPAL, 2012).  By the end of 2011, insured losses had exceeded US$600 million, including 
US$76 million to repair a flooded thermoelectric power plant (Marsh, 2012). Although only a small proportion of 
total losses were insured, the disaster resulted in an increase in deductibles for insurance of flood-related dam-
age and loss.  SMEs were particularly affected given that many were uninsured and did not have access to re-
sources required for business recovery.  Similarly, 93–95 percent of estimated household losses were uninsured 
(Fasecolda, 2011).

The housing and infrastructure sectors (transport and energy) each accounted for 38 percent of total direct 
losses.  In particular, 14 percent of the national road network and 3 percent of its bridges were damaged. This 
represented US$1.7 billion in repairs in 2011 alone (Government of Colombia, 2011).

(Source: UNISDR)

28

Chapter 1Figure 1.5  Hazard-related business disruptions: of major concern and that actually had been experienced during the last five years (in percent)

(Source: Sarmiento and Hoberman, 2012)

of  total  capital  formation  in  many  countries,  how 
that investment is made, managed and regulated is 
fundamental  to  business  resilience,  competitive-
ness  and  sustainability.    If  public  infrastructure  is 
vulnerable, business is also at risk.  

business  disruptions  –  both  of  major  concern  and 
that had actually been experienced during the last 
five  years  –  were  related  to  disruptions  in  power, 
telecommunications and water utilities (Sarmiento 
and Hoberman, 2012).

Although larger businesses normally have the cash 
flow  and  reserves  to  absorb  indirect  losses,  many 
smaller  businesses  simply  never  recover.    Smaller 
businesses have a reduced, more localised custom-
er  base—often  affected  during  disasters  (UNDP, 
2013; Battisti and Deakins, 2012).  When lack of local 
customers  reduces  demand  and  thus  cash  flow, 
smaller businesses’ financial resources for recovery 
are limited (Villarroel, 2012; Vitez, 2013).  

In  Costa  Rica,  for  example,  direct  disaster  losses 
totalled US$1.8 billion between 1988 and 2009.  Of 
these, 62 percent were in public infrastructure, of 
which more than half was located in the business-
critical  transport  sector  (Government  of  Costa 
Rica, 2010).  
  
In Colombia, road networks represent a major chal-
lenge  to  business  competitiveness.  As  Box  1.3 
shows, this competitiveness was eroded during the 
2010–2011  El  Niño  Southern  Oscillation  (ENSO) 
episodes,ix when a large number of extensive disas-
ters caused major damage. 

The importance of public infrastructure for business 
is confirmed in a survey carried out for this report in 
six disaster-prone cities of the Americas.x  As Figure 
1.5  shows,  three  of  the  top  four  hazard-related 

29

1.4 Globally integrated disasters: 

supply chain interruption

Global  trade,  financial  markets  and  supply 
chains have become increasingly interconnect-
ed.  When disasters occur in globally integrated 
economies, the impacts ripple through regional 
and global supply chains causing indirect loss-
es to businesses on the other side of the globe.  

As  supply  chains  become  globalised,  so  does  the 
vulnerability  of  businesses  to  supply  chain  disrup-
tions, for example, when disasters affect critical pro-
duction  nodes  or  distribution  links.    The  interrup-
tion  of  one  critical  node  or  link  produces  regional 
and  global  ripples  throughout  the  supply  chain.  

Global  supply  chains  increasingly  supply  disaster 
risks as well as parts and services.  For example, a 
survey of businesses in 62 countries found that 85 
percent  of  organisations  had  experienced  at  least 
one supply chain interruption in 2011.  Of these, 51 
percent  were  caused  by  weather-related  hazards 
and  another  20  percent  by  earthquakes  in  Japan 
and New Zealand (BCI, 2011). 

The impacts of the Eyjafjallajökull volcanic ash cloud 
in Iceland in April 2010 demonstrated how an erup-
tion could affect business in a globalised world (Mu-
nich Re, 2010).  For up to six days, air traffic in most 
European countries was shut down; and airlines lost 
US$1.7 billion in revenues.xi  At its peak, the crisis im-
pacted  29  percent  of  global  aviation  and  affected 

Box 1.4  From Japan to Thailand and back again

3.11 Tsunami

Following the 2011 earthquake and tsunami, automobile and electrical component production in Japan de-
clined by 48 percent and 8 percent, respectively. But automobile production also fell by 20 percent in Thailand, 
18 percent in the Philippines and 6 percent in Indonesia.  Electrical component production fell by 18 percent in 
the Philippines and 8 percent in Malaysia (Ye and Abe, 2012). 

The Renesas Electronics Corporation, the world’s largest custom manufacturer of microchips for the automo-
bile industry, and which serves Japanese automobile manufacturers, suffered estimated losses of US$615 mil-
lion.  Toyota lost US$1.2 billion in product revenue owing to parts shortages that caused 150,000 fewer Toyota 
automobiles to be manufactured in the United States of America; production stoppages at five plants in the 
United Kingdom; and reductions in production of 70 percent in India and 50 percent in China (Asano, 2012).

Following Tropical Storm Nock-Ten and heavy monsoon rains, the Chao Phraya River flooded in Thailand, inun-
dating 15 provinces of the country (Haraguchi and Lall, 2012). From October to December 2011, more than 1,000 
factories of 804 companies were flooded for up to two months. Of these companies, 451 were Japanese (Ibid.). 

Although the factories of Nissan and Toyota were not flooded, they had to suspend car production owing to the 
difficulty in obtaining parts from affected suppliers.  In November 2011, automobile production fell by 84 per-
cent compared with the same month in 2010. Given that Thailand plays a key role in global supply chains in the 
electronics and automobile industries, Honda factories in Malaysia, North America and Japan had to reduce or 
halt production.  Total loss of operating profit to Toyota and Honda was estimated at US$1.25 billion and US$1.4 
billion, respectively.   As in the case of the Japan earthquake, a significant proportion of these losses were be-
cause of one affected supplier that produced critical electronic components (Haraguchi and Lall, 2012). 

At the time, Thailand also produced 43 percent of the world’s hard disk drives (Okazumi et al., 2012). Leading 
producers such as Seagate, Western Digital, Toshiba and Hitachi were all located in the flooded area.  During 
the floods, hard disk drive production fell by 77 percent, causing the price of some hard disk drives to triple be-
tween November 2011 and February 2012 (Ye and Abe, 2012).

Given the large number of Japanese companies in Thailand, Japan’s manufacturing production index fell by 2.4 
percent between October 2011 and January 2012, led by a reduction in electrical component production, which 
fell by 3.7 percent (Ibid.). 

(Source: UNISDR)

30

Chapter 11.2 million passengers a day.xii Businesses also lost 
billions in uninsured losses (Munich Re, 2010).  Insur-
ance payments are only made if business interrup-
tion is preceded by physical damage to the insured 
property itself or – with extended coverage – a sup-
plier of parts or utility company.  In this case, aircraft 
were not damaged; they were simply grounded.

In Japan and Thailand, businesses in areas affected 
by the 2011 disasters suffered direct loss to proper-
ty, plant, equipment and stock or were indirectly im-
pacted by power shortages or by damage to roads, 
railways and ports.  As Box 1.4 shows, these losses 
and impacts had systemic regional and global im-
plications. 

Many  large  global  businesses  rely  on  SMEs  as 
partners and suppliers, which means that supply 
chain  risk  is  directly  related  to  the  capacity  of 
SMEs to manage their disaster risks. Given that, as 

highlighted above, the most frequent disaster risks 
faced by SMEs are related to utilities such as pow-
er,  water  and  telecommunications;  interdepen-
dence  also  exists  between  disaster  risk  manage-
ment in the public sector and supply chain risk. 

Thailand floods

1.5 When business leaves, it may 

never return

As  the  decline  of  the  Port  of  Kobe  highlighted, 
some  businesses  never  recover  from  disaster. 
The  wider  impacts  of  disaster  can  linger  for 
years,  undermining  longer-term  competitive-
ness and sustainability. 

As investors have learned, market share may be lost 
after  disasters  occur.  Business  image  and  reputa-

Box 1.5  Impacts of disasters on the nuclear industry

Less than an hour after the 11 March 2011 Great East Japan Earthquake hit, tsunami waves reached the Fuku-
shima Daiichi nuclear power plant, exceeding the design parameters of the plant by approximately 5 metres 
and knocking out the emergency power and seawater cooling pumps.  In the next days, three reactors suffered 
hydrogen explosions and fuel meltdowns causing a major release of radioactivity. Approximately 150,000 resi-
dents  were  evacuated,  a  restricted  area  of  20  kilometres  around  the  plant  was  enforced,  restrictions  were 
placed on food produced in the region and all nuclear reactors in the country were shut down, immediately re-
ducing national electricity production by approximately 30 percent (National Diet of Japan, 2012). 

Before the disaster, the global nuclear industry was enjoying something of a renaissance, with plans for an ex-
pansion of generation capacity, averaging about 1 percent per year in OECD countries and 6 percent in non-
OECD countries (Joskow and Parsons, 2012).  These plans were driven by a number of considerations, including 
meeting targets for reductions in CO2 emissions by 2020 and 2050, rising fossil fuel prices, technological im-
provements and a more favourable political environment.  China, for example, planned to increase electricity 
generated by nuclear power from 1 percent to 6 percent by 2020, and Japan planned to increase the contribu-
tion of nuclear power from 30 percent to 50 percent (Ibid.). 

The Fukushima disaster questioned the safety of the nuclear power industry. Before the disaster, Germany, 
Switzerland and Japan together accounted for approximately 20 percent of global nuclear power production 
(Joskow and Parsons, 2012). In September 2012, following the Official Report of the Fukushima Nuclear Acci-
dent  Independent  Investigation  Committee  (National  Diet  of  Japan,  2012),  Japan  announced  that  it  would 
phase out nuclear power by 2040, although subsequently the new administration announced they would not 
follow this commitment, after considering energy and economic issues. Four days after the earthquake, on 15 
March 2011, Germany permanently shut down the 8 oldest of its 17 nuclear units and in June 2011, Parliament 
passed a law to phase out the remaining plants by 2022 (Joskow and Parsons, 2012). The Swiss Federal Council 
also recommended that existing reactors be closed at the end of their licenses and not replaced; the final reac-
tor would close in 2034 (Ibid.).  

(Source: UNISDR)

31

Box 1.6 Disaster impact on employment and SMEs  

Employment in the Tohoku region of Japan was affected by both the global financial crisis beginning in 2008 as 
well as by the Great East Japan Earthquake in 2011. Though employment recovered quickly after both shocks, 
following the earthquake, there was a mismatch between labour demand and supply.  For example, in the con-
struction sector, there were 10 jobs available for every applicant, but in the locally important food-processing 
sector, there were 2 applicants for every job (Figure 1.6).   Employment for women recovered slower than for 
men, partly because of the slow recovery of the female-dominated food processing sector, whereas new em-
ployment opportunities in the construction sector were mainly for men.

Figure 1.6  Ratio of job openings per application in construction and food processing, in Miyagi prefecture and Japan 
overall after the Great East Japan Earthquake

(Source: UNISDR, based on Miyagi Labor Bureau)xv

The disaster affected SMEs particularly hard.  One-third of SMEs had still not restarted business 10 months after 
the disaster in January 2012 (Government of Japan, 2012a).  SMEs processing marine products were particular-
ly affected by the tsunami.  By January 2012, 50 percent had not resumed business and 30 percent had de-
creased their workforce (Ibid.).  

After reconstruction is completed, labour demand in the construction sector in Tohuku will decrease. A Japa-
nese think-tank estimates that unless new employment opportunities are created, 14,000 employees will have 
to change jobs and 82,000 will be forced to migrate to other regions by 2017 (Nomura Research Institute, 2011).  
Although reconstruction temporarily supports employment, efforts will be needed to boost and strengthen 
promising new industries as well as to invest in disaster risk reduction. 

In the area affected by the Canterbury Earthquakes in New Zealand in 2010 and 2011, 97.2 percent of all enter-
prises were SMEs as of February 2011.xvi  In New Zealand, 75 percent of all enterprises in all sectors are SMEs, 
employing 30 percent of the working population and producing an estimated 40 percent of total value-added 
output.   Although it is not known how many SMEs went out of business, in April 2012, 37 percent out of 128 sur-
veyed SMEs in Christchurch reported reduced revenues.  In another survey, 51 percent of businesses reported 
reduced revenue. 

Employment declined significantly, on the one hand, in the women-dominated retail trade, accommodation 
and food services sectors—from 54,100 in June 2010 to 41,600 in June 2012 (Parker and Steenkamp, 2012).  Em-
ployment in the construction sector, on the other hand, boomed from 25,900 to 32,800 in the same period 
(Ibid.).  These phenomena show, as in Tohoku, Japan, that problems emerged with job mismatch creating new 
challenges for women in the labour market. 

(Source: UNISDR)

32

Chapter 1tion  may  also  be  permanently  damaged  affecting 
longer-term sustainability.  Insurance may become 
more  expensive  and  its  availability  constrained.  
The  2011  Thailand  floods,  for  example,  caused  a 
number of insurance and reinsurance companies to 
pull  out  of  the  Thai  market  altogether  (AON  Ben-
field, 2012a).   

And these wider impacts may undermine entire in-
dustry sectors, as occurred with the global nuclear 
industry following the 2011 East Japan Earthquake 
and tsunami (Box 1.5). 

The  fate  of  businesses  and  cities  and  countries 
where  they  are  located  are  mutually  dependent.  
For  example,  productive  and  resilient  businesses 
boost the prosperity of cities and countries that are 
attractive to investors, competitive and more likely 
to sustain growth.  Likewise, competitive and resil-
ient cities and countries provide an environment for 
productive and competitive businesses.   

Disasters, however, can negatively affect the basic 
requirements for competitiveness, including sound 
infrastructure,  macroeconomic  stability  and  a 
healthy  and  educated  workforce  (WEF,  2012).  As 
such, countries that are unable to manage their di-
saster risks are likely to be less competitive in the 
medium  and  longer  terms.  For  example,  disaster 
losses in Costa Rica from 2005 to 2009 were equiva-
lent to 20 percent of its total public investment dur-
ing that period. The resources spent on rehabilitat-
ing  and  reconstructing  damaged 
infrastructure 
could have been spent on new roads, schools and 
health facilities and in building a more competitive 
economy (Government of Costa Rica, 2010). 

Following intensive disasters, countries may find it 
more difficult to attract foreign direct investment 
(FDI), as investors flow to geographic competitors.  
Following the 2011 Chao Phraya river floods, sev-
eral large companies relocated their plants either 
to less hazard-exposed areas of Thailand or to oth-
er countries in the region.xiii  More than 60 percent 
of  directly  affected  manufacturers,  mainly  from 

the  electronics  sector,  temporarily  relocated  their 
production  to  other  Asian  countries,  and  several 
considered permanent relocation (Ye and Abe, 2012; 
JCCB, 2012).

In Japan, a survey undertaken just two months after 
the 2011 disaster shows that companies were con-
cerned  with  increased  production  costs  due  to 
power outage induced interruptions and fragile sup-
ply chains.xiv  Almost 70 percent of companies sur-
veyed considered the possibility of relocating parts 
or  all  of  their  production  and  suppliers  abroad 
(Ibid.).    Partly  due  to  the  disaster,  the  government 
postponed  important  policy  decisions;  such  as  its 
participation in the Trans Pacific Partnership (TPP) 
Agreement and a proposed reduction in corporate 
income  tax,  which  would  have  improved  competi-
tiveness (Funabashi and Takenaka, 2012). 

Disasters  also  have  crucial  consequences  on  em-
ployment.  They directly affect the labour market for 
businesses, particularly SMEs, as well as for house-
hold  economies  and  the  macroeconomic  environ-
ment.  Box 1.6 highlights how disasters affected the 
labour  market  and  SMEs  following  the  2011  Great 
East Japan Earthquake and the Canterbury Earth-
quake in New Zealand. 

These  wider  impacts  of  a  disaster  are  difficult  to 
quantify but ultimately and over and above the di-
rect and indirect losses suffered, may define disas-
ter, both for business as well as for their employees 
and  the  countries  and  cities  competing  to  attract 
business investment.  

33

financial  resilience  (Chapter  5);  the  risks  to  natural 
capital  posed  by  wild-land  fires,  land  degradation 
and agricultural drought (Chapter 6) and the special 
case of Small Island Developing States (Chapter 7).  

Part  II  explores  how  disaster  risk  has  become  en-
dogenous to the contemporary globalised econom-
ic landscape through business investment decisions 
that have usually externalised disaster risk.  It analy-
ses how investors have made business investment 
decisions that increase risks in key sectors such as 
urban development (Chapter 8), tourism (Chapter 9) 
and agribusiness (Chapter 10). 

Part III presents how both global corporations and 
smaller  businesses  are  managing  disaster  risk,  in-
cluding  in  global  supply  chains  (Chapter  11)  and 
how their investment decisions are mediated by in-
vestment markets and the role of insurance (Chap-
ters  12  and  13).    It  further  analyses  how  govern-
ments as regulators and mediators of investment, in 
a global economy, occupy changing roles and have 
yet to fully embrace a prospective approach to di-
saster risk management (Chapters 14 and 15).  

Chapter  16  concludes  and  brings  together  several 
key findings of the report.  It elaborates on how cre-
ating shared value can become a key feature of ef-
fective  disaster  risk  management  and  –  more  im-
portant – how disaster risk management contributes 
to  creating  shared  value  for  business  and  society 
essential  for  achieving  economic  stability,  growth 
and sustainable development in a globalised land-
scape beyond 2015.

1.6  

 

 

 

Business as usual?

It’s no longer business as usual.  Disaster losses 
and impacts are presenting critical problems for 
businesses of all sizes, ranging from major glob-
al corporations to SMEs to informal sector pro-
ducers. 

This  chapter  has  highlighted  how  businesses  not 
only face massive direct losses from floods, storms 
and earthquakes, but also depend on publicly man-
aged and regulated infrastructure and services that 
can  be  interrupted  by  disasters.    In  a  globalised 
economy,  supply  chains  may  be  vulnerable  to 
events occurring on the other side of the globe.  Di-
sasters can also lead to longer-term declines in busi-
ness competitiveness and sustainability.

For these reasons, disaster risk is becoming a grow-
ing  concern  to  business.    Businesses  are  now  get-
ting to know their risks and exploring ways in which 
to reduce them.  These nascent efforts are more of-
ten than not based on voluntary mechanisms within 
businesses and among business partners.   

All business investment decisions have the potential 
to either increase or decrease disaster risk.  The rest 
of this report is concerned with how those decisions 
are  made  and  with  the  factors  that  mediate  and 
condition  those  decisions.    The  report  also  high-
lights  how  investing  in  disaster  risk  management 
can be a compelling proposition in shared value, for 
businesses themselves as well as for the cities and 
countries competing to attract investment. 

GAR13 comprises three main parts.  Part I examines 
the  new  landscape  of  intensive  and  extensive  risk 
(Chapter 2) and presents results from the new glob-
al risk model for earthquakes and tropical cyclones, 
as  well  as  new  exposure  data  for  tsunamis  and  a 
proof of concept for floods (Chapter 3).  In addition, 
this part features an analysis of the scale of econom-
ic losses associated with extensive risk (Chapter 4) 
and the implications for a country’s economic and 

34

Chapter 1Notes

i  Macroeconomic effects are included to some extent in all of 
these estimates but are a different way of representing them; they 
should therefore not be added to the direct and indirect losses or 
wider impacts.
ii  This figure constitutes a simplification of the different catego-
ries that might partly overlap. Care must be taken when calculat-
ing total loss to avoid double counting. For example, the direct 
structural losses to a plant may be assessed either through the 
damage to the capital stock (e.g. production plant) or the equiva-
lent loss of flows (i.e. future production).
iii  Exchange rate of 1US$=JP¥81.84. The estimate was reported 
in June 2011 by the Cabinet Office of the Japanese Government 
(http://www.bousai.go.jp/oshirase/h23/110624-1kisya.pdf).  It 
estimates  damages  to  buildings,  lifeline  facilities  and  infrastruc-
tures and excludes the impact of the Nuclear Power Plant accident.
iv  Here and in the next case of Thailand, data of gross fixed capi-
tal formation of the World Bank’s World Development Indicators 
were  used:  http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NE.GDI.FTOT.
CD?page=1. 
v  Economic loss as estimated by the World Bank in December 
2011 
(http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/2011/12/13/world-
bank-supports-thailands-post-floods-recovery-effort). This esti-
mate includes not only loss to physical investment but also other 
components such as loss to lost revenue by tourism and loss of 
agricultural output.
vi 
In  the  same  quarter,  the  manufacturing  sector  declined  by 
-21.8 percent.  Given that manufacturing represented 39 percent 
of Thailand’s GDP in 2011, it was the disruption of the manufactur-
ing sector that had such as large influence on the Thai economy.
vii  Small  and  medium  enterprises  are  independent  companies 
that have a smaller number of employees than a defined thresh-
old. This threshold is different across countries. The OECD men-
tions the following thresholds: less than 250 employees in the Eu-
ropean Union and fewer than 500 in the United States of America. 
However, in many countries, the threshold may be significantly 
lower, and small firms can be defined as having 10-50 employees, 
while  micro-enterprises  can  be  defined  as  having  1-10  workers 
(http://stats.oecd.org/glossary/detail.asp?ID=3123). 
viii  References used in this box: NOAA National Climatic Data Cen-
tre,  2012  www.ncdc.noaa.gov/news/summary-information-post-
tropical-cyclone-sandy; NOAA National Weather Service, 2012 www.
erh.noaa.gov/phi/storms/10292012.html; RMS, 2012 www.rms.com/
news/newsannouncements/Newspress.php?id=0.xml;  Time,  2012 
http://business.time.com/2012/10/31/hurricane-sandy-estimated-
to-cost-60-billion; IHS Global Insight, 2012 http://www.ihs.com/prod-
ucts/Global-Insight/industry-economic-report.aspx?ID=1065972961; 
EqeCat,  2012  www.eqecat.com/catwatch/post-landfall-loss-esti-
mates-superstorm-sandy-released-2012-11-01/;  Financial  Times, 
2012  http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/c8f6c208-24f4-11e2-86fb-00144fe-
abdc0.html#axzz2CtH3QSxJ.
ix  El Niño Southern Oscillation (ENSO) refers to the interaction 
between the global atmosphere and the tropical Pacific Ocean. 
It results in changes to weather patterns and ocean temperature 
across the globe, including changes in rainfall and storm patterns, 
and occurrence of floods and droughts. Within these changes, the 
El  Niño  phenomenon  is  associated  with  unusually  warm  ocean 
surface temperatures; La Niña is associated with particularly cold 
oceanic temperatures. Both occur approximately twice in a sev-
en-year period and last for typically 9–12 months and occasion-
ally up to two years. For exact definitions and more information, 
see:  UNISDR  terminology  -  preventionweb.net/english/profes-
sional/terminology/v.php?id=480  and  WMO  factsheets  -  http://
www.wmo.int/pages/mediacentre/factsheet/LaNinaQA.html.

x  This survey, carried out by Florida International University (FIU), 
York University and the Central American Institute for Business Man-
agement (INCAE), covered Vancouver, Canada; Miami, United States 
of America; Kingston, Jamaica; San Jose, Costa Rica; Bogota, Colom-
bia and Santiago, Chile.
xi  http://www.iata.org/pressroom/pr/Pages/2010-04-21-01.aspx.  
xii  http://www.iata.org/pressroom/pr/Pages/2010-04-21-01.aspx. 
xiii Western  Digital  and  Nidec,  two  important  global  players  in 
the  production  of  hard  disk  drive  components,  have  relocated 
some  of  their  manufacturing  to  Malaysia,  China  and  less  haz-
ard-prone  regions  in  Thailand.  For  more  information:  http://e.
nikkei.com/e/fr/tnks/Nni20121006D06JF389.htm 
http://
www.ft.com/cms/s/0/7d36186e-2937-11e1-8b1a-00144feabdc0.
html#axzz2DuUmiO4x (accessed 02/12/2012).
xiv  Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry, Government of Japan: 
http://www.meti.go.jp/committee/summary/0003410/013_s01_00.
pdf
xv  Miyagi Labor Bureau, “Balance of job openings and application,” 
http://miyagi-roudoukyoku.jsite.mhlw.go.jp/jirei_toukei/kyujin_
kyushoku/toukei/anteisyobetsu_kyujinkyusyoku_balance.html.
xvi Data in this paragraph are taken from Hatton, Seville and Vargo 
(2012), unless otherwise stated. 

and 

35

Part I  
The Globalised Landscape 
of Disaster Risk

37

“One trillion dollars have been lost in the last de-
cade  due  to  disasters  and  one  million  people 
killed”.i Such statements are familiar to investors 
and  business  developers.  But  they  only  partially 
reflect total disaster losses.  

The full scale of disaster losses is still not fully un-
derstood.  Reliable  data  exist  on  insured  lossesii 
and many major, intensive disasters are compre-
hensively  assessed.iii  Between  2001  and  2011, 
global  reinsurer  Munich  Re.  reported  about 
US$1.68 trillion in losses (Munich Re., 2012), a cal-
culation based on insured losses and estimates of 
insurance market penetration. Over the same pe-
riod, EMDATiv, the major public global disaster da-
tabase,  reported  US$1.25  trillion  in  losses.  But 
neither provides a complete picture of global di-
saster  losses,  as  none  accounts  for  uninsured 
losses  associated  with  recurrent,  smaller-scale, 
extensive  disasters,  particularly  in  low  and  mid-
dle-income countries.  

A growing number of national disaster databases 
now  provide  access  to  detailed  data  on  these 
losses.  When  combined  with  assessments  of  di-
rect losses in major disasters as recorded by EM-
DAT, these data provide a more complete picture 
of  the  real  dimension  of  direct  disaster  losses. 
Figure I.1 shows what this picture might look like 
in  the  40  low  and  middle-income  countries  with 
the  largest  losses  recorded  in  national  disaster 
databases.   

Direct  economic  losses  in  housing,  local  infra-
structure  and  agriculture  were  modelled  for  all 
smaller disasters documented by national disas-
ter databases but not captured by EMDAT.  Losses 
documented in EMDAT for larger disasters include 
estimates of damage to large capital intensive in-
frastructure that are generally not captured in na-
tional  disaster  databases.  The  resulting  com-
bined  dataset  provides  the  most  complete 
estimate  of  direct  disaster  losses  possible  with 

Figure I.1  Direct economic losses in 40 countries as estimated from national and global loss databases, 1981–2011 (in million US$)v 

(Source: UNISDR, based on DesInventar and EM-DAT combined datasets)

38

Part I  Figure I.2  Loss trends in 40 countries as estimated from national and global loss databases, 1981–2011 (in billion US$)vii 

(Source: UNISDR, based on DesInventar and EM-DAT combined datasets)

existing  publicly  available  data.  The  detailed 
methodology  used  to  model  and  estimate  eco-
nomic losses is described in Annex 2. 

Between  1981  and  2011,  total  direct  losses  in 
these  countries  were  approximately  US$305  bil-
lion, of which internationally reported events rep-
resent  about  67  percent.  The  implication  is  that 
the headline-grabbing figures recorded in global 
datasets  over the last decade may be quite con-
servative.    Once  the  losses  associated  with  na-
tionally  reported  smaller  disasters  are  included, 
those  figures  are  likely  to  be  at  least  50  percent 
higher.  At the same time, these figures refer only 
to direct losses and thus exclude the cost of indi-
rect losses and wider effects of disaster.

As  Figure  I.2  shows,  disaster  losses  in  the  same 
set of countries have been trending upward over 
this period.  

The chapters that follow in Part I explore how in-
vestment decisions and capital flows are internal-
ising  disaster  risk  in  different  kinds  of  capital 
stock, thereby increasing the overall stock of risk. 

Chapters 2 and 3 examine the new landscape of 
intensive  and  extensive  risk  and  present  results 
from  the  new  global  risk  model  for  earthquakes 
and  tropical  cyclones,  as  well  as  new  exposure 
data  for  tsunamis  and  regional  examples  for 
floods and landslides. 

Chapter 4 features an analysis of the scale of eco-
nomic losses associated with extensive risk, and 
Chapter  5,  the  implications  for  a  country’s  eco-
nomic and financial resilience.  

The  risks  to  natural  capital  posed  by  wild-land 
fires,  land  degradation  and  agricultural  drought 
are presented in Chapter 6, and the special case 
of Small Island Developing States in Chapter 7.  

39

Notes

i 
See  for  example:  http://www.undp.org/content/undp/en/
home/presscenter/events/2012/october/international_day_di-
saster_reduction.
ii  Swiss Re. publishes regular updates on insured losses globally 
via its SIGMA statistics and publications (e.g. Swiss Re 2012). Muni-
chRe., via its NatCatService platform and its Touch – Natural Haz-
ards service portal, provides analyses, statistics and services on 
all aspects of natural hazards: http://www.munichre.com/en/rein-
surance/business/non-life/georisks/natcatservice/default.aspx.
iii  Governments, with the support of the UN, the World Bank or 
regional development banks, conduct economic assessments of 
intensive  disasters  using  variations  of  the  ECLAC  methodology 
(ECLAC, 2003).
iv  EMDAT:  The  OFDA/CRED 
International  Disaster  Database: 
www.emdat.net.  Université  catholique  de  Louvain  –  Brussels  – 
Belgium. EMDAT is a global database that registers reports of di-
sasters above its threshold of 10 deaths, 100 affected people, or a 
call for international assistance. 
v  Only  the  40  countries  with  the  highest  losses  were  selected 
for this graph to enable visualisation at common scales. See An-
nex 2 for information on progress in the development of national 
disaster loss databases, economic loss estimation and merging of 
global and national datasets.
vi  See www.munichre.com/touch/naturalhazards and www.em-
dat.be. 
vii  Only  the  40  countries  with  the  highest  losses  were  selected 
for this graph to enable visualisation at common scales. See An-
nex 2 for information on progress in the development of national 
disaster loss databases, economic loss estimation and merging of 
global and national datasets.

40

Chapter 2
The Hidden Risks of 
Economic Globalisation   

41

Disaster risk has been etched into the contemporary economic landscape largely through investment 
decisions.  In most countries, 70 percent to 85 percent of total investment is made by the private 
sector – small and large companies, investors and households. How these investments are made, di-
rectly determines levels of disaster risk. They shape the direction of capital flows and the level of 
disaster risk that is internalised in the capital stock or assets produced.  To date, these investments 
have largely increased disaster risk. 

As a consequence, the wealth of countries has repeatedly been eroded by disasters through loss of 
and damage to its capital stock. When produced, human and natural capital is affected by disasters; 
the competitiveness and sustainability of economies can be severely compromised with long-term 
negative impacts. These risks and the resulting costs are often transferred to and shared with 
other locations, actors or times. 

2.1  

 

 

The wealth of nations at risk

 

The wealth of a country in the form of produced, 
human  and  natural  capital  can  be  severely  af-
fected by disasters. In such cases, even a tem-
porary inability of local and national economies 
to attract capital may have long-term negative 
impacts.

Disasters  are  often  still  described  as  exogenous 
shocks (G20/OECD, 2012).  In reality, disaster risk is 
endogenous  to  investment  and  assets.  Extreme 
hazards,  such  as  major  earthquakes,  volcanic 
eruptions and destructive tsunamis, can certainly 
be described as exogenous events. But the losses 
and  impacts  that  characterise  disasters  usually 
have as much to do with the exposure and vulner-
ability  of  capital  stock  as  with  the  severity  of  the 
hazard event.  

Capital stock can be divided into three categories: 
produced  capital  (including  machinery  and  struc-
tures and urban land); intangible capital (including 
human and institutional capital); and natural capital 
(including  energy,  mineral  and  forest  resources, 
crop and pasture land and protected areas) (World 
Bank, 2011; UNU-IHDP and UNEP, 2012).i 

Disaster  risk  becomes  internalized  in  and  endoge-
nous to these different categories of capital stock, 

42

reflecting how and where investment decisions ori-
ent capital flows,  in the context of a range of medi-
ating factors, including government regulation and 
incentives, insurance availability and pricing and fi-
nancing.  In other words, disaster risk is not natural 
but is produced through investment decisions and 
the range of factors that mediate those decisions. 

Since  the  last  global  economic  crisis  of  the  mid-
1970s,  a  new  economic  globalisation  has  trans-
formed the world beyond recognition—in its econ-
omy,  society,  politics,  culture, 
territory  and 
environment. It is beyond the scope or objective of 
this report to analyse the complexity or dynamics 
of these transformations. But if economic globali-
sation  has  changed  the  pathways  through  which 
capital  flows,  then  the  landscape  of  disaster  risk 
will also have been transformed. 

Over  recent  decades,  spatial  barriers  to  invest-
ment have been continuously eroded. Technologi-
cal innovations such as containerization, satellite 
communication  and  the  internet;  the  liberaliza-
tion of trade and financial markets; new organiza-
tional models based on networks rather than hier-
archies  and  the  emergence  of  important  new 
markets  are  only  some  of  the  components  that 
have enabled and encouraged large businesses to 
decentralize, outsource or off-shore all or part of 
their  operations  to  different  locations  worldwide 
(Castells et al., 2012). 

Part I - Chapter 2In doing so, businesses have enhanced productivity 
and profitability by exploiting the comparative ad-
vantages of different geographies, such as in coun-
tries and cities that offer attractive labour costs and 
skills,  easy  access  to  export  markets,  good  infra-
structure, a stable economic and political environ-
ment,  and  many  other  factors.    Although  in  many 
cases, low labour costs may have been the principal 
incentive driving production, distribution, research 
and development, sales and services to other loca-
tions, each business sector responds to a particular 
range of requirements and incentives. 

As business investment becomes increasingly foot-
loose  and  freed  from  spatial  constraints,  at  the 
same time, it has become increasingly sensitive to 
the  mix  of  comparative  advantages  internalised  in 
each location.  In other words, choosing the right lo-
cation to invest becomes increasingly important to 
maintain and enhance competitiveness.  

At the same time, as business investors scan the ho-
rizon in search of locations that can provide a com-
petitive edge, competition between cities and coun-
tries to attract investment has become increasingly 
fierce.  National and city governments promote their 
comparative advantage and attract investors by im-
proving infrastructure, urban development and cul-
tural landmarks.  

The  volume  of  foreign  direct  investment  (FDI)  pro-
vides an indication of the size of global capital flows.  
As Figure 2.1 highlights, FDI peaked at US$2.35 tril-
lion in 2008, of which US$1.13 trillion went into ser-
vices,  including  infrastructure;  US$0.98  trillion  into 
manufacturing; and US$0.23 trillion into primary ac-
tivities such as mining, oil and gas and agriculture. 

Globally, one of the results of these flows has been a 
substantial increase in the value of produced capi-
tal.  In  absolute  terms,  produced  capital  remains 

Figure 2.1  FDI projects by sector, 2005–2011ii

 (Source: UNISDR, based on estimates by UNCTAD, 2012)

43

concentrated in OECD countries. The value of pro-
duced capital in OECD countries increased by about 
one-fifth  from  US$75.3  trillion  in  1995  to  US$93.4 
trillion in 2005 (World Bank, 2011).  

In  relative  terms,  however,  there  have  been  spec-
tacular increases in the value of produced capital in 
those  low  and  middle-income  countries  that  have 
been successful in attracting investment.  The value 
of produced capital in East Asia and the Pacific,iii  for 
example, more than doubled from US$4.6 trillion in 
1995 to US$10 trillion in 2005. 

In contrast, the value of produced capital in regions 
that have been less successful in attracting invest-
ment has grown from a small base and at a slower 
rate. For example, the value of produced capital in 
sub-Saharan Africa increased from US$1.1 billion in 
1995 to only US$1.3 billion in 2005, representing less 
than 1% of the world’s total.    

Figure  2.2  highlights  the  contrast  between  China, 
where the stock of produced capital has more than 
quadrupled over the last 20 years, and the United 
States of America, where it has increased by only 

Figure 2.2  Produced capital growth in China and the United 
States of America 

(Source: Adapted from UNU-IHDP and UNEP, 2012)

44

70  percent  over  the  same  period  (UNU-IHDP  and 
UNEP, 2012).

Since 2009, and as Figure 2.1 previously shows, FDI 
flows have fallen as a result of the global crisis. FDI 
flows  from  countries  such  as  China,  however,  are 
growing rapidly, reaching US$77 billion in 2012. Al-
though  still  relatively  small,  this  trend  indicates 
changes  in  the  direction  of  capital  flows.  At  the 
same time, as labour costs increase and access to 
skilled  workers  becomes  limited  in  some  markets, 
some  previously  attractive  locations  for  FDI  may 
lose some of their comparative advantage. 

2.2  

 

 

Increasing exposure

 

New data confirm that a rapid increase in expo-
sure is a major driver of disaster risk today. In-
vestments in flood plains or on cyclone-prone 
coastlines  lead  to  spiraling  risk  levels  but  are 
still considered profitable as special industrial 
zones,  a  skilled  workforce  and  large  markets 
bring comparative advantages and continue to 
attract business.

Some regions that are successfully attracting in-
vestment  and  have  seen  the  largest  increase  in 
produced  capital  are  also  exposed  to  hazards 
such  as  earthquakes,  tropical  cyclones  and  tsu-
namis. As such, benefits to business from globali-
sation  have  also  been  accompanied  by  major 
boosts in population and value of assets in haz-
ard-exposed areas. These areas include tsunami 
and  cyclone-prone  coastlines,  flood-prone  river 
basins  and  earthquake-prone  mega-cities.    Sea-
soned  investors  have  not  acted  irrationally  in 
flocking  to  these  areas.  On  the  contrary—many 
such areas offer higher productivity and compar-
ative  advantages.  For  example,  export-oriented 
production  and  distribution  tends  to  cluster 
around  international  ports;  tourism  is  attracted 
to tropical beaches and islands (Hallegatte, 2011). 
These  areas,  however,  present  disaster  risks, 

Part I - Chapter 2which are not necessarily factored into business 
investment decisions. 

hazard-exposed areas today is greater by an order 
of magnitude than it was 40 years ago. 

Between  1970  and  2010,  for  example,  while  global 
population growth was 87 percent, populations liv-
ing  in  flood  plains  grew  by  114  percent  and  in  cy-
clone-prone coastlines by 192 percent. Similarly, the 
proportion  of  global  GDP  exposed  to  tropical  cy-
clones  increased  from  3.6  percent  to  4.3  percent 
over the same period. Most of this increase occurred 
in  Asia  (UNISDR,  2011).  This  implies  that  through 
economic globalisation, populations and assets lo-
cated  in  hazard-exposed  areas  have  grown  faster 
than in other areas. Figure 2.3 below, for example, 
highlights the concentration of produced capital in 
areas exposed to cyclonic winds in East Asia. 

2.3 Reducing mortality risk and 

increasing economic risk

Exposure is a key driver, but vulnerability levels 
still strongly shape the different levels of disas-
ter risk that can be found between and within 
countries. Several countries have been success-
ful in significantly reducing mortality risk. But 
many  countries  have  struggled  to  reduce  eco-
nomic risks—particularly those with limited ca-
pacities  for  managing  development  process 
and investments. 

This growth in exposure is one of the principal driv-
ers of increasing disaster risk. Simply put, the con-
centration  of  individuals  and  produced  capital  in 

Disaster  risk  not  only  depends  on  the  severity  of 
hazard or volume of population or assets exposed, 
it  also  is  a  function  of  the  susceptibility  of  people 

Figure 2.3  Produced capital stock in Southeast Asia and cyclone wind hazard (50 years return period)

Cyclonic winds

(Source: GAR global risk model)

45

and economic assets to suffer loss and damage—in 
other  words,  their  vulnerability.  And  vulnerability 
has also been modified by economic globalisation. 

In general, higher-income countries and those with 
rapid  economic  growth  over  recent  decades  have 
successfully reduced their mortality risk.   With eco-
nomic  development,  capacities  in  disaster  and 
emergency management generally improve.  Since 
2007, countries reporting progress against the Hyo-
go  Framework  for  Action  (HFA)  have  consistently 
highlighted good progress in strengthening disaster 
preparedness and response and in developing insti-
tutional and legislative capacities to do so (UNISDR, 
2009 and 2011). 

With improved transport infrastructure and health 
facilities,  which  facilitate  evacuation  and  prompt 
medical attention, this leads to reduced vulnerabili-
ty,  at  least  in  the  case  of  floods  and  tropical  cy-
clones,  even  though  the  exposed  population  in-
creases (Kahn, 2005; UNISDR, 2011).  For example, it 
was  estimated  that  mortality  risk  associated  with 
tropical cyclones in East Asia and the Pacific fell by 
50 percent between 1980 and 2010 (UNISDR, 2011) 
although exposure increased by about 160 percent.    

In contrast, in regions with slower economic growth, 
mortality risk is still high.  For example, in sub-Saha-
ran  Africa,  flood  mortality  risk  has  been  growing 
consistently since 1980 (UNISDR, 2011) because the 
rapid increase in exposure has not been accompa-
nied by a commensurable reduction in vulnerability. 
These  examples  confirm  that  the  underlying  risk 
drivers as identified in previous Global Assessment 
Reports are key challenges for several countries.

Figure 2.4 compares an index of mortality risk (UNIS-
DR,  2009)  with  an  index  of  competitiveness  (WEF, 
2012) and an index of conditions and capabilities for 
disaster risk reduction—for example, managing ur-
ban development, setting up effective governance 
structures, protecting the environment and alleviat-
ing  poverty  and  vulnerability  (DARA,  2012).  Some 
countries, such as Haiti, Madagascar and Sierra Le-

46

Figure 2.4  Countries with high mortality risk, low competitive-
ness and weak conditions and capabilities for risk reduction   

(Source: UNISDR, based on the WEF Competitiveness Index 2011; GAR Mortality 
Risk Index 2011; DARA Risk Reduction Index 2012)

one, have not been successful in attracting invest-
ment, have low capacities to manage disaster risks 
and have high mortality risk. 

Many  countries  have  been  far  less  successful,  in 
contrast, in reducing the vulnerability of their pro-
duced capital, including housing, infrastructure and 
productive  assets.  Low  and  middle-income  coun-
tries, in particular, report that they are challenged to 
use tools such as land-use planning, environmental 
management  and  building  codes  to  reduce  these 
vulnerabilities (UNISDR, 2009 and 2011). As a conse-
quence, as mortality risk has decreased in success-
ful economies, economic disaster risk has been in-
creasing  in  concert  with  the  growth  in  exposure 
(Neumeyer and Barthel, 2010).  In some regions, in-
cluding  in  OECD  countries,  the  risk  of  losing  pro-
duced capital in disasters may now be growing fast-
er than the capital being produced (UNISDR, 2011; 
Hallegatte, 2011).   

Earthquake mortality risk differs from the mortality 
risk  associated  with  floods  and  tropical  cyclones.  
While  warning  systems  are  becoming  increasingly 
sophisticated, earthquake mortality is closely corre-
lated  to  building  collapse.  This  implies  that  earth-
quake-prone countries with rapidly growing econo-

Part I - Chapter 2mies and the inability to reduce the vulnerability of 
their building stock may also have increased earth-
quake mortality risk.  

In countries that are not competitive and have been 
unsuccessful  in  attracting  investment,  economic 
loss risk, in absolute terms, has not risen in the same 
way.  This is not because their produced capital is 
not vulnerable but because the density of hazard-
exposed capital is far lower. 

These trends have clear implications for business 
investment. Although vulnerability may be lower in 
high-income  countries,  as  the  value  of  produced 
capital increases, disaster risk also increases sim-
ply  as  a  result  of  increased  exposure.      However, 
businesses  that  invest  in  low  and  middle-income 
countries may face increased disaster risk, not only 
as  a  result  of  increasing  exposure  but  because 
these countries have not yet developed the capac-
ities  to  reduce  their  vulnerabilities.    If  businesses 
do not factor these vulnerabilities into their invest-
ment decisions, they may be assuming risks and li-
abilities that will only become apparent when haz-
ard events occur. 

2.4 The globalisation of risk: 

vulnerable supply chains

Today’s globalised production systems and sup-
ply chains have created new vulnerabilities. While 
increasing  efficiency  and  saving  costs  for  busi-
nesses, global supply chains may contain hidden 
disaster risks with potentially devastating conse-
quences, including for investors and markets.

Economic  globalisation  has  increased  sharply  the 
value  of  produced  capital  exposed  to  hazards  in 
countries challenged to reduce their vulnerabilities; 
it has also provided changes to the structure of sup-
ply chains. These changes magnify and transmit di-
saster risk to other countries and regions not direct-
ly exposed. 

As  different  business  functions  have  been  out-
sourced and decentralised, the global economy has 
become  structured  around  an  integrated  web  of 
supply  chains.iv  For  example,  faced  with  growing 
competition, the Japanese automobile industry de-
centralised production to other countries.  As Figure 
2.5 highlights, this led to a doubling in the export of 
automobile parts, from about 1.3 million manufac-
tured parts in 1999 to about 3.2 million in 2010. The 
industries  supply  chain  has  thus  become  increas-
ingly globalised. 

To become successful, businesses not only procure 
materials  and  parts  from  overseas  suppliers,  but 
also  outsource  functions,  such  as  product  design 
and  logistics.  Productivity  therefore  increases  be-
cause each business in the supply chain can strate-
gically allocate resources to those activities where it 
has  a  comparative  advantage.  The  supply  chain 
thus  becomes  a  web  involving  multi-tier  suppliers 
and service providers. 

Various  trends  have  characterised  global  supply 
chain  evolution:  the  production  process  has  been 
split  into  separate  nodes  in  different  locations, 
linked by multi-modal distribution facilities; supplier 
consolidation has emerged to increase economies 
of scale and reduced transaction costs; production 
agglomeration  in  areas  with  low  transport  costs 
(such as coastal areas and river basins) has facilitat-
ed knowledge spill-over, labour market pooling, in-
put sharing, lower product shipping costs and logis-
tics  consolidation,  increasing  the  dependence  of 
supply chains on international distribution facilities 
such as major ports and airports (Ye and Abe, 2012).

Although  globalisation  of  supply  chains  may  have 
increased  productivity,  it  has  also  globalised  risk; 
when business at a critical node in a supply chain is 
affected  by  a  disaster,  the  effects  quickly  ripple 
throughout the entire supply chain.  

As highlighted above, as supply chains have evolved, 
production  has  been  clustered  in  areas  that  may 
provide businesses with low transport costs but are 

47

Figure 2.5  Increased export of parts in the Japanese automobile industry (in JP¥ 1 million)v

 (Source: UNISDR, based on data from the Japan Auto Parts Industry Associationvi)

Box 2.1  Port cities with high exposure and vulnerability to climate extremes

Rapid urbanisation

Maritime transport handles over 80 percent of the volume of global trade and accounts for over 70 percent of its 
value.  Since 1970, global seaborne trade has expanded by an annual average of 3.1 percent and has doubled in 
the last 30 years (UNDESA, 2012).

Port cities are a vital nexus in global supply chains.  In 2005, 13 of the 20 most populated cities in the world were 
port cities.  Many of these are exposed to flooding and storms.  An analysis of a sample of 136 port cities with 
populations of more than 1 million highlighted that currently North America has the highest volume of exposed 
economic assets and Asia the largest proportion of exposed population (Nicholls et al., 2008).

Owing to economic and urban growth, natural and artificial subsidence, sea level rise and climate change, this 
exposure is likely to increase dramatically, particularly in low and middle-income countries.  Whereas the esti-
mated  exposure  of  economic  assets  is  expected  to  increase  from  US$416  billion  in  Miami,  United  States  of 
America, in 2005 to US$3,513 billion in 2070, in Mumbai, India, asset exposure would increase from US$46 bil-
lion to US$1,598 billion, and in Guangzhou, China, from US$84 billion to US$3,557 billion (Nicholls et al., 2008). 
In Dhaka, Bangladesh, it would increase from US$8 billion to an extraordinary US$544 billion (Ibid.). 

Low and middle-income countries are driving growth in global merchandise trade.  For example, the share of 
low and middle-income countries in total global unloaded goods rose from 18 percent to 56 percent between 
1970 and 2010 (UNCTAD, 2012).  Increased hazard exposure therefore not only poses a threat to the competitive-
ness of cities and ports but increasingly to global trade flows and supply chains.

(Source: UNISDR)

48

Part I - Chapter 2often hazard-exposed. As Box 2.1 shows, the depen-
dence of supply chains on logistical and transporta-
tion  nodes  such  as  ports  and  airports,  further  in-
creases risk.

Businesses  have  demonstrated  that  supply  chain 
efficiency can be increased by reducing inventories, 
shortening  transportation  times  and  streamlining 
production.  However,  these  measures  may  under-
mine  supply  chain  resilience  (Haraguchi  and  Lall, 
2012). Lean supply chains and ‘just-in-time’ delivery 
systems  require  more  frequent  deliveries  of  sup-
plies,  minimising  inventories  and  turnover  time.  
While  maximising  efficiency,  they  further  increase 
the  interdependence  between  businesses  and  re-
move  the  buffer  provided  by  stocks  (Ye  and  Abe, 
2012).  In  turn,  this  increases  the  probability  that  a 
disaster at one critical point of a supply chain will 
have a systemic impact. 

Investors need to be aware that small and medium 
enterprises  (SMEs)  often  play  a  key  role  in  supply 
chains,  providing  small  quantities  of  labour-inten-
sive  components  and  services.  As  noted  above, 
SMEs  may  be  more  vulnerable  and  less  resilient 
than larger businesses, as they are generally undi-
versified and underinsured.  

2.5  

Shared risks

 

 

 

The risk of losses and negative impacts from di-
sasters  is  often  transferred  or  shared  over 
space and time. Business investments that in-
crease  disaster  risk  may  directly  increase  the 
cost of disasters to affected communities. Gov-
ernment regulation that fails to protect critical 
infrastructure may result in high costs to busi-
nesses  from  power  outages,  communications 
failures and collapse of transport systems. Sim-
ilarly, today’s new risks will be experienced by 
tomorrow’s generations.

As new business investments are made in hazard-

exposed areas, disaster risks to the business itself 
are generated.  But other risks, often referred to as 
external  social  and  environmental  costs,  are  in  ef-
fect transferred to or shared with other sectors in-
cluding  the  public  sector.    When  investment  deci-
sions  are  made,  businesses  may  not  take  into 
account how disaster risks may threaten their own 
operations—it  is  even  less  usual  for  businesses  to 
account for risks that are shared with others.  These 
shared  risks  are  not  priced;  thus,  market  mecha-
nisms to account for them usually do not exist.   

One of the most well-known examples of risk trans-
fer or sharing is through greenhouse gas emissions.   
Anthropogenic  climate  change  may  exacerbate 
weather-related  hazards  in  other  regions  and  thus 
lead  to  increased  disaster  losses.    However,  these 
costs are not borne by the emitter.  Small island de-
veloping states (SIDS), for example, are responsible 
for  less  than  1  percent  of  total  global  greenhouse 
gas emissions but are likely to suffer disproportion-
ately from the effects of sea-level rise or risks associ-
ated with storm surges and coastal flooding.

But climate change is only one mechanism through 
which risk is shared. For example, new road and real 
estate developments in urban areas may decrease 
the  capacity  of  water  management  systems  and 
soils to absorb excess water during storms in a city. 
New  urban  development  may  therefore  produce 
flood risks, which are then shared with low-income 
households located in the most flood-prone areas 
and who would experience the greatest losses. City 
governments would also lose, as they would have to 
invest in drainage infrastructure. Box 2.2 highlights 
how, during the Chao Phraya floods in Thailand in 
2011, a transfer of risks to low-income households 
took place.

Other  mechanisms  of  risk  sharing  include  when 
business  investments  contribute  to  a  depletion  of 
regulatory  or  productive  ecosystem  services—for 
example, when mangroves are destroyed for shrimp 
farms;  when  groundwater  resources  are  overex-
ploited  for  commercial  agriculture  or  recreational 

49

Box 2.2  The impact of the Thailand floods on the urban poor

Although media attention on the 2011 Thailand floods focused on the impact on supply chains in the automo-
bile and electronics industries, there were also major impacts on the urban poor. 

Located only 1–2 metres above mean sea level, Bangkok is naturally prone to flooding.  But flood hazard has 
been magnified by urbanisation.  Canals, which provided the backbone of the city’s transport network and ful-
filled an important drainage function, have been filled in; dense urbanisation has decreased the area of perme-
able surface; groundwater extraction is causing the city to subside at a faster rate than climate change-induced 
sea level rise.  Watersheds in the Chao Phraya river basin have been degraded, while weakly implemented urban 
planning and management led to the growth of both private developments and informal settlements in flood-
prone areas.   Informal settlements, for example, often encroach on canals and are the first to be affected.  

Although approximately 21 percent of the population of Bangkok was affected by flooding, this percentage in-
creased to 73 percent of low-income households affected.  The Thai Government’s National Housing Authority 
estimates that 90,362 homes out of a total of 135,582 were of low-income families. Five years ago, the IPCC had 
issued a warning of the particular vulnerability of the Chao Phraya river basin and the danger to the growing 
population living there (Nicholls et al., 2008). 

is  a  shared  risk,  and  businesses,  the  public  sector 
and  civil  society  all  participate  in  its  construction.  
Disaster risk management, therefore, must be con-
sidered a shared value—an issue that we revisit in 
the final chapter of this report.

Notes

‘Primary’ refers to mainly mining, quarrying and petroleum.

i 
These categories are those defined and measured empirically 
by the World Bank (World Bank, 2011) but many other classifications 
exist. The items included here are only an example of the compo-
nents included in each category.
ii 
iii  Economic regions as defined by the World Bank. East Asia and 
the  Pacific  exclude  OECD  countries  such  as  Australia,  Japan  and 
New Zealand.
iv  A system of organisations, technology, information and resourc-
es that moves products and services from suppliers to customers.
v  Figures given at 2010 prices, using GDP deflators from the World 
Bank  database  (http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.DEFL.
ZS).  The  percentage  presented  is  the  share  of  export  to  the  total 
product sales. The performance for each fiscal year is based on data 
from 360–450 large automobile parts producers in any given year. 
vi  See http://www.japia.or.jp/research/index.html.

(Source: UNISDR)

activities such as golf courses; or when forests are 
cut down for agricultural or urban development. 

According  to  a  recent  survey  the  external  environ-
mental costs of eleven key industry sectors rose by 
50 percent from 2002 to 2010, from US$566 to 854 
billion and are doubling every fourteen years.   In the 
agribusiness  sector  alone,  external  environmental 
costs outweighed the sectors entire earnings (KPMG 
International, 2012).  These social and environmen-
tal risks and costs are not on the balance sheets of 
businesses but are shared with other sectors as well 
as future generations.  

However, risk sharing is not unidirectional.  Failure 
by the public sector to manage risks in public infra-
structure shares risks with businesses that face in-
terruption owing to power outages or transport dis-
ruption.    Similarly,  failure  to  effectively  regulate 
land-use or to control building standards increases 
risks for city regions.  These risks and externalised 
costs are then borne by businesses.  

Ultimately, however, risk sharing may have a ‘boo-
merang effect’ (Beck, 1992), given that entities or in-
dividuals  that  produce  these  risks  will  also  be  ex-
posed to them.  From this perspective, disaster risk 

50

Part I - Chapter 2Chapter 3
Intensive Riskscapes

51

Patterns of intensive risk have developed along the fault lines of four decades of economic devel-
opment and globalisation. The potential consequences of these risks can now be estimated and visu-
alized. A first ever global probabilistic assessment allows for a better understanding of intensive risk 
for earthquakes and cyclonic winds. 

The results from the global assessment are a wake-up call: global  average annual  losses  from 
earthquakes alone are estimated to exceed US$100 billion. Of these, 80 percent are concentrated in 
high-income countries. Probable maximum losses for Japan and the United States of America in the 
case of a catastrophic one-in-250 year earthquake are over US$100 billion. In these countries, 
high exposure is the key driver of disaster risk.

Vulnerability continues to determine risk levels, particularly in low and middle-income countries. 
Philippines and Puerto Rico could lose more than 15 percent of their exposed capital stock to 
winds from a catastrophic one-in-250 year tropical cyclone. 

Roughly 80 percent of cyclonic wind risk is concentrated in Asia. The continent also has significant 
tsunami exposure, with Japan leading in both absolute and relative exposure of its people. Howev-
er,  smaller  economies,  including  many  SIDS,  can  expect  higher  losses  relative  to  their  capital 
stock for all hazards 

Risk maps

3.1 The past is not a good guide to 

the future

No two disasters are alike.  Along a major earth-
quake fault line, in a large river basin or along a 
coastline, an infinite number of hazard events 
could occur.  However, most of these have yet 
to  happen.  Therefore,  although  patterns  and 
trends  of  disaster  loss  provide  a  guide  to  the 
past,  they  are  often  not  sufficient  to  predict 
and estimate losses that may occur at present 
and in the future.  

Historical records may provide information on haz-
ard  events  that  have  occurred,  even  over  several 
hundred  years.  However,  in  any  given  location, 
many events, particularly extreme events that only 
occur every thousand years or so have yet to mate-
rialise.  In order to explore future risks, therefore, it 
is necessary to look beyond historical losses.  

52

For GAR13, a probabilistic approach to risk model-
ling has been adopted. This approach estimates the 
probability of events of different severity occurring in 
a  given  location,  including  extreme  and  infrequent 
events that have not yet occurred (or which we have 
no records of), but which could potentially occur in 
future. Historical losses are integrated into this mod-
el, as they are an important source of information.

Of  interest  to  investors  and  businesses  exploring 
new  terrain,  a  new  global  analysis,  carried  out  for 
the  GAR,  is  beginning  to  map  the  contours  of  this 
risk landscape.  The objective of the GAR global risk 
model  is  to  provide  comparable  disaster  risk  met-
rics for all countries and territories in the world.  

As Figure 3.1 highlights, initial global risk estimates 
for earthquakes and cyclonic winds and an improved 
estimate for tsunami exposure are now available.  

At present, the estimates refer to the risk of direct 
loss to urban produced capitali and are agglomer-
ated at the country level.ii  The model does not esti-
mate the risks of indirect loss owing to business in-

Part I - Chapter 3Figure 3.1  GAR Global Risk Model deliverables for 2013 and 2015

(Source: UNISDR)

terruption, risks to agriculture, forestry or other rural 
sectors nor mortality and injury. 

there may be no recorded earthquake loss over the 
last 100 years.  

By quantifying the value of urban produced capital 
exposed to each potential hazard event that could 
occur  in  each  location,  and  by  assessing  its  likely 
vulnerability,  it  is  then  possible  to  estimate  the 
probability of how much disaster loss could occur in 
a given time period. 

Maximum losses associated with events of specific 
return periods are described as probable maximum 
losses (PML):  for example, the maximum loss that 
might occur once every 250 years would reflect a 0.4 
percent probability of the loss occurring in any given 
year.  When PML for all events that could occur are 
averaged  over  a  long  period,  then  annual  average 
loss (AAL) can be calculated.   

Depending  on  the  hazard  profile  of  a  country,  the 
AAL  represents  the  probability  of  both  frequently 
occurring losses, for example, with return periods of 
five or ten years, as well as highly infrequent losses 
that may occur, for example, once every thousand 
years.  For that reason, AAL should not be confused 
with  the  average  observed  losses  that  have  oc-
curred, even if records go back a century or more.   A 
country may have a relatively high AAL—from earth-
quakes, for example—if catastrophic loss is expect-
ed  from  a  rare  thousand-year  event,  even  though 

Annex 1 provides a technical description of how the 
new GAR global risk model is being developed.  

Risk estimates are computed using highly simplified 
global hazard models, a proxy for the exposure of 
urban produced capital and a standardised global 
set of vulnerability curves.  Owing to the simplifica-
tion inherent to global modelling and to the limita-
tions of the current input data on hazard, exposure 
and vulnerability, the estimates obtained from the 
model have an intrinsic degree of error and uncer-
tainty.  As such, estimates are presented as a set of 
risk  classes  rather  than  as  absolute  numbers  and 
represent the likely order of magnitude of loss.  

Given  that  the  estimates  are  calculated  using  the 
same methodology and with consistent global level 
proxy data, risk classes are internally coherent at the 
global  level  and  provide  a  point  of  comparison 
between  risk  levels  in  countries  and  territories.  
These risk classes should be considered as starting 
points to understand the degree of possible annual 
losses for a country, enabling a government to dis-
cuss which disaster risk management strategies are 
most appropriate for its risk profile.  The risk classes 
may also help investors to understand the degree of 
risk faced by different countries. 

53

However, the results are unlikely to be comparable 
with national or local AAL and PML estimates cal-
culated with detailed hazard, exposure and vulner-
ability data or for specific portfolios of insured as-
sets. This should not be considered a defect of the 
model.    However  much  it  is  enhanced,  a  global 
model can never provide nor substitute for the de-
tailed risk estimates required for designing nation-
al  and  local  risk  reduction  investments  or  insur-
ance  schemes.    However,  the  estimates  provided 

by the global model may encourage governments 
to develop the more specific risk models required 
to implement disaster risk reduction. 

The  development  of  the  global  model  is  iterative 
and the current release should be considered as a 
starting point.  Between 2013 and 2015, the different 
hazard  models,  exposure  proxy  and  vulnerability 
curves will be enhanced and further developed, tak-
ing into account peer review and the best available 

Box 3.1  Proof of concept for the GAR flood model

While river floods will not be included in the GAR risk model until 2015, a national level proof-of-concept study 
shows promising results. As Figure 3.2 shows, in Thailand, modelled results were compared with the outcomes 
of the Chao Phaya river floods of 2011. 

Figure 3.2 Flood hazard for Thailand compared with actual flood footprint of 2011

(Source: GAR global flood model; UNOSAT iii)

The modelled results were largely coherent with the maximum flood depths of between 3 metres and 4 metres 
recorded in different sites upstream from Bangkok.  

(Source: UNISDR)

54

Part I - Chapter 3science  and  data  to  provide  greater  accuracy.  By 
2015, the model should also include global risk esti-
mates for flooding, storm surges, volcanic ash and 
tsunamis.  Box  3.1  presents  a  proof  of  concept  for 
the global flood model.  

3.2  

Earthquake risk

 

 

Absolute  earthquake  risk  is  concentrated  in 
high-income countries. But many small and low-
income  countries  have  a  higher  proportion  of 
their urban produced capital at risk. 

Total  global  annual  average  loss  (AAL)  for  earth-
quakes  is  estimated  at  more  than  US$100  billion.  
As Figure 3.3 shows, these economic risks are high-
ly concentrated in countries with large volumes of 

exposed  produced  capital  and  high  earthquake 
hazard. 

As highlighted in the previous chapter, given invest-
ment decisions and capital flows, global produced 
capital  remains  heavily  concentrated  in  high-in-
come countries. Therefore, the highest absolute lev-
els of earthquake risk are also found in these coun-
tries,  which  is  where  approximately  80  percent  of 
global AAL is concentrated.  

In terms of regional distribution, about 76 percent of 
total global earthquake AAL is concentrated in Asia, 
9 percent in Europe, 8 percent in North America and 
5 percent in Latin America.

Figure 3.4 shows the distribution of earthquake AAL 
for countries in different risk classes. For example, 
the  value  of  urban  produced  capital  in  Japan  and 

Figure 3.3  Annual average loss (AAL) from earthquakes and earthquake hazard (250 year return period)

Earthquake AAL

(Source: GAR global risk model)

55

Figure 3.4  Annual average losses from earthquakes by risk class

(Source: UNISDR, based on GAR global risk model)

the  United  States  of  America  is  US$14  trillion  and 
US$22 trillion, respectively, representing 15 percent 
and 22 percent each of global urban produced capi-
tal. However, although about 100 percent of Japan’s 
produced  capital  would  be  exposed  to  a  250  year 
earthquake, only about 34 percent of the produced 
capital of the United States of America would be ex-
posed.  Therefore,  the  AAL  of  Japan  is  an  order  of 
magnitude higher than the AAL of the United States 
of America. 

Some middle-income countries, such as China, Iran 
(Islamic Republic of) and the Philippines, also have 
high levels of risk because their exposed produced 
capital  is  more  vulnerable  than  in  high-income 
countries, for example due to weaker building struc-
ture  and  material.  The  impact  that  this  has  on  ex-
pected AAL highlights the risks of making business 
investments  in  countries  with  higher  levels  of  vul-
nerability an important consideration for investors. 

56

Although estimates of absolute loss are important, 
the impact of an earthquake on a country’s econo-
my will depend on the proportion of its urban pro-
duced  capital  that  could  be  affected.  Figure  3.5 
shows  that  many  low  and  middle-income  and 
smaller countries can be expected to lose a higher 
proportion of their urban produced capital, which in 
turn could be expected to generate serious indirect 
losses for business and macroeconomic effects.iv 

For example, the absolute value of AAL for countries 
such as Papua New Guinea and Vanuatu is low com-
pared with other countries (between US$10 and 100 
million),  but  this  value  represents  between  1  per-
cent and 10 percent of these countries’ total urban 
produced capital.  In contrast, for the United States 
of  America  and  China,  expected  annual  average 
losses,  although  totalling  between  US$1,000  and 
10,000  million,  represent  only  0.01  percent  to  0.1 
percent of their total urban produced capital.

Part I - Chapter 3Figure 3.5  Annual average losses from earthquakes as a percentage of urban produced capital by risk class   

(Source: UNISDR, based on GAR global risk model)

Probable  maximum  losses  for  a  one-in-250  year 
earthquake have been estimated both in absolute 
terms  as  well  as  relative  to  countries’  urban  pro-
duced capital. Although there is only a 0.4 percent 
probability  of  these  losses  occurring  in  any  given 
year, these values are indicative of the potential ex-
tent  of  losses  owing  to  catastrophic  earthquake 
events. As expected, countries with highest proba-
ble  maximum  losses  are  Japan  and  the  United 
States of America—with more than US$100 billion.  
Countries such as Iran  (Islamic Republic of) and Chi-
na  follow  closely  behind,  possibly  incurring  earth-
quake losses of more than US$10 billion. 

Comparing these expected losses with total urban 
produced  capital  provides  an  indication  on  what 
the impact of an event would be on a country’s as-
sets.  For example, in the Philippines they would cor-
respond to almost 19 percent of its total urban pro-
duced  capital.    Haiti  faces  losses  of  more  than  25 

percent of its urban produced capital again indicat-
ing the possibility of a serious impact on business 
and  the  economy  as  a  whole.    Some  small-island 
developing states, such as the Solomon Islands, risk 
losing over 40 percent of the value of their exposed 
capital in a catastrophic quake. 

Vulnerability  also  remains  a  key  determinant  of 
earthquake risk levels. If countries with similar values 
of exposed capital are compared, the assets of coun-
tries with higher PML are likely to be more vulnerable. 

For  example,  probable  losses  for  Spain  and  Hong 
Kong (Special Administrative Region of China), with 
a  high  value  of  exposed  urban  produced  capital 
(about US$1.9 trillion and US$1.1 trillion, respective-
ly) are lower than losses for Iran (Islamic Republic of) 
and Haiti, which have a significantly lower value of 
exposed  capital  (US$0.7  trillion  and  US$8.5  billion, 
respectively). These results reflect the much higher 

57

Figure 3.6  Probable maximum losses from earthquakes as a percentage of exposed urban produced capital (250 year return period)  

(Source: UNISDR, based on GAR global risk model)

vulnerability of exposed assets in Iran (Islamic Re-
public of) and Haiti compared with exposed assets 
in  Spain  and  Hong  Kong  (Special  Administrative 
Region of China) (Figure 3.6). 

3.3  

 

 

 

Risk from cyclonic winds

As  in  the  case  of  earthquakes,  expected  eco-
nomic  damage  from  tropical  cyclone  wind  is 
mainly  concentrated  in  high-income  countries 
and in Asia. However, in relative terms smaller 
countries,  such  as  SIDS  could  be  expected  to 
lose a far higher proportion of their assets.  In 
many low and middle-income countries, risk is 
heavily conditioned by vulnerability.  

the  risk  model  does  not  include  losses  owing  to 
storm surges or coastal flooding but only wind dam-
age. However, it does estimate the losses incurred 
as  cyclones  in  tropical  areas  move  southward  or 
northwards (depending on the hemisphere) and be-
come sub-tropical or extra-tropical storms (as in the 
case of Sandy in 2012, for example).  At present the 
tropical  cyclonic  wind  hazard  model  may  have  a 
greater  degree  of  uncertainty  and  error  than  the 
earthquake  hazard  model  and  will  be  further  vali-
dated and enhanced for GAR15.  

Figure  3.7  shows  the  geographical  distribution  of 
the risk. About 80 percent of the risk from cyclonic 
winds is concentrated in Asia, 13 percent in North 
America,  4  percent  in  Latin  America  and  about  2 
percent in the Caribbean.

Global  annual  average  losses  from  cyclonic  winds 
are  estimated  to  be  over  US$80  billion.  Currently, 

In terms of absolute losses, about 82 percent of risk 
is  concentrated  in  high-income  countries,  corre-

58

Part I - Chapter 3Figure 3.7  Annual average losses from cyclonic winds and tropical cyclone wind hazard (250 year return period)

Cyclone-winds AAL

(Source: GAR global risk model)

Figure 3.8  Annual average losses from cyclonic winds by risk class

(Source: UNISDR, based on GAR global risk model)

59

Figure 3.9  Annual average losses from cyclonic winds compared with urban produced capital   

(Source: UNISDR, based on GAR global risk model)

Figure 3.10  Probable maximum losses from cyclonic winds (250 year return period) compared with the exposed urban produced capital

(Source: UNISDR, based on GAR global risk model)

60

Part I - Chapter 3sponding  to  the  highest  concentration  of  urban 
produced  capital.  Middle-income  countries  con-
centrate  18  percent  of  risk  from  cyclonic  winds, 
corresponding to about US$16 billion. Distribution 
of  AAL  across  countries  by  risk  class  is  shown  in 
Figure 3.8. 

cial Administrative Region of China), the Philippines 
and Puerto Rico are in the same risk class. However, 
in relative terms, Hong Kong (Special Administrative 
Region  of  China)  faces  losses  of  only  2  percent, 
whereas the Philippines and Puerto Rico face losses 
of more than 15 percent of their exposed capital. 

Japan  and  the  United  States  of  America  concen-
trate 56 percent of global risk from cyclonic winds, 
corresponding  to  the  high  value  of  their  exposed 
capital.v    Urban  produced  capital  exposed  to  cy-
clonic  windsvi  in  Japan  and  the  United  States  of 
America  is  valued  at  about  US$14  trillion  and 
US$11.6  trillion,  respectively.  This  corresponds  to 
100 percent and 52 percent, respectively, of total ur-
ban produced capital of both countries. 

Middle-income  countries  such  as  China,  Mexico 
and  the  Philippines  all  have  high  AAL  in  terms  of 
absolute  value.  However,  in  relation  to  the  coun-
tries’ produced capital, the losses vary significant-
ly:  although  the  AAL  for  China  and  Mexico  corre-
sponds to about 0.2 percent of the country’s urban 
produced capital, the AAL for the Philippines cor-
responds to more than 1 percent of the country’s 
total produced capital (Figure 3.9).

Absolute  probable  maximum  losses  from  a  cata-
strophic one-in-250 year cyclone are also estimated 
to be significant, particularly for countries with high 
asset exposure.  

When  calculated  as  a  percentage  of  total  urban 
produced capital, the probable maximum losses 
from such as catastrophic event become particu-
larly threatening to small countries. For example, 
countries such as Belize, Guadeloupe, Martinique 
and Samoa could lose between 20 percent and 40 
percent  of  their  total  urban  produced  capital 
from cyclonic wind disasters (Figure 3.10).

As in the case of earthquakes expected losses are 
also  influenced  by  vulnerability.  For  example,  in 
terms  of  absolute  probable  maximum  losses, 
countries  and  territories  such  as  Hong  Kong  (Spe-

3.4  

 

 

Tsunami exposure

 

Exposure  to  tsunamis  is  a  good  proxy  for  the 
risk  associated  with  highly  destructive  one-
in-500  year  tsunamis.    Japan  has  the  highest 
exposure of produced capital in absolute terms 
and the third highest in relative terms but many 
smaller  countries  and  territories,  including 
Hong Kong and Macau (Special Administrative 
Regions  of  China)  have  high  levels  of  relative 
risk.  Of major global concern is the exposure to 
tsunamis  of  critical  facilities  such  as  airports 
and nuclear power plants.

Produced capital in coastal areas is also at risk from 
tsunamis.    Tsunamis  are  relatively  infrequent,  with 
only 5–10 events reported globally per year, but they 
can  be  devastating,  causing  massive  loss  of  life, 
large economic losses and the destruction of critical 
facilities. The Indian Ocean tsunami in 2004 is esti-
mated  to  have  caused  about  220,000  deaths  and 
more  than  US$10  billion  in  damages  (Cosgrave, 
2007).  The  East  Japan  tsunami  in  2011  resulted  in 
15,875 deaths, 2,725 missing personsvii  and approxi-
mately US$206 billion in damagesviii.  

The global tsunami model has been updated for 
GAR13. Compared with the first global scale tsu-
nami  hazard  and  exposure  assessment  carried 
out for GAR09, the GAR13 model adopts improved 
methodologies  and  provides  a  more  complete 
coverage  of  the  global  earthquake  sources  that 
might  produce  destructive  tsunamis.  This  im-
proved the model in many locations, such as Ja-
pan and Latin America.ix   As Box 3.2 at the end of 
this  chapter  shows,  the  results  from  national 

61

models  of  some  countries,  such  as  Indonesia, 
also contributed to the global modelling effort.  

Figure  3.12  below  shows  the  global  distribution  of 
infrequent but severe tsunamis generated by large 
earthquakes  with  return  periods  of  approximately 
500 years, equivalent to a 0.2 percent probability of 
occurrence in any given year.x 

Figure 3.13 highlights the exposure of both people 
and produced capital to these tsunamis.  Japan is 
highly  exposed  in  both  relative  and  absolute 
terms,  and  concentrates  about  16  percent  of  ex-
posed  global  produced  capital.    Macao  (Special 
Administrative Region of China) also ranks high in 
relative  and  absolute  capital  exposed.  Many 
smaller countries and territories also have a high 

Figure 3.12  Global distribution of estimated inundation height from earthquake-generated 
tsunamis (500 year return period)

Tsunami hazard

(Source: UNISDR, based on NGI, 2013a) 

62

Part I - Chapter 3Figure 3.13  Top ten countries in terms of population and stock of urban produced capital exposed to tsunamis (absolute and relative)xii xiii

(Source: GAR global risk model)

relative exposure. Maldives has over 30 percent of 
its  produced  capital  stock  exposed,  followed  by 
the Solomon Islands with over 25 percent;  Oman 
with 9.5 percent; and Hong Kong (Special Adminis-
trative Region of China) with about 5 percent.   

Although tsunami exposure is not the same as tsu-
nami risk, in the case of extremely destructive 500 
year return period tsunamis, exposure is probably a 
good guide to risk, as vulnerability tends to become 
binary—assets  that  are  exposed  are  at  risk  and 
those that are not exposed are not. 

Of particular concern is the location of critical facili-
ties, including nuclear power plants and airports, in 
areas exposed to destructive tsunamis.xi In the Unit-
ed  States  of  America,  a  total  of  13  nuclear  power 
plants are either in or close to areas exposed to tsu-
namis; in China, Japan and the United Kingdom of 
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the numbers of 
such plants are 12, 10 and 7, respectively.  However, 
nuclear facilities are subject to rigorous local risk as-
sessments and thus likely to have countermeasures 
in place to reduce risk. 

63

Airports are similarly at risk. In the United States of 
America,  58  airports  are  in  areas  exposed  to  de-
structive tsunamis; in Japan, there are 40.  Airport 
exposure  is  most  critical  in  small  island  states, 

whose economies may depend on a single airport 
or  where  all  airports  will  be  affected  at  the  same 
time. In the French Polynesia archipelago, for example, 
a total of 26 airports are exposed.

Box 3.2  Unveiling tsunami hazard in Indonesia 

Indonesia has high tsunami risk. In the past 100 years, 24 tsunamis have killed more than 235,000 people. To 
better manage this risk, the national disaster management agency (Badan Nasional Pananggulangan Bencana, 
BNPB)  and  AusAID,  through  the  Australia-Indonesia  Facility  for  Disaster  Reduction,  formed  a  collaborative 
team  representing  Institut  Teknologi  Bandung,  Indonesian  Institute  of  Science  (LIPI),  BPPT,  Badan  Geologi, 
BMKG, TDMRC and Geoscience Australia to conduct an advanced and rigorous national tsunami hazard assess-
ment. 

Tsunami hazard maps are based on a probabilistic tsunami hazard assessment methodology, which allows the 
probability of tsunamis of different heights to be quantified. Maps produced allow disaster managers to:

•	 Understand	the	chance	of	a	tsunami reaching the coastline that would trigger an orange (‘tsunami’) or red 
(‘major tsunami’) tsunami warning;
•	 Understand	the	maximum	tsunami height over different return periods;
•	 Rank	the	tsunami potential for each district in Indonesia to prioritise communities for tsunami mitigation 
activities;
•	 Assess	tsunami potential for each district to plan tsunami mitigation activities;
•	 Determine	earthquake fault lines that may have an impact on each district.

The assessment highlights that the West coast of Sumatra, the South coast of Java and Nusa Tenggara have the 
highest tsunami hazard (Figure 3.11). 

Figure 3.11  Tsunami hazard in Indonesia (500 year return period)

(Source: Geoscience Australia)xiv

64

Part I - Chapter 3Notes

i  Urban produced capital is the produced capital in urban areas 
with more than 2,000 inhabitants. 
ii  Countries and territories for which no data on urban produced 
capital is available could not be included in the risk modelling ex-
ercise.  These  include:  American  Samoa,  Andorra,  Ashmore  and 
Cartier Islands, Azores Islands, Baker Island, Bassas da India, Bird Is-
land, Bouvet Island, British Indian Ocean Territory, Christmas Island, 
Clipperton  Island,  Cocos  (Keeling)  Islands,  Cook  Islands,  Dhekelia 
and Akrotiri SBA, Europa Island, French Guernsey, Glorioso Island, 
Guam, Heard Island and McDonald Islands, Holy See, Howland Is-
land, Isle of Man, Jarvis Island, Jersey, Johnston Atoll, Juan de Nova 
Island,  Kingman  Reef,  Liancourt  Rock,  Madeira  Islands,  Midway 
Island,  Nauru,  Navassa  Island,  Netherlands  Antilles,  Niue,  Norfolk 
Island, Northern Mariana Islands, Palmyra Atoll, Paracel Islands, Pit-
cairn, Romania, Saint Helena, Saint Pierre et Miquelon, Scarborough 
Reef, Senkaku Islands, South Georgia and the South Sandwich Is-
lands, Southern and Antarctic Territories, Spratly Islands, Svalbard 
and Jan Mayen Islands, Timor-Leste, Tokelau, Tromelin Island, Wake 
Island, Wallis and Futuna.
iii  www.unitar.org/unosat/maps/tha. 
iv 
In countries where only a small proportion of urban produced 
capital is at risk,  there is less chance of business and supply chain 
interruption and a greater likelihood of rapid recovery. In contrast, 
where a significant proportion of the urban produced capital is at 
risk, it is more likely that business will be interrupted owing to infra-
structure damage and supply chain disruption and that recovery of 
the economy as a whole will be slower.     
v  Exposure  is  here  estimated  overlapping  the  urban  produced 
capital  with  the  cyclonic  wind  hazard  for  a  return  period  of  250 
years, with wind speed higher than 50 Km/h.
vi  Capital exposed to cyclonic wind speed higher than 150 km/h 
for 250 year return period. This is a proxy for the exposure as it does 
not take into account flooding owing to tropical cyclones.
vii  Data are as of 5 Dec. 2012 by National Police Agency, Japanese 
Government 
(http://www.npa.go.jp/archive/keibi/biki/higaijokyo.
pdf).
viii 1USD=JPY81.84.  The  estimate  was  reported  in  June  2011  by 
Cabinet  Office,  Japanese  Government  (http://www.bousai.go.jp/
oshirase/h23/110624-1kisya.pdf).  
ix  See Annex 1 for more detail on the methodology.
x  The return period attributed for the model needs to be consid-
ered as an estimate, and some events might have a slightly lower or 
higher return period than 500 years. 
xi  All data related to nuclear power plants and airports at risk from 
Norwegian Geological Institute and UNEP-GRID.
xii  In  this  graph,  (urban)  produced  capital  is  used  as  a  reference 
point for relative risk (rather than gross fixed capital formation) as 
the total exposure of produced capital needs to be compared with 
the total stock of produced capital.
xiii ‘Exposure’ here is calculated by overlapping the potential area 
inundated by an extreme tsunami (return period approximately 500 
years) with the population or stock in the area. 
xiv  Information for this box provided directly to UNISDR by GeoSci-
ence Australia.

65

Chapter 4
Invisible Risks

67

Extensive risk is associated with localised, mainly weather-related hazards with short return peri-
ods.  These  highly  localised,  yet  frequent  hazards  include  surface  water  and  flash  flooding,  land-
slides, fires and both agricultural and hydrological drought.  They are exacerbated by badly man-
aged urban development, environmental degradation and poverty.

An analysis of the scale of economic losses shows that extensive risk continues to be underestimat-
ed.  The real cost of these largely human produced risks is rarely highlighted. Although extensive 
risk events cause only 13 percent of total mortality, they are responsible for 42 percent or more of 
total economic losses.

These losses are hidden in largely invisible risk layers that no insurance covers. And yet they can 
amount to more than 10 percent or more of annual capital formation. 

4.1  

 

 

 

The production of extensive risk

In-depth  analysis  of  new  national  disaster  loss 
data  confirms  a  previously  recognised  and  yet 
regularly  ignored  truth:  accumulated  losses 
from small-scale, highly frequent and localised 
disaster events approach in magnitude those of 
major disasters and contribute to declines in social 
welfare,  economic  growth  and  ecosystems. 
Urban and rural areas alike, particularly in low 
and middle-income countries, experience regu-
lar  small  disasters  that  undermine  local  devel-
opment as well as national competitiveness.

GAR09 (UNISDR, 2009) highlighted four underlying 
risk drivers that characterise the accumulation of 
extensive risks. (1) Badly planned and managed ur-
ban development, for example, can generate flood-
ing, through factors such as increased run-off from 
a  growing  area  of  impermeable  surfaces,  inade-
quate  investment  in  drainage  and  water  manage-
ment and the development of low-lying flood prone 
areas. (2) The decline of regulatory ecosystem ser-
vices,  such  as  wetlands,  aquifers,  forests,  flood-
plains and mangroves, exacerbate and magnify haz-
ard  levels.  (3)  Low-income  households  are  often 
unable to participate in the formal market to land 
and  housing  and  urbanise  hazard  prone  areas, 
through  informal  mechanisms.    (4)  Cities  and  re-
gions with weak governance may either lose control 

68

over  the  above  processes  or  contribute  to  them. 
Given that not only exposure and vulnerability but 
also hazards are produced through these underly-
ing drivers, extensive risk is endogenous to and pro-
duced by urban and economic development.

Wealthier,  better-governed  city  regions  are  likely, 
over  time,  to  successfully  manage  the  processes 
that generate extensive risk.  Rapid urban growth of-
ten reflects economic success and major inflows of 
capital into infrastructure and productive develop-
ment  (Mitlin  and  Satterthwaite,  2012).  In  fact,  in 
high-income and in many middle-income countries, 
the growth in GDP per capita has outpaced growth 
in  urban  population  (UN-HABITAT,  2012).  Although 
exposure  and  intensive  risk  increase  over  time, 
these  cities  and  countries  reduce  their  extensive 
risk, for example, through investments in protective 
infrastructure, environmental management and up-
grading of informal settlements.   

In contrast, in many low-income countries, growth 
in  urban  population  has  outstripped  growth  in 
GDP per capita (Ibid.) in part from population mi-
gration owing to declining rural economies and cri-
ses.  In these cities, a greater proportion of low-in-
come  households  participate 
in  urbanisation 
through  informal  mechanisms  of  land  acquisition 
(Johnson  et  al.,  2012;  Hamdan,  2012).  Govern-
ments  have  little  capacity  to  reduce  risks  over 
time, and both extensive and intensive risks lead to 

Part I - Chapter 4Box 4.1  Extensive risks in urban centres in Kenya and Tanzania

A recent survey of disaster risk reduction in the towns of Kisumu in Kenya and Moshi in Tanzania depicts similar 
pictures.  Administrative capacities in Kisumu and Moshi are challenged as local governments try to maintain 
basic infrastructure—such as storm drains—the disrepair of which leads to frequent flooding.  The lack of waste 
management systems means that drains are frequently blocked with garbage and sewage, increasing flood risk 
and compromising water quality.  The impact on low-income households, who frequently live in the most flood-
prone areas, is devastating.  Land-use planning is ineffective and disaster reduction planning non-existent.  Lo-
cal governments have no budget to dedicate to reduce risks and have little influence over environmental degra-
dation in surrounding areas that increase risks in these towns. 

(Source: UNISDR, 2012)

higher rates of mortality. Almost by definition, infor-
mal settlements (and a significant proportion of so-
cial housing) occupy areas of low land value, such as 
low-lying  flood-prone  areas  or  on  landslide-prone 
hillsides.  

In the case of Cape Verde and Senegal, for exam-
ple, in their capitals Praia and Dakar, flooding has 
intensified over the years (DARA, 2013).  New stud-
ies  at  the  local  level  in  West  Africa  highlight  that 
underlying drivers of flood risks are poor drainage 
systems related to land-use and newly built envi-
ronments, and limited access to land.  The studies 
point to West Africa’s continuous problems in ex-
panding  urban  centres  and  the  need  for  urban 
planning  and  sufficient  public  or  private  invest-
ments  in  adequate  infrastructure.  Local  data  of 
these  studies  were  backed  by  national  data  that 
indicated similar problems in urban areas in Cape 
Verde, Ghana and Senegal (Ibid.). 

In  addition,  the  health  of  millions  is  threatened 
(Mitlin  and  Satterthwaite,  2012).    For  example,  in 
Maputo, Mozambique, the limited coverage of the 
city’s  sewage  system  is  a  serious  cholera  threat 
even  in  normal  times,  which  becomes  a  major 
challenge  for  authorities  during  annual  flooding 
(Thompson, 2004).

As  Box  4.1  shows,  investments  in  protective  infra-
structure, such as drainage and slope stabilisation, 
are often inadequate.  Low-income households are 
also more likely to live in makeshift or poor quality 

constructions, further increasing their vulnerability. 
Disaster risks in rural areas may be particularly invis-
ible, given the low density of produced capital and 
declining  population.  As  Box  4.2  highlights,  in  the 
case  of  Colombia,  rural  populationsi  with  unsatis-
fied  basic  needs  experienced  the  largest  relative 
losses during the 2010–2011 La Niña episode. 

Indirect losses and the wider effects of disaster loss 
for  low-income  households  and  communities  are 
rarely  accounted  for.  However,  GAR09  (UNISDR, 
2009) highlighted, through a set of microeconomic 
studies,  negative  welfare  outcomes,  including  de-
clines  in  school  attendance,  nutrition,  health,  pro-
ductivity and increases in inequality and unemploy-
ment. Some of these outcomes can be transmitted 
across generations (Ole MoiYoi, 2012).  GAR11 (UNIS-
DR, 2011) also showed how extensive disasters neg-
atively affect children and their future. 

The social costs of extensive risk are not accounted 
for by either governments or business and are largely 
absorbed by low-income households and commu-
nities, undermining their potential for development 
and eroding resilience.

69

Box 4.2  Extensive risks in rural areas

In Colombia, weather-related disasters are strongly correlated with ENSO episodes. But while the 2010–2011 La 
Niña was no stronger than others that had occurred in 1973–1976, 1998–2001 and 1988–89, the losses in terms 
of people affected and damage to housing were far greater (see Figure 4.1).

Figure 4.1  Hydrometeorological disasters and losses in Colombia, 1970–2011

(Source: Adapted from Osso, 2012a)

Most importantly, as Figure 4.2 shows, the proportion of the population affected in rural municipalities (rural 
index between 50 and 75) and with over 56 percent of unsatisfied basic needs was approximately 35 times 
greater than in the case of urban centres (rural index between 1 and 25) and with less than 27 percent of unsat-
isfied basic needs).  

Figure 4.2  Proportion of disaster-affected inhabitants in urban and rural areas 
(expressed by rural index) and with unsatisfied basic needs (expressed by UBN 
index) during the 2010-2011 ENSO episode in Colombia

El Niño and La Niña

(Source: UNISDR, adapted from Osso, 2012c)

(Source: UNISDR)

70

Part I - Chapter 44.2  

Visualising the invisible

 

 

More than 50 countries are now recording local 
disaster losses, enabling them to visualize the 
real impact their society and economy is facing. 
This information is now available for governments, 
affected communities and businesses interested 
in investing in these markets.

Localised hazards can be modelled if the necessary 
data  is  available.  For  example,  Figure  4.3  high-
lights the results of a study of landslide hazard in 
El Salvador.  

risk  patterns  and  trends.    It  is  still  not  possible  to 
provide  a  global  vision  of  extensive  risk.  Box  4.3, 
however, highlights that a growing number of coun-
tries are developing detailed disaster loss databas-
es that allow extensive risks to be modelled.  

For businesses and governments that want to know 
more about these risks, a complete analysis of ex-
tensive risk patterns and trends is provided in Annex 
2.   Analysis on the selected set of more than 270,000 
records of disaster impacts from 56 countries con-
firms the trends and patterns previously identified 
in smaller subsets of 22 and 11 countries (UNISDR, 
2011 and UNISDR, 2009).  

However,  given  that  extensive  risks  are  character-
ised by short return periods, the analysis of histori-
cal loss data provides a valid approach to modelling 

Table  4.1  shows  that,  although  extensive  disasters 
cause only 13 percent of total mortality, they are re-
sponsible  for  42  percent  of  the  total  economic 

Figure 4.3 Hazard (top) and exposure (bottom) to landslides induced by rainfall in El Salvador

(Source: UNISDR, adapted from NGI, 2013b)

71

Box 4.3  Progress in recording local disaster losses and impacts

Extensive disasters

As part of a process that aims at a global vision of local disaster losses, UNISDR, UNDP, the World Bank, Corpo-
racion OSSO and other partners are supporting national governments to build information systems that sys-
tematically account for disaster losses and impact.  Currently 56 countries engage in this effort. 

In Latin America and the Caribbean, Guyana, Honduras, Jamaica, Nicaragua and Uruguay have all recently pub-
lished disaster databases.  

In Africa, Ethiopia, Kenya, Mali and Uganda have completed initial datasets that allow a more realistic view of 
disaster losses in countries where global datasets have little coverage. In the Arab states, new databases have 
been published in Djibouti and Lebanon. 

In Asia, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Timor-Leste and Viet Nam have completed disaster databases; in 
the Pacific Islands, a regional dataset covers 22 Small Island Developing States (SIDS).  The Lao People’s Demo-
cratic Republic disaster database has been used for a National Assessment Report (Lao People’s Democratic 
Republic, 2012).  

(Source: UNISDR)

72

Part I - Chapter 4losses recorded in the datasets. In countries that do 
not experience large-scale disasters, this figure may 
be much higher. 

Losses associated with extensive risk, as in the ex-
ample for Honduras and Uganda below, are spread 
over the entire country, affecting all municipalities 
(Figure 4.4). 

The agricultural sector is one of the most affected 
by extensive risks, as initially highlighted by GAR11 

with  data  from  Mozambique.  These  impacts  are 
further  confirmed  in  the  case  of  Lao  People’s 
Democratic Republic (Government of Lao People’s 
Democratic Republic, 2012) and Lebanon (Figure 4.5).   

Economic losses associated with extensive risk are 
also increasing rapidly in the 34 new country data-
sets  included  in  this  reportii  and  are  consistent 
with the findings of GAR09 and GAR11 (Figure 4.6).  
Damage to educational facilities in particular is ris-
ing rapidly. 

Table 4.1  Extensive and intensive risk impacts summary for 56 countries and 2 Indian states (1981–2011)

(Source: UNISDR)

Figure 4.4  Extensive risk direct economic losses per municipality, in Honduras (left, 1981–2011) and  in Uganda  (right, 1991–2011) 

(Source: UNISDR)

73

Figure 4.5  Extensive risk, number of hectares of agricultural crops affected in Lebanon (left, 1981-2011) and Lao People’s Democratic 
Republic (right, 1991-2011)

(Source: UNISDR, based on DesInventar)

Figure 4.6  Loss trends over time (1990–2011) in 34 countries not presented in previous GAR analysis 
(left: economic losses; right: education facilities)

(Source: UNISDR, based on DesInventar)

74

Part I - Chapter 44.3  

 

 

Hidden risk layers

 

A  newly  applied  methodology  to  evaluate  di-
rect  loss  and  damage  from  extensive  disaster 
events allows extensive risk to be expressed as 
a loss exceedance curve. This enables countries 
to develop a more complete analysis of risk and 
of their contingent liabilities associated with di-
sasters. 

Extensive  risks  are  rarely  recorded,  and  therefore 
not taken into account in national risk assessments, 
which  usually  only  focus  on  intensive  risks.  GAR11 
(UNISDR, 2011) presented a new hybrid loss exceed-
ance  curve  as  a  way  of  combining  and  measuring 
both  extensive  and  intensive  risks  at  the  country 
level. Additional hybrid curves have now been de-
veloped for eight Latin American countries.iii 

provides information on largely extensive risks with 
return periods of up to approximately 30 years but 
does not capture intensive risks with longer return 
periods. Similarly, the analytical curve estimated us-
ing  a  probabilistic  risk  model  does  not  capture 
much of the extensive risk with shorter return peri-
ods.  The hybrid curve captures both. 

Figure 4.8, based on hybrid loss exceedance curves 
for ten Latin American countries (CIMNE et al., 2013b ; 
ERN-AL,  2011),  highlights  the  annual  average  loss 
(AAL) that would be expected from all disasters, 
intensive  and  extensive,  both  in  absolute  terms 
and expressed as a percentage of gross fixed capital 
formation (GFCF). Although Mexico has the highest 
probable  AAL  in  absolute  terms,  in  relative  terms, 
Honduras stands to lose more than 12 percent of 
its gross fixed capital formation every year owing 
to direct disaster losses.  

Figure  4.7  shows  the  hybrid  curve  for  Guatemala.  
The empirical curve, based on historical loss data, 

This kind of information is valuable to inform invest-
ments in disaster risk reduction.  Often, the costs of 

Figure 4.7  Hybrid loss exceedance curve for Guatemala

(Source: UNISDR, adapted from CIMNE et al., 2013b)

75

Figure 4.8  Absolute AAL (left) and AAL relative to GFCF (right), both calculated from the hybrid risk models of selected countries

(Source: UNISDR, adapted from CIMNE et al., 2013b)

insurance  or 

extensive  disasters  are  not  fully  absorbed  by  gov-
ernment, 
international  assistance.  
Parts of these losses are absorbed directly by low-
income  rural  and  urban  households  but  also  by 
SMEs and businesses in the informal sector.  Unless 
these losses are made visible and their fiscal impact 
understood, it is difficult to justify increased public 
sector  investments  in  safe  and  resilient  infrastruc-
ture.  If  indirect  losses  to  business  from  extensive 
risks  could  be  measured,  then  the  private  sector 
may  become  a  key  advocate  for  increased  public 
sector investment.

Notes

i 
Rural  populations  are  defined  here  using  an  Index  of  Rurality 
based on population density and the distance between smaller ru-
ral and larger urban centres (UNDP, 2011:  Colombia Human Devel-
opment Report).
ii  The  new  countries  are  Djibouti,  East  Timor,  Ethiopia,  Guyana, 
Jamaica, Kenya, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Mali, 
Nicaragua,  Sri  Lanka,  Uganda,  Uruguay,  Viet  Nam,  plus  22  coun-
tries that have developed a joint Pacific islands regional loss data-
base: American Samoa; Cook Islands; Fiji; French Polynesia; Guam; 
Kiribati;  Marshall  Islands;  Micronesia,  Federated  States  of;  Nauru; 
New Caledonia; Niue; Northern Mariana Islands; Palau; Papua New 
Guinea; Pitcairn Islands; Samoa; Solomon Islands; Tokelau; Tonga; 
Tuvalu; Vanuatu; Wallis and Futuna Islands.
iii  Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Costa Rica, Ecuador, El Salvador, 
Guatemala, Honduras, Peru and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).

76

Part I - Chapter 4Chapter 5
The Resilience Challenge

77

Business investments are made taking into account a variety of risks, including disaster risk. Howev-
er, while immediate risks to assets and operations may be considered, it is equally important for 
investors to be aware of the economic resilience of the country they are investing in. 

Businesses are more likely to recover faster in a country where governments have the capacity to 
invest in recovery or where they have risk financing measures in place that cover most contingencies.

Major losses can challenge the macroeconomic stability of even high-income countries.  Given that 
macroeconomic stability is considered a basic requirement of a country’s competitiveness, countries 
need to recognise the potential macroeconomic implications of disasters.  Currently, some countries 
that can least afford to lose investment stand to suffer the highest disaster losses. 

High losses and potential fiscal gaps can result in cumulative macroeconomic effects over time with 
severe implications for a country’s long-term economic and fiscal resilience.

5.1  

 

 

 

Threats to economic resilience

Direct losses from major disasters trigger indirect 
losses and wider impacts that can challenge the 
macroeconomic  stability  of  even  high-income 
countries.  A country wishing to promote its com-
petitiveness  and  strengthen  economic  sustain-
ability  should  recognise  the  potentially  signifi-
cant macroeconomic implications of disasters.

Risk refers to the probability of a given magnitude 
of loss in a given period of time. Resilience refers to 
the  capacity  of  a  country’s  economy  to  absorb 
losses  and  recover.  How  quickly  an  economy  re-
covers  and  how  quickly  a  business  recovers  are 
clearly interrelated.  But businesses are more likely 
to recover faster in a country where governments 
have  the  capacity  to  invest  in  recovery  or  where 
they  have  risk  financing  measures  in  place  that 
cover most contingencies.  

Figure 5.1  Reported disaster losses and GFCF in Mozambique, 1993–2011 

(Source: UNISDR, based on national disaster loss data bases, EMDAT and World Bank indicators)

78

Part I - Chapter 5Figure 5.2  Annual average losses from earthquakes (top) and cyclonic winds (bottom) compared with gross fixed capital formation

(Source: UNISDR, based on GAR global risk model)

79

Box 5.1  Estimating a government’s direct burden

The GAR13 model also takes into account losses to produced capital stock under government responsibility. 
These include government buildings and public structures as well as housing for low-income communities. 
These types of losses are here defined as ‘fiscal losses’, as they represent the sovereign or fiscal risk of a govern-
ment in case of a disaster. They are calculated as part of total annual average losses to buildings, both public 
and privateii .  

As infrastructure replacement costs are likely to constitute an important part of a government’s direct burden, 
fiscal losses presented here are likely to be underestimated. Nevertheless, they provide an important reference 
for governments. For example, fiscal losses from a 1 in 250 years return period earthquake can amount to more 
than US$9 billion for the Philippines and US$3 billion for Colombia. China and Mexico both face fiscal losses 
from earthquakes of about US$4 billion, whereas fiscal losses from cyclonic wind damage would amount to 
US$17 billion for China and more than US$13 billion for Mexico.

The scale of these losses is better understood when comparing them with national or government revenue, i.e. 
a country’s income from taxes and non-tax sources. National revenue can be seen as a proxy for a country’s 
ability to buffer losses.  Figure 5.3 shows probable maximum fiscal losses from earthquakes compared with 
national revenue. In the case of the Philippines, losses amount to about 27 percent of government revenue, 
whereas for the Dominican Republic and Bhutan, probable maximum fiscal losses may exceed 13 percent of 
their revenue. The Philippines displays an equally significant fiscal vulnerability to wind damage, highlighting 
how losses can easily exceed government revenue, potentially resulting in an increased debt burden.

Figure 5.3  Fiscal probable maximum losses (PML) from earthquakes with a 250 years return period compared with 
national revenue

(Source: UNISDR, based on GAR global risk model and World Bank dataiii)

(Source: UNISDR)

80

Part I - Chapter 5A first approach to resilience is to look at a country’s 
capacity  to  invest.  Gross  fixed  capital  formation 
(GFCF) is a metric that represents annual public and 
private investment in a country.i   

Some countries that can least afford to lose invest-
ment  are  losing  the  most.  For  example,  in  Mozam-
bique,  the  value  of  annual  reported  disaster  losses 
surpassed GFCF three times during the period 1993–
2011.  In  each  episode,  investment  not  only  slowed 
down in the country but actually reversed.  In 2011, 
this  value  represented  12  percent  of  Mozambique’s 
capital  formation,  in  El  Salvador,  8  percent;  and  in 
both Honduras and Nicaragua, about 6 percent.

Figure 5.2 below highlights the proportion of GFCF 
at risk from both earthquakes and cyclonic winds.  
When annual average losses (AAL) represent a high 
proportion of GFCF, this implies that it will take lon-
ger for lost capital to be replaced by new investment 
and thus recovery slower.   

For example, Japan not only has a high absolute AAL, 
this also represents a high proportion of its total GFCF.  
This means that losses cannot be easily replaced by 
the formation of new capital stock. In general, coun-
tries with sluggish growth and investment will find it 
more  difficult  to  replace  lost  capital  stock.  In  these 
countries, to protect economic growth, investment in 
disaster risk reduction is extremely important. 

In contrast, countries such as the United States of 
America  or  China,  which  also  have  high  absolute 
levels of AAL, have much higher rates of capital for-
mation.  This  means  that  they  will  be  able  to  re-
place lost capital more quickly and have a shorter 
recovery time. 

A second approach to economic resilience is to esti-
mate  fiscal  losses,  which  are  disaster  losses  that 
governments are responsible for. As Box 5.1 shows, 
these losses can challenge the macroeconomic sta-
bility  of  even  high-income  countries.  Macroeco-
nomic stability is considered a basic requirement of 
a  country’s  competitiveness  (WEF,  2012);  countries 

Table 5.1  Estimated contingent liabilities for the Government of 
Colombia

(Source: Government of Mexico and World Bank, 2012)

therefore  need  to  recognise  the  potential  macro-
economic implications of disasters.  

5.2  

 

 

 

The financing gap

A country’s economic resilience depends to an 
important extent on whether a government is 
able  to  absorb  losses.  Assessing  the  fiscal  ca-
pacity of a country is therefore critical to know-
ing whether it will be in the position to provide 
timely relief, invest in the required reconstruc-
tion  and  buffer  economic  downturns  to  avoid 
major and long-term macroeconomic impacts.

Economic  resilience  also  depends  on  whether  a 
government is able to finance recovery and recon-
struction  through  a  broad  array  of  public  and  pri-
vate  mechanisms,  including  budget  reallocations, 
tax  increases,  reserves,  domestic  or  external  bor-
rowing, international assistance, insurance and rein-
surance payouts, and market mechanisms such as 
catastrophe-linked securities (Mechler et al., 2006). 

81

The scale of a government’s fiscal deficit or financ-
ing  gap  following  a  disaster  depends  on  how  ex-
plicit and implicit the liabilities of governments are 
defined.  The Government of Colombia, for exam-
ple, has recognised this, and has embarked on an 
ambitious  effort  to  fully  assess  contingent  liabili-
ties arising from disaster risk (see Chapter 15 of this 
report)—this initiative is part of its overall manage-
ment strategy for government contingent liabilities 
(Government of Mexico and World Bank, 2012). 

Basing  its  analysis  of  liability  on  GAR11’s  examina-
tion of Colombia’s probable maximum losses from 

disasters (UNISDR, 2011), the government has found 
that  disasters  associated  with  natural  hazards  are 
the second most important source of its contingent 
liabilities, after those associated with legal proceed-
ings (see Table 5.1).

Based  on  this  analysis,  the  Colombian  Govern-
ment’s  new  disaster  risk  financing  strategy  will 
include  risk  transfer  solutions  for  potentially  af-
fected infrastructure and low-income housing as 
well  as  a  strong  retention  strategy  via  reserve 
funds  (Government  of  Mexico  and  World  Bank, 
2012).

Table 5.2  Liabilities of a national government (items that can be related to risk from physical hazard appear in red)

(Source: Mechler et al., 2009)

Figure 5.4  Loss exceedance curve for Honduras

(Source: UNISDR, adapted from CIMNE et al., 2013b)

82

Part I - Chapter 5Figure 5.5  Fiscal vulnerability of Honduras to disaster loss

 (Source: Hochrainer et al., 2013)

In many countries, following a disaster, implicit lia-
bilities  bring  uncertainty  to  the  national  account 
when  reconstruction  and  disaster  relief  expendi-
ture have to be accommodated (see highlights in 
Table 5.2). For example, many governments act im-
plicitly  as  ‘insurers  of  last  resort’  for  low-income 
households even if this responsibility is rarely en-
shrined in law. 

This  kind  of  ad  hoc  compensation  provides  disin-
centives  for  risk  reduction.  Worse,  ‘compensation 
inflation’  can  occur  when  households  expect  at 
least the same level of compensation as provided in 
previous  disasters,  which  increases  the  govern-
ment’s fiscal burden (World Bank, 2012b). Establish-
ing  an  ex-ante  legal  framework  is  needed  to  de-
crease  the  level  of  fiscal  uncertainty  and  ensure 
clear incentives for risk reduction.
 
Based  on  different  risk  metrics  and  criteria  for 
measuring  government  fiscal  capacity,  a  number 
of examples illustrate the potential scale of these 
financing gaps.  
 
In  Honduras,  analysis  based  on  results  from  a  hy-
brid  loss  exceedance  curve  (see  Chapter  4  of  this 

report) shows significant losses even from frequent-
ly recurring events (Figure 5. 4).

These results enabled an analysis of anticipated re-
lief obligations of the government and its available 
sources of funding, illustrating the financial vulnera-
bility of the Honduran Government to disaster risk 
(Figure 5.5).

The analysis shows that the government depends 
largely  on  traditional  sources  to  cover  for  losses 
from  frequently  occurring  small  to  medium-sized 
floods  and  storms  (Hochrainer  et  al.,  2013).  How-
ever, for events with a relatively low return period 
of one-in-33 years, the government would still face 
a significant financing gap with potentially signifi-
cant economic development setbacks, rendering it 
unable to provide timely relief and reconstruction 
efforts (Ibid.).

Another  case  in  point  is  Madagascar,  where  a  fi-
nancing  gap  would  appear  from  any  event  more 
severe  than  a  one-in-23  year  cyclone  (Figure  5.6). 
And  losses  from  one-in  100  year  events  could 
cause  financing  gaps  of  almost  US$1  billion  (Ho-
chrainer, 2012).  These estimations were based on 

83

optimistic  scenarios  of  resource  availability;  other 
scenarios showed that the Government of Madagas-
car would be challenged to cover losses from even 
annual events (Ibid.). 

This information is useful in two ways. First, it indi-
cates what scale of disaster would exhaust and ex-
ceed  a  country’s  domestic  resources  (taxes  and 
budget  diversion)  and  external  resources  (largely 

new  debt).  Second,  based  on  the  analysis  of  im-
pacts  from  disasters  for  selected  return  periods, 
such as a one-in-100 year event, information on the 
monetary scale of resources and gaps can be used 
to develop risk financing instruments and negotiate 
appropriate premiums.

The  Inter-American  Development  Bank’s  disaster 
deficit  index  (DDI)  highlights  resource  implications 

Figure 5.6  The fiscal gap for cyclone exposure in Madagascar

 (Source: Hochrainer, 2012)

Figure 5.7  Countries’ ability to absorb the losses of a one-in-100 year event (2008 data)

(Source: UNISDR, based on IADB, 2010 ERN-AL, 2011 and CIMNE et al., 2013b)

84

Part I - Chapter 5Figure 5.8  Financing the deficit from disasters in the Philippines (in billions of Pesos)

(Source: Jose, 2012)

of major disasters in eight countries in Latin America 
and the Caribbean. The DDI captures the ratio of re-
source demands incurred by disasters to a country’s 
availability of funds to cover these demands. 

Figure  5.7  shows  the  results  in  the  case  of  a  one-
in-100 year disaster, with any value above 1 on the 
DDI indicating a financing gap.  For example, the DDI 
indicates  that  despite  an  estimated  PML  of  more 
than US$4 billion, Mexico is well positioned to cover 
these losses with available resources.  In contrast, 
Honduras would be seriously challenged in spite of 
a much smaller PML. 

The  Philippines  also  has  consistently  experienced 
financing gaps owing to disasters since 2000 (Figure 
5.8).  Although  the  Philippines  has  financed  part  of 
those gap by domestic and foreign credit, in many 
countries, sovereign risks are likely to limit borrow-
ing capacity.

The  fiscal  gap  may  be  even  greater  in  the  case  of 
low-income  countries  and  others  with  high  debts 
and a constrained fiscal space.  Nepal, for example, 
would  be  unable  to  finance  the  costs  of  even  a 

one-in-20 year event, and that gap would be great-
er than US$2 billion (Figure 5.9).

Figure 5.9  Fiscal vulnerability and financing gap for earthquake 
and flood risk in Nepal

(Source: Mechler et al., 2013)

85

inflows of resources for reconstruction or to the cre-
ative destruction of obsolete capital, may even con-
tribute positively to the economy (Albala-Bertrand, 
1993  and  2006;  Skidmore  and  Toya,  2002).  Recon-
struction spending may give demand-lacking econ-
omies a temporary boost. 

However, while these positive effects may be possi-
ble in competitive and resilient economies with high 
levels  of  GFCF  and  without  financing  gaps,  this  is 
less likely in countries with low levels of GFCF and 
with large gaps. Numerous studies indicate that di-
sasters tend to impact negatively on economic de-
velopment (Mechler 2004; Hochrainer, 2009; Crespo 
Cuaresma et al., 2008; Noy, 2009). In general, larger 
and  more  diversified  economies  are  likely  to  be 

5.3  

Macroeconomic effects

 

 

Disasters  can  negatively  impact  the  economic 
development  of  any  country,  but  for  smaller 
economies that are heavily dependent on single 
economic sectors, these impacts are likely per-
vasive.  Direct  and  indirect  losses  can  result  in 
macroeconomic effects that cumulate over time. 

Although countries with fiscal gaps may have more 
difficulty recovering after a disaster, there is less cer-
tainty  regarding  longer-term  macroeconomic  im-
pacts (World Bank, 2011). Some studies show that 
disasters  have  no  long-term  effect  on  economic 
performance  or,  on  the  contrary,  either  owing  to 

Figure 5.10  Simulations of GDP growth and tropical cyclone exposure

(Source: Hsiang and Jina, 2012)

86

Part I - Chapter 5Figure 5.11  Simulation for Pakistan (IDRR = investment in disaster risk reduction) 

(Source: Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA))iv

more resilient than smaller economies, heavily de-
pendent on single economic sectors (UNISDR, 2009 
and 2011; Gencer, 2012).  In less resilient economies, 
the wider impacts of disasters are more likely to be 
pervasive.  

of  economic  growth  projections  shows  that  al-
though real GDP growth would be impacted by a 
major  disaster  event,  investments  in  disaster  risk 
reduction  could  significantly  curtail  this  impact 
(Figure 5.11).

Although  further  research  is  required  to  reconcile 
the results from different economic models, recent 
studies show that in the medium (Hochrainer, 2009) 
or long term (Hsiang and Jina, 2012), countries that 
have experienced intensive disasters may never re-
cover  this  lost  growth.    For  example,  countries  af-
fected  by  tropical  cyclones  experience  lower  GDP 
growth  in  the  15  years  that  follow  compared  with 
the  estimated  growth  that  would  have  occurred 
without cyclone impacts.  In countries with frequent 
severe cyclones—such as Madagascar and the Phil-
ippines—and large fiscal gaps, growth will be lower 
over  several  decades  (see  Figure  5.10).    Countries 
with less frequent and severe cyclones—such India 
or  the  United  States  of  America—also  experience 
lower growth, but the divergence is far less.   

New simulations of the impact of disaster risk re-
duction measures on economic growth also show 
useful results. In Pakistan, for example, an analysis 

The impacts of disasters on economic growth over 
time can be understood when assessing potential 
mid-  to  long-term  macroeconomic  impacts.  In 
Honduras, a one-in 100 year event could produce 
direct  losses  amounting  to  33  percent  of  its  GDP.  
Given its limited ability to finance this loss, the gov-
ernment also would have to prepare for further cu-
mulative consequences over time, estimated at up 
to  almost  24  percent  of  GDP  over  a  period  of  5 
years (Figure 5.12).

Currently, national accounting does not adequately 
measure  disaster  impacts.  On  the  contrary,  ac-
counting systems usually report reconstruction and 
relief spending, adding to GDP figures. Disaster risk 
may be included in new approaches to wealth ac-
counting  at  the  national  level  such  as  adjusted 
savings,v to improve risk management and financing 
strategies in the future (Mechler, 2009).  

87

ated  States  of),  Monaco,  Montenegro,  Myanmar,  Georgia,  Ghana, 
Gambia,  Guinea-Bissau,  Greece,  Guatemala,  Hong  Kong  Special 
Administrative Region of China, Honduras, Indonesia, Iran  (Islamic 
Republic of), Italy, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Libya, Lithu-
ania,  Luxembourg,  Latvia,  Mexico,  Mali,  Mongolia,  Mozambique, 
Malawi, Malaysia, Namibia, New Caledonia, Niger, Nicaragua, Nepal, 
Oman, Panama, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Puerto Rico, Paraguay, 
Réunion, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Samoa, Senegal, 
San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Solomon Islands,  
Somalia, Serbia, Spain, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Swaziland, Swit-
zerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Turks and Caicos Islands, 
Turkmenistan,  Tonga,  Tunisia,  Turkey,  Taiwan  Province  of  China, 
Ukraine,  United  Arab  Emirates,  United  Kingdom  of  Great  Britain 
and  Northern  Ireland,  United  Republic  of  Tanzania,  United  States 
of America, United States Virgin Islands, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Ven-
ezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Vanuatu, Viet Nam, Western Sahara, 
Yemen, Zimbabwe.
iv 
Information directly provided to UNISDR by JICA in support of 
the 2013 Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction. The 
simulations were made using JICA’s “DR2AD Model”, an economic 
model that measures the social and economic impacts of disaster 
risk  reduction  investments  and  allows  policy-makers  to  evaluate 
multi-index effects of these investments.
v  See for example World Bank Indicators’ adjusted savings data: 
http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/TOPICS/ENVIRON-
MENT/EXTEEI/0,,contentMDK:20502388~menuPK:1187778~pagePK
:148956~piPK:216618~theSitePK:408050,00.html. 
vi  http://www.wavespartnership.org/waves/private-sector%E2% 
80%99s-role-recognizing-value-natural-capital-focus. 

Figure 5.12  Modelled cumulative macroeconomic effects of 
disasters in Honduras

(Source: Hochrainer et al., 2013)

Businesses should be a strong proponent of such ef-
forts as they promise a first step towards addressing 
hidden fiscal risks that can directly impact on their 
environment,  as  witnessed  since  the  global  eco-
nomic crisis began in 2007. Businesses have begun 
to recognise this in accounting for natural capitalvi  
(WAVES,  2012),  which—as  discussed  in  the  next 
chapter—is critical to national wealth, but are yet to 
fully embrace this as an opportunity. 

Notes

i 
Countries  for  which  no  data  on  gross  fixed  capital  formation 
is  available,  and  which  were  therefore  not  included  in  the  follow-
ing  analysis,  are:  Anguilla,  Democratic  People’s  Republic  of  Ko-
rea,  French  Guiana,  Guadeloupe,  Martinique,  Mayotte,  Myanmar, 
Réunion, Turks and Caicos Islands, United States Virgin Islands.
ii  Losses to other types of assets such as road or water infrastruc-
ture are not included.
iii  World  Bank  data  on  national  revenue  from:  http://data.world-
bank.org/indicator/GC.REV.XGRT.GD.ZS?page=1  
Countries  for  which  no  data  on  revenue  is  available,  and  which 
were therefore not included in the analysis, are: Aruba, Angola, An-
guilla, Albania, Algeria, Argentina, Antigua and Barbuda, Australia, 
Belgium,  Belize,  Bolivia  (Plurinational  State  of),  Brazil,  Botswana, 
British Virgin Islands, Brunei Darussalam, Burundi, Central African 
Republic, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Cayman Islands, Chad, Comoros, 
Congo,  Cote  d’Ivoire,  Cuba,  Czech  Republic,    Democratic  Repub-
lic of the Congo, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, 
Dominica,  Ecuador,  El  Salvador,  Equatorial  Guinea,  Eritrea,  Ethio-
pia,  Faeroe  Islands,  French  Guiana,  French  Polynesia,  Gabon,  Ger-
many, Gibraltar, Guinea, Guadeloupe, Grenada, Guyana, Haiti, Iraq, 
Liechtenstein, Mauritania, Martinique, Mayotte,  Micronesia (Feder-

88

Part I - Chapter 5Chapter 6
Natural capital risk

89

A country´s wealth is determined to a significant extent by its stock of natural capital. Disaster 
risks include the loss and erosion of natural capital with potentially serious consequences for busi-
ness, households and a country’s wealth. 

Globalisation is not only modifying risk patterns through increasing hazard exposure and vulnera-
bility, but also through climate change. Along with climate change, environmental degradation, de-
forestation and the over-exploitation of natural resources all result in increased risks to natural cap-
ital. For example, wild-land fires now affect all continents with the cost of damage to tropical 
ecosystem services alone potentially exceeding US$3 trillion per year.

Land degradation is a key driver of agricultural drought risk. Large areas of Africa, the Arab and 
Mediterranean regions are experiencing both land degradation and high levels of soil moisture deficit 
leading to a potentially irreversible loss of natural capital. The scale of direct losses and indirect 
impacts from agricultural drought is still poorly understood but potentially significant.  But inno-
vative new probabilistic models of agricultural drought risk are now providing a clearer picture of 
potential crop losses at the country level and can be related to relevant economic indicators. 

6.1  

 

 
Natural wealth

 

time because the exhaustion of natural capital com-
promises the wealth of future generations. 

A country’s wealth is also dependent on its stock 
of  natural  capital.  A  country  with  a  declining 
base  of  natural  capital  is  unlikely  to  achieve  a 
sustainable increase in wealth.  

Natural capital is understood as a set of renewable 
and non-renewable natural resources, including agri-
cultural  land,  fisheries,  fossil  fuels,  forest  resources, 
water,  biodiversity  and  minerals.  Apart  from  flows 
into produced capital, business investment also flows 
into other sectors, such as agribusiness, forestry and 
mining,  in  countries  with  abundant  natural  capital.  
Whether these investments pose risks to natural capi-
tal needs to be assessed and understood.   

Risks  associated  with  natural  capital  may  affect 
businesses  as  well  as  other  social  sectors  in  the 
same  way  as  disaster  risks  associated  with  pro-
duced capital.   With natural capital, many risks gen-
erated  through  business  investments  are  exter-
nalised and transferred through mechanisms such 
as climate change, land degradation and the over-
exploitation  of  water  resources;  in  the  long  term, 
these become shared risks not only in space but in 

However,  although  risks  to  produced  capital  are 
now modelled with increasing accuracy, the estima-
tion of natural capital risks is still in its infancy.  As 
such, both costs to business as well as shared risks 
are  rarely  factored  into  investment  decisions.  The 
sections that follow will explore some of the drivers 
of  natural  capital  risk,  including  climate  change, 
land degradation, and the impact of wild-land fires 
and  agricultural  droughts.    Chapter  10  in  Part  II  of 
this report will build on this analysis and explore the 
role of agribusiness in food security risk.

Global warming

6.2 The ultimate risk transfer: 

global climate change

Globalisation  is  not  only  modifying  risk  pat-
terns through increasing hazard exposure and 
vulnerability, but also through climate change.   

Since the beginning of the industrial revolution in 
1750,  the  atmospheric  abundance  of  the  three 

90

Part I - Chapter 6principal greenhouse gases—carbon dioxide, meth-
ane and nitrous oxide—have increased by 39 percent, 
158  percent  and  20  percent,  respectively  (WMO, 
2011). 

As  Box  6.1  shows,  increasing  greenhouse  gas  con-
centrations in the atmosphere modifies climate, al-
though  uncertainties  remain  regarding  the  reper-
cussions in weather and climate-related hazards in 
different regions (IPCC, 2012).  

Increased combustion of fossil fuels, deforestation 
and  land-use  changes  are  directly  linked  to  the 
capital flows and investment decisions of the past 
and to growing green-house gas emissions in the 
present  and  future.    Industry  contributes  directly 
and  indirectly  about  37  percent  of  global  green-
house gas emissions, and these have increased by 
65 percent since 1971 (Worrell et al., 2009). Produc-
tion of energy-intensive industrial goods, in partic-
ular,  has  increased  dramatically  since  1970  (ce-
ment, by 336 percent; aluminium, by 252 percent; 
steel, by 95 percent; ammonia, by 353 percent; and 
paper, by 190 percent) (Ibid.). But emissions from 

energy  production,  transport,  agriculture  and  ur-
banisation  are  also  critical.  And  as  this  chapter 
highlights,  other  factors  such  as  wild-land  fires, 
which  are  often  associated  with  deforestation, 
also make critical contributions. 

For  more  than  a  century,  high-income  countries 
have  been  contributing  to  these  emissions.  How-
ever, as a consequence of economic globalisation, 
many  low  and  middle-income  countries  are  now 
becoming  large  greenhouse  gas  (GHG)  emitters. 
Given  that  climate  change  modifies  climate  and 
weather-related hazards, it becomes the ultimate 
mechanism of global risk transfer and of generat-
ing shared risks.  It represents the privatisation of 
benefits  that  accrue  from  present  investment  at 
the expense of future losses that will surface from 
climate change later in this century. It also repre-
sents  a  transfer  or  export  of  disaster  risk  from 
countries responsible for the majority of emissions 
to  those  that  have  fewer  emissions  but  will  see 
their disaster risks increase.  Figure 6.1 compares 
the  ratio  of  GHG  emissions  with  expected  losses 
from  cyclonic  wind  damage.  Many  countries  with 

Box 6.1  Special IPCC Report appraises and addresses future climate extremes 

The Special Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change presented the latest results from current 
research on climate change. The more science progresses in the field, the more it is possible to produce analysis 
that can delineate future climate patterns with higher degrees of confidence. Main conclusions of the report in-
clude the following:

Virtually certain   

Substantial warming in temperature extremes by the end of the 21st  century.

Very likely  

Mean sea level rise will contribute to upward trends in extreme coastal, high water levels.

Likely   
 
 

Increased frequency of heavy precipitation or the proportion of total rainfall from heavy  
falls will increase in the 21st century over many areas of the globe.  
 
Increase in tropical cyclone maximum wind speed, though not in all ocean basins.

 

High confidence  
 
 
 

Changes in heat waves, glacial retreat and/or permafrost degradation will affect high  
mountain phenomena such as slope instabilities, movements of mass and glacial lake  
outburst floods. Many glacier- and snow-fed rivers will experience increased run-off and  
earlier spring peak discharge.

Medium confidence   Reduction in the number of extra-tropical cyclones averaged over each hemisphere.  
 
 
 

Droughts will intensify in some regions, including southern Europe and the 
 
Mediterranean, central Europe, Central North America, Central America, Mexico,  
north-east Brazil and southern Africa.

(Source: IPCC, 2012)

91

Figure 6.1  Losses from cyclonic wind compared with greenhouse gas emissions

(Source: UNISDR, based on World Resources Institute (*)i)

low  emissions  will  also  face  high  costs  from  sea 
level rise.

Today, a familiar tendency is to assign the causality 
of  all  weather-related  impacts  to  climate  change.  
In  reality,  at  least  over  the  next  two  to  three  de-
cades, increasing hazard exposure and vulnerabili-
ty  associated  with  economic  and  urban  develop-
ment will have a greater influence on disaster risk 
than  climate  change  (IPCC,  2012;  UNISDR,  2009 
and  2011;  Nicholls  et  al.,  2008;  Swiss  Re.,  2011a).  
Climate change will have a disproportionate influ-
ence on economies most susceptible to weather-
related risks, however (IPCC, 2007).  Many of these 
countries depend heavily on climate-sensitive nat-
ural capital, such as land, water and forests. 

One  climate  change  outcome,  which  the  IPCC  has 
agreed is certain, is increased warming. In regions 
that  may  also  experience  decreased  precipitation, 
warming  will  increase  the  likelihood  of  wild-land 
fires and agricultural drought, which feed back into 
climate change. 

92

6.3  

Unsustainable risks

 

 

Environmental degradation, deforestation and 
overexploitation of natural resources all result 
in increased risks to natural capital. The nega-
tive  impacts  of  weather-related  disasters  fur-
ther erode the natural capital base of nations, 
reducing their overall wealth and competitive-
ness.

There is growing interest in quantifying the value of 
natural capital and the consequences of its loss to 
national economies.ii The wealth of a country is the 
sum of produced, human and natural capital. As hu-
man  capital  increases,  although  total  wealth  in-
creases, natural capital is likely to be depleted and 
thus  wealth  per  capita  can  decrease.  The  persis-
tence of environmental degradation and natural re-
source depletion, therefore, is an environmental as 
well as a social and economic concern.   Figure 6.2 
highlights countries that are challenged to address 
environmental degradation. 

Part I - Chapter 6Loss  of  natural  capital  owing  to  environmental 
degradation and other factors is particularly criti-
cal in countries whose natural resources provide a 
higher contribution to the overall wealth than their 
produced  capital  (UNU-IHDP  and  UNEP,  2012).  In 
Nigeria, for example, the value of natural capital is 

estimated  to  be  more  than  10  times  that  of  pro-
duced capital.iv  Between 1990 and 2008, Nigeria’s 
population increased by 74 percent while its natu-
ral capital decreased by about 1 percent. As a re-
sult,  total  wealth  per  capita  fell  by  about  30  per-
cent (Figure 6.3). 

Figure 6.2  State of global environmental degradation based on the Risk Reduction Index 2012iii

(Source: DARA, 2012)

Figure 6.3  Role of natural capital (purple line) in Nigerian wealth, represented by the inclusive wealth index, absolute (left) and per capita (right)

(Source: UNISDR, based on data from UNU-IHDP and UNEP, 2012)

93

Table 6.1  Changes in land-use in Colombia between 1995 and 2009 (in ha)

(Source: OSSO, 2012c)

In the same period, the value of natural capital in 
Australia fell by 8 percent in absolute terms and by 
72 percent per capita. Given that produced capital 
per capita increased by 73 percent during this pe-
riod, the depletion of natural capital did not affect 
total wealth, which increased by 2 percent per cap-
ita.  However,  the  capacity  of  produced  capital 
growth  to  absorb  the  loss  in  natural  capital  may 
not  be  sustainable  in  the  longer  term  (UNU-IHDP 
and UNEP, 2012).

The depletion of natural capital may be accelerat-
ed by business investments into extractive activi-
ties—such as mining, gas and oil extraction—and 
agribusiness; driven by demand for raw materials 
and  energy  by  rapidly  expanding  and  urbanising 
economies and for food supply by a growing urban 
population.  

In  the  case  of  Colombia,  for  example,  Table  6.1 
shows that between 1995 and 2009, Colombia lost 
about  20  percent  of  its  agricultural  land  and  16 
percent of its forests, but rangelands increased by 
29 percent (OSSO, 2012c). Only 53 percent of range-
lands are considered apt for grazing.  At the same 
time, between 2002 and 2010, mining concessions 
increased from 1.13 million hectares to 8.5 million 
hectares, an area now greater than that dedicated 
to either agriculture or forests.

Business  investments  in  areas  such  as  bio-fuels, 
timber  and  agribusiness,  and  those  involving  the 
clearing of tropical forest, may increase wild-land 
fire hazard.  These fires lead to a major depletion of 
natural  capital  and  the  loss  of  critical  shared 

94

ecosystem  services  as  discussed  below.  Agribusi-
ness investments in drought-prone areas may simi-
larly contribute to increased land degradation and 
over-exploitation  of  water  resources—an  issue  ex-
plored in more detail in Chapter 10 of this report.

Wild-land fires
 
Wild-land fires

 

6.4  

 

 

Wild-land fires are both a driver and a result of 
the degradation of natural capital. The risk of 
wild-land  fires  affects  all  continents  with  in-
creasing occurrence particularly in the western 
United States of America, south-east Australia 
and southern Europe. The global cost of dam-
age to ecosystems services may reach US$190 
billion per year, in the case of tropical ecosys-
tems alone.

In  many  ecosystems,  wild-land  fires  are  a  natural 
and essential force in maintaining ecosystem struc-
ture and productivity or an important land manage-
ment  tool.  However,  wild-land  fires  can  be  highly 
damaging events, and are associated with a range 
of drivers, both physical and artificial.

Using  two  different  global  datasetsv,  the  average 
global  burnt  area  as  detected  by  satellite  sensors 
fluctuates  between  3  million  km2  and  4.5  million 
km2, an area equivalent to the size of India and Paki-
stan combined (Chatenoux and Peduzzi, 2013). Fig-
ure  6.4  shows  that  wild-land  fires  affect  all  conti-
nents seasonally.  In recent years the extent of burnt 

Part I - Chapter 6Figure 6.4  Wild-land fire seasons, 2000–2006

(Source: Chatenoux and Peduzzi, 2013)

areas in regions such as the western United States 
of  America,  south-east  Australia  and  southern  Eu-
rope has risen dramatically (GFMC, 2012).    

Physical factors, such as climate variability and to-
pography,  influence  the  patterns  and  variability  of 
wild-land fires in regions. These factors include tem-
peratures,  precipitation  levels  and  distribution  as 
well as length of dry periods (Aldersley et al., 2011).  
Wild-land  fire  hazard  is  influenced  by  climatic  ex-
tremes—in  2012,  the  northern  hemisphere  was  hit 
by  a  heat  wave  that  contributed  substantially  to 
wild-fires,  especially  in  Europe  and  the  United 
States of America.  

As with other hazards, however, social and econom-
ic drivers have as much or more influence, especially 
on the initiation and extension of wild-land fires:  for 
example,  land-use  changes  such  as  the  abandon-
ment of agricultural land owing to rural to urban mi-
gration  or  the  conversion  of  forests  to  rangeland.  
Other factors, such as fire-suppression policies, re-
duce fire activity in the short term but may lead to a 

greater  incidence  of  catastrophic  fire  in  the  long 
term. These factors vary from region to region.  

In  equatorial  Asia,  for  example,  fire  is  widely  em-
ployed to convert land covered by primary or sec-
ondary forests to other uses, especially for bio-fuel 
crops.  This  practice,  exacerbated  by  extended  dry 
periods associated with ENSO episodes, favours the 
uncontrolled  spread  of  wild-land  fires  (Goldham-
mer, 2009).

Fires have traditionally been used to clear forests in 
tropical  regions.  However,  as  population  density 
has increased, this practice has become an increas-
ing  source  of  uncontrolled  wild-land  fires.  In  addi-
tion,  uncontrolled  selective  logging,  in  which  only 
some species are removed, leave the remaining for-
est highly susceptible to fire (Chocraine, 2003).

In  southern  Europe,  the  hot  and  dry  summer  cli-
mate, characterised by strong seasonal winds, ex-
acerbates human-induced fires initiated for differ-
include  the 
ent  reasons.  Contributing  factors 

95

Box 6.2  Methodology to quantify economic losses to ecosystem services from wild-land fires

This first estimation, developed using the TEEB methodology, is based on an evaluation of ecosystem services 
that includes: carbon storage, production of oxygen (O2), production of biomass (used for timber, fire wood, 
building, and so on), recreational value, intrinsic and support to biodiversity, protection of water sources, re-
duction of soil erosion, production of pharmaceutical products, beauty (landscape) and spiritual values. For-
ests also contribute to the local climate. 

Not all ecosystem services were evaluated. Furthermore, while the value of a tonne of carbon storage is compa-
rable across the globe, this is not the case for recreational values. Finally, it is difficult to include benefits of 
wild-land fires into the equation as well as to differentiate wild-land fires that are natural from human cause. 

(Source: Chatenoux and Peduzzi, 2013)

Table 6.2  Loss of natural capital (2002-2006) and wealth of countries (1995-2005)

(Source: Rank and economical losses (Chatenoux and Peduzzi, 2013); natural capital and wealth growth rate (World Bank, 2011)) 

abandonment of agricultural land (leaving the land 
populated with highly inflammable species of vege-
tation),  lack  of  forest  management  and  growth  of 
urban areas in proximity of forests and in fire-prone 
areas (Bassi and Kettunen, 2008).

Average annual internationally reported losses gen-
erated  by  wild-land  fires  over  the  past  decade 
(2002–2011) were US$2.4 billion (EM-DATvi).  Individu-
al fires may cause substantial losses. For example, 
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, a single fire in Septem-
ber  2012  caused  about  US$83  million  in  damages 
(WMO, 2012). However, globally, wild-land fires rep-
resent  only  0.1  percent  of  internationally  reported 
disaster mortality and less than 1.9 percent of eco-
nomic losses. 

Wild-land fires, however, have a devastating impact 
on natural capital, which has not been quantified or 

adequately  accounted  for.  Fires  affect  numerous 
ecosystem services including carbon storage, sup-
port to biodiversity, protection of water sources, re-
duction  of  soil  erosion  and  land  degradation  and 
climate regulation.  At the same time, in some eco-
systems,  wild-land  fires  provide  benefits;  for  in-
stance, there are species that need fires for their re-
production and seeding. Fires of natural origins, for 
example, ignited by lightning, are an integral part of 
certain ecosystems such as boreal forests. 

Economists and scientists today agree that qualify-
ing  and  quantifying  ecosystem  services  lost  and 
their  economic  value  is  still  an  incipient  issue 
fraught  with  calculation  uncertainties.  As  Box  6.2 
highlights, despite gaps in knowledge and data and 
methodological  challenges,  a  first  estimation  for 
tropical ecosystems based on an evaluation of dif-
ferent ecosystem services was developed using the 

96

Part I - Chapter 6methodology proposed by TEEB (The Economics of 
Ecosystems and Biodiversity; TEEB, 2010). 

Fires do not belong naturally to tropical forest eco-
systems.  However,  wild-land  fires  may  now  be 
leading to a loss of ecosystem services in the range 
of  US$146–US$191  billion  per  year.vii  Given  that 
tropical ecosystem services may take 40 or more 
years  to  recover,  cumulative  annual  losses  could 
be  as  high  as  US$2.9–US$3.8  trillion.  These  loss-
es—between  US$2.5  and  US$3.5  trillion  a  year—
are  concentrated  in  Africa  (Chatenoux  and  Pe-
duzzi, 2013).  These figures should be treated with 
caution  given  the  uncertainties  involved  in  their 
assessment, but they highlight a potential and crit-
ical  depletion  of  natural  capital  from  wild-land 
fires in tropical forest ecosystems. 

had slow rates of wealth growth between 1995 and 
2005  (World  Bank,  2011).  These  losses  to  natural 
capital  are  rarely  taken  into  account  when  invest-
ment decisions are made.  

6.5 Agricultural drought: the case 

of Africa, the Arab states and _                  

the Mediterranean

Observed and predicted changes in rainfall and 
temperature  have  important  implications  for 
agriculture. In central Kenya, decreases in rain-
fall  could  reach  up  to  150  mm  per  year.  Com-
bined with increasing temperature, agricultural 
drought hazard is predicted to increase, which 
will reduce the area of arable land.

As Table 6.2 shows, many of the countries with the 
highest losses in ecosystem services rely on natural 
capital for most of their total wealth. Similarly, some 

As highlighted in GAR11, agricultural drought haz-
ard is not only due to lack of rainfall.  Estimations 
of  meteorological  drought,  therefore,  are  a  poor 

Figure 6.5  Drought typologies and cascading impacts

(Source: National Drought Mitigation Center, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, United States of Americaix)

97

guide to drought impacts on agriculture.  

As Figure 6.5 shows, agricultural drought refers to the 
availability of sufficient water in the soil to satisfy the 
needs  of  crops.viii  Agricultural  drought,  therefore,  is 
mediated by other factors such as temperature and 
wind, which influence evaporation and transpiration 
and the capacity of the soil to hold moisture.  

In Africa, the Arab states and the Mediterranean, ag-
ricultural drought is a major hazard.  Without taking 
into account its potential impact on natural capital 
and on economies in the region, any estimation of 
disaster risk is fundamentally incomplete.   

Box 6.3 presents two different but complementary 
approaches being pursued to improve the charac-
terisation  of  agricultural  drought  risk  (Erian  et  al., 
2012;  Jayanthi  and  Husak,  2012).  The  models  in-
clude crop losses and economic environmental im-
pacts.  But  the  impacts  on  welfare  and  livelihoods 
have not been estimated at this time. 

and the Sahel, measured through an index that also 
takes  into  account  drought  frequency,  extent  and 
persistence in that 10-year period.xi 

Mediterranean countries have been particularly af-
fected between 2000 and 2010. In Turkey, about 25 
percent of total rain-fed cropland (which constitutes 
about 15 percent of total country territory) has been 
affected  by  severe  drought;  in  Italy,  Serbia  and 
Macedonia, 20 percent of total rain-fed cropland has 
been affected.  In Portugal, Spain and Greece, more 
than 25 percent of the rangeland is heavily affected 
by  drought.  This  corresponds,  respectively,  to  15 
percent, 10 percent, and 8 percent of total land in 
these countries (Erian et al., 2012). 

Scientific  literature  (IPCC,  2007  and  2012)  agrees 
that all categories of drought hazard in the Mediter-
ranean region will get worse as the region gets drier 
and warmer. However, in Africa, there is only medi-
um to low confidence owing to a lack of document-
ed evidence and data (IPCC, 2012).  

Analysis of changes in vegetation coverx between 2000 
and 2010 highlights that a large area of Africa, the Arab 
states and the Mediterranean has experienced drought 
(Erian et al., 2012). Figure 6.6, for example, illustrates 
agricultural  drought  intensity  in  the  Horn  of  Africa 

In Eastern Africa, other studies highlight long-term 
decline  in  rainfall  and  increasing  temperature, 
such  as  in  parts  of  Ethiopia,  Kenya,  Sudan  and 
Uganda,  which  will  increase  agricultural  drought 
hazard (Funk et al., 2010; 2012a; 2012b). Figure 6.7, 

Box 6.3  Modelling agricultural drought risk

The Arab Centre for the Study of Arid Zones and Drylands (ACSAD) uses satellite data from the last 10 years to 
reconstruct past agricultural droughts. It measures month by month differences in vegetation. This allows a 
characterisation of the intensity, variability frequency and persistence of agricultural drought in any given area.  
With this information, it is possible to identify the exposure of areas of rain-fed agriculture, rangeland, individu-
als and cattle to agricultural drought as well as the amount of drought-affected areas experiencing land degrada-
tion (Erian et al., 2012). For GAR13, this approach was piloted in Africa, the Arab states and the Mediterranean.  

FEWSNET developed a set of synthetic droughts to extrapolate the probability of specific areas being affected 
by  agricultural  droughts  of  differing  intensity.    Once  calibrated  with  data  on  yield  reductions  in  observed 
droughts, it becomes possible to estimate the probable crop losses for droughts of different return periods as 
well as expected annual average losses (Jayanthi and Husak, 2012).  For GAR13, this approach was piloted in 
Kenya, Malawi, Mozambique and Niger.

Both approaches are complementary—one provides an assessment of agricultural drought occurrence, conse-
quences and severity in the past; the other enables the quantification of the expected losses that are likely to 
affect a specific area in the future. 

(Source: UNISDR)

98

Part I - Chapter 6for  example,  highlights  observed  and  projected 
changes  for  Kenya  between  1975  and  2025.  For 
central  Kenya,  the  projected  decrease  in  rainfall 
might  reach  150  mm  per  year,  whereas  tempera-
ture  is  estimated  to  increase  about  0.9  degrees 
Celsius  (Funk  et  al.,  2010).  Increasing  agricultural 

drought will reduce the areas of land to support vi-
able agricultural livelihoods. 

These changes are leading to a decline of precipi-
tation  in  areas  that  to  date  received  sufficient 
rainfall to support agriculture and a shift of rain-

Figure 6.6  Agricultural drought intensity from 2000 to 2010 in the Horn of Africa and the Sahel 

(Source: Erian et al., 2012) iv

99

fall locations overall, as Figure 6.8 highlights.

Other  studies  point  to  potential  changes  in  cli-
mate  in  Western  Africa.  For  example,  Mali  is 
considered at risk of a ‘climate zone shift’, owing 

to the Sahara moving south. Because of changes 
in climate, in 2030, the annual value of crop and 
livestock  production  is  likely  to  drop  between  5 
percent and 15 percent (ECA, 2009). 

Figure 6.7  Observed and projected changes in rainfall and temperature from 1975 to 2025 in Kenya

(Source: Funk et al., 2010)

Figure 6.8  Climate change in Ugandaxii 

(Source: Funk et al., 2012b)

100

Part I - Chapter 66.6  

 

 

 

Land degradation

Land degradation has been recognised as a key 
driver of agricultural drought risk. Vast areas in 
Africa, the Arab and Mediterranean regions are 
experiencing  both  land  degradation  and  high 
levels of agricultural drought. As a result, these 
areas  are  at  risk  of  desertification,  represent-
ing an irreversible loss of natural capital.

Land degradation is associated with intensive agri-
culture  or  overgrazing,  and  salinisation  owing  to 
inappropriate  irrigation,  deforestation  and  the 
breakdown of traditional agro-ecological systems.  
Climate  change  may  interact  with  some  of  these 
factors, but is rarely the main driver of land degra-
dation (WMO, 2005).     

Land degradation can increase agricultural drought 
by reducing the moisture-carrying capacity of the 

Figure 6.9  Drought hazard and land degradation in sub-Saharan Africa, the Arab region and the Mediterranean (main map); Horn of 
Africa and Spain highlighted (bottom maps)

200

0
Kilometres

200

0
Kilometres

(Source: Erian et al., 2012)

101

soil.  And soil water deficiency can further increase 
land  degradation  through  the  loss  of  vegetation 
cover. Areas that are experiencing both land degra-
dation and high levels of soil water deficiency are 
more at risk of desertification, which represents an 
often irreversible loss of natural capital (Erian et al., 
2012; Watson et al., 2005; WMO, 2005). 

As Figure 6.9 shows, large areas of Africa, the Arab 
states and the Mediterranean region experienced 
both  drought  hazard  and  land  degradation  be-
tween  2000  and  2010.  Contrary  to  loss  estimated 
from wild-land fires, the loss of natural capital and 
ecosystem  services  owing  to  drought  and  land 
degradation has not yet been calculated. 

6.7 Agricultural drought losses 

and impacts

The  scale  of  direct  losses  and  indirect  impacts 
from agricultural droughts is still poorly under-
stood.  Estimated  yield  reductions,  however, 
point to significant losses. For example, a one–
in–ten year drought in Mozambique would lower 
the maize yield by 6 percent and the GDP by 0.3 
percent. Niger has a 1 in 10 probability of suffer-
ing a loss of more than 10 percent of expected 
millet production.

The contribution of agriculture to GDP is in decline 
(Yumkella et al., 2011), but agriculture continues to 
be the main source of income and employment for 
many households living below US$1 per day.  In sub-
Saharan Africa, for example, the agricultural share of 
GDP  has  decreased  from  42  percent  in  1965  to  12 
percent in 2008 (Ibid.). At the same time, agriculture 
generates two-thirds of total employment and more 
than  75  percent  of  the  value  of  domestic  trade 
(Ibid.). In Ethiopia, for example, although the sector 
contributes 44 percent of the country’s GDP, 85 per-
cent  of  the  population  is  employed  in  agriculture 
(Spielman et al., 2011).

102

Because  of  its  complexity,  accurate  and  complete 
global data on crop losses from agricultural drought 
do not exist.  And many losses associated with local-
ised  droughts  are  not  documented.    However,  the 
magnitude  of  losses  can  be  gauged  from  specific 
events. 

For  example,  direct  and  indirect  losses  from  the 
2008–2011  droughts  in  Kenya  were  approximately 
US$12.1 billion, which are estimated to have caused 
a  reduction  of  GDP  of  2.8  percent  per  year  during 
that period (Cabot Venton et al., 2012). Similarly, the 
1998–2000 droughts are estimated to have caused a 
16 percent reduction in GDP during each year of that 
period (Ibid.).  

During the 2008–2009 drought in the Syrian Arab Re-
public, 75 percent of farmers suffered total crop fail-
ure (Erian et al., 2012). Between 2005 and 2009, pro-
duction  of  barley  in  the  region  fell  by  40  percent. 
This production failure was exacerbated by the ab-
sence  of  natural  pasture  and  the  doubling  of  feed 
prices.  Given  that  barley  is  the  primary  feed  for 
many cattle, this led to a reduction in livestock (FAO, 
2009).  Consequently,  the  estimated  number  of 
sheep dropped from 22.9 million heads in 2007 to 
19.2 million heads in 2008 (NAPC, 2009). 

Innovative new probabilistic models of agricultural 
drought risk (see Box 6.3 above) are now providing a 
clearer picture of potential crop losses at the coun-
try level and can be related to relevant economic in-
dicators. As with other hazards, a probabilistic ap-
proach  is  required  given  that  many  droughts  that 
could potentially occur have not yet done so. 

In Mozambique, agriculture contributes 25 percent 
of GDP (World Bank, 2011). The probabilistic model 
estimates that the country risks losing, on average, 
0.12  percent  of  its  GDP  every  year  owing  to  the 
probable  loss  of  3  percent  of  its  total  maize  pro-
duction due to drought (Jayanthi and Husak, 2012).  
A one–in–ten year drought in Mozambique would 
lower the maize yield by 6 percent and GDP by 0.3 
percent (Figure 6.10).

Part I - Chapter 6Figure 6.10 Loss exceedance curve showing Mozambique’s expected loss in maize production (in percentage) and its correspondent 
probability of exceedance

(Source: Jayanthi and Husak, 2012)

Figure 6.11  Estimated likelihood of drought occurrence in Niger

(Source: Jayanthi and Husak, 2012)

103

evaluation varies significantly depending on region and ecosystems 
monitored. This can be explained by the different satellite sensors 
and methodology used; however, it generates uncertainties and is 
something that needs to be improved in the future.
vi  CRED  data  on:  http://www.emdat.be/database.  University  of 
Louvain, Belgium.
vii  Different  satellite  sensors  provide  different  quantifications  of 
burnt area.
viii Agricultural drought is a complex issue that not only depends on 
rainfall, temperature or soil conditions, but also relates to the speci-
ficity  of  the  cultivations  as  well  as  irrigation  systems.  Local,  or  at 
least regional, analyses of droughts and drought risk are required to 
fully understand the drivers of risk as well as the impacts of drought 
events in each context. IPCC  uses the term ‘soil moisture drought’ 
instead of ‘agricultural drought’ because soil moisture deficits have 
several additional effects besides those on agro-ecosystems, most 
importantly  on  other  natural  or  managed  ecosystems  (including 
both forests and pastures) (Erian et al., 2012).
ix  http://www.drought.unl.edu/DroughtBasics/TypesofDrought.
aspx. 
x  This  analysis  was  carried  out  using  the  normalised  difference 
vegetation index, as explained in Erian et al., 2012.
xi  This figure is based on the changes in the normalised different 
vegetation  index  (NDVI)  compared  with  the  agricultural  seasons 
(Erian et al., 2012).
xii  The left map shows the average location of the March–June 500 
mm rainfall isohyets for 1960–1989 (light brown), 1990–2009 (dark 
brown), and 2010–2039 (predicted, orange). The green polygons in 
the foreground show the main maize surplus regions; these areas 
produce  most  of  Uganda’s  maize.  The  blue  polygon  in  the  upper-
right shows the Karamoja region. The right map shows analogous 
changes for the June–September 500 mm rainfall isohyets

In Niger, a 2009 drought caused the loss of approxi-
mately 410,000 metric tonnes (MT) of millet—about 
13 percent of expected production (IRIN, 2010).  The 
probabilistic model indicates that Niger has about a 
1  in  10  probability  of  suffering  similar  crop  loss  or 
higher in any given year.  Figure 6.11 represents the 
probability  of  drought  frequency  for  different  dis-
tricts in Niger.

Improved modelling of agricultural drought, togeth-
er  with  down-scaled  climate  scenarios  put  it  in  a 
framework that is consistent with risk estimates for 
other hazards and could reduce uncertainty regard-
ing distribution and intensity of agricultural drought 
as well as its potential impacts. 

A better understanding of the relationship between 
drought  likelihood,  food  production  losses  as  well 
as the wider risks to natural capital and social sec-
tors would encourage informed investments by the 
agribusiness sector and more relevant and effective 
public policy decisions by governments.  Together, 
these  two  players—public  and  private—could  be 
one step ahead of damaging environmental change 
by limiting the risks associated with countries’ natu-
ral capital.   

Notes

i  Data from World Resources Institute (WRI): Per Capita Emissions: 
metric  tonnes  of  CO2  equivalent  (mtCO2e)  per  person.  Additional 
data: Puerto Rico,   http://www.epa.gov/ttnchie1/net/2008inventory.
html;  Hong  Kong  (Special  Administrative  Region  China),  http://
www.epd.gov.hk/epd/english/climate_change/files/HKGHG_Sec-
tors_201009.pdf;  Federal  States  of  Micronesia,  http://unfccc.int/
resource/docs/natc/micnc1.pdf. 
ii  For  example,  the  Rio+20  Natural  Capital  Summit  (http://www.
uncsd2012.org/index.php?page=view&type=1000&nr=450&me
nu=126)  and  the  WAVES  public-private  partnership,  involving  50 
countries and 86 private companies (www.wavespartnership.org).
iii  The risk reduction index (RRI) is a composite index of underlying 
capacities and conditions for disaster risk reduction. The environ-
mental  degradation  rankings  are  based  on  a  number  of  proxy  in-
dicators such as air pollution, deforestation, desertification, water 
contamination and water scarcity.  For more information on the RRI, 
please see: http://daraint.org/risk-reduction-index/. 
iv  Based  on  the  Inclusive  Wealth  Index  developed  by  UNU-IHDP 
and UNEP (2012).
v  L3JRC and MODIS MCD45. Although the two global datasets are 
in agreement regarding the global evaluation of burnt areas, their 

104

Part I - Chapter 6Chapter 7
Small Islands, 
Big Opportunities

105

Small Island Developing States (SIDS) face high levels of disaster risk and have comparatively low 
economic resilience.  Most of the countries with a large proportion of their total produced capital 
at risk to earthquakes, cyclone wind damage and tsunamis are SIDS.  Solomon Islands, Dominica and 
Vanuatu all face losses of over 30 percent of the value of their produced capital in the case of a one-
in-250 year earthquake.

14 of the 16 countries where wind damage from a one-in-250 year tropical cyclone would represent 
more than 60 percent of annual capital formation are SIDS or recognised small island territories; 
and 10 out of 13 countries in the case of earthquakes. 

With small and undiversified economies, many SIDS are severely constrained to participate success-
fully in the global economy.  But SIDS are probably the group of countries where investments in di-
saster risk reduction and climate change adaptation are likely to reap the greatest benefits.  In-
vesting  in  disaster  risk  reduction  is  most  likely  the  best  chance  these  countries  have  to  attract 
investment, strengthen resilience and improve competitiveness and sustainability. 

7.1  

 

 

Disaster risk in SIDS

 

In absolute terms, disaster risk in SIDS represents 
only a small proportion of global risk. However, 
because of their small size, often a very large pro-
portion of their total produced capital is at risk to 
earthquakes, tropical cyclones and tsunamis. 

The  United  Nations  recognises  38  Small  Island 
Developing  States  (SIDS)  and  a  further  14  non-UN 
member  states  and  territories  with  similar  charac-
teristics in three regions: the Caribbean; the Pacific; 
and the Indian Ocean.i   

SIDS are highly exposed to a range of hazards. A large 
part  of  their  population  lives  in  the  Low  Elevation 
Coastal Zone,ii making them highly exposed to storm 
surges and tsunamis. Maldives, for example, has more 
than 80 percent of its population in this zone (Mahon et 
al., 2012).  Volcanic islands often feature relatively large, 
steep river catchment systems. These have risks of sig-
nificant flash flooding and debris flows. 
 
The GAR global risk model allows the estimation of 
risks  for  a  number  of  these  hazards,  permitting  a 
better  understanding  of  the  levels  of  disaster  risk 
faced by SIDS.

106

Given their small size, the expected annual average 
losses (AAL) from earthquakes and tropical cyclone 
wind damage represent respectively only 2 percent 
and 1.4 percent of the global total. 

However, precisely because of their small size, often 
a very large proportion of their total produced capi-
tal is at risk.  For example, as Figure 7.1 highlights, in 
the case of a 1-in-250 year earthquake, 8 of the 10 
countries that would lose the largest proportion of 
the value of their urban produced capital are SIDS.  
In  the  Solomon  Islands,  Dominica  and  Vanuatu, 
between 30 percent and 50 percent of the value of 
their urban produced capital would be lost. 

As  Figure  7.2  shows,  in  the  case  of  a  catastrophic 
one-in-250  year  cyclone,  the  top  10  countries  in 
terms of losses in relation to the value of urban pro-
duced  capital  are  all  islands,  6  of  which  are  SIDS. 
Turks and Caicos Islands, Cayman Islands and Gua-
deloupe could all expect to lose more than 30 per-
cent of the value of their urban produced capital to 
wind damage. 

A significant proportion of their population and pro-
duced capital is also exposed to extreme tsunamis 
(Figure 7.3). The 2009 tsunami that affected Samoa, 

Part I - Chapter 7Figure 7.1  Top 10 countries in terms of AAL (left) and probable maximum loss (PML) (right) from earthquakes as a percentage of urban 
produced capital 

(Source: UNISDR, based on GAR global risk model)

Figure 7.2  Top 10 countries with highest AAL (left) and PML (right) from cyclonic winds

(Source: UNISDR, based on GAR global risk model)

American Samoa and Tonga in the Pacific demon-
strated  the  kind  of  impacts  that  can  be  expected.  
Figure 7.3 shows the exposure of population and ur-
ban  produced  capital  to  a  destructive  one-in-500 
year  tsunami.  Both  Solomon  Islands  and  Maldives 
have more than 25 percent of their urban produced 
capital  exposed  to  tsunamis.  And  Maldives  has 
nearly 10 percent of its population exposed.

SIDS  also  experience  four  types  of  flooding:  flash 
floods,iv  river  floods,  coastal  floods  and  ponding 
floods.  The  island  of  Samoa,  for  example,  has  his-
torically  suffered  coastal  flooding.  In  2008,  it  was 
estimated  that  the  associated  AAL  could  be  up  to 
US$25  million  (Economics  of  Climate  Adaptation 
Working Group, 2009).  Ponding flooding is a serious 
hazard in some Caribbean SIDS. In these countries, 

107

Figure 7.3  Absolute and relative urban produced capital (top) and population (bottom) exposed to tsunamis in SIDSiii

(Source: UNISDR, based on GAR global risk model)

Table 7.1  Annual average losses and probable maximum losses (250 years return period) from ponding flooding for selected Caribbean countries

 (Source: GAR global risk model)

108

Part I - Chapter 7floods are often associated with the accumulation 
of rainfall in low-lying areas.  

Table  7.1  highlights  AAL  associated  with  ponding 
flooding for six Caribbean countries. Barbados has 
the highest proportion of its urban produced capital 
at risk, followed by Puerto Rico. In most countries, 
wind damage represents a more significant risk than 
ponding  floods.  However,  in  Barbados,  the  AAL  of 
ponding floods is higher than that of wind damage.  
This  type  of  flooding  is  particularly  disruptive  be-
cause it can last for several days, interrupting trans-
port and posing health risks. Thus, although direct 
losses might be low compared with other hazards, 
indirect losses for local households and businesses 
might be significant.

7.2 Climate change impacts on 

SIDS

SIDS  are  among  the  countries  that  contribute 
least to climate change yet stand to suffer most 
from  its  negative  impacts.  Disaster  losses  are 
projected to increase, due to sea level rise, the 
increased severity of cyclones worsening water 
scarcity and drought and other factors.

SIDS contribute less than 1 percent of total carbon 
dioxide emissions.v But given their high exposure to 
weather-related  hazards,  they  are  likely  to  dispro-
portionately suffer from the magnifying effect of cli-
mate  change.  These  effects  include  sea  level  rise 
and  associated  flood  and  storm  surge  hazard,  in-

Table 7.2  Projected changes in climate extremes for SIDS 

creasing cyclonic wind intensity, erosion, saltwater 
intrusion into coastal aquifers and worsening water 
scarcity  and  drought  (CCRIF,  2010;  Perch-Nielsen, 
2009; UNWTO and UNEP, 2008; IPCC, 2012; Simpson 
et al., 2008).  

For example, SIDS located in the Pacific can expect 
to experience extreme events such as storm surges, 
heavy rainfall, tropical cyclones, droughts and heat 
waves with significant negative impacts (Australian 
Bureau of Meteorology and CSIRO, 2011). In the Ca-
ribbean, changes in annual hurricane frequency and 
intensity could result in additional annual losses of 
US$446 million by 2080—incurred mainly from busi-
ness interruption to the tourism sector (Toba, 2009).

Table 7.2 highlights likely climate change impacts on 
SIDS identified by the IPCC (2012). 

7.3 Disaster losses and economic 

resilience

As  a  result  of  limited  diversification  and  small 
market size, the economies of many SIDS are not 
resilient to disaster loss. Both estimated and ob-
served losses represent a high proportion of an-
nual  capital  formation  and  contribute  to  slug-
gish longer-term growth.    

Disaster  risks  pose  a  serious  threat  to SIDS  econo-
mies.  Figure 7.4 shows that in the case of catastroph-
ic earthquakes with a 250 year return period, 10 out 
of  the  13  countries  where  losses  would  be  greater 

(Source: adapted from Mahon et al., 2012 (based on IPCC, 2012))

109

than 60 per cent of their annual capital formation are 
SIDS. In the case of cyclones, 13 out of 16 countries 
are SIDS or recognised small island territories.  
Countries with low levels of investment and high 
AAL  are  in  the  long  term  less  likely  to  be  able  to 

absorb  losses  even  from  more  frequent,  less  se-
vere events. Many SIDS have annual average losses 
from both earthquakes and cyclonic winds above 1 
percent of their annual average capital formation 
(Figure  7.5).  For  the  Solomon  Islands,  Tonga  and 

Figure 7.4  Probable maximum losses from one-in-250 year earthquakes (top) and cyclonic wind damage (bottom) as a percentage of 
gross fixed capital formation (SIDS highlighted in bold)

(Source: GAR global risk model)

110

Part I - Chapter 7Trinidad and Tobago, annual average losses from 
earthquakes  exceeds  one-tenth  of  annual  pro-
duced capital.

The estimations of the risk model are confirmed in 

some countries by observed losses. For example, in 
Jamaica,  observed  total  average  losses  between 
1991 and 2011 were equivalent to 2.6 percent of its 
gross fixed capital formation.
The effects of disaster loss are amplified in SIDS by 

Figure 7.5  Annual average losses from earthquakes (top) and cyclonic winds (bottom) compared with gross fixed capital formation, 
with SIDS highlighted in bold

(Source: GAR global risk model)

111

their  small  size,  which  means  that  hazard  events 
may  affect  their  entire  territory  and  economy,  be-
cause  their  economies  are  often  concentrated  in 
one  or  two  sectors,  and  because  many  countries 
also  have  high  levels  of  indebtedness  and  hence 
constrained fiscal space to invest. Additional com-
mon  challenges  include  remoteness,  narrow  re-
source base, degradation of their marine and terres-
trial  environment  and  exposure 
to  global 
environmental challenges, including climate change 
(UNDESA,  2010).  Thirty-four  SIDS  have  high  or  ex-
treme levels of environmental vulnerability (UNEP-
SOPAC, 2005). 

With small and undiversified economies, many SIDS 
are severely constrained to participate successfully 
in the global economy.  Geographic distance, lower 
trade  and  transport  volumes  and  weak  infrastruc-
ture  generally  mean  that  SIDS  have  higher  overall 
logistics  and  transport  costs—undermining  their 
competitiveness. In the case of Jamaica (Figure 7.6), 
for  example,  the  impact  of  repeated  tropical  cy-
clones  may  have  contributed  to  sluggish  growth 
over decades.

These challenges also present opportunities, how-
ever.  Regional initiatives such as the Caribbean Ca-
tastrophe Risk Insurance Facility (CCRIF) and more 

Figure 7.6  Impact of tropical cyclones on GDP growth in Jamaica 

recently  the  PCRAFI  (see  Box  7.1)  are  facilitating 
greater awareness of the fiscal risk posed by disas-
ters in the Caribbean and Pacific Island SIDS; they 
are  also  providing  options  for  countries  to  reduce 
their financing gap. To be effective and sustainable 
in the medium term, these programmes need to be 
accompanied by commensurate investments to re-
duce disaster risks.  In providing comprehensive risk 
assessments, they are also providing tools to do so. 

On their own, it would be difficult for many SIDS to 
address their high levels of disaster risk, low levels of 
economic  resilience  and  challenged  competitive-
ness and sustainability.   As the PCRAFI highlights, 
through effective regional mechanisms, the critical 
mass of technical and financial resources to reduce 
disaster risk becomes more readily available.  

If  these  resources  can  be  mobilised,  then  the  big-
gest challenge for SIDS can also be their best oppor-
tunity.  From one perspective, disaster risk presents 
a serious threat to these countries’ economic com-
petitiveness.    However,  precisely  because  of  this 
combination  of  high  risks  and  low  resilience,  SIDS 
are probably the countries where investments in di-
saster risk reduction and climate change adaptation 
are likely to reap the greatest benefits.  Investing in 
disaster risk reduction is most likely the best chance 

(Source: Hsiang and Jina, 2012)

112

Part I - Chapter 7Box 7.1  Comprehensive risk assessment in the Pacific

Based on the experience of the Caribbean Islands, the Pacific Island countries decided to set up a risk transfer 
facility  for  the  region.  This  gave  birth  to  the  Pacific  Catastrophe  Risk  Assessment  and  Financing  Initiative 
(PCRAFI).vi  PCRAFI provides Pacific Island countries with disaster risk modelling and assessment tools (SOPAC, 
2010). It also encourages dialogue among countries on integrated financial solutions for reducing their financial 
vulnerability to disasters and to climate change. 

Initially, PCRAFI provided 15 countries with disaster risk assessment tools (see Figure 7.7 below). Among these 
tools are regional historical hazard and loss databases; probabilistic hazard models for major hazards including 
cyclones, earthquakes and tsunamis; and a comprehensive exposure database.

 Fig 7.7  Map of annual average losses in Fiji

(Source: PCRAFI)

Country-specific catastrophe risk models have been developed using these tools, along with catastrophe risk 
profiles (Figure 7.8).  

Figure 7.8  Loss exceedance curve for Fiji

(Source: PCRAFI)     

(Source: UNISDR)

113

these  countries  have 
investment, 
strengthen resilience and improve competitiveness 
and sustainability. 

to  attract 

Notes

http://www.un.org/special-rep/ohrlls/sid/list.htm. 

i 
ii  Defined as the continuous area along the coast that is less than 
10 metres above sea level.
iii  Exposure  here  is  calculated  by  overlapping  the  total  capital 
stock and the population with the footprint of the tsunami run-up 
for a return period of approximately 500 years (see Chapter 2).
iv  Ponding  flood  is  also  referred  to  as  ‘pluvial  flood’  as  it  is  the 
type  of  flooding  that  derives  from  direct  run-off  of  rainfall  water 
and caused by the lack (or overcharge) of a natural drainage system 
(www.floodsite.net).
v  United  Nations  Statistics  Division’s  Millennium  Development 
Goals Indicators: http://mdgs.un.org/unsd/mdg/SeriesDetail.aspx? 
srid=749&crid=. 
vi  PCRAFI is a joint initiative of the Secretariat of the Pacific Com-
munity (SPC)/Applied Geoscience and Technology Division (SOPAC), 
the World Bank and the Asian Development Bank (ADB).

114

Part I - Chapter 7Part II  
Private Investment and 
Disaster Risk

117

In May 2012, earthquakes of magnitudes of up to 6.0 
on the Richter scale shook the Emilia Romagna re-
gion in Italy, followed by almost 2,000 aftershocks; 
the economic impacts—both immediate and down-
stream—unexpectedly  reverberated  across  indus-
tries as varied as agribusiness, biotechnology, real 
estate and tourism (see Box II.1).  

In March of the same year—just two months before 
the earthquakes—the Emilia Romagna region had 
been ranked as the fifth most attractive Southern 
European region and the first in Italy for business 
by the Financial Times foreign investment special-
ist division.i But even if disaster risk had been con-
sidered,  and  had  negatively  affected  the  ranking, 
business activity in the region may not have been 
significantly lower. 

Investing  in  hazard-prone  locations  rarely  reflects 
irrational  behaviour  by  individual  business  inves-
tors.  On  the  contrary,  as  highlighted  in  Chapter  2, 
many  such  areas  offer  comparative  advantages 
that translate into higher productivity, profitability 
and  competitiveness.  Multiple  investments  over 
decades, however, have accumulated high levels of 
disaster risk, which now negatively affect the very 
competitiveness  that  investments  sought  in  the 
first place. At the same time, risks are externalised 

Box II.1  Cost to business investment in Emilia Romagna, Italy

 

 

 

or transferred across space and time to other loca-
tions  and  sectors.  This  ‘external  risk  neglect’  or 
shared  risk  affects  economic  sustainability  as  a 
whole (Berger et al., 2010).
 
Part II of this report examines whether, how and why 
businesses  have  factored  disaster  risk  into  their  in-
vestment  decisions  and  with  what  consequences. 
This is examined in three risk-sensitive sectors: urban 
development;  tourism;  and  agribusiness.  The  three 
chapters reflect on the perceived trade-offs between 
productivity and growth, on the one hand, and inter-
nalised  and  externalised  risks,  on  the  other  hand, 
which characterise investment in these sectors.

Chapter 8 examines investments in the urban devel-
opment sector, in particular the role of speculative 
investment, public regulation and major infrastruc-
ture projects in structuring-shared urban risks and 
costs. 

Chapter 9 focuses on the tourism sector, with par-
ticular  attention  to  tourism  in  SIDS.  The  chapter 
analyses the relative dependency of small and undi-
versified  economies  on  tourism  investments  and 
revenues.  It  also  explores  the  potential  economic 
value  of  disaster  risk  management  for  businesses 
and national economies invested in tourism. 

Emilia Romagna is one of Italy’s most productive regions, accounting for 10 percent of the country’s GDP, and 
boasting one company for every ten inhabitants; most companies are small to medium-sized enterprises, but 
several are also large multinational corporations, including in the biomedical sector.ii  Emilia’s four most affect-
ed provinces provide almost 60 percent of the region’s employment, spread over a range of industries including 
global automobile brands, pharmaceutical and biomedical plants, fashion and textiles, and construction firms 
(Government of Italy, 2012). Regional food production is of national importance and was significantly affected 
by the series of earthquakes that hit the region in 2011 and then again in 2012 when the quakes destroyed pro-
duction facilities, and significantly affected the plants and investments of many multinational biomedical com-
panies.iii  

An in-depth economic study of the damage assessed direct losses, including losses suffered by public and pri-
vate sectors, at US$11.5 billion (Government of Italy, 2012).iv  One month after the May 2012 quakes, several 
companies, in particular SMEs, had not yet reopened, and Italian officials estimated that about 20,000 workers 
in 3,500 companies had been temporarily laid off and their jobs at risk (Aon Benfield, 2012b). The disasters also 
deterred tourists from enjoying the region’s 110 km of coastline, with major hubs such as Rimini and Riccione. 

(Source: UNISDR)

118

Part II   Chapter 10 looks at some of the key drivers of di-
saster  risk  within  the  agribusiness  sector.  It  ex-
plores the impacts that the sector’s vulnerability to 
hazards and a range of local and global pressures 
have on smallholders and household food securi-
ty.  Identifying new approaches to creating shared 
value along the agricultural value chain, the chap-
ter focuses on sub-Saharan Africa and the specific 
vulnerabilities  and  opportunities  of  the  sector  in 
that region.

Notes

(ac-

http://www.investinemiliaromagna.it/wcm/investiner_en 

i 
cessed 27 February 2013).
ii  http://www.euronews.com/2012/06/05/italy-s-earthquakes-
hit-economy;  
http://www.euronews.com/2012/06/07/italian-quake-damage-es-
timate-grows (accessed 27 February 2013).
iii  http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2012/jun/05/italy-emilia-
romagna-earthquake (accessed 27 February 2013).
iv 
In contrast, the global disaster loss database EM-DAT reported 
economic losses of less than US$16 million only, once again empha-
sising the staggering gap in global assessments of economic losses 
associated with disasters (http://www.emdat.be).  

119

Chapter 8
Urbanising Risk

121

More investment in infrastructure and the built environment will be required over the next 40 
years than has occurred over the last 4 millennia. How disaster risk is addressed in the construction 
and real estate development sectors is therefore going to shape the future of disaster risk reduction.

Where investments in urban development generate new risks or exacerbate existing ones, the cost of 
disasters is often spread across communities and sectors. These shared costs are not well account-
ed for and responsibilities are not well defined. A number of disincentives work against businesses 
investing in reducing disaster risk in urban development, including the promise of high profit from 
speculative investment and ineffective public regulation. 

Large-scale infrastructure projects and new approaches to sustainable urban development provide 
opportunities  for  engaging  private  investors  and  the  construction  sector  in  new  public-private 
partnerships for resilient investment.

8.1 Urban development and the 

future of disaster risk   

 

 

 

        reduction 

Whether or not disaster risk is factored into in-
vestment decisions in urban development will 
have a decisive influence on the future of disas-
ter risk reduction.

The future of disaster risk reduction will be largely 
played out in city regions. As highlighted in Chapter 
2, investments in real estate development and infra-
structure in areas exposed to earthquakes, tropical 
cyclones and tsunamis have contributed to a mas-
sive  increase  in  the  hazard  exposure  of  produced 
capital in some regions, particularly in Asia. Howev-
er, in many cities and countries that have success-
fully attracted investment in transport and energy 
infrastructure,  ports,  airports,  housing,  industry 
and services, investment in disaster risk reduction 
and the capacities to implement have often lagged 
behind. 

As  a  consequence  new  patterns  of  intensive  risk 
have been produced. Worldwide, expected annual 
average  losses  to  urban  produced  capital,  from 
earthquake  and  cyclonic  wind  damage  alone  now 
represent  approximately  US$180  billion  per  year 
(see Chapter 3). At the same time, the transforma-
tion  of  city  regions,  through  badly  planned  and 

122

managed  urban  development  and  environmental 
modification,  has  generated  new  hazards  and  ex-
tensive risks that now are responsible for compara-
ble, additional levels of loss (see Chapter 4).  

Historically,  much  urban  growth  in  low  and  mid-
dle-income  countries  has  occurred  through  infor-
mal mechanisms of land acquisition, building and 
infrastructure  provision.  Mortality  aand  extensive 
risks are disproportionately concentrated in these 
countries, where a large proportion of low-income 
households  lives  in  informal  settlements  in  haz-
ard-exposed areas. GAR09 and GAR11 analysed in 
detail the nexus between weak urban governance, 
the growth of informal settlements and the accu-
mulation of disaster risk in low and middle-income 
countries.   

This chapter complements that analysis by illustrat-
ing  some  of  the  key  challenges  and  opportunities 
associated  with  managing  disaster  risk  in  formal 
processes of urban development and infrastructure 
development—not only in low and middle but also 
in high-income countries.   

As  this  chapter  will  highlight,  at  present  there  are 
only limited incentives for businesses in the urban 
development  sector  to  invest  in  risk  reduction.  
However, there is evidence that this incentive struc-
ture may be changing.  Investing in resilient and sus-

Part II - Chapter 8tainable  urban  development  is  becoming  a  com-
pelling value proposition for business, particularly 
when it is structured through partnerships with the 
public  sector  (Global  Construction  Perspectives 
and Oxford Economics, 2011).

8.2  

 

 

 

The new wave of urbanisation

More investment in infrastructure and the built 
environment  will  be  required  over  the  next  40 
years than has occurred over the last 4 millen-
nia. Consequently, the construction and real es-
tate development sectors are estimated to grow 
by almost 70 percent by 2020.

The  world  is  increasingly  urban.i  By  2050,  the 
world’s urban population (including those living in 
small  urban  centres)  will  represent  about  70  per-
cent of a projected global population of 9 billion.ii 
The proportion of the labour force in the industry 
and  services  sector,  which  has  now  reached  65 
percent, has grown at approximately the same rate 
as the urban population (Global Construction Per-
spectives and Oxford Economics, 2011).

The urban population of sub-Saharan Africa is ex-
pected to grow from 298 million in 2010 to 596 mil-
lion in 2030 and 1,069 million in 2050 (United Na-
tions,  2012).  The  urban  population  of  India  is 
expected to grow from 379 million in 2010 to 606 
million  in  2030  and  875  million  in  2050.  Other  re-
gions and countries with high, expected growth in-
clude North Africa and China. 

Historically, this represents a major shift in the dis-
tribution  of  the  world’s  urban  population  and  its 
largest cities.  In 1970, the urban population of Eu-
rope represented 30.5 percent of world urban pop-
ulation; by 2050, this figure will have dropped to 9.5 
percent. In contrast, the urban population of sub- 
Saharan  Africa  represented  only  4.1  percent  of 
world  urban  population  in  1970;  by  2050,  it  is  ex-
pected to increase to 17.1 percent (Ibid.). 

Clearly this new wave of urbanisation represents a 
major  business  opportunity.  More  investment  in 
infrastructure  and  built  environment  will  be  re-
quired  over  the  next  40  years  than  has  occurred 
over the last 4 millennia (WEF, 2012). Consequently, 
the construction and real estate development sec-
tors are estimated to grow dramatically in the next 
10  years  (Global  Construction  Perspectives  and 
Oxford Economics, 2011). 

One estimate projects investment in urban devel-
opment  to  increase  by  67  percent—from  US$7.2 
trillion  in  2011  to  US$12  trillion  by  2020iii    (Global 
Construction Perspectives and Oxford economics, 
2011).  A  total  of  US$97.7  trillion  will  be  spent  on 
construction globally during the next decade and 
by 2020, construction will account for 13.2 percent 
of world GDP (Ibid.). 

Analysis of the commercial real estate sector also 
shows  that  after  the  financial  crisis  of  2007–2008, 
investment has bounced back to over US$400 bil-
lion globally in 2012 (Figure 8.1).  

Although a huge business opportunity, this invest-
ment  represents  a  challenge  for  disaster  risk  re-
duction.  Much of this new urbanisation will unfold 
in hazard-exposed countries such as India and in 
regions  with  weak  disaster  risk  management  ca-
pacities, as in sub-Saharan Africa. 

Figure 8.1  Direct commercial real estate investment, 2007–2012

(Source: UNISDR, based on Jones Lang LaSalle (2013))

123

The sheer volume of investment in urban develop-
ment and infrastructure expected in the coming de-
cades means that the future of disaster risk reduc-
tion is at stake. If this investment takes place, as it 
has  in  the  past,  without  factoring  in  risk  consider-
ations, then the new wave of urbanisation will be ac-
companied by another wave of disaster risk accumu-
lation. This will threaten the resilience, sustainability 
and  competitiveness  of  countries,  cities  and  busi-
nesses alike. Conversely, if incentives and regulations 
to  encourage  risk-sensitive  investment  are  put  in 
place,  the  new  wave  of  investment  may  become  a 
unique opportunity to further disaster risk reduction. 

8.3 The urban  

development process

Part  of  the  disaster  risks  produced  through  in-
vestments in urban development and infrastruc-
ture are spread across communities and sectors 
to become shared costs. These shared costs are 
produced  through  large  numbers  of  individual 

public  and  private  investment  decisions  and 
non-decisions taken over the long term—making 
it difficult to attribute responsibility. 

Urban development as a business sector involves 
a wide range of stakeholders. These include land-
owners and those who buy land and property for 
speculative  development;  building  professions 
that design and supervise construction; banks, in-
vestment funds and others that finance urban de-
velopment;  construction  and  engineering  busi-
nesses,  which  range  from  huge  multinationals  to 
local  building  companies;  the  insurance  industry; 
utility  and  service  providers;  and  public  sector 
bodies that are meant to plan and regulate urban 
development.  

As Figure 8.2 below shows, business investments in 
urban  development  are  influenced  by  a  range  of 
factors  and  involve  different  stakeholders.  The  ur-
ban development process typically moves through 
a process that includes several stages: pre-project 
(developing the design brief, concept and technical 

Figure 8.2  Factors that influence the production of risk in urban construction

(Source: Johnson et al., 2012)

124

Part II - Chapter 8design of a site); pre-construction (developing pro-
posals,  tender  documentation  and  procurement); 
construction; and post-completion (including oper-
ation and maintenance). 

Decisions  to  manage  disaster  risk  may  be  taken 
during any of these different phases and reflect the 
interaction  between  stakeholders  involved  and 
factors that influence their actions. These factors 
include  risk  awareness;  pricing  of  insurance;  the 
existence  and  enforcement  of  risk-sensitive  land-
use plans or building codes; and public policies to 
promote growth and investment.

But ultimately, as in any other sector, trade-offs ex-
ist between the risks and costs and potential gains 
and profits. For example, as discussed in Chapter 
2, even risk aware businesses may decide to invest 
in  hazard-exposed  areas  with  other  comparative 
advantages, reflecting the imperative of economic 
growth  and  a  conscious  trade-off  in  which  high 
levels of return on capital are considered sufficient 
to offset potential risks and losses.    

In urban development, identifying these trade-offs 
is  complicated  for  many  reasons.  Many  intensive 
risks have long-return periods, meaning that for in-
vestors in urban development, the risks have low 

Table 8.1  Types of risk-inducing construction practices and who bears the burden of risk

(Source: Johnson et al., 2012)

125

visibility  and  are  downplayed.  Even  when  they 
have been assessed, the risks may be ignored giv-
en the expectation of a high short-term return on 
capital.  At  the  same  time,  risks  are  produced 
through  large  numbers  of  individual  public  and 
private  investment  decisions  and  non-decisions 
taken over long periods—making it difficult to at-
tribute responsibility, ownership or liability. While 
real estate development and infrastructure proj-
ects  may  generate  new  disaster  risks,  these  are 
then transferred from developers to the ultimate 
users  of  urban  development,  reducing  account-
ability. As Table 8.1 shows, investments in urban 
development  and  infrastructure  produce  shared 
risks and costs for the public sector and for other 
businesses and communities.

8.4 Speculative gain and public 

regulation: the disincentives for   
                   disaster  risk management in real  
 

             estate development

In principle and in most countries, local, city or 
national governments regulate investments in 
urban development. However, even when disas-

ter risk considerations have been factored into 
planning and regulatory frameworks, there have 
been  major  challenges  to  implementation  in 
practice.
  
At present there are only limited incentives for busi-
nesses in the urban development sector to invest in 
reducing disaster risks. The short-term profitability 
of speculative urban development, weak or ineffec-
tive public regulatory frameworks, which rarely take 
disaster risk into account; and the absence of clear 
channels  of  responsibility  and  accountability  for 
risks and costs generated conspire against risk-sen-
sitive investment.
  
Speculative investment
The first of these disincentives is represented by po-
tential  profits  from  short-term  speculative  invest-
ment in land and property.  Historically, investment 
in urban development has been driven as much by 
the profits to be made as by demand from a growing 
population and productive sector (Harvey, 1985). In 
rapidly  growing  economies,  land  and  property 
speculation thrives. Asset prices and rents in many 
economically  successful  urban  areas  have 
in-
creased sharply leading to increasingly segregated 

Box 8.1  Real incentives for investment of private capital in Dhaka’s real estate

The growth of Dhaka’s industry and service sectors over the last 20 years has triggered a boom in the city’s real 
estate sector. For example, whereas only 30 garment-manufacturing companies existed in the country in 1980, 
in 2011, the number had risen to 5,150 with many located in Dhaka.  The garments sector now represents 70 
percent of Bangladesh’s net exports.

However,  other  factors  have  also  contributed  to  the  real  estate  boom.    Remittances  have  proved  a  robust 
source of financing and the change from multigenerational households to nuclear families has increased de-
mand for urban housing.  An increase in rents by 250 percent from 1990 to 2007 stimulated investment in real 
estate.  Today, the construction industry employs 2.4 million in Dhaka, which in 2010–2011 contributed about 
25 percent of national GDP, of which 19 percent was from private investment. These figures represent the for-
mal real estate sector and do not include significant investment and construction in informal settlements in 
Dhaka and other urban centres of Bangladesh.

Regulation of real estate development is rarely effective.  Developers require approvals from different authori-
ties whose regulations and approval criteria are poorly coordinated.  Combined with limited public sector ca-
pacity and temptation by developers to bypass steps in the approval process, disaster risks are rarely assessed 
and are transferred from poorly regulated developments to public authorities, infrastructure users and private 
households.

(Source: Jabeen, 2012)

126

Part II - Chapter 8cities,  in  which  low-income  households  as  well  as 
small  businesses  find  themselves  pushed  towards 
the urban periphery or onto hazard-exposed areas.  

In Brazil, for example, prime urban land is held by 
landowners  in  anticipation  of  profits  through  fu-
ture  sales  while  low-income  households  settle  in 
areas with limited basic infrastructure and services 
(Kataria  and  Zerjav,  2012).  Perversely,  these  poor 
quality services often come at a high price and are 
another  profit-generating  stream  in  the  informal 
market for water and energy (Ibid; Baker and Mc-
Clain, 2009). 
 
In  Dhaka,  Bangladesh,  as  Box  8.1  highlights,  the 
country’s  sustained  macroeconomic  growth,  low 
interest rates for savings, increased access to cred-
it  and  a  growing  formal  working  sector  have  all 
contributed  to  a  major  flow  of  investment  into 
speculative real estate development.

The short-term profitability of speculative urban de-
velopment does not encourage consideration of di-
saster risks, which may only manifest as losses af-

ter  the  development  has  been  sold.  Investors  or 
developers  rarely  take  responsibility  or  account-
ability for the disaster risk that may be generated 
and sold on. In the case of the shared risks that are 
generated, the situation is further complicated be-
cause risks can rarely be attributed to a single in-
vestment decision, but are generated by layers of 
successive investments over decades.  

There is now consensus that the flow of specula-
tive financial capital into the real estate sector in 
the United States of America led to an over-accu-
mulation of capital in that sector and risks in the 
financial sector triggered the global crisis that be-
gan  in  2007–2008  (Castells  et  al.,  2012).  The  evi-
dence  of  an  over-accumulation  of  disaster  risk  in 
hazard-exposed  cities  (see  Chapter  4)  has  analo-
gous causes, given that so much land and property 
development, particularly in housing, responds to 
speculative investment.
 
Ineffective public regulation
The second disincentive is ineffective public regula-
tory  frameworks.    In  most  countries,  local,  city  or 

Box 8.2  The build-up of risk in Lagos, Nigeria

With a recorded growth rate of more than 20 percent, construction and real estate development is one of the 
fastest growing sectors in Nigeria.  Including the informal sector, the private sector is responsible for providing 
almost 90 percent of national housing stock.  This growing role was actively stimulated by the government via 
its role in supporting development of real estate developer associations and restructuring the housing finance 
market (Henshaw, 2010). 

However, while sound urban development policies exist, implementation of building and safety codes remains 
marred by corruption and limited capacity (Onakuse and Lenihan, 2007). About 80 percent of artisans engaged 
in the construction industry is either unskilled or uncertified owing to the absence of standardised training 
(Ede, 2011; Aniekwu and Ozochi, 2010; Kayode et al., 2008). Moreover, about 70 percent of Lagos’ population 
lives in informal, poorly regulated settlements (Adelekan, 2012).

Consequently, disaster risk has been increasing. Although land zoning regulations take flood risk into account, 
they are not based on hazard and risk assessments.  Urban development has increasingly taken place on mar-
ginal, flood-prone and unsafe lands.  Coastal development has increased losses to wetlands, changes in the ar-
ea’s hydrology and increased flood risk, which affects the urban poor (Adelekan, 2012). 

Floods in 2010 and 2011 highlighted increasing risk, with the latter event resulting in the highest claim settle-
ment in the history of the Nigerian insurance industry and significant un-assessed costs to low and middle-in-
come households and the public sector. In addition, hazard-mitigation measures to reduce the risk generated 
by uncontrolled urban development have generated huge costs to the Lagos state government.

(Source: Johnson et al., 2012)

127

national governments have legal responsibilities to 
regulate investments in urban development. A large 
variety of instruments are used for regulatory pur-
poses.  These  include  master  plans  or  high-level 
planning guidelines to orient the longer-term devel-
opment of a city or region; city or local level land-
use  and  zoning  plans  and  planning  regulations;  
building standards and regulations as well as spe-
cific  requirements  for  large  projects,  such  as  envi-
ronmental impact assessments (EIA).  

In principle, these regulatory frameworks could and 
should  be  used  to  discourage  investments  in  real 
estate or infrastructure that contribute to increasing 
disaster  risk.  In  practice,  regulation  alone  is  rarely 
effective in managing disaster risks, for a number of 
reasons.

First,  the  way  that  urban  investment  has  been 
planned, regulated and implemented over past de-
cades has changed substantially. In many higher-
income countries, from the mid-1950s to the mid-
1970s,  there  was  a  strong  culture  of  public 
intervention  and 
in  government-
planned  and  implemented  urban  development 
and  land  use  (Kataria  and  Zerjav,  2012;  Glesson 
and Low, 2000).  But from the mid-1970s onward, 

investment 

there was a gradual shift in focus from directly in-
vesting  in  urban  development  to  facilitating  in-
creased private investment—deregulating markets 
and  privatising  state-owned  land  (Mukhija,  2003; 
Alexander, 1986).  

While publicly planned urban development was not 
necessarily risk sensitive, this shift in focus encour-
ages speculative development, which as highlighted 
above  is  not  conducive  to  disaster  risk  manage-
ment. In Serbia, for example, rapid privatisation of 
housing stock, including public housing estates that 
previously had been heavily subsidised by national 
and municipal government budgets, has resulted in 
the rapid decay of buildings and increased disaster 
risk  (Kataria  and  Zerjav,  2012).  In  Chile,  deregula-
tion  and  de-zoning  of  urban  land  has  also  led  to 
unregulated  construction  on  hazard-exposed  ar-
eas with inadequate overall building quality (Smol-
ka and Sabatini, 2000).

Many  low  and  middle-income  countries  also  ad-
opted  legislation  and  planning  mechanisms  to 
regulate  land  use,  building  and  urban  develop-
ment; or inherited inappropriate mechanisms from 
the  colonial  era,  but  generally  with  significantly 
weaker capacities in implementation and enforce-

Box 8.3  Rapid growth of construction sector equals rapid growth of disaster risk in Viet Nam

Viet Nam has experienced rapid economic growth and urbanisation in recent decades.  In parallel, private in-
vestors in the real estate sector have gained more power to shape urban planning and development. Increasing 
pressure to build in hazard-prone areas comes from migration and urbanisation, which is exacerbated by spec-
ulative real estate development driven by opportunities for short-term profits.  Many areas previously zoned as 
subject to flood risk are being developed as residential and industrial sites, not only in large cities such as Ho 
Chi Minh City but also in smaller urban centres. 

For example, Can Tho City, with a population of 350,000, is the demographic and economic centre of the Viet-
namese Mekong Delta.  Major new residential and industrial developments are planned in the Cai Rang district 
at the confluence of the Hau and Can Tho Rivers with high flood risk.  The city district’s zoning plans reflect this 
risk only partially; for example, future flood risk scenarios were not included. 

Real estate developers heavily influence zoning plans in the city.  Approval has been sought to build almost 
double the number of new residences allowed for in the district’s master plan.  While not all of these will be de-
veloped, agricultural land and floodplains will be converted to residential areas creating a patchwork of devel-
opment, open spaces and fallows, which interrupts natural drainage flows in the city and aggravates flood risk. 
As a consequence, authorities may be forced into large public investments in flood mitigation infrastructure. 

(Sudmeier-Rieux et al., 2012)

128

Part II - Chapter 8Box 8.4  The Italian floods: shaping, building and exhausting floodplains

In Italy, damages (and often deaths) caused by flooding make it to the news almost every year. During the 20th 
century, Italy was recorded as Europe’s second country most affected by flooding, with about 3,000 flood disas-
ters (Llasat and Siccardi, 2010). The flood that affected the Veneto region in October 2010 was estimated to have 
caused €3.7 billion in damages (European Commission, 2011), and damages from events that affected Liguria 
and Toscana in October 2011 were valued at €722 million (European Commission, 2012).  In November 2012, six 
people vanished during the flood affecting Toscana.iv 

Although physical factors such as climate, topography and morphology contribute to flood hazard, the way riv-
er  basins have been intervened (for example, canalising rivers) has been an important factor contributing to 
current flood risk.v   In Northern Italy, excessive extraction of ground water has led to heavy subsidence in the 
Po Valley, reaching 0.7 cm per year (Carminati and Martinelli, 2002), which in turn increases flood hazard. 

The urbanisation of floodplains has also contributed to increased flood risk, particularly since the 1960s. Differ-
ent laws and policies have been adopted to regulate land use (Luino et al., 2012).  But local autonomy to desig-
nate the areas that can be built up, along with the fact that flood risk assessments are not an ‘exact’ science, 
has in some cases allowed developers to keep building in floodplains (Ibid.). However, it is not only a matter of 
legislation—regulations are not always respected. For example, in Campania, population growth and specula-
tive development has extended city boundaries towards flood-prone areas and also contributed to landslide 
risk in the area (Di Martire et al., 2012). 

(UNISDR)

ment.  These  mechanisms  were  often  used  to 
structure  urban  space  in  a  way  that  segregated 
higher  and  lower-income  households  and  formal 
and  informal  areas  of  cities  (Mitlin  and  Sattert-
waite, 2013). As Box 8.2 exemplifies, in some cases, 
this  has  resulted  in  city  governments  completely 
losing control over urban development (UN-HABI-
TAT, 2012).

In  recent  years,  however,  a  counter  trend  has 
emerged.  In  middle-income  countries  with  suc-
cessful economies, formerly ineffective or non-ex-
istent  planning  and  regulatory  mechanisms  have 
been strengthened, enabling city governments to 
exercise  some  control  and  authority  over  urban 
development. 

Second, even where regulatory mechanisms do ex-
ist  and  when  disaster  risk  considerations  have 
been factored into these mechanisms, there have 
been major challenges to implementation in prac-
tice.  More  than  half  of  the  countries  reporting  on 
progress  against  the  HFA  in  2011–2013  recognise 
that  they  lack  risk-sensitive  mechanisms  to  regu-
late investment in urban development.   

For  example,  in  Bangladesh,  the  government  ac-
knowledges  that  the  country  does  not  have  risk-
sensitive policies for land zoning and the regulation 
of private real estate development (Government of 
Bangladesh, 2012). Risks may also be generated by 
inaction and non-decisions, which weaken account-
ability  and  responsibility.  In  Turkey,  construction 
takes  place  that  ignores  the  country’s  relatively 
strong building codes (Yönder and Turkoglu, 2010; 
Balamir, 2012; Sengezer and Koç, 2005). 

As Box 8.3 highlights, investors and developers are 
often  able  to  influence  and  manipulate  land-use 
zoning plans designed to regulate disaster risk. 

As Box 8.4 illustrates, similar challenges are faced 
in high-income countries. 

In the United Kingdom, where flood risk manage-
ment has been debated for decades, a policy that 
requires local planning authorities to identify risks 
posed by floods to new development has existed 
since 2006. However, a sequential approach in the 
planning process allows planning permission to be 
granted for development on floodplains if the de-
veloper can show that no alternative sites exist.

129

Box 8.5  Flood damage in the United Kingdom—what went wrong?

In the United Kingdom, 2012 was a particularly wet year, with second highest rainfall recorded in about 100 
years. In November 2012, in some locations, rainfalls of a return period above 100 years were recorded (NERC 
(CEH), 2012).  Flooding affected many parts of the country, causing losses estimated at about £1 billion, with 
more than 1,000 homes damaged or destroyed. Insured losses represented about half of the total cost (AON 
Benfield, 2012c). This was the worst damage since the 2007 floods, which in turn had triggered reforms in the 
United Kingdom’s management of flood risk.vi   

So what went wrong again in 2012?  Existing regulation and guidance on required risk assessments (Govern-
ment of the United Kingdom, 2006) and the new National Planning Policy Framework (Government of the Unit-
ed Kingdom, 2012) might not have provided the Environment Agency with enough authority to stop develop-
ment  (Barclay,  2012).    The  rate  of  construction  in  the  floodplain  has  continued  to  increase  (Committee  on 
Climate Change, 2012), which increases exposure and risk (Bosher, 2012; Barclay, 2012). 

But this is not the only issue. From one perspective, regulation would appear to be successful.  Since 1989, 7 
percent to 11 percent of new housing in the United Kingdom has been built in areas with “high flood risk” (Bosh-
er, 2012).  Between April 2008 and March 2011, the Environment Agency reported that the rate of planning per-
mits granted against their advice was reduced from an annual rate of 4.6 percent to 0.9 percent.

However, existing flood risk ‘zoning’ only accounts for river and coastal flooding.  Therefore development can 
still take place in areas subject to surface water and flash flooding.  Insufficient drainage and culverts blocked 
owing to lack of maintenance were important contributors to the 2012 flooding. Substantial cuts in funding to 
the Environment Agency and to local flood risk management initiatives (Bennett, 2012) might have contributed 
further.

Also, areas protected by flood defences are not defined as ‘high risk’.  Therefore, many new developments were 
built on areas protected by flood defences (thus, strictly speaking, not at risk of flooding). To maintain the same 
standard of protection for such developments, the government needs to heavily invest in the maintenance of 
such structures. Thus, increasing development in areas protected by flood defences, or continuing to build new 
defences, may be unsustainable in the long term (Committee on Climate Change, 2012). 

However, public acceptance of curbing new developments in floodplains or reducing the standard of protection 
from floods is limited. The Humber Estuary is a case in point. Being particularly vulnerable to sea level rise, the 
maintenance of the current standard of protection provided by flood defences is not viable in the whole estu-
ary. After extensive consultation with residents and local business, there was little support for proposals to 
‘make space for the water’ (Government of the United Kingdom, 2008).

Households and businesses clearly need to be more aware of risks when deciding where to buy a house or es-
tablish a business. In the United Kingdom, information on flood risks is freely available. Despite this, a recent 
survey showed that in London, less than one-third of small and medium-sized businesses at risk are adequately 
equipped against floods.vii  Currently, the government has an agreement with insurers that oblige them to pro-
vide policies to those who live in areas with a yearly probability of 1 in 75 (or lower) of being flooded (Bennett, 
2012a). Although this does not protect all households (e.g. those at higher risk of flooding and those who cannot 
afford insurance), it provides a certain degree of security. This agreement is, however, expiring in 2013. 

(Source: UNISDR)
  
In  practice,  developers  have  received  planning 
permits to build on flood-prone areas, especially in 
densely  populated  areas  such  as  Greater  London 
(Bosher,  2012).  As  Box  8.5  highlights,  building  in 
flood-prone areas has had a direct and decisive in-
fluence on economic losses in the United Kingdom 
in recent years.

130

There is little evidence, therefore, to show that di-
saster risk in urban development can be managed 
by public regulation alone, even in countries with 
strong  institutions  and  a  high  level  of  capacities.  
The attractive short-term returns on capital to be 
gained from speculative real estate development, 
the  potential  collusion  between  different  stake-

Part II - Chapter 8Figure 8.3  Private participation in infrastructure projects in low and middle-income countries, 1985–2011viii

(Source: UNIDR based on World Bank and PPIAF, PPI project databaseix)

holders  in  the  urban  development  process  and 
loop-holes in regulation itself, all conspire against 
an effective management of disaster risks. 

8.5 Infrastructure development 

and risk transfer

Infrastructure  investments  at  the  scale  re-
quired to meet sustainable economic and devel-
opmental goals will increasingly rely on private 
sector  engagement,  particularly  in  low-income 
countries. 

Box 8.6  Delhi metro exposed to multiple risks

The  OECD  estimates  that  by  2030,  annual  invest-
ment requirements for telecommunications, road, 
rail, electricity (transmission and distribution) and 
water are likely to total about US$53 trillion, an av-
erage  of  2.5  percent  of  world  GDP  (OECD,  2007). 
When  electricity  generation  and  other  energy-re-
lated  infrastructure  investments  in  oil,  gas  and 
coal  are  added,  the  total  would  be  more  than 
US$70 trillion or 3.5 percent of world GDP (Ibid.). 

The need for such investment is particularly critical 
in  low-income  countries.    For  example,  the  World 
Bank  estimates  that  African  countries  need  to 

A metro line to connect Delhi, India, with a new suburb is one of the city’s biggest recent infrastructure projects.   
This privately financed project, however, may contribute to increasing earthquake and flood risk in the city.  

In terms of direct risks, more than 50 stations on this new line are located in areas of high earthquake hazard, 
exposing the line to earthquakes of up to a magnitude of 8 on the Richter scale (see Figure 8.4).  One of the sta-
tions was also built in a high flood hazard area.  In both cases, hazard information was available on municipal 
zoning maps.  As a result, the metro line is exposed to high flood and earthquake risk even for short return peri-
ods of 1–10 years (IIHS, 2012).

131

Figure 8.4  Delhi metro lines overlaid on the seismic micro-zoning map, and location of Shastri Park metro station in flood-
plains of the Yamuna riverbed

(Source: IIHS, 2012)

This direct risk to metro stations and rail line structures has been addressed and reduced owing to application 
of risk-sensitive building codes.  However, this is not necessarily the case for new real estate developments sur-
rounding the stations.  For example, following construction of the station in the floodplains, further commer-
cial expansion is planned in the area without consideration of risk (IIHS, 2012).  

Decision-making for such large-scale infrastructure projects is a complex process in any country or city.   But in 
planning and implementing such projects, disaster risks are constructed and then transferred to the ultimate 
users of the infrastructure, irrespective of zoning and risk maps (IIHS, 2012). Despite awareness of earthquake 
and flood risk, much of the expansion of Delhi (Figure 8.5) has taken place in highly hazard-prone areas.

Figure 8.5  Change in urban built-up area and land cover in Delhi, 1992–2011

(Source: IIHS, 2012)

(Source: IIHS, 2012)

132

Part II - Chapter 8spend about 9 percent of their GDP on new as well 
as on the operation, maintenance and expansion of 
existing infrastructure to reach the Millennium De-
velopment Goals by 2015 (World Bank, 2008a). How-
ever,  this  has  not  translated  into  actual  spending, 
owing to budget constraints in many countries. Ac-
tual expenditure on infrastructure in Africa has been 
only half of the required 9 percent over the last 40 
years (Ibid.). 

Private  participation  in  the  development  of  infra-
structure, including private financing, is thus sought 
to  bridge  the  gap  between    needs  and  available 
public resources. The World Bank’s database on pri-
vate engagement in infrastructure projectsx shows 
that despite fluctuations, this has been increasing in 
low-income  and  middle-countries  since  the  mid-
1980s (Figure 8.3). 

Investment  in  major  infrastructure  projects  struc-
tures how cities and their regions grow.  If disaster 
risk  considerations  are  not  factored  into  their  de-
sign, collapsed and damaged critical infrastructure 
can be a serious cause of business interruption and 
a source of indirect disaster loss for city regions.  But 
even when the infrastructure itself is disaster proof, 
it can lead to other investments in hazard-prone ar-
eas that increase disaster risk.   Infrastructure proj-
ects, therefore, have a major potential to generate 
shared risks and costs. 

Major infrastructure projects are increasingly devel-
oped as public-private partnerships (PPPs), in which 
a  varying  proportion  of  the  investment  and  risk  is 
carried  by  the  public  sector  and  by  private  inves-
tors.  Depending on how these PPPs are structured, 
who owns these risks may not be clearand part of 

Box 8.7  Impact of dike rupture in Colombia, the Netherlands and Japan

Over the last 40 years, construction of dikes has been the principal strategy for flood hazard mitigation in the 
floodplains of Colombia, particularly on the Magdalena and Cauca Rivers that cross the country from south to 
north.  Between 1970 and 1990, 715 km of dikes were constructed along the river and 626 km in lateral canals in 
the Cauca river basin alone (OSSO, 2012c).  Although dikes provide flood protection, they explicitly or implicitly 
encourage development and increased exposure on areas where flood hazard has been reduced.  

During the 2010/2011 ENSO episode in Colombia, dykes failed in at least 42 percent of the country’s depart-
ments, and were responsible for a significant proportion of total flood losses (OSSO, 2012c). During and follow-
ing the disaster, a significant proportion of resources invested in rehabilitation and reconstruction was used to 
rehabilitate or reinforce dykes (US$884 million by Colombia Humanitaria and US$21 million by the Adaptation 
Fund), potentially reproducing or aggravating the risks that existed before the disasters (Ibid.).   

In contrast, the Netherlands, with two-thirds of its population and 60 percent of its land below sea level, had 
been investing in dyke construction for decades, turning floodplains into poldersxi  for agricultural and urban 
development (Orie and Stahel, 2012).  A series of floods in the 1990s, associated with dyke failures, led to a new 
approach that effectively “depolderises” the country (Ibid.).  By deepening riverbeds and moving dykes away 
from the river, rivers can expand into floodplains at almost 40 locations along the major rivers.xii  Although costs 
for this strategic shift are an estimated €2.2 billion, the social and environmental benefits are expected to be 
even higher (Orie and Stahel, 2012). 

In Japan, the 2011 tsunami triggered a review of design concepts for levees against possible tsunami impact. 
The main innovation was a classification of disaster risks into two categories: extensive and intensive risk. In 
the revised designs, levees are required to withstand extensive risks with a return period of 10 to about 100 
years (Government of Japan, 2012b). In other words, levees have to be built to protect populations from high-
frequency risk. For intensive risks, which are likely to happen with a return period of more than 100 years, build-
ing levees would usually neither be a guarantee for protection nor do they show positive cost-benefit ratios. 
Therefore, in addition to infrastructures, the government focuses on resident evacuation and other prepared-
ness measures for such events.

(Source: UNISDR)

133

the risk may be transferred from the private to the 
public sector.

In India, the country’s Eleventh Five Year Plan allo-
cated more than US$500 billion for infrastructure 
investment up to 2012, of which a substantial por-
tion was earmarked for the engineering and con-
struction  sectors  (PwC,  2008).    Increasingly,  in  In-
dia,  PPPs  are  emerging  where  private  investment 
finances publicly managed construction. 

As Box 8.6 shows, these partnerships do not nec-
essarily lead to improved disaster risk assessment 
and  management,  and  may  underplay  disaster 
risks or lead to their transfer as shared costs to the 
public sector or to city residents.  

The construction of infrastructure to control floods, 
such as dykes, may also generate shared risks and 
costs,  as  it  facilitates  real  estate  development  in 
flood-prone areas that appear to be protected.  The 
consequences  of  dyke  failure  may  be  worse  than 
the  risks  that  were  supposed  to  be  addressed  by 
the infrastructure in the first place (Box 8.7).

Unless the ownership of the risks that can be gener-
ated by large infrastructure projects is made explicit 
and  the  responsibilities  of  both  private  and  public 
partners clarified, there may be insufficient incentive 
for the private partners to invest in risk reduction.  At 
the same time, the public partners are often unaware 
of how much new risk they are really taking on.

8.6 Towards a new incentive structure: 

disaster risk reduction as a value     
                proposition in urban development

 

Through partnerships, businesses are able to re-
duce their own losses as well as support the pub-
lic sector to more effectively manage and reduce 
disaster  risks.  Resilient  infrastructure  systems 
underpin  resilient  business  and  resilient  busi-
ness underpins prosperous cities and countries.

On  6  July  2011,  businessman  Donald  Trump  and 
Panama’s President Ricardo Martinelli participated 
in the inauguration ceremony of Trump Ocean Club, 
Panama, a luxury international hotel and casino.xiii   

Box 8.8  Addressing flood risk in Scotland – joint private and public action

Compared with other parts of the United Kingdom, Scotland has been comparatively successful in reducing its 
exposure to flood hazard. Since 1995, new construction in floodplains has been reduced to almost zero as a re-
sult of a national planning policy that prohibited the building of residential property in areas of high flood risk. 

The Scottish success was the result of working closely with private real estate developers and insurers. Plan-
ners in local governments were legally obliged to set up Flood Liaison and Advice Groups (FLAG) (Crichton, 
2012) as non-statutory advisory groups of public and private sector representatives with insurers playing a key 
role in their establishment. Between 2000 and 2003, the Association of British Insurers (ABI) was instrumental 
in helping to establish 19 FLAGs with 28 Scottish local authorities covering more than 90 percent of the Scottish 
population.  These  groups  also  brought  together  property  developers,  landowners,  water  departments  and 
suppliers, emergency planners, hydrology consultants, representatives from the national rail network, the po-
lice, fire and rescue services and many more. With local government’s land use planners, development control 
officers and neighbouring authorities, all issues related to water management were addressed on a catchment-
wide basis, making available critical hydrological and flood risk information to all stakeholders. Many groups 
convened information sharing events and involved community groups.

The success of this initiative is undisputed.  Only one local authority, Moray, did not engage and continued con-
struction in floodplains.  Consequently, it now has serious problems with flooding and access to flood insur-
ance. In other parts of the United Kingdom (see Box 8.5 above), local communities are not directly involved in 
flood planning and there is no mechanism in place for planners to consult with developers, insurers and other 
key stakeholders across the catchment area.

(Source: Johnson et al., 2012)

134

Part II - Chapter 8Box 8.9  Creating value in the urban construction and development sector

Urban developers who sell properties immediately after development will have lower stakes in an integrated 
approach to disaster risk management. However, developers who own, lease and/or manage buildings even af-
ter construction will have a vested interest in protecting profits from losses, including those associated with 
disasters. Mori Building, a Japanese private developer, is such a company, and it has recognized the need to 
explicitly deal with earthquake risk in the construction and maintenance of its developments. It has begun to 
promote an urban development concept that seeks to build “a city to escape into rather than a city from which 
people run away”. Its biggest development includes, for example, a local power plant constructed under con-
sideration  of  both  earthquake  risk  and  CO2  reduction  goals.  During  the  aftermath  of  the  Great  East  Japan 
Earthquake, the plant had the capacity to produce and sell surplus electricity to outside areas that experienced 
power outages. The company has housed and trained employees with specific responsibilities for disaster man-
agement and undertakes regular emergency drills.

Mori Building has not made this investment without calculating the costs and benefits. A survey of office re-
quirements of more than 1,000 companies in Tokyo, conducted in April 2011 just after the major disaster, re-
vealed that the most important criteria for selection was earthquake resilience (92 percent), followed by proven 
disaster management by the company managing the building (55 percent), and back-up of electricity to avoid 
power outages (51 percent). Although the result of this survey was clearly biased by the immediate disaster ex-
perienced by companies, the success of Mori’s approach to take concerns seriously speaks for itself: its large 
commercial buildings with office space are fully occupied.

(Source: Mori Building (2012))

The Trump Ocean Club represented a new high-wa-
ter mark in Panama’s burgeoning real estate sector.  

Unfortunately,  the 
inauguration  represented  a 
high-water mark in more ways than one. The cere-
mony will now mainly be remembered for the se-
vere flooding in the Punta Pacifica area where the 
Club was built and for televised images of the VIPs 
struggling through the flood-waters.xiv While it had 
rained  heavily,  the  floods  were  caused  by  inade-
quate  drainage  infrastructure  that  had  not  kept 
pace  with  the  city’s  growth  and  could  no  longer 
cope with peak run-off. The capacity of the drain-
age system had also been reduced due to the ac-
cumulation of cement from real estate projects in 
the drains themselves.xv  

As this case highlights, investments in urban devel-
opment  may  generate  shared  risks  and  costs  for 
the city as a whole, such as increased flood hazard.  
But these shared risks can also boomerang back to 
affect businesses and investors, including through 
damaged reputations.  As businesses are starting 
to  understand  how  these  shared  risks  and  costs 
can affect them, a new incentive structure for risk-

sensitive urban development is beginning to emerge. 

There is growing evidence of the emergence of ex-
panded  risk  governance  frameworks  in  cities.    Ur-
ban  governments  that  seek  to  attract  investment 
are entering into innovative partnerships with busi-
nesses (Box 8.8) as well as with low-income commu-
nities to address climate change, improve security 
and  effectively  manage  risk  (Johnson  et  al.,  2012).   
And  new  approaches  to  urban  development  that 
highlight  environmental  and  social  sustainability 
are becoming a key value proposition for the con-
struction and real estate sector. Reducing the risks 
associated with flooding and other hazards fits eas-
ily into this new narrative of urban development.

In urban environments, governments can seek to in-
clude businesses and investors in planning and de-
cision-making instead of seeking to control private 
investment through regulation only (Johnson et al., 
2012). The construction sector is an example where 
there  are  particularly  important  pre-project  and 
pre-construction stages where disaster risk should 
be  considered  and  where  both  private  and  public 
stakeholders can play a critical role (IIHS, 2012). Fur-

135

ther, incentives for private urban developers to in-
vest in and market their disaster risk management 
efforts  already  exist  and  need  to  be  articulated 
more clearly to promote replication (see Box 8.9).
However, risk considerations are often included too 

late in the process when they have limited scope to 
influence  project  design  and  completion.  Stake-
holders have varying levels of incentives for includ-
ing disaster risk reduction measures in the planning 
process.  Often  whether  or  not  they  engage  in  the 

Figure 8.6  Overview of critical actors, their stake and influence, engaged in different project stages in construction

(Source: IIHS and UCL, based on IIHS, 2012 and Johnson et al., 2012)

Box 8.10  Risk assessments and scenario planning for cities

In 2007, Chicago undertook an assessment of its exposure and vulnerability to climate change.  Applying state-
of-the-art climate models and risk information, the assessment focused on key infrastructure and developed a 
number of scenarios to evaluate the incremental costs of climate change (Oliver Wyman, 2008). Directly involved 
in the assessment were 18 different city departments that provided the input required for analysis of probable 
economic impact of climate change on the city’s capital investments, internal operations and budgets (Ibid.). 

The assessment highlighted rising temperatures and higher levels of rainfall as the main future drivers of dra-
matically increasing energy and maintenance costs.  Annual energy costs in the high emissions scenario were 
estimated at nearly 14 times the costs in the low scenario, meaning that efficiency gains in energy consumption 
would yield the highest returns (Oliver Wyman, 2008).

In July 2005, Mumbai experienced heavy rainfall of half of its annual average within 24 hours, which resulted in 
flooding of more than 60 percent of the city with poor and vulnerable populations suffered significant impact 
with an estimated total loss between US$240 million and US$250 million (Hallegatte et al., 2010). Mumbai’s di-
saster risk management plan of early 2005 had not anticipated the massive direct losses as well as indirect im-
pacts after the floods in the form of epidemics from contaminated water and food. After the event, the munici-
pal government updated its plan to include post-event impacts such as the spread of communicable diseases.  
Significant investments were made in flood control, both structural and non-structural (United Nations, 2010).

However, Mumbai still faces the serious challenge of flood risk owing to a high prevalence of informal and un-
safe settlements, high density of construction on the shoreline and continuing land reclamation efforts that go 
hand-in-hand with the degradation of its coastline, including loss of mangroves and wetlands around the city.xvi  

(Source: UNISDR)

136

Part II - Chapter 8process is a function of stake and influence, which 
may  vary  for  each  stakeholder  during  different 
phases of a project. Incentives for including safety 
and  disaster  risk  reduction  measures  in  the  plan-
ning processes of the project may be increased by 
raising their stakes; for example, by improving pub-
lic  participation  processes,  the  capacities  of  the 
implementation  agencies  and  regulatory  bodies, 
and enforcing Professional Acts and making profes-
sionals more liable for their practice (Figure 8.6).

As Box 8.10 shows, the first step towards develop-
ing  a  joint  business  case  for  urban  planners  and 
business  investment  is  often  a  risk  assessment 
that is either commissioned by the city council or 
the Mayor’s office or by the business itself. 

Similarly, regulation that ensures the carry-over of 
insurance  policies  from  developers  to  property 
owners  could  contribute  to  the  practice  that  risk 
assessments of investments not only focus on the 
construction phase of the project but take into ac-
count the lifespan of the building (IIHS, 2012).

Businesses in the real estate sector can also play a 

Figure 8.7  Green roofs on the building of Quito’s water utility

key role in raising awareness of disaster risks. For 
example, in the United States of America, the Fed-
eral  Alliance  for  Safe  Homes  (FLASH)  has  built  a 
unique  coalition  of  more  than  100  organizations 
ranging from local governments to private sector 
enterprises, to the insurance industry and the fed-
eral government, all committed to reducing dam-
age from natural hazards (Government of the Unit-
ed  States  of  America,  2012).  It  has  helped  to 
educate  Americans  on  how  they  can  lessen  the 
impacts  of  hurricanes,  floods,  fires,  earthquakes, 
and other natural hazards on their homes. 

Green building is increasingly being mainstreamed 
as a key component of this value proposition and 
in cities’ efforts to develop more socially and envi-
ronmentally  sustainable  living  spaces  (Carpenter, 
2013).  Green buildings attract higher rents, higher 
asset  values  and  more  stable  tenancies  (Brug-
mann,  2012).  Real  estate  developers  increasingly 
market  aspects  such  as  energy-efficiency,  social 
space (Carpenter, 2013) and low environmental im-
pacts as factors of competitiveness. And it is likely 
that disaster risk management will likewise become 

(Source: Empresa Pública Metropolitana de Agua Potable y Saneamiento de Quitoxvii)

137

part of this value proposition.  

For example, in Ecuador, Quito’s water utility (Em-
presa Pública Metropolitana de Agua Potable y Sa-
neamiento  de  Quito)  is  encouraging  sustainable 

risk  reduction  through  water  conservation,  envi-
ronmental education and climate change adapta-
tion.  This  includes  the  promotion  of  sustainable 
urban  drainage  systems,  including  using  green 
roofs that reduce the risk of urban flooding by ab-

Box 8.11  Social and green cities in low-income countries

In the city of Thimpu, Bhutan, the local government has begun to develop an urban planning process that takes 
account of the interrelationship between environmental sustainability, effective disaster risk management and 
human well-being. The Thimpu Structure Plan is based on “Principles of Intelligent Urbanism,”xviii  acknowledg-
ing the needs of different occupations and lifestyles in the spatial organisation of the city. The plan is organized 
around 22 themes, including the achievement of a “balance with nature and tradition, conviviality and creating 
the ‘city of our dreams’” (Figure 8.8).

Fig 8.8 The Thimpu Structure Plan lays out the existing river front and planned enhanced development of urban green 
spaces and social meeting points

                  (Source: Thimpu Structure Planxix)

To achieve balanced industrial and residential development, environmental management and social and indi-
vidual well-being, the municipality has employed a development suitability matrix that lays out the degrees of 
inter-compatibility of different types of land use.xx  The matrix includes considerations of rainfall levels and 
temperature and of climate extremes, to encourage low-risk land-use planning. It supports development of 
multiple land uses to enhance livelihood diversification and sustainable development to strengthen the city’s 
economic resilience. However, there has been criticism in the local press regarding the slow implementation of 
the plan and its increasingly outdated features, as its original timeframe ended six years ago. 

In addition, Thimpu is still challenged with limited capacity in disaster risk management, including early warn-
ing and emergency funding, watershed management and access to risk information. But the municipal govern-
ment’s attention not only to physical safety in planning economic development within the city but also to life-
styles and a social-environmental balance in the city landscape is an approach that may well prove to build 
mid- to long-term resilience.

(Sources: Government of Bhutan, 2004; IIED, 2012a)

138

Part II - Chapter 8sorbing rainfall water and reducing the inflow into 
urban  drainage  systems  (Figure  8.7).    Green  roofs 
are  symptomatic  of  the  new  value  proposition  in 
urban development. They can reduce energy costs, 
improve air quality, reduce flood risks, mitigate ur-
ban heat islands and contribute aesthetic and en-
vironmental values to urban areas.

These  innovations  are  happening  as  part  of  a  re-
newed recognition of the role of urban design and 
planning to produce urban spaces that are not only 
attractive  and  functional  but  also  social,  sustain-
able  and  safe  (Soja,  1996;  Sassen,  2010).  They  are 
taking place not only in large global cities such as 
New York or Tokyo or in high-income countries, but 
also in low-income countries, such as in Bhutan, for 
example (Box 8.11). 

In  the  Republic  of  Korea,  the  national  government 
has  developed  tax  policies  and  other  financial  in-
centives  to  reduce  private  investors’  uncertainty 
and stimulate public-private partnerships (PPPs) for 
urban green growth (OECD, 2012). These were de-

veloped in its First Five-Year Action Plan for Green 
Growth  of  2009  and  include  construction  subsi-
dies,  compensation  for  base  cost  and  infrastruc-
ture credit guarantees (Ibid.).

Such  examples  show  that  business  will  invest  in 
green  urban  infrastructure  when  the  right  incen-
tives,  mainly  associated  with  cost  recovery  and 
competitive pricing, are provided (Johannessen et 
al., 2013). Certification initiatives and agreed stan-
dards  can  promote  this  further;  for  example,  in 
Sweden,  collaboration  between  various  govern-
ment  departments,  municipalities,  building  and 
energy  companies,  property  owners,  consultants 
and architects is working to develop a sustainabili-
ty  certification  for  city  areas  (Karlsson,  2012).  Al-
though this initiative does not yet explicitly consid-
er  disaster  risk,  such  tools  can  be  adapted  to 
include  assessments  of  drainage  and  run-off  ca-
pacity, flood risk and heat absorption, to name a 
few (Johannessen et al., 2013).

A  good  example  of  a  certification  programme  is 

Box 8.12  PPPs in Canterbury, New Zealand

Infrastructure provides services, utilities and linkages, which allow cities to function and indeed present life-
lines for business and community. Infrastructure networks are often large, complex and interdependent sys-
tems, meaning that failure in one network can compromise the entire system. 

A good example of how PPPs can reduce risks to infrastructure networks was highlighted in the 4 September 
2010 and 22 February 2011 earthquakes near Christchurch, New Zealand, which caused damage of US$4 billion 
and US$12 billion, respectively. The Christchurch Engineering Lifelines Study (Christchurch Engineering Life-
lines Group 1997) undertaken in the 1990s, addressed a range of hazards including earthquakes, snow and 
wind-storms, flooding and tsunamis.  A key feature of the project was the wide involvement of engineers and 
managers from utility organisations, including local authorities, and private and public companies.  After the 
study, Christchurch’s utility companies built disaster risk management into their daily business practices. Inter-
organisational collaboration was facilitated and formalized through the Canterbury Lifeline Utilities Group. 

These efforts paid off when the earthquakes struck.  Thanks to investments in reinforcement before the earth-
quakes, the Port of Littleton was able to resume operations within days—despite heavy damages to the port 
and  major  losses  owing  to  demolished  commercial  buildings.  Telecommunications  buildings  that  had  also 
been reinforced were able to continue to operate. Most bridges had been retrofitted by Christchurch City Coun-
cil and the New Zealand Transport Agency and successfully survived the quakes; and US$6 million of invest-
ment  in  seismic  strengthening  work  by  Orion,  the  local  electricity  distribution  company,  saved  more  than 
US$65 million in direct losses.  

In contrast, residential losses were high owing to Christchurch’s history of land-use decisions, which allowed 
development on land susceptible to liquefaction, lateral-spreading and subsidence in the event of earthquakes.

(Source: Johnston, 2012)

139

the U.S. Green Building Council’s LEED Neighbour-
hood Development rating system, which incorpo-
rates disaster risk reduction concepts, particularly 
with regard to flood protection.xxi If these and oth-
er similar certification programmes can be expand-
ed and fully include risk neutrality within their crite-
ria,  they  can  become  another  powerful  incentive 
for businesses to invest in disaster risk reduction. 

At the same time, the construction of resilient in-
frastructure can also be a key value contribution. 
As  Box  8.12  shows,  PPPS  can  be  used  to  reduce 
risks and shared costs.  Resilient infrastructure sys-
tems underpin resilient business and resilient busi-
ness underpins prosperous cities and countries.

Notes

 http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-latin-america-14152439. 

heid.nl/ministeries/ienm#ref-verkeerenwaterstaat and http://www.
ruimtevoorderivier.nl/meta-navigatie/english/.
xiii  http://www.ticotimes.net/Current-Edition/News-Briefs/Don-
ald-Trump-inaugurates-Latin-America-s-tallest-building-in-Pana-
ma_Thursday-July-07-2011. 
xiv  http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ivJ7O1fqjhM. 
xv 
xvi  See  Government  of  Maharashtra:  http://www.visionmumbai.
org/images/projects/Document_EC%2039th%20%20meeting%20
minutes_Final_120412120808.pdf 
(accessed  25/2/2013);  http://
www.indianexpress.com/news/post1947-land-reclamation-tri-
pled-in-mumbai-study/960419  (accessed  25/2/2013);  http://india.
blogs.nytimes.com/2012/11/01/what-if-mumbai-gets-hit-by-a-
storm-like-sandy (accessed 25/2/2013).
xvii  Information provided directly to UNISDR. For more information 
on Quito’s water utility, see: www.emaapq.gob.ec. 
xviii http://www.dudh.gov.bt/Thimphustructural/Index.html. 
xix  http://www.dudh.gov.bt/Thimphustructural/Index.html. 
xx  http://www.dudh.gov.bt/Thimphustructural/maps/develop-
ment_matrix.gif.
xxi  http://www.usgbc.org/DisplayPage.aspx?CMSPageID=148. 

UNDESA World Population Prospects, the 2010 revision: http://

e.g. the Flood and Water Management Act, 2010.

i 
The urban population of Asia more than tripled between 1970 
and 2011, from 506 million to 1,895 million, and is projected to in-
crease to 2,703 million by 2030 (UNDESA, 2012).  The urban popu-
lation of Africa almost quintupled between 1970 and 2011, from 87 
million to 414 million and is expected to reach 744 million by 2030.   
Latin  America  and  the  Caribbean  have  a  far  slower  urban  growth 
rate than other regions, but this is only because a very high propor-
tion of its population already lives in urban areas. 
ii 
esa.un.org/unpd/wpp/index.htm. 
iii  Expressed in 2010 prices and exchange rates.
iv  wwww.ansa.it.
v  www.cirf.org.
vi 
vii  www.rics.org/uk/knowledge/news-insight/news/businesses-
in-the-capital-unprepared-for-flood-risk.
viii  The  value  is  expressed  in  2005  US  dollars;  the  GDP  deflator 
is  taken  from  World  Development  Indicators  of  the  World  Bank. 
Countries  are  classified  according  to  GNP  per  capita:  low-income 
countries  =  US$1,025  or  less;  lower  middle-income  countries  = 
US$1,026 to US$4,035; upper middle-income countries = US$ 4,036 
to US$12,475.
ix 
http://ppi.worldbank.org.
x 
The  database  covers  infrastructure  projects  in  energy,  tele-
communications and transport and water sectors of low and mid-
dle-income countries that meet three criteria: a) projects that are 
owned or managed by private companies, b) projects that directly 
or  indirectly  serve  the  public  and  c)  projects  that  reached  financial 
closure after 1983. For the detailed database description please see: 
http://ppi.worldbank.org/resources/ppi_methodology.aspx  (accessed 
28th February 2013).
xi 
floodplains (or shallow waters) with dykes.
xii  For more information on the Dutch “Room for the Rivers Pro-
gramme”  see:  Government  of  Netherlands,  http://www.rijksover-

The Dutch word “polder” refers to dry land created by enclosing 

140

Part II - Chapter 8Chapter 9
Hazardous Leisure

141

Small island states that have been most successful in attracting investment in the tourism sector 
have also experienced the highest losses relative to GDP and damages to uninsured public and pri-
vate infrastructure.

Where the ownership of risk is not well defined, costs may be borne by those that usually benefit 
least. In these settings, tourism can create new risks, but also presents great opportunity for risk 
management.

The role of social demand for resilient investment is currently not a strong lever in the tourism sec-
tor, particularly in the context of demand for beach tourism. Value propositions for small island holi-
day destinations that meet current demand and yet promote resilience need to be articulated.

Globally,  tourism  is  one  of  the  most  dynamic  and 
fastest-growing  business  sectors,  contributing  9 
percent to global GDP (WTO, 2011; WTTC, 2012). In 
2011, the tourism sector was responsible for 4.6 per-
cent  of  total  global  capital  investment.  The  sector 
creates more jobs than the financial services, com-
munications  and  mining  industries  and  for  every 
US$1 spent on tourism and travel, US$3.2 is gener-
ated in GDP (WTTC, 2012).

Figure 9.1  Contribution of tourism to exports of goods and 
services, annual average 2006–2010 (percent)

(Source: UNISDR, based on data from UNCTAD, 2011)

142

In 2012, the tourism industry was expected to grow 
faster than overall predicted global growth (UNW-
TO,  2011).i  Its  contribution  to  global  GDP  in  the 
same year was estimated to be US$2 trillion, gen-
erating  more  than  100  million  jobs  (WTTC,  2012). 
Most of this growth is occurring in China and India, 
where domestic tourism is expected to generate a 
sharp  upturn  in  capital  investment—contributing 
to  an  overall  growth  of  6.7  percent  in  Asia  (Ibid.). 
This chapter, however, will focus on tourism in Small 
Island Developing States (SIDS), and how business 
investment decisions contribute to disaster risks, in 
turn affecting the economy of these countries.

9.1 Comparative advantages but 

high risks 

Small island states in the Caribbean, Indian Ocean 
and Pacific are increasingly popular tourist desti-
nations, many of which are also highly exposed to 
hazards. Attracting investment in tourism devel-
opment  is  one  of  the  few  areas  where  SIDS  are 
competitive.  However,  it  also  poses  risks,  given 
their high economic vulnerability.

Many small island developing states (SIDS) are heavily 
dependent  on  tourism  and  a  number  of  different 
tourism products along the tourism supply chain as 
the key source of investment (Zhang et al., 2009).  Al-
though SIDS may be uncompetitive in other econom-
ic sectors, in tourism, many of them excel (WEF, 2011).  

Part II - Chapter 9Figure 9.2  Economic crisis vulnerabilityiii  of SIDS economies 
(LDCs and non-LDCs) compared with LDCs on average

ism generates economic growth and employment.  
But this reliance on a single economic sector implies 
risks.  As Figure 9.2 shows, all but a handful of SIDS 
(whether they are LDCs or not) have a higher vulner-
ability to shocks and crises than LDCs in general.  

9.2  

Beachfront risk

 

 

Direct and indirect losses from disasters in SIDS 
can affect not only the entire tourism industry 
but national economies as a whole. Tourism in-
vestments  both  exacerbate  and  suffer  signifi-
cant impacts from weather-related disasters in 
these countries.

The  comparative  advantage  of  SIDS  in  attracting 
business investment in the tourism sector is equally 
one of their greatest risks. For example, in the Carib-
bean, typical tourism development is located within 
800 metres from the high water mark (World Bank, 
2000).  In the Commonwealth Caribbean more than 
65 percent of hotel rooms are in coastal areas—in 
Barbados, for example, the percentage exceeded 90 
percent in 2002 (Jackson, 2002).

By their very nature, these investments—particular-
ly in beach tourism—are highly exposed to hazards 
such as tropical cyclones, storm surges and tsuna-
mis. Further, coastal tourism is highly exposed and 
vulnerable to negative impacts from climate change 
(ECLAC,  2011).  This  may  include  infrastructure  ex-
posed to sea level rise, beaches that are subject to 
coastal  erosion,  diving  centres  that  depend  on 
healthy  coral  reefs,  as  well  as  sedimentation  and 
water pollution. 

As  highlighted  in  Chapter  7,  many  SIDS  have  excep-
tionally  high  levels  of  disaster  risk.  Business  invest-
ment in the SIDS tourism sector, therefore, comes with 
high levels of disaster risk, which, given the high de-
pendency of local economies on tourism, becomes a 
shared cost for economies and societies as a whole. 

143

(Source: Adapted from (UNDESA, 2010))

In  many  SIDS,  business  investment  in  the  tourism 
sector  is  driven  by  attractive  tropical  beachfront 
and coastal locations, associated marine leisure op-
portunities as well as land-based activities, such as 
golfing.  Several  SIDS  also  promote  business  and 
conferencing facilities along with attractive beach-
fronts,  targeting  large  national  and  international 
companies  and  organisations.  Because  of  these 
comparative  advantages,  the  tourism  sector  has 
been  a  major  driving  factor  for  economic  growth, 
particularly between 2005 and 2010, enabling coun-
tries such the Maldives and Cape Verde to graduate 
from  their  Least  Developed  Country  (LDC)ii  status 
(UNWTO, 2012). 

In 2007, international tourism receipts accounted for 
51  percent  of  total  value  of  exports  of  SIDS  com-
pared with less than 10 percent in other developing 
countries (UNDESA, 2010). Figure 9.1 highlights the 
contribution made by the tourism sector to exports 
and GDP in 25 SIDS.

Investment in the tourism sector, however, presents 
SIDS with opportunities as well as challenges.  Tour-

Disasters  may  also  cause  interruptions  to  tourist 
sector  supply  chains,  as  flights  are  cancelled  and 
suppliers affected.  Even the warning of an impend-
ing cyclone may cause cancellations and hence in-
direct losses. The structure of these supply chains 
also makes them highly susceptible to interruptions 
that  affect  airports  and  air  traffic  in  the  principal 
markets  for  tourism  services,  such  as  the  United 
States of America. Storms and extreme weather that 
close major airport hubs, even for a few days, can 
lead  to  cancellations  in  tourism  destinations  on 
the other side of the globe (Hall, 2010).  

Business may also be affected for many years after 
a disaster given that it depends on perceptions of 
destination  safety  and  security  and  on  the  confi-
dence tourists place in industry players (Mahon et 
al.,  2012;  Forster  et  al.,  2012;  Méheux  and  Parker, 
2006). After disasters, however, tourism operators 
normally  attempt  to  ensure  a  speedy  recovery  of 
business,  playing  down  underlying  risks,  so  that 
potential tourists see the disaster as a brief busi-
ness  interruption  rather  than  a  manifestation  of 
these  risks.  In  some  cases,  such  as  the  Maldives, 
concerns about negative tourist perceptions have 
led to the withholding of disaster-related informa-
tion by industry stakeholders (Becken et al., 2011). 

Owing  to  lack  of  information  dissemination  on 
risks, the wider impacts of disasters on the sector 
have not necessarily resulted in reduced business 
for tourism operators. For example, in Grenada, by 
December  2005,  just  over  a  year  after  Hurricane 
Ivan, the tourism sector had almost completely re-
covered, with 96 percent of hotel rooms reopened 
(UNDESA, 2010).

Over the last decade, beach tourism destinations 
and island reserves in particular have experienced 
disasters  associated  with  the  following  hazard 
events: Indian Ocean tsunami in 2004, Hurricanes 
Katrina and Wilma in 2005, and the Samoan tsuna-
mi and Fiji floods in 2009.  Data on the amount of 
losses to the tourism sector or percentage of tour-
ism  operations  and  outputs  exposed  to  hazards 
are not readily available.  However, the few nation-
al or regional-level studies published to date all in-
dicate significant impacts (UNEP, 2008). 

In 2004, Hurricane Ivan resulted in estimated direct 
losses  of  US$900  million  in  Grenada—more  than 
twice  the  country’s  GDP.  The  tourism  sector  was 
particularly hard hit.  Of the island’s infrastructure, 
70 percent was damaged, and demand for services 
from the tourism sector declined for several years 
(World  Bank,  2004).  Apart  from  hotel  and  restau-
rant infrastructure, eco-tourism and agro-tourism 
components  suffered  severe  damage  to  their  re-
source base (Ibid.).

Later that year, the Maldives suffered direct losses 
from the Indian Ocean tsunami amounting to total 
estimated damages of US$470 million, or close to 
62 percent of GDP. Of this amount, about US$100 
million  were  losses  in  the  tourism  sector  (World 
Bank  et  al.,  2005).  Of  these  losses,  approximately 
one-half  were  insured.  Tourism  also  suffered  the 
largest indirect losses, together with the fisheries 
sector.  With  a  sharp  drop  in  tourist  arrival  num-
bers, tourism suffered the highest negative macro-
economic impact (Ibid.).

In 2009, another tsunami caused total disaster loss-
es  of  US$124  million  in  Samoa,  the  equivalent  of 
more  than  22  percent  of  GDP  (Government  of  Sa-
moa, 2009). Losses in the tourism industry account-
ed for almost 15 percent of direct and 56 percent of 
indirect losses. With tourism receipts accounting for 
65 percent of all exports (in 2009), Samoa’s efforts to 
recover  from  the  global  financial  crisis  at  the  time 
were further challenged (Ibid.).

144

Part II - Chapter 9Box 9.1  Losing out on post-disaster recovery: micro, small and medium enterprises in Arugam Bay, Sri Lanka

The local economy of Arugam Bay in Sri Lanka, dependent to a large extent on tourism and fishing, was devas-
tated by the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami that wreaked havoc on the coast. The particular impact on micro and 
small and medium enterprises (SMEs) and those that worked in these was quickly recognised; special initiatives 
were designed to help those affected to recover quickly. However, interest to also boost the more formal, com-
mercial tourism sector during reconstruction led to much of the government’s support for the sector going into 
large investments geared towards marketing the country’s beaches as an up-market, boutique tourism desti-
nation. As a result, small entrepreneurs and businesses as well as fishing communities were insufficiently in-
volved in the recovery processes and their livelihood recovery was severely hampered.

(Source: Robinson and Jarvey, 2008)

Box 9.2  A blueprint of investment-driven risk accumulation in the tourism sector – the case of Denarau, Fiji 

The 2009 floods that affected Fiji resulted in high economic costs that were borne almost exclusively by small 
businesses and households. About US$143 million were lost by small businesses and another US$7 million by 
households. In March 2012, more floods led to more devastation and only two months after the floods, the Nadi 
Chamber of Commerce reported that 46 small businesses (one-fifth of all small and medium businesses regis-
tered with the Chamber) had to close down because of damage to buildings or destruction of stock; only a 
handful eventually reopened.

Tourism development in Denarau has resulted in Nadi attracting more investments, people and businesses, 
which meant an increase in exposure of assets. The Pacific Catastrophe Risk and Financing Initiative (PCRAFI) 
surveyed the Nadi area, noting that financial exposure of physical infrastructure in the area could be estimated 
at US$2.3 billion. The physical landscape of the island has changed dramatically over time, creating new risks 
and exacerbating existing exposure (Figure 9.3).

Figure 9.3 Denarau before and after tourism development

(Source: Bernard and Cook, 2012)

145

9.3  

Who pays the costs?

As tourism investment attracts further business 
investments, generates jobs and with it results 
in  the  build-up  of  housing  development  and 
road infrastructure, the ownership of risk is usu-
ally not well defined. As a result, risks from new 

investment become shared costs borne often by 
those who benefit least from the return on this 
investment.

Losses  in  the  tourism  sector  in  SIDS  can  rapidly 
translate into impacts on employment and dispro-
portionally  affect  small  and  medium  enterprises 
(ECLAC, 2003). For example, after the Indian Ocean 

Box 9.3  Tourism investment, coastal erosion and rapidly increasing coastal disaster risk in Southern Viet Nam

Mui Ne is located east of Phan Thiet, the capital of Binh Thuan province in southeast Viet Nam. Increased invest-
ment in tourism infrastructure on Mui Ne’s beachfront, including construction of a large jetty, seems to have 
resulted in coastal erosion of Phan Thiet shores with resulting increased storm surge and flood risk. Obstruc-
tion of shoreline sediment transport by the jetty may be the main reason. The first photograph of Figure 9.4 
shows sandy beaches in front of two hotel developments (depicted here as Hotel West and Hotel East) as well as 
sand accumulation at a jetty west of the hotels towards Phan Thiet.

To retain sand at the hotel beach, Hotel East invested in the construction of a large jetty that was successful in 
protecting erosion and even increasing the beach area in front of the hotel. However, the lack of sediment trans-
portation from east to west, following the construction of the jetty, resulted in loss of beach area for Hotel West 
and coastal erosion further along the coast to Phan Thiet (Figure 9.4, large photograph), leaving those areas 
more vulnerable to storm surges and floods. 

Figure 9.4  Relationship between investment and erosion in coastal southern Viet Nam

(Source of data and figures: Takagi, 2012)

146

Part II - Chapter 9tsunami in 2004, many local economies based on 
tourism and fishing were severely damaged. Yet, in 
several cases, reconstruction and recovery efforts 
focused on large-scale investments that bypassed 
local businesses to accelerate overall tourism rev-
enue (Box 9.1).

SIDS competing to attract investment in the tourism 
sector are, implicitly or explicitly, accepting owner-
ship over part of the disaster risk generated by busi-
ness  investments  in  hotels  and  resorts.  Countries 
that have been most successful in attracting invest-
ment in the tourism sector and have consequently 
increased  their  hazard  exposure  have  also  experi-
enced the highest losses relative to GDP and dam-
ages to uninsured public and private infrastructure 
(Clayton, 2003).

Investments in tourism infrastructure also attract 
associated  investment  (housing  for  employees; 
road,  water  and  electricity  infrastructure;  small 
businesses)  to  hazard-exposed  areas.  Risks  to 
these  assets  are  often  not  borne  by  the  industry 
but  transferred  to  households,  small  entrepre-
neurs or the public sector—as in the aftermath of 
major floods in Fiji in 2009 and 2011 (Box 9.2).

Investments  in  the  tourism  sector  are  often  ac-
companied by associated urban and suburban real 
estate  development  and  land-use  change,  which 
can also lead to shared costs and transfer of risk 
over time and space. For example, although not a 
part of SIDS, the case of Mui Ne, near Phan Thiet in 
Viet Nam, highlights the direct causal relationship 
that  tourism  investment  has  in  one  location  and 
how that can increase disaster risk in another loca-
tion (Box 9.3).

9.4 Incentives and disincentives for 

risk-neutral investment in the  

 

    tourism  sector  

 

 

Incentive structures that address the need for 
risk-sensitive investment in the tourism indus-
try need to be developed significantly.

Despite recurrent disaster losses in SIDS, there is lit-
tle disincentive to continued and increased business 
investment  in  hazard-prone  beachfront  locations.  
Between 2004 and 2007, there were sequential major 
disasters affecting SIDS as well as a rapid growth in 
their tourism sector (WTTC, 2012).  

Because  beach  or  waterfront  locations  represent 
more  profitable  business  investments,  this  drives 
the concentration of investment into highly hazard-
exposed areas.  High profitability and short turnover 
to  recover  capital  investments  may  mean  that  in-
vestors  over  discount  the  risk  posed  by  intensive 
events with long return periods. And for SIDS gov-
ernments, tourism is one of the few sectors where 
they are competitive.  

As  with  other  business  sectors,  it  is  unlikely  that 
tourism  investments  in  hazard-exposed  locations 
reflect irrational behaviour by either businesses or 
governments, but rather a calculated trade-off be-
tween  returns  on  and  risk  to  capital.  The  typical 
tourism developer on Grenada’s main tourism belt 
of  Grand  Anse,  for  example,  will  calculate  the  ex-
pected economic return associated with a hazard-
prone,  seafront  location  and  choose  this  location 
over one that is located inland and away from the 
coast and which would produce lower returns (Ma-
hon, 2007).  Disaster risk is closely related to setback 
lines (the distance of tourism infrastructure from the 
shoreline). In the case of SIDS, appropriate setback 
lines may be unfeasible if the concerned islands are 
too small, as with the Maldives (Mahon et al., 2012).

However,  multiple  layers  of  investment,  decision-
making  and  ownership  structures  in  the  industry 
itself  mean  that  responsibility  and  accountability 

147

for disaster risk is often diffuse. For example, as in 
the case of one large international hotel chain, sep-
arate investors or investment funds own up to 80 
percent  of  its  global  hotel  business  (Honey  and 
Krantz,  2007).    In  such  cases,  the  premises  of  re-
sorts are usually operated by another set of inves-
tors, including local investors (Ibid.).  Thus, the risk 
for global chains, already spread across numerous 
operations across regions, is further reduced and 
instead transferred to local investors (Mahon et al., 
2012).  Even a major disaster in one region would 
affect only a minor percentage of businesses’ total 
global operations.  

From  a  government  perspective,  the  predomi-
nance of the sector in SIDS economies also implies 
high  inter-country  competition  to  attract  invest-
ment. This in turn can potentially weaken the role 
of  government  regulation  to  reduce  disaster  risk, 
including through land-use planning. 

For some small islands that turn down tourism in-
vestment, owing to disaster risk or environmental 
concerns, few other comparative advantages to at-
tract  alternative  investment  in  other  sectors  re-
main.  In contrast, large tourism investors can easi-
ly reorient their investments to other islands. 

As  such,  stringent  regulations  to  reduce  disaster 
risk—for example, establishing non-building zones 
on  coastlines—end  up  curbing  total  tourism  in-
vestment and revenue and are difficult to justify or 
sustain from an economic or political perspective. 

The  tourism  industry,  however,  is  also  a  frequent 
recipient of investments made by international de-
velopment  and  aid 
institutions.  For  example, 
about  US$10  billion  were  provided  in  2005  by  12 
international donor agencies to fund 370 individual 
tourism-related projects (Honey and Krantz, 2007). 
In addition, tourism and related infrastructure in-
vestments from the United States of America and 
Europe  into  the  Caribbean,  in  particular,  is  sub-
stantial (Lewsey et al., 2004). Although more could 
be done to proactively increase the disaster resil-

148

ience of these investments, good examples exist, 
such  as  the  Inter-American  Development  Bank’s 
Tourism Sustainability Scorecard.iv 

In addition, much of the produced capital in the 
sector was built in the 1960s and 1970s—a time of 
relatively weaker planning and regulation and low 
environmental  and  risk  awareness.  During  this 
period,  many  hotels  were  developed  extremely 
close to the high water mark (Honey and Krantz, 
2012;  Mahon,  2007;  Mahon  et  al.,  2012).  Many 
coastal  tourism  belts  throughout  the  Caribbean 
have developed seaward of the coastal road ow-
ing to little recognition of the impact that future 
sea level rise many have on properties (Mahon et 
al., 2012).

The imperative to attract investment in the tourism 
sector  is  not  generally  matched  by  corresponding 
efforts  to  manage  and  reduce  resulting  disaster 
risks (Mycoo, 2006). The lack of coordination among 
the  different  departments  concerned  with  attract-
ing tourism investment, on the one hand, and with 
managing  disaster  risk,  on  the  other  hand,  further 
leads  to  serious  policy  distortions  and  conflicting 
policy objectives and instruments.  

The availability and pricing of insurance has yet to 
act  as  a  disincentive  to  investment  in  hazard-ex-
posed  locations.  Tourism  investment  represents  a 
growing source of exposure for the insurance indus-
try.  Yet, there are only a limited number of assess-
ments available of potential insured losses and the 
associated  implications  for  insurance  premiums 
and insurability in high-risk regions (UNWTO, 2012). 

Although  increasing  losses  could  make  insurance 
unaffordable, or unavailable, in the future—partic-
ularly for smaller tourism businesses—there is little 
evidence that the tourism sector has begun to sys-
tematically  integrate  disaster  risk  considerations 
into  investment  and  operational  plans  (UNWTO, 
2012).  

Good  examples  do  exist,  however,  as  with  Fiji, 

Part II - Chapter 9where the banking and insurance sectors work to-
gether  to  protect  their  investment  in  tourism  as-
sets (Mahon et al., 2012). A new alliance between 
the Insurance Council of Fiji and the Fiji Institute of 
Engineers  has  resulted  in  a  certification  pro-
gramme overseen by a vetted panel of engineers. 
To acquire insurance and access bank loans, build-
ers  are  required  to  go  through  this  certification 
programme (Ibid.). 

9.5 The double-edged sword of 

social demand  

Client demand in the tourism sector continuous-
ly  undermines  efforts  to  create  incentives  for 
more risk-sensitive investment. New and unique 
selling points for holiday destinations that meet 
the current demand and yet promote resilience 
should be identified.

Up to 2,700 tourists may have died in coastal resorts 
in  Thailand  in  the  December  2004  tsunami  (Rosa, 
2012). However, this mass mortality did not diminish 
the enthusiasm of tourists for tsunami-prone coast-
al areas, in Thailand or elsewhere. 

Social  demand,  expressed  through  market  de-
mand, plays an important role when changing in-
vestment behaviour in other industries. In the tour-
ism  sector,  however,  the  demand  itself  is  driving 
the  risk  with  limited  incentives  to  proactively  re-
duce it. In fact, an asymmetry exists in the valua-
tion of risk by potential tourists: destinations per-
ceived as unsafe benefit from efforts that counter 
this  perception,  whereas  places  that  are  already 
perceived as relatively safe do not increase arrivals 
by  specifically  promoting  this  aspect  (Sirakaya  et 
al., 1997). This means that to a certain extent, al-
though  destinations  may  be  punished  for  being 
perceived  as  unsafe,  there  is  no  reward  for  being 
perceived as safe (Mahon et al., 2012).

Tourists prefer proximity to the beach, which pos-
es  a  challenge  to  coastal  zoning  for  safe  tourism 

developments.  A  survey  of  367  international  visi-
tors to the island of Tobago revealed that about 43 
percent thought that it is moderately to extremely 
important  that  their  hotels  have  disaster  plans;  a 
similar percentage found it moderately to extreme-
ly  important  to  receive  guarantees  of  personal 
safety from disasters; whereas about 40 percent of 
tourists thought it moderately to extremely impor-
tant  to  receive  information  about  disaster  events 
at  their  hotel.    However,  more  than  82  percent 
thought that it is moderately to extremely impor-
tant that their hotel be located close to the beach 
(Mahon et al., 2012).

As a consequence, the tourism sector can actively 
distort communication of risk information. Exam-
ples  from  the  Maldives  and  Thailand  specifically 
show that the tourism industry can be reluctant to 
share risk information out of concern that tourists 
will  perceive  them  as  lacking  destination  safety 
(Becken et al., 2011; Rittichainuwat, 2012; Mahon et 
al., 2012).

At the same time, although tourists may place re-
sponsibility for disaster risk management on resort 
and  facility  managers,  the  industry  assumes  that 
responsibility lies with local and national govern-
ments (Drabek, 2000), who may not have fully as-
sessed the risks. In Florida, for example, only about 
one-half  of  tourism  businesses  surveyed  in  2011 
had  either  written  procedures  for  disaster  events 
or  evacuation  plans  in  place  (Pennington-Gray  et 
al.,  2011).  Even  major  hotel  chains  do  not  visibly 
take  disaster  risk  into  account  (Bouvier  and  Ko-
nold, 2011). 

Yet, there are signs that in transparently managing 
disaster risks in the tourism sector, both business-
es making investments and SIDS striving to attract 
those investments increase their competitiveness. 
Several  countries  that  have  begun  to  spearhead 
this challenge are investing in measures that move 
significantly beyond ‘business as usual’  response 
preparedness to potentially effective risk manage-
ment  and  reduction  (Wright,  2013).  Varied  mea-

149

Notes

i  Data on real growth in the sector were not available for 2012 at 
the time of writing.
ii  To be categorised as a Least Developed Country by the Econom-
ic and Social Council of the United Nations, a country must satisfy 
three criteria: low gross national income (under US$750 based on 
a  three-year  average  estimate);  low  human  resources  (based  on 
indicators of nutrition, health, education); and high economic vul-
nerability (based on a composite Economic Vulnerability Index). For 
more information, see: www.un.org/special-rep/ohrlls/ldc. 
iii  Vulnerability here is defined based on United Nations Environ-
ment  Programme/SOPAC  methodology  (UNDESA,  2010)  and  takes 
into account characteristics such as size, remoteness, dependence 
on external demand and supply, extent of resource base, and expo-
sure to global environmental challenges.
iv  http://www.iadb.org/tourismscorecard.
v  All these measures are described by countries in their National 
HFA progress reviews, 2011–2013 available on http://www.preven-
tionweb.net/english/hyogo/progress/reports/?pid:222. 
vi  http://greenglobe.com/register/green-globe-certification-
standard/. 

sures have included developing new cyclone build-
ing standards (Cook Islands); coastal land-use and 
zoning plans that are considerate of projected tsu-
nami and storm surge levels (Fiji); and setting back 
new  infrastructure  developments  according  to 
storm surge inundation lines for events with a 100 
years return period (Anguilla).v 

Although resort  tourism features predominantly in 
beach  tourism 
in  several  SIDS,  such  as  Fiji 
(Scheyvens  and  Russell,  2012),  eco-tourism  is  now 
the  fastest-growing  segment  within  the  global 
tourism industry. Investments in resilient commu-
nities, environmental protection and local culture 
are already on the agenda of large hotel chains, air-
lines and tour operators (UNWTO, 2011).  

Certification programmes and voluntary rating sys-
tems  are  emerging  as  popular  tools.  They  are  in-
creasingly being accepted by clients and support-
ed by governments that seek to promote the role of 
private  enterprises  in  disaster  risk  management 
(Raisch, 2007; Raisch et al., 2007). One such exam-
ple  is  Green  Globe,  the  global  travel  and  tourism 
industries’ certification programme for sustainable 
tourism.  Green  Globe  Members  save  energy  and 
water  resources,  reduce  operational  costs,  and 
thus  positively  contribute  to  local  communities 
and their environment and meet the high expecta-
tions of green leisure and business travellers.vi   

During interviews with small tour operators in Ton-
ga, the main potential incentive for considering di-
saster  risk  was  a  quality  certification  programme 
that  incorporated  disaster  risk  reduction  (Mahon 
et al., 2012). 

By integrating risk-neutral behaviour into the agen-
da of tourism destinations and operators, the sus-
tainability  of  both  SIDS  and  the  tourism  invest-
ments  that  they  attract  could  increase.  Disaster 
risk reduction would present a triple win situation 
for  investors  in  the  industry,  SIDS  governments 
and communities in tourism destinations.

150

Part II - Chapter 9Chapter 10
No Free Lunch: 
Agribusiness and Risks to 
Food Security

151

The agricultural sector and with it, the agribusiness industry, has particularly high levels of disaster 
risk. Disasters in this sector are not only disasters for businesses, large or small, but also significantly 
affect rural societies, urban households, national and global commodity markets and food security.  

In the localities and regions where these investments are being made, already limited access to fer-
tile land by smallholder farmers may be further reduced.  In a context of increasingly constrained 
global food markets, the spread of agribusiness investments into regions with high but poorly under-
stood agricultural drought and other hazards generates risks of future and more severe food price 
spikes.    This  poses  a  greater  threat  to  the  food  security  of  households  in  low  income  areas  than 
drought itself.

But new practices are emerging that match investment opportunities for private companies with 
infrastructure and service gaps in under-developed markets, particularly in Africa. Partnerships are 
developed that aim to increase the productivity and resilience of smallholder farmers, contribut-
ing to local and national food security.

Agriculture remains a key sector in the global econ-
omy even as industrial and service sector growth 
continues. Moreover, in several regions, agricultur-
al  production  increases  at  a  staggering  rate—for 
example, in Latin America, it increased 50 percent 
from 2000 to 2012, and in sub-Saharan Africa, more 
than 40 percent (FAO, 2012a). In fact, urbanisation 

is giving a boost to the role of the agribusiness in-
dustry in mediating food production, distribution 
and consumption. 

Many  low  and  middle-income  countries  signifi-
cantly depend on food exports. And agribusiness’ 
role in creating income and employment opportu-

Figure 10.1  Contribution of agriculture to global employment (1997–2007)

(Source: ILO, 2012)

152

Part II - Chapter 10nities, particularly in those countries, is undeniable 
(FAO  and  UNIDO,  2009;  ILO,  2012;  World  Bank, 
2008b).  For  example,  in  sub-Saharan  Africa,  al-
though agriculture contributes about one-fifth of 
GDP growth, the sector provides more than one-
half  of  all  employment  and  remains  the  largest 
employer in the region (IMF, 2012). Even globally, 
although  total  employment  in  agriculture  is  de-
clining, it still provides more than one-third of to-
tal employment (Figure 10.1).

risk considerations into its investments will play a 
crucial role in global food security. 

10.1 The agricultural    

value chain

  

The complexity of value chains in the agribusiness 
sector means that interruptions at critical points or 
nodes can ripple through the entire supply chain.

Thus,  disasters  in  the  agricultural  sector  are  not 
only  disasters  for  agribusinesses,  large  or  small, 
but  they  also  affect  rural  societies,  urban  house-
holds,  national  and  global  commodity  markets 
and food security. And yet, only 14 percent of the 
94 countries reporting on progress in implement-
ing  the  HFA  (see  Chapter  14  and  Annex  3)  under-
take disaster risk assessments prior to investment 
in  agriculture.  The  risks  associated  with  agribusi-
ness  investments  become  costs  shared  with  all 
who purchase and consume food and agricultural 
commodities throughout the world. Therefore, de-
cisions taken by agribusiness in factoring disaster 

The  agribusiness  sector  is  organised  around  a 
complex  value  chain—input  suppliers,  producers, 
intermediaries,  processors,  marketers  and  con-
sumers, mediated by a range of facilitating agents 
and macroenvironmental factors (Figure 10.2). 

Along this value chain, size and form of business-
es  vary  immensely;  from  large  fertiliser  compa-
nies  to  individual  farm  households  that  sell  sur-
plus production to local buyers at the farm gate; 
from  local  grain  mill  cooperatives  to  medium-
sized processing plants; from small urban traders 
to multinational food chains. 

Figure 10.2  Framework of a typical agribusiness production chain

(Source: Fava Neves and Alves Pinto, 2012)

153

tween the moment farmers make decisions regard-
ing what crops to produce and when they are able 
to  harvest  and  sell  their  production.  During  this 
gap, in addition to other hazards, farmers face risks 
related  to  price  volatility  that  are  greater  than  in 
most  other  sectors  (Fava  Neves  and  Alves  Pinto, 
2012).  Figure  10.3  shows  how,  in  the  agribusiness 
sector, disaster risk lies at the junction of a broad 
spectrum of hazards, vulnerabilities and exposures. 

10.2  Drivers of production  

and price: local and global  

 

 

                     vulnerabilities

Dynamic global food markets and volatile prices 
are affected by disasters but also act as an impor-
tant driver of food insecurity and disaster risk. 

Despite  inherent  uncertainty  and  risk  in  the  sector, 
constant hikes in global prices for agricultural com-
modities since 2000, including exceptional food price 
spikes  towards  the  end  of  the  last  decade  (Figure 

However, the myriad of agricultural producers and 
those that rely on the sector for their livelihood all 
experience  different  types  of  vulnerabilities  and 
exposures along the value chain.  

At every step of the chain, transport and associated 
infrastructure can be at risk of direct damage from 
hazard events, meaning that interruptions at critical 
points or nodes can ripple through the supply chain. 
Those investing in agricultural production, process-
ing  and  trade,  therefore,  have  a  vested  interest  in 
the uninterrupted functioning of this infrastructure 
and in reducing damage owing to disasters.

Nevertheless, producers are usually in the supply 
chain’s most vulnerable position. In other sectors, 
producers  are  better  able  to  estimate  accurately 
output volume in relation to a desired level of pro-
duction and a given set of inputs.  In farming, how-
ever, production is subject to highly unpredictable 
and uncontrollable conditions, including weather-
related hazards and pest and diseases in crop and 
livestock. Additionally, there is a large time gap be-

Figure 10.3  The multiple dimensions of disaster risk in agriculture

(Source: UNISDR, adapted from Fava Neves and Alves Pinto, 2012)

154

Part II - Chapter 1010.4), have stimulated major new investments in the 
agricultural sector and in global food production.

Growth  estimates  for  the  cereal  market,  for  exam-
ple,  project  that  by  2021,  world  wheat  production 

will  increase  by  12  percent  from  the  base  period 
2009–2011 (reaching 761 million tonnes (Mt)); world 
coarse grain production will increase by 20 percent 
(1,359 Mt); and world rice production by 16 percent 
(542  Mt)  (OECD  and  FAO,  2012)  (see  Figure  10.5). 

Figure 10.4  Rising food prices since 2000 (as observed January 2000–August 2012, not adjusted against inflation) 

(Source: FAO, 2012c)

Figure 10.5  Observed and expected price and production of wheat, coarse grain and rice, 2000–2021  

 (Source: UNISDR based on OECD and FAO, 2012)

155

Countries expected to contribute to this growth in-
clude Kazakhstan, Russian Federation and Ukraine 
for  wheat;  and  Argentina,  Brazil  as  well  as  several 
Sub-Saharan countries for coarse grain. 

Rising global food prices are being driven by several 
factors. These include rising demand for food owing 
to  population  growth,  urbanisation  and  changing 

Figure 10.6  Expected increase in the consumption of crops and 
livestock in developing countriesi (percent change in consump-
tion: 2021 relative to average 2009–2011)

food  consumption  patterns,  particularly  in  rapidly 
growing  low  and  middle-income  countries;  high 
crude oil prices; use of agricultural commodities for 
the production of biofuels; and lower global stocks 
(FAO,  2012c;  OECD  and  FAO,  2012;  FAO  et  al.,  2011; 
World  Bank,  2008b).  For  example,  although  con-
sumption is expected to increase for all products in 
all regions, meat consumption in low-income coun-
tries in particular is expected to increase to double 
that  in  high-income  countries;  the  reason  for  the 
strong demand is increasing per capita income and 
population  growth,  especially  with  large  growing 
middle classes (Figure 10.6). 

The balance of supply and demand, however, does 
not directly translate into prices in the agricultural 
commodity market. National food security policies, 
such as export restrictions and hoarding, can pre-
vent  produced  commodities  from  being  traded  in 
the global market.  Price volatility and international 
price spikes are further catalysed by factors such as 
the concentration of production in a few hazard-ex-
posed  regions,  declining  stocks,  the  role  of  com-
modity  markets  and  weather  and  climate  related 
disasters. Despite this, global market projections for 

(Source: UNISDR based on OECD and FAO, 2012)

Figure 10.7  Global production and prices of ethanol and biodiesel, 2005–2021

(Source: UNISDR based on OECD and FAO. 2012)

156

Part II - Chapter 10Figure 10.8  World production of wheat, coarse grain and rice by country, 2011

(Source: UNISDR based on OECD and FAO, 2012)

Figure 10.9  Growth rates of yields for major cereals in low-income countries

(Source: World Bank, 2008b)

157

crops,  livestock  and  fisheries  products  often  still 
presume “normal weather conditions” as part of  “a 
plausible view on the evolution of the global agri-
cultural markets over the next decade” (OECD and 
FAO,  2012),  and  continue  to  discount  for  disaster 
risk in growth projections.

Increasing global demand for biofuels, triggered by 
higher  oil  prices,  has  significantly  underpinned 
price hikes (Matondi et al., 2012; Fava Neves, 2011; 
Ambali et al. 2011). Currently, about 65 percent of 
EU vegetable oil, 50 percent of Brazilian sugarcane 
and  about  40  percent  of  US  corn  production  is 
used  as  feedstock  for  biofuel  production  (OECD 
and  FAO,  2012).  By  2021,  global  ethanol  and  bio-
diesel production are projected to rise by 373 per-
cent and 779 percent, respectively, compared with 
production levels of 2005 (Figure 10.7), and related 
crop  production  increasing  correspondingly.  Also 
by 2021, 14 percent of global coarse grain produc-
tion,  34  percent  of  global  sugarcane  production 
and 16 percent of global vegetable oil production 
are expected to be used to produce biofuel (Ibid.) 

The production of major food crops is concentrat-
ed  in  selected  countries  that  are  exposed  to  fre-
quent hazards. For example, as Figure 10.8 shows, 
in 2011, the United States of America grew 28 per-
cent  of  the  world’s  coarse  grain  and  8  percent  of 
wheat,  whereas  China  produced  17  percent  of 
wheat and coarse grain and 29 percent of rice. An-
other hazard-prone country—India—also produced 
21 percent of rice, 12 percent of wheat and 4 per-
cent of coarse grain. Rice production especially is 
heavily concentrated in hazard-prone regions, with 
more than 70 percent of production concentrated 
in  five  hazard-prone  Asian  countries  (OECD  and 
FAO, 2012).  

Higher  costs  of  inputs,  such  as  fertilisers  owing  to 
high oil prices, and growing constraints from water 
and  land  degradation,  tend  to  slow  yield  and  pro-
ductivity  growth,  lessening  the  pace  of  production 
and  contributing  to  lower  stocks  (OECD  and  FAO, 
2012).  For  example,  growth  in  yield  rates  for  major 
cereals in low-income countries has been declining 
consistently since the 1980s, as shown in Figure 10.9.

Figure 10.10  Global stock in relation to domestic demand for wheat, coarse grain and rice, 2001–2021 

(Source: UNISDR, based on OECD and FAO, 2012ii)

158

Part II - Chapter 10Box 10.1  The 2012 drought in the United States of America

In 2012, the most severe and extensive agricultural drought in at least 25 years was affecting agriculture in the 
United States of America and parts of Canada and Mexico, with impacts on livestock and crops.  2012 produc-
tion deviated significantly from expectations early in the growing season. In the first weekly rating of the corn 
crop reported by United States Department of Agriculture’s National Agricultural Statistics Service (NASS) on 
20 May, more than 75 percent was rated as good-to-excellent, whereas only 3 percent was in the poor or very 
poor category. By 30 September, only 25 percent of the crop was rated good-to-excellent with 50 percent rated 
poor or very poor.  Sharp declines in soybean crop ratings also occurred, with only 35 percent of the crop rated 
good-to-excellent as of 7 October compared with 65 percent in first 2012 weekly soybean rating on 3 June.

By November 2012, production estimates for corn and soybean were down by 13 percent and 4 percent, respec-
tively, from 2011. This represented the lowest corn production in the United States of America since 2006. The 
drought also affected the transport of harvest within the country. Millions of tonnes of grain travel each month 
on the Mississippi River, but when water levels dropped to a historic low, barge traffic was severely hampered, 
and costs for alternative transport increased. 

The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) calculated that global cereal production in 
2012 was 2 percent lower than in 2011owing to severe droughts in the United States of America and across part 
of Europe and central Asia. Stocks are expected to decline even further as the 2013 outlook for the United States 
of America continues to be unfavourable with severe drought conditions continuing to plague the southern 
Plains (Figure 10.11). This will have direct impacts on global food prices. 

Figure 10.11  Agricultural drought in the United States of America

U.S. droughts

(Source: NOAA)

The US midwest represents a key node for worldwide agricultural production with implications for global com-
modity supply chains.  When analysts’ predictions for a record harvest collapsed, in futures markets, “prices for 
corn, soybeans, soy meal and rapeseed [...] exploded to record highs”.iv  International wheat quotations also 
surged 19 percent amid worsened production prospects in the Russian Federation for 2012 and expectations of 
firm demand for wheat as feed because of limited maize supplies.  Combined with the drought forecasts in the 
US this year, this means that importing countries across Asia, Africa, Europe and Latin America will continue to 
face uncertainty over supply and significant food price spikes, with global knock-on effects, as farmers else-
where switch to wheat for animal feed, thereby driving up prices for another staple.

(Source: NOAA, FAO, USDA and Cornell Universityv ; Clements-Hunt, 2012)

159

Decreased stocks weaken the agribusiness sector’s 
resilience  to  shocks,  including  to  hazards  such  as 
drought.  Low  stocks  and  uncertainty  about  stock 
levels in some parts of the world contributed to the 
2007–2008 price hikes (Figure 10.10). In fact, even ex-
pectations  of  depleted  stock  may  lead  to  price 
hikes (FAO et al., 2011).

High price volatility results partly from speculative 
trading with futures contracts in global commodity 
exchanges—the volumes of which have risen signifi-
cantly over the last years (Fava Neves and Alves Pin-
to, 2012; UNCTAD, 2011). In turn, the volatility of food 
prices may well have encouraged speculative trad-
ing as profits to be gained in price fluctuations usu-
ally attract traders (see also Chapter 12).

The  deregulation  of  futures  markets  in  the  United 
States of America and the European Union has re-
sulted  in  a  further  increase  of  pure  speculation  in 
commodity  futures  (Clements-Hunt,  2012).  Exces-
sive speculation, combined with regulatory failures 
for certain financial transactions in the commodities 
markets, have meant that from 2004 onward, deal-
ers have used US$173 billion of institutional invest-
ment  to  trade  in  main  commodities  (Masters  and 
White, 2011).  To absorb this new money, commodi-
ties futures markets expanded, leading to a dramat-
ic rise of futures prices, including for major agricul-
tural products (Ibid.). In fact, traders in commodity 
and futures markets can benefit directly from agri-
cultural droughts and temperature spikes as these 
create  the  conditions  for  dynamic  markets  with 
higher returns (Clements-Hunt, 2012; IATP, 2009).

The correlation of commodity and equity markets 
and herd behaviour by investors make the market 
very  sensitive  to  even  small  shocks  (UNCTAD, 
2011). For example, as commodities such as cere-
als  become  increasingly  securitized,  a  perceived 
risk of crop failure, owing to drought or flood, may 
be  magnified  via  speculative  market  behaviour, 
dramatically increasing global food prices as a re-
sult (FAO, 2010). 

160

Speculative investment in futures contracts—for ex-
ample, from index funds—can stimulate price spikes 
that  magnify  actual  production  shortfalls  (Masters 
and White, 2011; IATP, 2009). In 2011, the indexation 
of  commodity  markets  attracted  large  investors, 
such  as  pension  funds  and  insurance  reserves,  in-
creasing the volume of speculative trading from 30 
percent to 80 percent of commodity futures trading 
(Ibid.). Index funds currently hold about one-fourth 
of all agricultural futures contracts, and their partici-
pation is growing. Between March 2006 and Decem-
ber 2011, for example, the volume of commodity in-
dex funds trading in corn increased by 157 percent 
on the Chicago Board of Trade (IFPRI, 2011). 

All these factors influence the impact that hazards—
such as drought—may have on food prices. Interna-
tional food price spikes, for example, as occurred in 
2008, 2010 and 2012, are often said to be triggered 
by  production  shortfalls  in  major  producing  coun-
tries, such as Australia, Russian Federation and the 
United  States  of  America.iii  As  Box  10.1  shows,  the 
severe drought that affected the US Midwest in 2012 
had a significant effect on global food prices.   With 
the failure of the US corn and soya bean harvest in 
2012, importing countries across Africa, Asia, Europe 
and Latin America face uncertainty over supply and 
significant  food  price  spikes.  The  rapid  rise  in  US 
corn prices has knock-on effects globally, as farmers 
elsewhere, for example, switch to wheat for animal 
feed, thereby driving up prices for another staple.

10.3 Enter the dragon:  new 

                            low-income countries

agribusiness investments in  

Investment in agribusiness in low-income coun-
tries,  particularly  in  Africa,  is  rapidly  increas-
ing,  resulting  in  increased  land  pressure  and 
potentially increased disaster risk. 

Until 2008, increase in agricultural production was 
driven by increasing the cultivated areas as well as 
from significant growth in yields (Figure 10.12).  

Part II - Chapter 10Yield increases are projected to account for up to 90 
percent of future growth in agricultural production 
(FAO, 2009), but the expansion of arable land, par-
ticularly in low and middle-income countries, is still 
significant.  It is expected that by 2021, low and mid-
dle-income countries will put into production about 
10–12 percent of global arable land (Nellemann et 
al., 2009). This corresponds to 107–120 million hect-
ares of land in sub-Saharan Africa and Latin America 
(FAO, 2012a; Nellemann et al., 2009). This presents a 
huge business opportunity for agricultural investors 
and companies.

Recognising  this  opportunity,  large  businesses  are 
buying productive, arable land and investing in ex-
port-oriented  commercial  agriculture,  particularly 
in sub-Saharan Africa.  Globally, 13 of the top 20 tar-
get countries for international investment in agricul-
tural  land  acquisitions  are  in  Africa  (Figure  10.13). 
Most of these countries have a high share of agricul-
tural GDP and also high levels of food insecurity (An-
seeuw et al., 2012). 

Although there is little reliable information on these 
deals,  inventories  carried  out  in  Ethiopia,  Ghana, 

Figure 10.12  Increase of crop production owing to growth in 
yield and area (1965–2008)

(Source: World Bank data cited in Nellemann et al., 2009)

Madagascar  and  Mali  (Cotula  et  al.,  2009)  confirm 
land acquisitions of some 2 million hectares in the 
four  countries.  International  investment  accounts 
for about three-fourths of this land area (Ibid.). An-
other study—based on FAO data—shows that land 
acquired  in  seven  countries  in  sub-Saharan  Africa 
(Ethiopia,  Ghana,  Liberia,  Madagascar,  Mozam-
bique,  South  Sudan  and  Zambia)  comprises  more 

Figure 10.13  Foreign investments in land acquisitions in selected countries according to size of total reported acquisitions

(Source: UNISDR, based on Land Matrix data.)vi

161

than 65 percent of total area acquired on the conti-
nent (Schoneveld, 2011).

Thus, some countries with relatively small areas of 
productive land, such as Congo, Ghana and Libe-
ria, have become key targets, mainly driven by the 
acquisition of farmland for biofuel feedstock pro-
duction  (Ibid.).  An  increasing  number  of  national 
inventories  of  land  deals  are  being  developed, 
highlighting  the  unprecedented  scale  of  land  ac-
quisitions, particularly in Africa (IIED, 2012b).

Governments are leasing land through many forms 
of  public–private  partnerships  (PPPs)—through 
sovereign  wealth  funds,  state-owned  enterprises 
and involvement of private enterprises. Opportuni-
ties  for  broader  public  benefits  in  host  countries 
are rare, and provisions for risk management and 
distribution  of  benefits  in  contracts  are  limited 
(IIED,  FAO  and  IFAD,  2011).  However,  for  several 
low-income countries, such as Madagascar or Ethi-
opia,  it  is  unlikely  that  agricultural  productivity 
could be increased without this investment.  

As with other sectors examined in this report, in-
vestments in the agribusiness sector involve trade-
offs. From an investor’s perspective, agribusiness 
is  an  increasingly  profitable  and  attractive  sector 
owing to high food prices and growing future food 
shortages. Investments also increase the produc-
tivity  of  agricultural  production  over  large  areas 
and thus contribute to increased global food pro-
duction.  

Many  governments  sell  or  lease  land,  which  is  a 
means of increasing their wealth using their natu-
ral capital. Agribusiness is one of the few sectors 
where governments can have comparative advan-
tages  to  attract  investment.  This  investment  cre-
ates opportunities to capitalize on the agricultural 
sector,  increase  employment  and  volume  of  ex-
ports and achieve economic growth. 
 
However, as with investment in urban development 
and tourism, these investments may increase disas-

162

ter risks if hazards associated with droughts, floods 
and other events are not identified, estimated and 
taken into account. As Chapter 6 of this report high-
lights, compared with other risks, the mapping and 
estimation of agricultural drought risk is still incipi-
ent in most low and middle-income countries. It is 
likely then that risk levels are not being adequately 
considered  in  investment  decisions,  let  alone  the 
shared social and environmental costs.   

10.4 The externalised cost of 

agribusiness investment

Business investment in agriculture that does not 
take into account the risk of drought, floods and 
other hazards may face high losses and result in 
high external environmental and social costs.

As  Chapter  6  highlighted  many  countries  where 
investments  are  being  made  have  high  levels  of 
agricultural  drought  risk  and  land  degradation, 
which may be increasing owing to climate change. 
Globally,  according  to  the  OECD  and  FAO  (2012), 
approximately 25 percent of the world’s agricultural 
land areas are highly degraded. Degraded soils are 
more vulnerable to temperature extremes, droughts 
and floods.

Without reliable information, it is unclear to what 
extent businesses in the sector are assessing these 
and other weather-related risks before making in-
vestments. However, if drought and other risks are 
not  being  adequately  factored  into  agribusiness 
investment decisions, businesses may face higher-
than-expected losses, which can have negative re-
percussions on the price and availability of agricul-
tural commodities. 

The cost of increasing an area of intensive agricul-
ture is usually justified through expected increases 
in production and yields (Yumkella et al., 2011). This 
assessment  of  costs  and  benefits,  however,  rarely 
includes the potential increase in direct losses ow-
ing to agricultural droughts and longer-term loss of 

Part II - Chapter 10natural  capital,  for  example,  through  land  degra-
dation;  nor  does  it  address  the  question  of  who 
owns these risks and pays the price.

Lack of accurate drought risk information may en-
courage  investment  in  inappropriate  agricultural 
practices, which in turn can further increase risks 
owing to overexploitation of finite water resources 
and  through  land  degradation.  For  example,  mo-
no-cropping increases the risk of loss of biodiver-
sity,  competition  for  water  in  rain-fed  agriculture 
and  the  possibility  of  introducing  alien  invasive 
species (Ambali et al., 2011).

Agribusiness companies will also face new risks, as 
underlying  risk  drivers  such  as  climate  change, 
land  degradation  and  dwindling  water  resources 
increase agricultural drought risk. Cases of increas-
ing agricultural drought, driven by changing micro-
climates and potentially climate change, are affect-
ing agribusiness across the world. 

For  example,  the  global  agribusiness  and  food 
company Bunge suffered a loss of US$56 million in 
its  sugar  and  bioenergy  segments  in  the  fourth 
quarter of 2010 only, owing to agricultural drought 
in its main growing areas in Brazil.vii In fact, Bunge 
reported that the overall impact from droughts in 
various regions exceeded US$70 million for this one 
quarter.    The  company  was  affected  not  only  by 
lower  production  that  resulted  in  lower  sales  and 
gross margins, but also by increased cost absorp-
tion from its fixed costs, charges related to writing-
off damaged cane and replanting and costs related 
to the settlement of their hedge positions on global 
commodities markets.viii 

The agribusiness sector has particularly high exter-
nal social and environmental costs.  It is estimated, 
for  example,  that  currently  the  costs  externalised 
by the agribusiness sector outweigh the earnings 
of the entire sector (KPMG, 2012). This clearly pres-
ents  an  opportunity  for  reassessment  of  current 
value creation within the industry from both busi-
ness  and  society  perspectives.  A  few  select  busi-

nesses in the sector are beginning to recognise a 
number of risks that may impact their performance 
in the medium to long term should they not begin 
to think about shared rather than just shareholder 
value.

In  a  context  of  increasingly  constrained  global 
food  markets,  the  spread  of  agribusiness  invest-
ments  into  regions  with  high  but  poorly  under-
stood agricultural drought and other hazards gen-
erates  risks  of  future  and  more  severe  food  price 
spikes. As will be highlighted in section 10.6 of this 
chapter this poses a greater threat to the food se-
curity of low-income rural and urban households 
than drought itself. 

10.5  

 

Water risks  

 

 

 

Agriculture is the biggest water consumer, with 
around 70 percent of all water withdrawn global-
ly. Increasing demands on water resources by ag-
ricultural  production,  including  biofuel  produc-
tion, are driving water scarcity, also contributing 
to trans-boundary conflict.

The World Economic Forum’s Global Risks 2012 re-
port  identifies  water  supply  crises,  food  shortage 
crises, extreme volatility in energy and agricultural 
commodity prices, and rising greenhouse gas emis-
sions  among  its  top  global  risks  over  the  next  10 
years.ix  Demand  for  food,  water  and  energy  is  ex-
pected  to  grow  by  35  percent,  40  percent  and  50 
percent, respectively, by 2030 (National Intelligence 
Council,  2012),  and  because  of  their  interdepen-
dence, problems pertaining to one resource will be 
linked to supply and demand for the others.  

High demands of water by agricultural production, 
coupled with declining rainfall in some areas, can 
lead  to  a  dramatic  depletion  of  non-renewable 
water sources. Agriculture, including crop and live-
stock production, remains the biggest global water 
consumer—about  70  percent  of  all  water  with-

163

drawn (FAOx; Hoekstra and Chapagain, 2008; OECD 
and  FAO,  2012).  This  percentage  includes  water 
consumption for animal feed production.  

Biofuel  production—depending  on  what  crop  is 
grown and in which region—potentially causes sig-
nificant  pressure  on  existing  water  resources  (Na-
tional  Academy  of  Sciences,  2007).  But  perhaps 
more important is that water used in biofuel refiner-
ies can create a significant local footprint; for exam-
ple, a refinery that produces 100 million gallons of 
ethanol per year uses an equal amount of water as 
does a town of 5,000 people (Ibid.).

The impact of decades of overconsumption of water 
can be felt in the agribusiness sector worldwide.  In 
several countries, such as India and Egypt, electrici-
ty for pumping groundwater and the water itself are 
free if used for agricultural production. This clearly 
affects  levels  of  water  use  and  abuse,  resulting  in 
unsustainable  water  practices;  for  example,  85–95 

percent of all water use in India and Egypt is used for 
agriculture  irrigation  (Saeijs  and  van  Berkel,  1995). 
On a global scale, about 15–35 percent of all water 
use for irrigation is considered unsustainable (WBC-
SD, 2005). 

When water price is undervalued or water is free of 
charge, the price of water consumption is not added 
to  the  cost  of  the  final  product  and  trade,  which 
means that exporting countries trade their precious 
water  resources  for  free.  Through  exporting  prod-
ucts,  be  it  raw  material,  flowers,  tea  or  industrial 
goods,  water  utilised  in  the  process  must  also  be 
considered as exported. In drought-affected coun-
tries, such as the Sahel belt and the Horn of Africa, 
5–15 billion m3 of virtual waterxi  a year are being ex-
ported (see Figure 10.14), probably unaccounted for 
(Mekkonen  and  Hoekstra,  2011)  and  leaving  local 
farmers, pastoralists and agribusinesses increasing-
ly vulnerable to water scarcity and droughts. 

Figure 10.14  Virtual water balance in Africa in terms of import (+) or export (-)

(Source: adapted from Mekkonen and Hoekstra, 2011)

164

Part II - Chapter 10The growing demand for freshwater is posing sever-
al issues related to water availability and sourcing. 

The  overextraction  of  groundwater  is  irreversibly 
undermining water quality. Furthermore, this prac-
tice  ultimately  leads  to  land  subsidence,  which  in-
creases risk from river and coastal flooding. In Bang-
kok,  Thailand,  it  was  estimated  that  the  land  has 
subsided up to 10 cm/year, mainly owing to exces-
sive  water  extraction  (Lorphensri  et  al.,  2011).  This 
phenomenon contributed substantially to the 2011 
floods (Aon Benfield, 2012a).

Increasing demand towards finite water resources 
also  heightens  trans-boundary  conflicts.  In  Africa 
alone, there are 59 trans-boundary river basins, ac-
counting for 80 percent of the continent’s surface 
water  resources.  In  Arab  countries,  about  65  per-
cent  of  annually  renewable  resources,  including 
water, originate outside the boundaries of the Arab 
region,  which  makes  these  countries  particularly 
vulnerable  to  water-related  disputes  (Erian  et  al., 
2012). Similarly, Egypt relies virtually exclusively on 
run-off from the Nile’s headwaters in the Ethiopian 
and Equatorial Highlands several thousands of ki-
lometres  south  (Calvert,  Ceres  and  Oxfam,  2010). 
The construction of the Renaissance Dam in Ethio-
pia may have positive outcomes for Ethiopia, but is 
likely  to  affect  water  availability  and  security  in 
Egypt (Vella, 2012; Erian et al., 2012).

Climate change is likely to add more constraint on 
water availability. Because of climate change, annu-
al  discharge  in  the  Euphrates  River  is  expected  to 
decrease by 29–73 percent by 2070 (compared with 
its flow in 2000) (Erian et al., 2012).  

10.6 Risk transferred to 

smallholders and  

 

    

             pastoralists 

 

Food insecurity and crises are linked more strong-
ly to the accessibility rather than the availability 
of food. This means that increases in agricultural 
production will not necessarily result in increased 
food security, particularly for low-income house-
holds. 

Agribusiness  investments  may  transfer  risks  and 
costs to already vulnerable local communities. In 
the localities and regions where these investments 
are  being  made,  already  limited  access  to  fertile 
land  by  smallholder  farmers  may  be  further  re-
duced. Over the past 40 years, per capita availabil-
ity of farmland in Africa has halved and its distribu-
tion is highly unequal (Yumkella et al., 2011). Host 
communities may lose access to productive land, 
grazing areas or transhumance routes, and are dis-
possessed of land and water resources under cus-
tomary tenure (Anseeuw et al., 2011). 

Agricultural drought is already a major challenge to 
smallholder farmers and pastoralists in Africa, par-
ticularly in areas of low productivity where a high 
percentage  of  the  population  lives  from  subsis-
tence agriculture and livestock production in mar-
ginal areas with low and irregular rainfall. In these 
environments, even a small shift in seasonal pre-
cipitation  can  lead  to  major  crop  and  livestock 
losses (UNISDR, 2009). 

However, the relationship between crop and live-
stock  losses  from  agricultural  droughts  and  food 
insecurity is far less simple.  In fact, there is no sim-
ple  linear  correlation  between  crop  production 
and food security (Sen, 1981; Dreze and Sen, 1989; 
Bouis and Welsh, 2010; Burchi et al., 2011).

As Box 10.2 highlights, studies of household econo-
mies  in  sub-Saharan  Africa  repeatedly  reveal  that 
subsistence agricultural production provides only a 
small  part  of  food  requirements  (Ruel  et  al.,  1998; 

165

Louw et al., 2007; Baiphethi and Jacobs, 2009).  Most 
food  consumed  in  households  is  purchased  or 
comes from food aid and assistance, which in turn is 
also often sold.

This study, with a similar study conducted in Niger 
(Holt et al., 2009), also highlighted the importance 
of livestock as a source of household wealth, and 
explains  why  food  crises  often  occur  even  during 
good harvests.  Households sell the food they pro-
duce  on  the  market  to  buy  staple  cereals.  Food 
price  spikes  can  drastically  alter  the  terms  of  ex-
change;  in  other  words,  households  cannot  buy 
enough food with what they are able to sell.  

Food  price  spikes  particularly  affect  low  and  mid-
dle-income  countries,  where  households  spend  a 

far higher proportion of their income on food than 
in high-income countries.  For example, in Indone-
sia,  46  percent  of  household  expenditure  goes  to 
food, compared with only 6 percent in the United 
States of America (IFPRI, 2011). National food mar-
kets are closely correlated with global markets. Ris-
ing and volatile global food prices therefore impact 
directly  on  food  security  and  vulnerability  in  low-
income countries. During the 2005 food crisis in Ni-
ger, for example, malnutrition was highest in areas 
with  abundant  production  and  was  driven  largely 
by a spike in the price of millet—driven by the dy-
namics of the export market to Nigeria.   

Similarly, an estimated 18.4 million inhabitants in 
the Sahel faced a food crisis in 2012. However, ce-
real  production  in  the  region  in  2011  was  only  3 

Box 10.2  Understanding the underlying causes of food insecurity and malnutrition

The Household Economy Analysis (HEA) tool is a livelihoods-based survey designed to provide a clear and ac-
curate representation of household economies. The analysis is conducted at different levels of a wealth contin-
uum, in different livelihood zones across a region of a country, assessing the cost of diet (COD), energetically 
and nutritionally. 

An analysis (below) carried out in October 2012 in the most drought-affected areas in Kenya shows a high de-
pendency of households on purchased goods and food aid; illustrates the resilience deficit; and explains the 
slow recovery after the 2011 food crisis (Fig 10.15).

Figure 10.15 Source of food per livelihood zone and wealth group in northeast Kenya

(Source: King, 2012)

(Source: Save the Children International)

166

Part II - Chapter 10percent lower than the average of the previous five 
years, and 2010 had seen a bumper harvest (Gub-
bels, 2012). As Box 10.3 highlights, food crises can 
occur even in growing economies. 

By increasing farmers’ income and assets, improv-
ing agricultural production contributes to reducing 
hunger in rural areas. However, data from the Sa-
hel and the Horn of Africa show that child malnutri-
tion rates are not related to general food availabili-
ty  (Burchi  et  al.,  2011).  Despite  this  recognition, 
there is a tendency in food security policies to fo-
cus on food production as a main solution (Bouis 
and Welch, 2010).

The root causes of food insecurity in regions such as 
Africa  are  therefore  less  related  to  agricultural 
drought as to chronic vulnerability and the underly-
ing development deficit (Gubbels, 2012). For exam-
ple, during the 2010 Sahel crisis, the case-load of se-
vere  acute  malnutrition  (or  SAM)  in  Niger,  the 
epicentre, was 320,000 children (IASC, 2012). A year 
later, in 2011, Niger had exceptional rains and a re-
cord agricultural harvest. However, the case-load of 
SAM dropped only slightly, to 307,000 children (Ibid.).

Because households depend so heavily on purchas-
es or aid, food markets heavily mediate food crises. 
Rising retail food prices are a particular problem for 
low-income countries and low-income households, 
more generally. When examining annual food price 
inflation rates over the past 10 years, one can con-
clude  that  they  have  been  both  higher  and  more 
variable  in  low-income  countries  than  in  OECD 
countries (OECD and FAO, 2012). This is caused part-
ly by the greater weight of basic food in the con-

Box 10.3  Price increases and food insecurity in Ethiopia

sumer food basket in low-income countries.

In some countries, such as Kenya, overall food pro-
duction has been increasing owing to higher produc-
tivity  and  despite  increasing  agricultural  drought 
(Erian et al., 2012).  In other countries, such as Niger, 
production  has  increased  through  developing  new 
cultivated  areas  and  owing  to  improved  rainfall, 
relative to the 1980s (Ibid.). However, many African 
countries are heavily dependent on imports for the 
main  staple  foods  (Mkumbwa,  2011).  As  Figure 
10.16  shows,  national  production  is  increasingly 
surpassed  by  consumer  demand,  with  projected 
unmet  consumer  needs  in  East  African  countries 
by 2020 potentially increasing by 75 percent.

Between the early 1970s and early 2000s, East Af-
rica’s  import  dependency  ratio  for  cereal  food 
commodities  grew  from  6  percent  to  20  percent 
(Mkumbwa, 2011), leaving consumers—in particu-
lar low-income groups—vulnerable to price hikes 
of  staple  cereals  (see  also  Box  10.3).  A  key  chal-
lenge for countries in today’s globalised food sys-
tem  is  that  increases  in  food  production  at  the 
national level are no longer directly linked to food 
security.  At  best,  the  relationship  is  indirect;  at 
worst, it does not exist at all.

The  import  and  trading  of  cereal  crops  is  deter-
mined not only by national production deficits, but 
also and importantly by government food and trade 
policies,  such  as  import  protection  and  domestic 
agriculture  support  policies,  and  export  taxed  or 
bans.  National food supply deficits are often sub-
ject  to  adjustments  of  regional  and  international 
trade imbalances. For example, Malawi in 2012, de-

Ethiopia is one of the fastest growing non-oil producing economies in Africa (African Development Bank, 2012); in 
2011, the economy grew at 11.4 percent, marking the eighth consecutive year of rapid growth. In 2012, the coun-
try witnessed significant rises in food prices, e.g. wheat by 20 percent and maize, the main staple food, by 80 
percent (FAO, 2012a). As a result, and despite its strong economic performance in agricultural production for ex-
port (coffee), the same year saw 3.2 million people registered in need of humanitarian assistance (FAO, 2012b).

(Source: UNISDR)

167

Figure 10.16  Future supply and demand for East African Countries 

(Source: Mkumbwa, 2011)

spite a bumper harvest of 3.2 million tonnes of maize 
compared  with  a  national  consumption  of  2.4  mil-
lion tonnes, announced an export ban to rebuildi the 
national reserve. This narrowed the options of coun-
tries  with  a  food  deficit,  such  as  Kenya,  to  secure 
maize imports at the reduced 25 percent import tar-
iff within the Common Market for Eastern and South-
ern  Africa  (COMESA)  as  opposed  to  a  50  percent 
tariff on imports from non-COMESA members.xii  

10.7 A way forward?  

Another approach to 

 

              

         agribusiness investment

 
    

Policy and practice that continues to prioritise 
humanitarian assistance over long-term invest-
ment  in  increasing  smallholder  productivity 
and access to markets is becoming increasingly 
unviable.  New  partnerships  between  farmers, 
governments  and  agribusiness  companies  are 
emerging that may more effectively strengthen 
the resilience of local producers and markets. 

For decades, existing policies and practices in Africa 
seem  to  have  been  focused,  on  the  one  hand,  on 

168

promoting  export-oriented,  commercial  produc-
tion in more favourable areas that have access to 
more  reliable  rainfall,  inputs,  roads  and  markets. 
They still rely today, on the other hand, on interna-
tional humanitarian assistance to buffer food inse-
curity  among  smallholder  farmers  and  pastoral-
ists. Given the internal and external risks posed by 
large agribusiness investments, on the one hand, 
and continued food insecurity, despite decades of 
massive  investment  in  humanitarian  assistance, 
on the other hand, a new approach is urgently re-
quired. National and regional efforts, such as the 
Ethiopian  Government’s  Productive  Safety  Net 
Programme  described  in  GAR11,  aim  to  address 
this challenge, but remain exceptions to an overall 
trend of stagnant policies and investments. 

There is a massive disproportion of spending on re-
ducing  disaster  risks  and  strengthening  resilience, 
which over the last decade (2000–2009) accounted 
for only 1 percent of total overseas development as-
sistance  (ODA)  in  the  40  countries  receiving  the 
highest humanitarian aid (Kellet and Sparks, 2012).  
Humanitarian  assistance  has  been  continuously 
high over the last decades (see Figure 10.17), but is 
increasingly unsustainable and has become part of 

Part II - Chapter 10the continuation of disaster risk and food insecuri-
ty rather than part of the solution.

FAO  (2011a)  estimates  that  roughly  one-third  of 
food produced for human consumption alone (not 
counting animal feeds that take 37 percent of grain 
production)  is  wasted.  Another  study  shows  that 
potentially  30–50  percent  of  all  food  produced 
never  reaches  a  human  stomach  (IMECHE,  2012). 
The causes of food losses in low-income countries 
are mainly connected to financial, managerial and 
technical  limitations 
in  harvesting  techniques, 
storage  and  cooling  facilities,  infrastructure  and 
packaging and marketing (FAO, 2011a). In medium 
and high-income countries, which contribute more 
to  food  waste  than  low-income  countries,  food 
loss tends to occur at the consumption stage. 

Given  the  dependence  of  food-insecure  house-
holds on purchased food, investments in global lo-
gistics to reduce food waste and efforts to change 
consumption patterns, coupled with improving ac-
cess  to  food  for  low-income  households,  may  do 

more to increase global food security than any fur-
ther  investments  in  the  intensification  of  produc-
tion  (Fava  Neves,  2011;  Maxwell  and  Slater,  2003; 
Webb et al., 2006). 

Investments to address infrastructure deficits may 
also contribute to increased food security. In Afri-
ca, for example, a persistent infrastructure deficit 
is a key determinant of low productivity and trade. 
Less than 4 percent of sub-Saharan Africa’s arable 
land  is  irrigated—a  much  lower  proportion  com-
pared with South Asia (almost 39 percent) or Latin 
America and the Caribbean (11 percent) (Yumkella 
et al., 2011). Supplemental irrigation, which allows 
earlier planting in appropriate time, would dramat-
ically increase yields in those areas. 

And as Table 10.1 shows, Africa’s infrastructure net-
works consistently lag behind those of other low-in-
come countries. In such contexts, damage to infra-
structure  from  even  small  and  localised  disaster 
events, such as floods, can have severe implications 
for the resilience of smallholder farmers as well as 

Figure 10.17  Overseas development aid flows for food aid and food security 

(Source: UNISDR, based on data from OECD Creditor Reporting Systemxiii)

169

big companies owing to major disruptions in market 
access.

Agriculture  promotion  policies  should  be  carefully 
designed. For example, instruments—such as input 
or  insurance  subsidies—can,  on  the  one  hand,  re-
duce vulnerability of producers and other actors in 
the agricultural value chain, but, on the other hand, 
may increase overall vulnerability of the local agri-
cultural  system  by  facilitating  production  on  mar-
ginal  lands  and  possibly  increasing  drought  expo-
sure (Hazell and Hess, 2010). 

New partnerships between smallholders, local and 
national governments and large agribusiness com-
panies may pave the way for a longer-term strategy 
that effectively strengthens the resilience of small-
holder farmers.  More and more companies are recog-

nising the business opportunities inherent in address-
ing existing agricultural challenges (see Box 10.4).
  
Owing to rising agricultural commodity prices, some 
multinational  agribusiness  corporations  are  now 
seeing opportunities to invest in improving the pro-
ductivity and strengthening the resilience of small-
holder farmers. 

As  Box  10.5  highlights,  although  still  controversial, 
commercial initiatives are providing technology and 
outreach  to  smallholder  farmers  for  food  produc-
tion in regions with high potential and where limited 
gaps in infrastructure, markets and production defi-
cits may relatively cost-effectively relieve some risks 
to natural and human capital. At the same time, in-
vestments by major global corporations raise new 
concerns regarding the use of genetically modified 

Table 10.1  Infrastructure deficit of Africa’s low-income countries

(Source: adapted from Foster and Briceno-Gardena, 2010)

Box 10.4  Creating shared value in agriculture in India

In India, Jain Irrigation Systems, the largest manufacturer of irrigation systems and a leading fruit and vegetable 
processing business, developed a micro-irrigation system based on the principle of drip irrigation that was ap-
propriate for smallholder farmers and that reduced water usage by 30 percent compared with commonly used 
flood irrigation systems (Borgonovi et al., 2011).  Targeting small farmers with less than 1 hectare of land, the 
company has developed a significant new market and claims to have grown at a compounded annual growth 
rate of 41 percent from 2005 to 2010 (Borgonovi et al., 2011).

Another example from the subcontinent is a public-private partnership (PPP) that seeks to address farmers’ vul-
nerability to volatile commodities markets. Gramin Suvidha Kendra (GSK) has established partnerships with a 
variety of private companies, non-governmental organisations and government institutions, such as the state 
postal departments, to provide farmers with agricultural inputs and expert advice as well as information on stor-
age, financing and futures prices; the latter via the Multi Commodity Exchange of India Limited (MCX), a founding 
partner of GSK. First surveys of participating farmers indicate real success, with 57 percent of farmers reporting 
the successful use of MCX futures prices for their cropping decisions and 66 percent claiming productivity in-
creases owing to access to improved seeds and fertilisers.

(Source: UNISDR)

170

Part II - Chapter 10seeds  and  the  creation  of  monopolistic  depen-
dence.  This  is  despite  growing  recognition  that  in 
future,  new  developments  in  biotechnology  for 
plant breeding to address the challenges of an in-
creasingly changing climate will be required.  

The  2008  World  Development  Report  on  Agricul-
ture  reported  strong  synergies  between  agribusi-
ness, agriculture performance and poverty allevia-
tion  (World  Bank,  2008b).  Strong  links  between 
agribusiness  and  smallholders  via  effective  gov-
ernment  policy  can  reduce  rural  poverty  and  in-
crease resiliency if they are successful in promot-
ing components critical for small farm production 
as  well  as  commercial  agriculture  (Figure  10.19). 

Agribusiness companies usually seek to do this via 
a combination of partnerships to increase opportu-
nities for technology transfer, contract farming and 
hybrid schemes of small and large-scale farming.

Many of the elements in this approach are already 
well  known  and  have  been  successfully  demon-
strated  to  produce  results:  agro-ecological  ap-
proaches to agriculture, which can increase pro-
ductivity,  strengthen  resilience  and  conserve 
natural capital (Pretty, 2006; Altieri,  1987); decen-
tralised natural resource management (Sekar, 2000); 
investments  in  infrastructure  and  development  of 
markets that link  smallholders to modern national 
and international supply chains (Le Courtois et al., 

Box 10.5  Agribusiness investing in smallholders

Syngenta —a world leader in crop protection—recognises the productive regions of sub-Sahara as a market 
that is vast and virtually untapped.  In 2012, its CEO announced plans for a significant investment in smallhold-
ers across Africa.xiv 

More than 75 percent of maize production is currently provided by small farmers in the region (FAO, 2011b). By 
treating smallholders as individual firms, Syngenta has committed to enter into partnership agreements with 
them, providing the full package of required inputs, technical services, insurance and knowledge to create via-
ble smallholders. As smallholders get access to key inputs for increased productivity, Syngenta will invest to in-
creasing the size of the market and with it, its overall market share (Figure 10.18), possibly creating shared value 
for both groups.

Figure 10.18  Syngenta estimated global market size and crop sales

(Source: Syngenta)

171

2010);  social  protection,  through  conditional  cash 
transfers and temporary employment programmes 
(Farrington  et  al.,  2008;  Devereux,  2003;  UNISDR, 
2011);  and parametric crop insurance schemes (see 
example in Box 10.6).

But  for  approaches  like  these  to  be  viable,  an  en-
abling policy environment will be required, involving 
all institutions engaged in property and land-holding 
registration, environmental protection and land-use 
departments  as  well  as  business  regulators  (Fava 
Neves and Alves Pinto, 2012; Hill and Pittman, 2012). 

In Brazil, for example, the government has been suc-
cessful in promoting substantial private investment 
into  food  and  non-food  agricultural  production  by 
creating  incentives  through  a  mixture  of  infrastruc-
ture improvements and policy instruments (Box 10.7).

For  government  departments  concerned  with  in-
creasing growth and investment, the challenge is to 
present  an approach as  a competitive advantage in 
the  context  of  stimulus  packages  for  agribusiness 

investments,  such  as  the  provision  of  local  infra-
structure;  the  regulation  of  environmental  protec-
tion as well as human resources; taxation policies; 
and research and development (Fava Neves, 2011). 
Although Brazil was successful in attracting signifi-
cant investment in agribusiness, the opening up of 
lands to national and foreign investors, for example 
in  the  Amazon  region,  has  also  resulted  in  large-
scale deforestation (Cattaneo, 2002).

As highlighted in Chapter 6, improved modelling of 
agricultural  drought  and  other  hazards,  together 
with down-scaled climate scenarios can provide an 
evidence  base  that  would  encourage  informed  in-
vestments by the agribusiness sector and more rel-
evant and effective public policy decisions by gov-
ernments.  

Increasing  agricultural  productivity  and  resilience 
alone  will  not  eliminate  food  insecurity  for  highly 
vulnerable rural households who rely on purchased 
food and aid.   However, by increasing the value and 
quantity  of  crops  smallholder  farmers  are  able  to 

Figure 10.19  Components for improving the resilience of smallholder farmers

(Source: UNISDR, based on Fava Neves and Alves Pinto, 2012)

172

Part II - Chapter 10Box 10.6  The future of index-based insurance—the R4 Rural Resilience Initiative  

The challenge of how insurance of property and assets can be relevant and affordable to low-income communi-
ties has triggered a number of micro-insurance initiatives over the last two decades (UNISDR, 2009 and 2011). 
Some of these instruments, such as index-based crop insurance schemes, have enjoyed remarkable success 
across the globe. However, even these targeted programmes rarely reached the most vulnerable of low-income 
populations—those with no land or productive assets to insure.

An innovative partnership between Swiss Re., a major global reinsurance company, the UN World Food Pro-
gramme, and Oxfam, a large international development organisation, is testing and developing a new set of inte-
grated tools to reach some of the most vulnerable populations in Africa. Building on the success of HARITA, the 
first micro-insurance scheme to offer poor farmers to pay for crop insurance with their own labour, the R4 Rural 
Resilience Initiative seeks to improve approaches to targeting and financing to mature the programme into a 
commercially viable option that is accessible to the poorest. Success will depend on a number of factors, not 
least the functioning of the partnership between public and private actors in this scheme. To date, although 
these innovations have shown promising results in reaching farmers for which normal insurance schemes are out 
of reach, such programmes have had to rely on heavily subsidised premiums and have not yet been scaled up to 
a level that would prove their viability and sustainability.

(Source: Spiegel and Satterthwaite, in Orie and Stahel, 2012)

Box 10.7  Like moths to a flame—attracting private investment in agriculture through electricity

Secure energy supply is crucial for some agribusiness activities, as energy is necessary to operate pumps in irri-
gation systems, ventilators in poultry farms, cooling systems for the storage of some fresh food such as milk and 
meat, etc.

In 2000, about 10 million or 80 percent of smallholder farmers in Brazil had no access to public power supply 
(Government of Brazil, 2010). From 2003 to 2010, the government invested heavily to change this, and by 2010, 
the budget for this initiative had reached R$20 billion (Ibid.). By September 2011, 14.2 million people had been 
reached.xv  Hand-in-hand with this investment, a new policy on the creation of Production Community Centres, 
in which private investment was sought and supported, was established. 

(Source: UNISDR)

sell and by reducing the risks of crop loss and yield 
reduction, it is possible to increase income, which in 
turn will allow farmers to purchase more food and 
increase  reserves  for  lean  periods,  building  theirs 
and society’s resilience to disasters.  

173

Notes

Category  of  ‘Developing  countries’  as  used  in  OECD  and  FAO, 

i 
2012.
ii  OECD and FAO (2012) explain that the decrease of stock ratio in 
rice is mainly caused by a contraction in China and India from the 
extraordinarily high inventory levels of recent years.
iii  Years based on the FAO Food Price Index: http://www.fao.org/
worldfoodsituation/wfs-home/foodpricesindex/en/
iv  “Stuck on dry land,” Financial Times (Analysis), 31 July 2012.  
v  h t t p : // w w w. c p c . n c e p . n o a a . g o v/p r o d u c t s /e x p e r t _
assessment/seasonal_drought.pdf ; 
 
http://US$a01.library.cornell.edu/US$a/current/CropProd/Crop-
Prod-11-09-2012.pdf ; 
 
http://www.fao.org/worldfoodsituation/wfs-home/csdb/en/ ; 
 
http://www.fao.org/worldfoodsituation/wfs-home/foodpricesin-
dex/en/ ; 
 
http://www.ers.US$a.gov/topics/in-the-news/us-drought-
2012-farm-and-food-impacts.aspx ; 
 
http://www.US$a.gov/oce/commodity/wasde/latest.pdf.
vi  http://landportal.info/landmatrix;  accessed  18  February  2013 
only using land deals in relation to agricultural production.   

   

   

   
   

   

vii  http://www.morningstar.com/earnings/21927995-bunge-ltd-
bgq4-2010.aspx?pindex=2 (accessed 21 February 2013).
viii http://www.morningstar.com/earnings/21927995-bunge-ltd-
bgq4-2010.aspx?pindex=3 (accessed 21 February 2013).
ix  http://reports.weforum.org/global-risks-2012.  
x  FAO  Aquastat,  www.fao.org/nr/water/aquastat/water_use/in-
dex.stm. 
xi 
‘Virtual water’ refers to the amount of water that is used by one 
country by consuming goods produced somewhere else. At country 
level,  this  water  is  neither  accounted  for  in  the  population’s  con-
sumption nor in the country’s water demand. In the countries were 
the goods are produced, this ‘virtual water’ is subtracted to the local 
consumption. As this ‘virtual water’ is often not accounted for, the 
water balance for these producing countries might not capture cor-
rectly the sources of shortages.
xii  COMESA  =  Common  Market  for  Eastern  and  Southern  Africa. 
Source of data: Agritrade, 12 February 2012 http://agritrade.cta.int.  
xiii http://stats.oecd.org/index.aspx?r=543569.
xiv  Verbal communication during Naivasha Drought Experts meet-
ing, October 2012.
xv  http://www.brasil.gov.br/energia-en/light-for-all-program-1/
what-it-is/br_infografico?set_language=en.

174

Part II - Chapter 10Part III  
Business Strategies and 
Risk Governance

177

Business  investment  decisions  are  not  taken  in  a 
vacuum.  Seasoned investors weigh possible profits 
and risks, deciding whether to spread risk through 
insurance  and  how  to  manage  uncertainty.  Inves-
tors—private and institutional—operate similarly in 
an  attempt  to  maximise  return  on  investment.  In-
surance companies seek to price risk so that market 
share and profitability are maximised; risks are man-
aged;  and  insolvency  avoided.  National  and  local 
governments  also  compete  to  attract  investment 
while  attempting  to  manage  associated  risks  and 
costs.  

These  competing  interests  created  tension,  which 
requires the stakeholders involved to negotiate per-
ceived  trade-offs.  But  recently,  the  concept  of 
shared value and its focus on the interdependency 
of business, investment, insurance and public regu-
lation and service provision has been recognised as 
a more mature approach to competitiveness (Porter 

and Kramer, 2006 and 2011). When considering the 
different types of risk and risk layers as laid out in 
the  first  part  of  this  report,  businesses—ranging 
from  small  informal  traders  to  large  multinational 
corporations—may be impacted differently, but will 
all have an interest in bringing down risk levels and 
strengthening resilience. 

For example, a small shop owner in an informal set-
tlement who is most likely unable to take out indi-
vidual insurance on his dwelling and stock will have 
a vested interest in his settlement’s association and 
municipality  to  maintain  electricity,  water  supply 
and drainage systems in case of local floods. 

Although the CEO of a large diversified global con-
sumer goods company may not be too concerned 
about the flooding of one of its numerous plants lo-
cated in the same municipality, the local manager 
will  have  a  vested  interest  in  uninterrupted  local 

Figure III.1  Risk layers, differentiated impact on and relevant risk management strategies for business

(Source: UNISDR) 

178

Part III   power supply and functioning local transport to en-
sure that his client base as well as his workforce is 
maintained.

Similarly,  although  a  large  national  company  will 
have adequate insurance covering its main assets, 
its operations are equally vulnerable if its local small 
suppliers are vulnerable to highly frequent, localised 
events. Thus, effective reduction of extensive risk, if 
translated  into  more  resilient  infrastructure  and 
communities, also reduces risk to larger businesses 
(Figure III.1).

In  the  same  way,  national  and  local  governments 
that effectively reduce the more extensive layers of 
risk  protect  not  only  their  infrastructure  invest-
ments  and  avoid  growing  liabilities  for  vulnerable 
communities, but also contribute to an increasingly 
business-friendly and enabling environment that at-
tracts larger investments.
In the context of shared risks, how businesses, gov-
ernments,  investors  and  insurers  perceive  and  as-
sess  disaster  risk  influences  business  decisions  to 
invest in hazard-exposed areas. But equally, it can 
potentially  motivate  investments  in  reducing  risks 
and strengthening resilience, thus creating a shared 
value for all stakeholders. 

This subject will be the focus of Part III of this report. 
Chapters  11  to  13  look  at  the  different  ways  that 
businesses, the finance sector and insurance indus-
try consider disaster risks in their investment deci-
sions. Chapters 14 and 15 then consider how differ-
ent forms of risk governance mediate, regulate and 
provide incentives to these processes. 

179

Chapter 11
From Managing Disasters 
to Managing Risks

181

Business decisions to invest in hazard-exposed areas are seldom irrational.  They usually reflect a 
search for spearheading competitiveness and increasing productivity by taking advantage of the 
comparative advantages offered by such locations.  

Businesses have yet to systematically include disaster risk considerations into this process of weigh-
ing opportunities and risks. The integration of these considerations into corporate risk management 
functions is still incipient even in large businesses; and awareness of how these risks can be effec-
tively managed is even lower. 

11.1        Managing new risks: 

disasters on the horizon

Risk  management  in  the  business  sector  con-
tinues to focus on financial, economic and legal 
risks.  Disaster  risk  is  still  not  considered  fully 
even in large companies; and small enterprises 
usually do not undertake systematic risk assess-
ments.

In  recent  years, 
large  businesses—particularly 
those  with  global  operations—have  become  in-
creasingly sensitive to the different risks that may 
affect their operations. Most large businesses em-
ploy a dedicated Chief Risk Officer and some have 
dedicated risk management departments. Increas-
ingly, overall responsibility for risk management is 
at the C-Suite executive level, such as Chief Finan-
cial  Officers  (CFOs)  or  Chief  Executive  Officers 
(CEOs) (Deloitte, 2012).

However, the focus of corporate risk management 
is centred on financial, economic, market and legal 
risks.  Although  business  surveys  highlight  an  in-
creasing imperative to manage risks, disaster risks 
are  rarely  considered.    In  recent  surveys,  despite 
the impact of recent major disasters, disaster risk 
is not listed in the top 10, 20 or 50 risks identified 
(Deloitte,  2012;  Lloyds,  2012;  Forbes,  2012;  PwC, 
2012).  

This practice is also reflected in curricula of many 
business  schools.  For  example,  courses  on  Risk 
Management  for  Corporate  Leaders  at  Harvard 
Business  School  and  the  University  of  Oxford’s 
Global  Risk  Investment  Management  Programme 
usually deal with risks such as credit risk, currency 
risk and reputation risk, but few schools explicitly 
include disaster risk in their risk management cur-
riculum.  

Box 11.1  Managing risks of local public entities through public-private partnerships (PPPs)

In 2011, one of the world’s leading consulting and insurance brokerage firms engaged in open dialogue with lo-
cal and national governments on how to integrate disaster risk management practices into public risk gover-
nance structures. Marsh Risk Consulting, part of the Marsh and McLennan group, subsequently developed prac-
tical guidance for local governments on the adoption of the ISO Standard 31000 to their policies, practices and 
administrative structures (Marsh, 2011). 

Recognising that the ISO standard neither explicitly mentions disaster risk nor lends itself easily to the func-
tions of public administration, this initiative has brought principles of private sector risk management and pub-
lic sector planning processes closer together. Perhaps more important, it has articulated clearly the need for 
proactive planning and risk assessment beyond the usual focus on response preparedness and contingency 
planning. Citing the example of the largest leaser of social housing in France, the Caisse des Dépôts Group (SNI), 
Marsh highlights that this conglomerate carries out systematic risk-benefit analyses ahead of any new invest-
ment (Marsh, 2011). 

(Source: UNISDR)

182

Part III - Chapter 11Figure 11.1  Percentage of companies with business continuity plans or crisis management programmes (by company size)v

28.7

37.5

33.8

23.3

39.6

37.2

57.2

65.8

20.1

14.1

18.8

(Source: Sarmiento and Hoberman, 2012)

Similarly,  international  standards  are  not  yet  fully  
articulating  disaster  risk  dimensions.  For  example, 
although  the  ISO  31000  standard  on  risk  manage-
ment can be adapted to any type of risk, it does not 
explicitly highlight disaster risk.i This gap has been 
identified,  and  companies  are  taking  initiatives  to 
address it (see Box 11. 1).

After  witnessing  large  disasters,  global  businesses 
are now beginning to consider how to manage di-
saster risks. For example, a 2011 poll of 1,000 senior 
global  executives  highlighted  that  29  percent  had 
been financially affected by the 2011 Great East Ja-
pan  Earthquake  and  accompanying  nuclear  disas-
ter (PwC, 2012). And 24 percent of these were taking 
measures to strengthen their risk management ca-
pacities (Ibid.).  

over the last three years. Of these, 53 percent were 
now investing to strengthen risk management—for 
example,  protecting  operations  and  offices  and  
bolstering supply chains (UKTI, 2011). 

supply 

chain 

vulnerability 

Supply chain resilience has attracted particular at-
tention because risk has increased through globali-
sation (see Chapter 2 of this report). Factors that in-
fluence 
include: 
dependence, for example, to what extent is the sup-
ply chain dependent on one single supplier; visibilty, 
to what extent is the supply chain risk visible; and 
design  information  portability  and  substitution, 
how quickly can design information be transferred 
from  one  affected  supplier  to  another  and  how 
quickly  can  production  be  resumed  at  the  substi-
tute supplier (Fujimoto, 2011).

In another poll, 90 percent of businesses stated that 
they had suffered weather-related disaster impacts 

Many smaller businesses, however, face a challenge 
in  addressing  disaster  risk.    Having  an  emergency 

183

These findings are validated in other regions (Villar-
roel, 2012). SMEs are often more vulnerable per se 
and more likely to be located in less-resistant build-
ings  and  have  a  smaller,  more  localised  customer 
base (UNDP, 2013; Battisti and Deakins, 2012). They 
usually do not engage in hazard management pro-
grammes and lack financial resources for recovery 
(Villarroel, 2012; Vitez, 2009). 

Few SMEs have been able to articulate the case for 
or to strengthen their capacities to manage disaster 
risks. Where the case has been made, however, em-
phasis is on preparedness, such as evacuation plans 
and  response  measures,  rather  than  on  prospec-
tively  managing  disaster  risks  (Sarmiento  and 
Hoberman, 2012; UNDP, 2013). Very small and fami-
ly-owned  businesses—for  example,  fishing  enter-
prises  in  low  and  middle-income  countries—face 
even tighter constraints on their ability to invest in 
risk  reduction.  However,  as  Box  11.2  explains,  cer-
tain  simple  measures  have  enabled  businesses  to 
survive disasters. 

plan  in  place  is  key  in  explaining  business  perfor-
mance  after  major  events  (Corey  and  Deitch,  2011), 
but, as Figure 11.1 shows, a survey carried for this re-
port in six disaster-prone cities of the Americasii high-
lighted  that  less  than  one-fifth  (18.8  percent)  of  all 
surveyed businesses had a business continuity plan, 
and  in  highly  risk-prone  cities  such  as  Bogota  and 
San José, the percentage was even lower.  Similarly, 
almost one-fourth was unable to estimate costs of a 
major  disruption  to  their  business  (Sarmiento  and 
Hoberman, 2012).  In fact, although many methods 
and tools exist to meas ure the value and exposure of 
business interruption, there are difficulties in assess-
ing this fully against other dimensions that need to be 
considered, i.e. time, revenue and costs.iii

In particular, small and medium enterprises (SMEs) 
are more likely to lack risk awareness or struggle to 
find the capacity to manage disaster risks, mainly 
owing to financial, human resource and technical 
limitations (Wedawatta et al., 2010; Corey and De-
itch,  2011;  Battisti  and  Deakins,  2012).  Of  compa-
nies with at least 500 employees, about 37 percent 
had  a  business  continuity  plan  or  crisis  manage-
ment  programme  in  place,  but  companies  with 
less  than  100  employees,  as  few  as  14.1  percent 
had a plan (Figure 11.1).iv

Box 11.2  Successfully reducing losses on the coast of Yucatan, Mexico

Hurricane Isisdore struck the southeastern coast of Mexico in 2002, resulting in economic losses of US$500 mil-
lion on the Peninsula of Yucatan. Of this, US$8 million were estimated damages to the fishery industry, mainly 
from loss or damage of fishing boats and boat motors. The hurricane severely impacted small producers and 
holders of small ruminants, chicken and pigs. Learning from this experience, farmers and fishermen with the 
support of local governments developed risk management strategies to reduce future losses. These included 
safeguarding fishing equipment, such as boats and motors, and relocating farms to safe areas.

The local government of the municipality of San Felipe purchased land two kilometres from the shore and dis-
tributed it to 60 small producers. Although farmers remained in their original villages, they moved their live-
stock to safe ground. Similarly, fishermen negotiated access to cattle trucks and storehouses 15 kilometres in-
land where they could keep their fishing equipment safe. These strategies saved them approximately US$35,000 
per fisherman when in 2005, Hurricane Wilma hit. 

Neighbouring municipalities have since adopted these risk-reducing strategies; it has been estimated that each 
municipality has saved about US$6.5 million.

(Source: Cuevas, 2012)

184

Part III - Chapter 11Box 11.3  New attitudes to risk in large global businesses

Global consulting firm PricewaterhouseCoopers and UNISDR are collaborating on a global initiative to better 
understand and support disaster risk management in the private sector. In-depth conversations and 11 risk 
management workshops with 14 large companies with a global footprint and therefore increasing risk exposure 
took place (Table 11.1). 

Table 11.1  Companies participating in a global initiative on comprehensive disaster risk management for national busi-
nesses and global corporations

Company

ABB

ARUP

BG - British Gas

Citigroup

Country

Switzerland

India

United Kingdom

United State of America 

Industry

Industrial Products

Structural Engineering

Energy, Mining

Financial products and sevices

GE - General Electric

United State of America

Conglomerate - Infrastructure and Finance

HCC - Hindustan Construction Company

HIRCO

Hitachi

India

India

Japan

IHG - InterContinental Hotels Group

United Kingdom

Nestlé

NTT - Nippon Telegraph and Telephone

Roche

SPCL - Shapoorji Pallonji & Co. Ltd 

Switzerland

Japan

Switzerland

India

Walmart

United State of America 

Infrastructure

Real Estate investment

Conglomerate - Infrastructure and Finance

Hospitality

Nutrition, Health and Wellness

Telecommunications

Healthcare

Construction

Retail

(Source: PwC, 2013)

A few initial trends and new approaches can be identified. Senior managers consistently acknowledge that  
disasters have impacted their operations, and will continue to do so, with dire consequences in the future. They 
also recognise that indirect losses, through supply chain interruptions, can be as severe if not worse than direct 
losses.  However, shared risks and costs represented by the wider and macroeconomic impacts of disasters are 
not yet fully considered. 

Few global corporations collaborate actively with national and local governments across the countries in which 
they operate. But there is also concern among business managers that an in-depth engagement with governments 
may delay processes and obstruct effective business operations.  There is, however, ad hoc collaboration and 
information sharing among industry peers.

Disaster risk management focus in most corporations remains centred on business continuity planning.  Most 
businesses are engaging in some form of disaster risk assessment and management for their supply chains, and 
are increasingly moving towards the setting of risk management standards, which suppliers have to comply 
with. 

Some corporations rely on the insurance industry for risk information and assessments, and most have only 
limited access to disaster risk models and information.  This limits their disaster risk awareness or capacity to 
factor this information into investment decisions.  

To date, disaster risk management usually falls under the responsibility of dedicated supply chain management 
functions rather than as an integral part of business development and investment planning. However, a shift is 
taking  place  where  companies  are  moving  strategic  consideration  of  disaster  risk  to  the  level  of  senior   
management and advisory boards. 

(Source: PwC, 2013vi) 

185

11.2  

 

 
Emerging practices

 

 

gagement to agree on policies, strategies and plans 
to manage disaster risks or to develop appropriate 
risk governance arrangements. 

Global businesses have risk management strate-
gies for their own assets and operations in place. 
Owing  to  recent  experience,  a  number  are  now 
demanding  risk  assessments  along  their  supply 
chain.  But  only  a  few  are  beginning  to  take  the 
lead on a broader approach to disaster risk.

New  perspectives  on  business  risk  management 
are emerging, however. In the case of global corpo-
rations,  additional  consultations  carried  out  for 
this report indicate a gradual shift in perspective. 
As Box 11.3 highlights, large global businesses are 
starting to move from a narrow focus on business 
continuity  planning  towards  a  broader  approach 
to prospectively manage their disaster risks. How-
ever, these changes are still incipient and are only 
reflected  in  more  recent  (three-to-four  year)  risk 
management policies. 

This gradual widening of focus from business conti-
nuity planning to a more comprehensive and strate-
gic  approach  to  disaster  risk  management  mirrors 
developments  in  the  public  sector  where  central 
planning and finance ministries begin to assess di-
saster  risks  and  integrate  disaster  risk  consider-
ations  into  national  planning  and  accounting  pro-
cesses (UNISDR, 2011). Unfortunately, there are still 
few channels or forums for joint public-private en-

Figure 11.3  Company risk management strategies

In addition, where corporations have a global remit, 
their incentives to engage with local or national reg-
ulators and actors may be limited. Through diversi-
fying their supply chains in different industry sectors 
they may, on the one hand, increase their vulnerabil-
ity to disaster risks in specific locations; on the other 
hand, they may spread their risks and increase their 
room to manoeuvre in times of crises or when facing 
tough regulations in particular locations. 

A  number  of  large  global  businesses  are  now  de-
manding  risk  assessments  from  small  businesses 
that are key suppliers.  A few companies have suc-
cessfully combined enhanced information of poten-
tial  disruptions,  supply  chain  and  financial  impact 
with simulations of disaster events to reach a more 
comprehensive  understanding  of  risk  drivers  and 
geographical  concentration  of  risk  as  a  basis  for 
their supply chain management (Box 11.4). 

But disaster risk management has also been recog-
nised as a business development opportunity, par-
ticularly because of long-term climate change. A re-
cent study of SMEs in Germany shows that the range 
of products and tools for risk management—partic-
ularly  in  flood  management,  which  businesses  al-
ready market—is significant and has the potential to 

(Source: PwC, 2013)

186

Part III - Chapter 11Box 11.4  Cisco’s comprehensive, proactive risk management programme 

Learning from the impact of the Chengdu earthquake of 2008, Cisco, one of the largest global providers of net-
working equipment, has developed a sophisticated supply chain crisis management system that allows it to 
proactively manage disaster risks to its assets and operations. Including its worldwide network of supply chain 
partners, the company combines business continuity planning information with supply chain visibility and di-
saster risk data, identifying hotspots before and during a crisis (Harrington and O’Connor, 2009). 

The use of a risk engine enables Cisco to assess the likelihood of supply chain disruptions and to generate heat 
maps based on likelihood and impact (Figure 11.2). This engine incorporates complex datasets, including data 
on flood risk, geology and geopolitics, supplier performance, as well as actuarial data (Ibid.). This tool provides 
the basis for accumulation of comprehensive information on drivers, trends and patterns of risk and thus for 
success of Cisco’s resilient supply chains.

Figure 11.2  Risk engine used by Cisco

(Source: Adapted from Harrington and O’Connor, 2009)

187

expand  and  include  prospective  risk  management 
(DKKV, 2012).

A number of businesses also recognise the value of 
collaborating and sharing their knowledge and ex-
pertise with the public sector (PwC, 2013). However, 
although several joint initiatives exist, mid- to long-
term  collaboration  both  among  the  private  sector 
and with the public sector are isolated, insufficient 
and at early stages of maturity (Ibid., 2013). One lim-
iting factor is the lack of familiarity and leverage of 
private sector skills and know-how by public institu-
tions; as a result, existing initiatives on each side are 
not well aligned, and collaboration remains an un-
tapped opportunity to date (Ibid.).

Businesses  usually  employ  four  distinctive  strate-
gies—similar  to  those  considered  by  governments 
or communities—to manage exposure to risks, de-
pending on their risk appetite and exposure profile 
(Figure 11.3).

However,  when  global  corporations  were  asked 
about their existing disaster risk management strat-
egies,  many  show  low  levels  of  maturity  vis-à-vis 
long-term risk reduction and prospective risk man-
agement  (PwC,  2013;  and  Box  11.4  above).  This 

means that although there are good practices to be 
shared in understanding and responding to imme-
diate  risks  to  corporate  assets,  longer-term  risks 
and risks to supply chains are less well understood 
(Figure 11.4).

Unsurprisingly,  levels  of  maturity  in  understanding 
asset  exposure  and  associated  risks  vary  signifi-
cantly. Although many companies rely on insurance 
providers to conduct risk assessments of their ma-
jor  assets,  innovative  examples  exist.  One  of  the 
global corporations consulted for this report creates 
‘heat maps’ of each of its sites by overlaying compa-
ny data on hazard and risk maps, setting up global 
risk standards and creating local compliance regis-
ters in line with the company’s global risk standards 
(PwC, 2013). 

In  addition,  a  process  of  positive  and  negative  in-
centives  and  regular  annual  audits  ensures  in-
creased and monitored levels of compliance (Ibid.). 
New  initiatives  towards  developing  integrated  di-
saster risk management frameworks for the private 
sector (Figure 11.5) are promising steps in the direc-
tion  of  more  effective  business  and  public-private 
risk reduction.

Figure 11.4  Level of maturity using number of good practices as a proxy 

(Source: PwC , 2013)

188

Part III - Chapter 11Figure 11.5  Towards a disaster risk management framework for the private sector (under development)

(Source: PwC, 2013)

Notes

i  However, there is a promising sign that ISO 22301 Business Con-
tinuity Management may address disaster risk more directly, includ-
ing a proactive approach for disaster reduction.
ii  This survey, carried out by Florida International University (FIU), 
York University and the Central American Institute for Business Man-
agement (INCAE), covered Vancouver, Canada; Miami, United States 
of  America;  Kingston,  Jamaica;  San  Jose,  Costa  Rica;  Bogota,  Co-
lombia; and Santiago, Chile.
iii  Dempsey,  Myers  and  Company:  Business  Interruption  Values 
and  Exposures.  Quinnipiac  University,  14  June  2006:  http://www.
google.de/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=dempsey%20myers%20%26%20com-
pany%20business%20interruption%20time%20revenue%20cost&
source=web&cd=1&ved=0CCwQFjAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.
theccic.org%2FCustomer-Content%2FWWW%2FCMS%2Ffiles%2F
2nd_session2.ppt&ei=d_0wUZn0CoSOtQaf1IDIDw&usg=AFQjCNH
lS_NrnrBRx-YiDdvfZ0iNB9buJA.

iv  A similar survey carried out for Japanese companies just after 
the Great East Japan Earthquake reports that the reasons for lack 
of BCP in 2,865 SMEs were lack of know-how (42.1%), lack of need 
(35.3%), lack of human resources (33.1%), lack of time (26.35%) and 
lack  of  financial  cost  (22.1%)  (Teikoku  Databank,  Ltd,  2011,  http://
www.tdb.co.jp/report/watching/press/pdf/k110601.pdf.).
v  Total N is 1,198 with n=939 for less than 100 employees, n=210 
for 100–499 employees, and n=49 for 500+ employees.
vi  Additional  information  directly  provided  by  PwC  based  on 
workshop discussions and internal reports.

189

190

Part III - Chapter 11Chapter 12
Risk Blind Investing

191

Financial markets have expanded since the 1980s, but the right incentives to integrate disaster risk 
management into business investment decisions have not been provided.  

Investing  has  become  an  increasingly  short-term  and  speculative  activity,  losing  sight  of  longer-
term and systemic risks.  At the same time, asset owners and beneficiaries of pension and sovereign 
wealth  funds  have  become  increasingly  disconnected  from  how  their  money  is  being  invested, 
weakening responsible and accountable investment behaviour. 

Risks, including disaster risks, are rarely visible, hidden in complex and opaque financial instru-
ments. And analytical reports, models and forecasts ignore disaster risk. This has a profound effect 
on the way investment markets operate, building up new hidden risks in private finance.

12.1 Deregulation and  

expansion of financial capital

The inherent logic of expanding and increasingly 
fast-moving  capital  markets  has  created  new 
risks that materialised with severe global effects 
in the financial crash of 2007–2008. Disaster risk 
is another hidden risk that financial markets are 
still ignoring.

The  deregulation  of  financial  markets  since  the 
1980s  has  stimulated  a  staggering  increase  in  the 
volume  of  financial  capital  linked  to  increasingly 
short-term  investment  behaviour  and  speculation 
(UNCTAD, 2011).  By the end of 2010, total value of fi-
nancial assets across the globe had reached US$212 
trillion (comprising equity market capitalisation and 
outstanding bonds and loans).  

At the same time, financial capital has been con-
centrated in a limited number of large institutions 
and in a largely unregulated ‘shadow banking sys-
tem’ (UNCTAD, 2011). This shadow banking system 
is a complex value chain of intermediaries, includ-
ing  investment  banks,  hedge  funds  and  equity 
funds  and  instruments  that  enable  assets  to  be 
moved around the world through a large number 
of financial instruments that enable investment in 
physical  assets  as  well  as  in  production  and  ser-
vices (Ibid.). The scale of this shadow banking sys-
tem has become so vast that by early 2008, it was 
estimated that assets under its management in the 

192

United  States  of  America  alone  amounted  to  al-
most US$20 trillion (Ibid.).

The financial market has developed the ability to 
respond and adapt quickly to benefit from short-
term  profit-making  opportunities.  However,  mar-
kets  are  more  challenged  to  account  for  longer-
term  risks  and  liabilities  or  for  systemic  risks,  as 
has been demonstrated in the financial crisis that 
began in 2007 (Clements-Hunt, 2012; Ritter 2004). 

Recent surveys of investors’ perceptions and incen-
tives  for  investments  in  low-income  countries  and 
emerging markets have revealed the following top 
catalysts—market size or access, human resources 
and  domestic  institutions,  banking  services,  and 
political and economic forecasts (WEF, 2012; IIGCC, 
2010; Bhinda and Martin, 2009). Perceived risks do 
not include the likelihood of loss owing to disasters 
but rather electricity supply constraints, corruption, 
interest rates, inflation and tax-related issues (Bhin-
da and Martin, 2009; UNCTAD, 2011). 

The  number  of  investors  who  explicitly  consider 
how investments produce disaster risks remains un-
known, particularly in the case of large hedge funds, 
government bonds and commodities (IIGCC, 2010).  
And the business case for risk-neutral investment is 
often  undermined  by  uncertainties  about  public 
policy response (e.g. the price of carbon; land-use 
and  zoning  regulations;  insurance  legislation)  and 
even,  despite  amassed  evidence  to  the  contrary 

Part III - Chapter 12(IPCC, 2012), by a “lack of confidence in the material-
ity of climate change” (Ibid.: p.29). 

12.2  Hidden risks in the  

institutional investment  

 

           value chain 

 

 

Investors  and  their  fund  managers  are  far  re-
moved  from  the  consequences  of  the  invest-
ment decisions they take, all but erasing effec-
tive  accountability.  In  addition,  the  increasing 
complexity of investment products and trading 
systems has resulted in an opaque system that 
creates hidden risks, including disaster risk.

The institutional investment value chain includes in-
stitutional investors such as pension funds, mutual 
funds, sovereign  wealth funds, hedge funds,  insur-
ance funds and private equity; and intermediaries, 
such as investment banks, asset managers and in-
vestment  consultants  (Cambridge  Programme  for 
Sustainable Leadership, 2011a). 

Institutional  investors  manage  assets  worth  more 
than US$80 trillion globally (Ibid.) on behalf of hun-
dreds  of  millions  of  beneficiaries  such  as  employ-
ees, in the case of pension funds; national citizens, 
in  the  case  of  sovereign  wealth  funds;  premium 
holders, in the case of insurance funds; and rich in-

Figure 12.1  The institutional investment value chain (simplified)

dividuals,  in  the  case  of  foundation-based  or  high 
net worth wealth managers (Clements-Hunt, 2012).  
Figure 12.1 highlights how this value chain delegates 
responsibility 
investment  decision-making 
through a diverse ecosystem of intermediaries with 
only limited mechanisms for reporting and account-
ability back to beneficiaries or first investors.

for 

Although intermediaries ultimately have a fiduciary 
responsibility vis-à-vis original investors (beneficia-
ries), their primary role is to identify investment op-
portunities that benefit from a certain level of risk 
and return.  These investments are made across a 
range of financial instruments, including the trading 
of stocks and bonds.  In particular, trading activity in 
so-called  over-the-counter  (OTC)  markets  signifi-
cantly outweighs turnover on closely regulated and 
more transparent public stock markets (Clements-
Hunt, 2012). 

Asset  managers  rarely  consider  disaster  risk  when 
making  investments.  The  increasing  distance  be-
tween  these  managers  and  beneficiaries  means 
that  the  latter  are  increasingly  disconnected  from 
how their investment portfolios are being managed, 
including how much is at risk from disasters.  And 
because the financial market has become increas-
ingly disjointed from the real economy, it generates 
a  further  disconnection  between  asset  managers 
and how the invested money is ultimately used.

(Source: UNISDR, adapted from Clements-Hunt, 2012)

193

Box 12.1  European and US pension funds buy farmland in South America and Africa

Through TIAA-CREF, the leading US financial services company and the main provider of retirement services for 
US academic and research sectors, a number of pension funds, including from Sweden and Canada, have be-
gun to invest heavily into farmland development across the globei.  Direct investment into agricultural produc-
tion on commercial farms in South America and Africa produces high returns.  As Chapter 11 in this report high-
lighted, these investments may not only internalise risks to the business, but also by extension to the investor. 
They may also externalise risks, for example, to displaced smallholder farmers and pastoralists or through the 
overexploitation of land and water resources. 

Another big institutional investor, TLG Capital, announced in October 2012 its investment in an agricultural 
fund—EmVest—which manages more than 10,000 hectares of land across sub-Saharan Africa.  TLG and EmVest 
have invested about US$65 million across the region and are expecting to expandii. 

Recently, however, TIAA-CREF joined a number of European institutional investors to launch the Farmland Prin-
ciples—a commitment to not invest in deals with high environmental or social costs or rights violations (Grain, 
2012), suggesting that social demand—expressed in the United States of America and Europe through cam-
paigns against investment strategies—can create disincentives.

(Source: UNISDR)

As  the  volume  of  financial  capital  has  ballooned, 
so  have  the  hidden  risks—as  the  financial  crisis 
that began in 2007 manifested. The increasing so-
phistication, complexity and opaqueness of finan-
cial instruments means that securities and bonds 
for businesses with high levels of disaster risk are 
bought  and  sold  without  considering  how  these 
risks  may  affect  asset  values  (Clements-Hunt, 
2012). 

Even  where  risks  are  recognized  and  their  impact 
on  a  particular  asset  is  considered,  willingness  to 
invest in the asset can prevail because part of the 
risk tends to be transferred to the public sector or 
to other sectors and countries, and thus becomes 
shared risk.  In other words, the risk is considered 
an externality for the business and therefore to the 
investment.  For  example,  global  investment  in 
emissions-heavy  industrial  activity,  such  as  coal 
mining, continues to increase—in 2010, total invest-
ment  by  banks  in  coal  mining  was  almost  double 
the  amount  before  the  financial  crisis  (Petherick, 
2012). 

Much  of  this  investment  is  hidden  within  complex 
and  aggregated  corporate  loans,  funded  by  large 
funds  or  banks  whose  individual  investors  rarely 
know  what  specific  activities  are  being  financed 

194

(Ibid.).  Beneficiaries in high-income countries with 
well-established  pension  funds  may  unknowingly 
be benefiting through transferring disaster risk to 
countries  most  at  risk  or,  as  the  example  in  Box 
12.1  shows,  by  investing  in  agricultural  practices 
that increase drought risk. 

12.3 Eyes wide shut: 

           disaster risk

 

consistently discounting  

 

 

Economic growth projections and business fore-
casts at different levels do not account for disas-
ter risks. The implications of disasters on a coun-
try’s fiscal policy, infrastructure and utilities, and 
overall  enabling  business  environment  are  not 
understood with potentially serious consequenc-
es for business investment decisions.

The global crisis that began in 2007 demonstrated 
that investment decisions that are rational from an 
individual perspective can generate correlated and 
systemic  risks  to  the  financial  system  as  a  whole 
(Castells et al., 2012). Because investment decisions 
tend  to  be  based  on  broadly  similar  risk  models, 
analyses and forecasts, markets tend to become in-
creasingly correlated and concatenated and hence 

Part III - Chapter 12the  risk  increasingly  systemic.  By  mid-2009,  global 
wealth valued at US$28.8 trillion, captured in equity 
and real estate values, had been lost in the resulting 
meltdown (McKinsey Global Institute, 2009). 

In the same way, and as the Thailand floods epito-
mised, individual business investment decisions in 
hazard-exposed  areas  can,  over  time,  generate 
systemic global disaster risks. The preceding years 
of profit-oriented investment may have resulted in 
2011  as  the  year  with  the  largest  disaster-related 
economic and insurance losses ever (Orie and Sta-
hel, 2012; Ferris and Petz, 2012; Worldwatch Insti-
tute, 2012). Investors seem to underestimate or are 
blind  to  systemic  risk,  whether  associated  with 

sub-prime mortgages or hazard-exposed industri-
al estates (White and Fan, 2006). 

Information on the economic risks associated with 
disasters, climate change or water scarcity is readi-
ly available. In 2002, for example, a group of finan-
cial institutions predicted that economic losses as-
sociated with disasters and climate change would 
amount to US$150 billion per year (UNEP FI, 2002). 
This  figure  was  surpassed  just  three  years  later, 
when Hurricane Katrina hit the US coast in 2005.  In 
2007,  a  revised  scenario  was  developed  that  pre-
dicted potential losses owing to climate change of 
US$1 trillion per year by 2040 (UNEP FI, 2007).   

Box 12.2  No more forecasting blind spots—applying future risk lenses

The Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU), one of the world’s leading institutes for economic, political and social 
analysis, provides, among other information services, economic forecasts, risk and country briefings to busi-
nesses and public sector actors alike. These briefings and underlying data are widely used and globally refer-
enced, and thus have a substantial level of influence on the public understanding of future risks and economic 
projections. These country and sector forecasts do not include risks associated with natural hazards, as the 
methodology of the EIU explicitly excludes assessments of future hazard and risk. 

For example, the 2012 country report of Indonesia, one of the world’s highly hazard-prone countries, does not 
address disaster risk at all (EIU, 2012a). The 2012 Kenya country report addresses drought risk more clearly. 
However, it is not integrated in the economic forecast model. Instead the report describes that policy-making 
will remain vulnerable to exogenous shocks, which include drought and volatile commodity prices, and contin-
ues to warn that droughts would pose downside risks to GDP growth forecasts, calculated at 4.8 percent for 
2013 (EIU, 2012b).

However, specific analysis that is tailor-made for individual clients may include disaster risk analysis upon re-
quest. Further, in the aftermath of a disaster, regular country reports do refer to these events and their impacts 
on economic performance. For example, in case of Haiti, which was recently hit by tropical storms, including 
Hurricane Sandy, and is still in the reconstruction process, the country report addresses disaster risk in several 
places. Thus, the economic impact of past disasters caused, for example, by agricultural loss or physical capital 
damage is woven into the economic forecast, but the probability of future disaster risk is not (EIU, 2012c).

Although excluding disaster risk from standard forecasts may seem surprising from a disaster risk manager’s 
point of view, from the perspective of an economic forecaster, it makes good sense. For example, the short time 
period of forecasts—two years in the case of EIU forecasts—means that including disaster risk probabilities is a 
tricky exercise. 

New developments in probabilistic risk modelling and assessments, however, and increasingly sophisticated 
concepts of resilient economies and supply chains in the business sector could change this trend and help the 
emergence of a new generation of economic forecasts. The EIU has recognised the significant impact that di-
saster events can have on economic and business performance and is therefore considering an integration of 
relevant indicators for disaster risk into its models (EIU, 2012d). Although in its infancy, this process could great-
ly enhance the understanding of other dimensions of economic and business resilience than those currently 
dominating and limiting investment decision-making.

(Source: UNISDR)

195

Box 12.3  Forecasting risk—lessons from Thailand?

In October 2011, only a few weeks before the country’s economy was engulfed by the Chao Phraya river floods, 
the EIU, a major source for country risk profiles generated by businesses and investors across the globe, fore-
cast an expansionary fiscal policy of the Thai Government for 2012 and estimated GDP growth of 3.8 percent in 
2011 to 4.8 percent in 2012 (EIU, 2011a). 

After the floods shut down more than 14,000 businesses nationwide, this estimate of real GDP growth was re-
vised downwards to 2.5 percent in November and to 1.2 percent in December (EIU, 2011b & 2011c; Atradius, 
2011). Political and related policy forecasts had to be revised also owing to expected repercussions from the 
floods.

A few months earlier, an investor country briefing by a major bank, based heavily on EIU data, did note that the 
export-heavy Thai economy was “very vulnerable to external demand shocks” (Rabobank, 2011), and had been 
affected  by  the  Japan  disaster  in  March  2011.  Yet  its  growth  projections  for  Thailand  in  2011  remained  un-
changed.  

An empirical study of the relationship between foreign direct investment (FDI) flows and the occurrence of di-
sasters over the last 40 years in Thailand shows that investment has not been influenced by disaster occurrence 
in general, and floods in particular (Figure 12.2; Thampanishvong, 2012). 

Figure 12.2  FDI and disaster occurrence in Thailand from 1970 to 2011

(Source: Thampanishvong, 2012, based on data from Bank of Thailand and EM-DAT)

However, other studies covering 94 countries over a 20-year period have found a negative and significant rela-
tionship between disasters and FDI (Escaleras and Register, 2011). 

In Thailand’s 2012 economic forecast briefing, flood risk is mentioned, suggesting that the “perfect storm of 
factors that combined to produce the floods in 2011” were not in place for 2012 (EIU, 2012e). Yet, it cautions that 
the risk of renewed flooding had not disappeared and notes that investor confidence had not been restored, 
exacerbated  by  intra-government  conflict  over  water  management  and  flood  drainage  between  the  city  of 
Bangkok and surrounding areas.

(Source: UNISDR)

196

Part III - Chapter 12Public  domain  global  disaster  risk  information  de-
veloped for the GAR has been available since 2009iii  
and similar information published since 2004 (UNDP, 
2004;  World  Bank,  2005).  Commercial  risk  models 
are also produced for the insurance industry. 

But  this  information  is  not  generally  included  in 
business surveys, economic forecasts and country 
briefings  that  guide  investors  and  credit  ratings. 
Even  in  high-risk  countries,  disaster  risk  is  rarely 
mentioned, contrary to quality and availability of la-
bour,  access  to  export  markets,  political  and  eco-
nomic stability and incentives, such as tax breaks.  
Forecasters consider disaster risk too uncertain and 
volatile, particularly over the relatively short periods 
that are used for forecasting, to allow the integra-
tion of expected impacts into economic growth pro-
jections (see Box 12.2). 

Global  reference  reports  such  as  the  International 
Monetary Fund’s World Economic Outlook and the 
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Devel-
opment’s Economic Outlook do not include disaster 
risk into their economic modelling, possibly owing 
to the difficulty of estimating disaster risk per se and 
lack of consensus on the possible impact of disas-
ters on economies.

Even in a weather-sensitive sector such as agribusi-
ness, forecasts in 2011 and 2012 did not consider di-
saster risk-related factors in their projections. Thus, 
the  risk  of  a  global  food  spike  posed  by  the  2012 
drought  in  North  America  was  not  identified  (see 
Chapter 10). 

In these projections, other risk factors and uncer-
tainties, such as fluctuating crude oil prices or ex-
change  rates,  are  considered  but  disaster  risk  is 
not.  Despite  recent  weather-related  impacts  on 
global  commodity  markets,  these  projections 
claim to provide “a baseline for further analysis of 
alternative  economic  or  policy  assumptions”  and 
to  analyse  the  conditions  for  “increasing  agricul-
tural productivity in a sustainable manner” (Ibid.).

Similarly, as Box 12.3 shows, even while water levels 
were rising in Thailand in October 2011, none of the 
major forecasting agencies and analysts warned of 
potential  impacts  on  economic  activity.  This  was 
certainly not because information on flood risk was 
not publicly available,iv  but more likely because of a 
low level of awareness of disaster risk by economic 
forecasters and risk analysts and the difficulties of 
incorporating disaster risk-related metrics in their 
work. 

12.4   

 

Winds of change

 

 

 

Recent  efforts  of  investor  groups  concerned 
with  climate  change  have  begun  to  show  re-
sults with 10 percent of global investment man-
agers  now  integrating  environmental,  social 
and  governance  (ESG)  issues  into  their  invest-
ment process (IIGCC, 2010). 

Increasingly,  companies,  investors  and  govern-
ments  are  recognizing  that  more  transparency  in 
business practices, the spread of investment port-
folios and patterns of natural resources consump-
tion may create opportunities for greater efficiency 
and  effectiveness  in  business  operations  (CDP, 
2011).  Correspondingly,  a  growing  number  of  re-
sources are available today for companies and in-
vestors to assess and disclose physical risks, par-
ticularly  climate-related  risks  (Calvert,  Ceres,  and 
Oxfam, 2012).

Regulators are also requiring that businesses dis-
close  hidden  risks.    For  example,  the  Climate 
Change Act in the United Kingdom in 2008 led to a 
requirement  that  companies  in  the  energy,  water 
and transport sectors publish a report on the risks 
posed by the impact of climate change.  And the 
Canadian  Securities  Administration  (CSA)  has  is-
sued  similar  guidance  (Calvert,  Ceres  and  Oxfam, 
2012).  Although currently these requirements only 
refer  to  climate  related  risks,  in  the  future  they 
could also address other disaster risks, for exam-

197

ple, associated with earthquakes, tsunamis, volca-
nic eruptions and landslides.

ments  that  generate  environmental  and  social 
costs. 

The threat of falling equity prices or negative analyst 
ratings  for  businesses  that  do  not  manage  or  dis-
close their disaster risks may in time become a pow-
erful  incentive  that  rewards  those  businesses  and 
governments, which more effectively manage those 
risks.  

Notes

and 

i 
https://www.tiaa-cref.org/public/about/press/about_us/
http://www.top-
releases/articles/pressrelease422.html 
1000funds.com/news/2011/06/08/swedish-fund-goes-farming-
for-diversification/.
ii  http://www.emvest.com/latest_news_media.aspx.
iii  http://www.preventionweb.net/english/maps/?pid:34&pif:3. 
iv  A flood risk model including Thailand has been available since 
2009.    http://www.preventionweb.net/english/hyogo/gar/2011/en/
what/rdp.html. 

A  changing  approach  to  investment  is  also  taking 
root in some large institutional investors.  For exam-
ple,  the  Government  Employees  Pension  Fund  of 
South  Africa  has  recognized  that  the  information 
available and used in each stage of the investment 
chain  is  asymmetric.  This  means  that  providers  of 
investment opportunity know more than investors 
and control the information of those whose money 
they manage (IISD et al., 2012). In addition, regula-
tion  is  encouraging  long-term  investors,  such  as 
large pension funds, to invest in securities with low 
risk to ensure liquidity and stability of their portfoli-
os. The South African pension fund is seeking to di-
versify its portfolio by investing in longer-term de-
velopment projects across the country (Ibid.). 

One of the largest sovereign wealth funds, the Nor-
wegian Pension Fund Global, is another example. It 
passively  invests  in  more  than  8,000  companies 
worldwide and yet has established standards for en-
vironmental,  social  and  governance  issues  to  be 
taken into account in all of these. However, to quan-
tify the benefits to these initiatives and to estimate 
the cost of externalized risks is not a trivial exercise, 
particularly when it comes to valuing natural capi-
tal.  As a result, performance criteria for investment 
contracts and loans that take natural capital – and 
disaster risk considerations – into account have yet 
to be identified (Cambridge Programme for Sustain-
able Leadership 2011b).  Recent initiatives are now 
addressing this gap (TEEB, 2010) though there is still 
a need to link the real costs of externalities such as 
environmental pollution, the destruction of natural 
capital or the cost of increased disaster risk. 

While  these  changes  still  involve  a  minute  propor-
tion of the total value of global financial assets, they 
do indicate a change in direction.  These changing 
values are now guiding both regulators concerned 
with  reducing  systemic  risks  as  well  as  investors 
who want to protect their investments against such 
risks  and  at  the  same  time  avoid  making  invest-

198

Part III - Chapter 12Chapter 13  
Securing Investment - 
Insurance Revisited

199

Insurance pricing and availability has a major influence on business investment decisions and be-
haviour.  Currently, a number of disincentives work against the adequate pricing of disaster risk: on 
the one hand, expensive premiums may make investment unattractive; on the other hand, overly low 
premiums can exacerbate the discounting of future risk, potentially resulting in the creation of new 
disaster risk. 

In rapidly growing economies, particularly in Asia, insurance penetration is spreading faster than di-
saster risks are being reduced.  The over-supply of capital through insurance-linked securities may 
also distort risk pricing.  It also generates fiscal risks when premiums are not risk-based and public 
sector institutions with limited experience of the insurance market are involved.

13.1 Creating an enabling  

environment for effective  

 

           insurance

 

 

Insurance can potentially play an important role 
in disaster risk reduction, but only where the en-
abling environment allows for appropriate pric-
ing  and  coverage.  Governments  and  insurance 
companies are yet to take full advantage of this 
potential.

Insurance pricing and availability has a major influ-
ence on business investment decisions and behav-
iour. Unless assets such as factories and other facili-
ties can be insured, businesses cannot obtain loans 
and  other  forms  of  finance.  Expensive  premiums 
may make the investment unattractive, making the 
business 
look  elsewhere.  Conversely,  however, 
when premiums are too low, businesses may be en-
couraged to overly discount the risks and invest in 
hazard-exposed  areas,  accumulating  disaster  risks 
for themselves and creating wider risks and costs.  

Insurance is one of the main financial tools for house-
holds  and  companies  to  strengthen  their  disaster 
resilience. This is achieved by spreading the risk of 
exceptional disaster loss among a large number of 
policyholders  and  over  a  long  time.  Insurers  com-
pensate disaster damages in return for the premiums 
each insurance buyer paid ex-ante, in accordance with 
the agreed contract. Although few financial institutions 
undertake  an  overall  assessment  of  disaster  risk, 
most require insurance coverage as a condition for 

200

providing loans to businesses. This chapter will dis-
cuss  how  insurance  can  be  a  useful  financial  tool 
for  businesses  and  individuals  to  strengthen  their 
resilience, competitiveness and sustainability. 

Although  the  details  of    insurance  coverage  vary 
widely, insurance rarely guarantees business conti-
nuity  or  protects  businesses  from  the  wider  im-
pacts of disaster. Insurance can provide protection 
from asset loss and even supply chain interruption, 
but does not compensate for wider effects like low 
employee morale, increased absenteeism, stress or 
unrest,  low  productivity,  declining  customer  de-
mand and goodwill, and other impacts (Kataria and 
Zerjav, 2012). In other words, insurance is not a sub-
stitute for sound risk-based investment decisions. 

Additionally, the insurance required when applying 
for  a  loan  does  not  necessarily  cover  all  hazards, 
resulting in limited payouts to affected households 
or  businesses  and  even  countries,  in  the  case  of 
national  catastrophe  insurance.  For  example,  in 
Australia, an ‘insurance gap’ exists whereby differ-
ent definitions of flood by insurers limited the in-
surance  payout  after  the  2010–2011  floods,  and 
brought  confusion  and  frustration  among  insur-
ance buyers (World Bank, 2011).

Similarly, when governments insure their sovereign 
risk,  instruments  such  as  catastrophe  bonds  may 
be  effective  in  avoiding  short-term  welfare  losses 
and  reinforcing  macroeconomic  stability,  but  gen-
erate no net income. If, following a disaster, income 

Part III - Chapter 13declines  in  the  long  term,  the  primary  gains  from 
the  smoothing  obtained  from  reinsurance,  contin-
gency  loans  and  catastrophe  bonds  are  obtained 
by  delaying  losses  (Hsiang  and  Jina,  2012).  Insur-
ance alone and in itself, in other words, does not en-
able  disaster-affected  countries  to  catch  up  and 
cannot substitute for investments in risk reduction 
(Hamdan, 2012). 

In principle, insurance should also act as a powerful 
incentive  for  disaster  risk  reduction.  An  insurance 
premium  should  represent  the  economic  value  of 
risk, which in a perfect market would equal the ex-
pected loss plus transaction costs (Galegatti et al., 
2008).  However,  perfect  markets  do  not  exist  and 
whether  owing  to  an  inadequate  or  inaccurate  as-
sessment of risks or to government intervention in 
the market, insurance premiums do not necessarily 
reflect a realistic pricing of risk (Nguyen, 2012).

Classic  problems  surrounding  insurance  include 
moral hazard and adverse selectioni , both related 
with information asymmetry in the market (Galegat-
ti et al., 2008). If insurance pricing reflects real risk, 

insurance can facilitate risk reduction investments, 
for example, as in the case of the California Earth-
quake insurance (see Box 13.1 below). When lower 
premiums  are  set,  for  example,  for  earthquake-re-
sistant properties, this provides an incentive to in-
vest in retrofitting and earthquake-resistant design, 
thus avoiding moral hazard and adverse selection. 

Although risks in developed markets, such as Eu-
rope, Japan and the United States of America, are 
modelled  with  precision  by  the  commercial  risk 
modelling  industry,  this  is  often  not  the  case  in 
new and emerging insurance markets. At the same 
time,  although  sophisticated  risk  models  enable 
the  insurance  and  reinsurance  industry  to  calcu-
late  premiums,  data  from  these  actuarial  models 
are  rarely  available  to  those  who  purchase  insur-
ance policies, generating information asymmetry. 
The accuracy of loss estimates and the translation 
of those into premiums cannot be easily verified by 
the insurance buyers.  Developments of public di-
saster databases and risk models have the poten-
tial to start to bridge this information asymmetry 
(see Chapter 15 for examples).

Box 13.1  National and regional insurance mechanisms in the United States of America

The US National Flood Insurance Programme (NFIP) provides subsidised flood protection insurance to proper-
ties located in designated special flood hazard areas. In addition, the government was not allowed to purchase 
reinsurance. As a result, it had accumulated debts of US$17.8 billion by 2007. Legislation requires the NFIP to of-
fer subsidised premiums even to homes that suffer repetitive losses, thus decreasing or negating risk reduction 
investment for those properties and resulting in an estimated 25–30 percent of claims paid for repetitive losses. 

In addition, policy-holders often stop paying their insurance and instead rely on the government’s relief sup-
port as soon as mortgage lenders, who are supposed to control this, have transferred their account to capital 
markets and thus lose oversight. In such cases, debt-based private ownership—in this case, housing at risk of 
flood damage—once again increases public liabilities. The government recognised this problem and in June 
2012, passed legislation that will phase out NFIP subsidies on properties with repetitive losses, introduce mini-
mum deductibles as well as allow for a rezoning of areas to correspond more closely to new risk assessments, 
all which are expected to avoid moral hazard and have positive impacts on risk reduction investment.

In  contrast,  the  California  Earthquake  Authority  has  proven  a  successful  public-private  partnership  (PPP), 
where risk-based pricing and cost-effective structures have ensured a solvent programme that offers afford-
able premiums. Actuarially sound methods were used while benefitting from government reinsurance and sup-
port. Recently, the adoption of a building code for retrofitting existing structures is trying to link with lower in-
surance premium offers to lower the cost of insurance in general. 

In doing so, a double incentive for insurance purchase and risk mitigation strategies would be created that 
would ultimately benefit the insurance market, the insured and government budgets. 

(Source: Orie in Orie and Stahel, 2012)

201

Governments  are  critical  determinants  of  the  role 
that insurance markets can play in managing disas-
ter risk. Their interpretation of the social contract of 
the society they govern shapes the landscape of risk 
financing and risk management. To develop the in-
surance market, many governments play the role of 
regulator, framing how the market works, acts as re-
insurer and, in some cases, directly sells insurance 
to citizens and companies. The latter has the poten-
tial  to  distort  premiums,  for  example,  when  insur-
ance is subsidised to increase penetration rates. Un-
derpriced premiums that do not reflect risk levels do 
not  provide  incentives  to  invest  in  disaster  risk  re-
duction.  When, in addition, governments act as in-
surers of last resort, this may encourage moral haz-
ard and perverse incentives in favour of investment 
in hazard-exposed areas (Nguyen, 2012). In addition, 
it exposes governments and ultimately taxpayers to 
losses, as in the case of the US National Flood Insur-
ance Programme (NFIP), outlined in Box 13.1. 

But there are also other successful insurance prod-
ucts  where  the  premium  does  not  directly  reflect 
expected loss. For example, in the case of paramet-
ric  insurance,  the  payout  from  insurance  compa-
nies  is  related  to  the  scale  of  a  predetermined 
event, such as the severity of a storm and not to the 

Box 13.2  Catastrophe insurance in China

scale of the loss. Insurers can instantly calculate to-
tal  payout  amount  after  the  trigger  event  and  do 
not  have  to  evaluate  individual  loss  claims.  Para-
metric insurance gives the insured incentives to in-
vest  in  risk  reduction,  given  that  if  losses  are  re-
duced they still receive the same payout. It also lets 
the  insured  decide  how  much  risk  they  want  to 
transfer. 

If  comprehensive  risk,  exposure  and  vulnerability 
models do not exist, as is often the case in many 
low  and  middle-income  countries,  parametric  in-
surance may be easier to implement than conven-
tional  insurance.  However,  it  still  requires  invest-
ment in the infrastructure to monitor hazard levels 
in a way that can produce credible and transparent 
estimates of the severity of each event. This invest-
ment  is  a  prerequisite  for  the  expansion  of  insur-
ance penetration in low-income economies.

Regional approaches to disaster insurance can offer 
a solution by pooling not only risks but also resourc-
es across a greater area and number of actors. For 
example, in south-eastern Europe, the South East-
ern  Europe  and  Caucasus  Catastrophe  Risk  Insur-
ance  Facility  (SEEC  CRIF)  provides  homeowners, 
farmers, enterprises and governments with access 

China’s insurance penetration is still comparatively low, particularly outside the agricultural sector. This is de-
spite almost two decades of rapid economic growth, usually associated with significant growth in the insurance 
market (Ranger and Williamson, 2011). Earthquake insurance penetration is only 3 percent across China (Wang 
et al., 2009) and with typhoons and floods rises to only 5 percent (Swiss Re., 2008). Consequently, insured losses 
are usually low even following major disasters.  After the Huaije and Yangtze River flooding in 2007, insurance 
claims only amounted to 6 percent of total estimated loss. And during the Wenchuan Earthquake in 2008, pay-
outs made by the insurance industry only equalled about 1 percent of total losses (Lloyds, 2012).

Insurance regulation can trigger growth in insurance markets, but there are also other types of public policies 
and regulatory mechanisms that can result in increasing demand and facilitate the effective capital markets 
required for insurance to operate (Ranger and Surminski, 2011). In China, although public policy is seen as a 
means to promote insurance in the agricultural sector, no similar approach exists to support development of 
insurance for the property sector. However, this may change in the coming years owing to continued and grow-
ing urbanisation—today, more than 44 percent of the country’s population lies in urban areas (Kamal-Chaoui et 
al., 2009). In 2010, industrial and service sectors accounted for 89 percent of total GDPiii , which means that pub-
lic policies on insurance and reinsurance as part of overall risk governance arrangements can be expected to 
change.

(Source: Surminski in Orie and Stahel, 2012)

202

Part III - Chapter 13Box 13.3  The Christchurch insurance crisis and lessons for the future

The two major earthquakes that hit New Zealand in September 2010 and in February 2011 generated insurance 
losses of an estimated US$17 billion. These losses were a combination of payouts through the country’s public 
residential insurance, the Earthquake Commission (EQC), losses to the commercial sector and losses to resi-
dential properties in excess of the EQC, covered by private insurers. The EQC alone faced more than 310,000 
claims, with each of the two events drawing the highest number of claims by far in the EQC’s 65-year history. 
The second largest insurer in the country—AMI, with 85,000 policyholders in Christchurch alone—had to be 
bailed out by the government with an estimated US$800 million. Insurance claims could not be paid in a timely 
manner, creating a bottleneck for residents’ relocation to safer areas. Therefore, a programme was initiated by 
the government, in partnership with the insurance sector, in which 80 percent of residents in high-risk areas 
were allowed to not only sell their land but also to hand over the insurance claim.

Following the two earthquakes, zoning policies and building regulations were revised, including a decision to 
abandon selected suburbs and depopulate the severely affected and densely built-up central business district 
of Christchurch. Moreover, the insurance industry announced several important changes, including incapacity 
to pay out (AMI) and the termination of insurance policies (Ansvar Insurance). As a result, the EQC premiums 
trebled from early 2012 onwards to reduce the insurance policy’s cash shortfall and begin to rebuild its re-
serves. A major concern, however, is that new earthquakes may hit New Zealand in the coming years, repeating 
the country’s experience between 1929 and 1942, when a series of seven major earthquakes struck. 

(Source: Muir-Wood, 2012; IRP, 2012; Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (http://cera.govt.nz/))

to  affordable  catastrophe  and  weather  risk  insur-
ance (World Bank and UNISDR, 2010). This regional 
risk pooling mechanisms is the result of a success-
ful  cooperation  between  a  private  reinsurer,  na-
tional  governments  and  international  organisa-
tions,  which  continue  to  support  countries  to 
enact appropriate regulatory and policy reforms to 
enable increasing insurance coverageii. 

Historically,  one  of  the  main  drivers  of  growth  in 
the non-life insurance market has been increasing 
income  per  capita  (Feyen  et  al.,  2011;  Enz,  2000; 
Zheng et al., 2008). But it is not the only determi-
nant of how insurance penetration develops within 
a  country.  Public  policy  and  regulated  insurance 
markets  have  proven  to  be  another  strong  driver 
towards  increasing  insurance  coverage  in  coun-
tries with limited penetration (Hussels et al., 2005) 
and may become the main factor of new regulato-
ry  responses  to  climate  change  (Ranger  and  Sur-
minski, 2011).

History shows that insurance contributes to disaster 
risk  reduction  only  in  countries  with  a  mature  risk 
management culture (Muir-Wood in Orie and Stahel, 
2012).  The  Netherlands  provides  a  good  example. 

Investments  made  in  hazard  mitigation  since  the 
early 17th century now mean that flood mortality 
is  500  times  lower  than  during  the  Middle  Ages 
(Van Baars and Van Kempen, 2009). 

Until recently, Dutch citizens could not legally pur-
chase  flood  insurance,  which  forced  the  govern-
ment  to  ensure  flood  risk  protection  levels  (Orie 
and  Stahel,  2012).  Although  this  legal  barrier  has 
been  removed,  flood  insurance  is  still  not  widely 
available.  Discussions  to  develop  a  public-private 
partnership  (PPP)  for  insurance  coverage  were 
halted in 2010 as a result of the economic crisis and 
tightening fiscal space (Ibid.).

In rapidly growing economies, particularly in Asia, 
insurance penetration is spreading faster than di-
saster risks are being reduced (Muir-Wood in Orie 
and Stahel, 2012). This practice increases exposure 
of the insurance industry to high and growing loss-
es,  even  if  existing  risks  are  accurately  modelled, 
which may not always be the case.  In these coun-
tries,  low  insurance  pricing,  aimed  at  increasing 
market penetration or attracting investment, may 
not encourage risk-averse investment.  

203

On the contrary it may stimulate increased business 
investment and hence accelerate the accumulation 
of disaster risk.  It also generates fiscal risks when 
premiums are not risk-based and public sector insti-
tutions  with  limited  experience  of  the  insurance 
market are involved (Orie and Stahel, 2012.).  In Chi-
na, as Box 13.2 shows, insurance penetration in the 
property sector is still very low. 

Recent catastrophes such as the Christchurch, New 
Zealand,  earthquakes  and  Thailand  flooding  also 
have forced the insurance market to reconsider how 
to price intensive risks and to review their engage-
ment in the market based on principles of insurabili-
tyiv.    Major  disasters  can  lead  to  insurance  pricing 
being revised and availability constrained.  In Christ-
church,  a  number  of  devastating  earthquakes  in 
2010 and 2011 led to a thorough review of the coun-

try’s insurance policies and land-zoning regulations 
(Box 13.3; Muir-Wood, 2012).  

In  another  example,  insured  losses  from  the  Thai-
land floods were estimated between US$15.2 billion 
(Aon  Benfield,  2012a)  and  US$18  billion  (Orie  and 
Stahel, 2012).  Subsequently, insurers and reinsurers 
have revised their risk ratings, and significant increas-
es in the price of insurance and reduction of coverage 
are  expected  (Aon  Benfield  2012a;  Box  13.4).  This 
could result in a potentially negative effect on foreign 
direct  investment  for  Thailand  but  may  discourage 
business investment in flood prone areas. 

PPPs have the potential to greatly improve coverage 
and functioning of insurance markets. For example, 
in Norway, mortgage lenders are legally obliged to 
require  that  property  owners  purchase  fire  insur-

Box 13.4  The role of insurance in private investment promotion and business continuity

About 65–70 percent of insurance losses suffered in Thailand were borne by Japanese insurance companies 
through local subsidiaries, joint ventures or direct presence in the country (Courbage et al., 2012). Many of these 
had already paid out large amounts owing to the Great East Japan Earthquake and tsunami (Aon Benfield, 
2012b).  In spite of significant reinsurance, the three largest property insurance companies announced that 
their net loss owing to the flood was expected to be as high as US$5.1 billion as of mid-February 2012. 

As a consequence, private insurers and reinsurers began to restrain flood coverage and charge higher premi-
ums owing to the high risk of the country.  This created challenges for Japanese companies with facilities in 
Thailand.  As a result, the Japan External Trade Organization (JETRO) and Japanese business association re-
quested the Thai Government to establish a public reinsurance fund to restore business confidence by provid-
ing flood insurance and reinsurancev. The Thai Government set up the National Catastrophe Insurance Fund in 
March 2012.  However, if insurance pricing does not reflect risk levels, this may encourage rather than discour-
age increased disaster risk in the country.  With the new Fund, these risks are now in effect owned by the Gov-
ernment of Thailand. 

(Source: JETROvi)

Box 13.5  Mexico’s MultiCat catastrophe bond

MultiCat Mexico 2009—catastrophic bonds to transfer earthquake and hurricane risks in Mexico to capital mar-
kets—was a product of a formal PPP. Swiss Re, one of the world’s largest reinsurance companies, acted as co-
lead manager and joint book-runner, drawing on its experience in providing insurance in emerging markets. 
The Mexican Government constructed the Fund for Natural Disasters (FONDEN) and an accompanying loss esti-
mation model (R-FONDEN) to financially and technically underpin the MultiCat transaction. The partnership 
can be also indirect. According to Swiss Re, the public sector and the insurance industry are ‘implicit partners’ 
(Swiss Re, 2011b). 

(Source: UNISDR)

204

Part III - Chapter 13ance, which is again legally mandated to accompa-
ny  natural  peril  coverage  (Orie  and  Stahel,  2012). 
Private insurance companies that wish to sell these 
policies  are  legally  required  to  join  an  insurance 
pool  called  the  Norwegian  Natural  Perils  Pool 
(NNPP). The premium rate is the same for all insur-
ance  buyers,  as  stipulated  by  the  Pool  Board  that 
represents all participating companies. The govern-
ment manages the NNPP, provides reinsurance, and 
regulates  the  payout  (Orie  and  Stahel,  2012).    To 
avoid  moral  hazard  potentially  associated  with  a 
universal  premium  rate,  insurance  companies  are 
allowed to reduce or waive indemnity if the insured 
cannot show that appropriate measures were taken 
to reduce the risk of loss (Ibid.).

PPPs, as in the Norwegian case, can ensure high sol-
vency, high penetration rates, and high amounts of 
accumulated  capital  reserves.    They  can  also  en-
courage  risk-sensitive  investment  behaviour  for 
businesses.  However, care should be taken to main-
tain appropriate levels of competition among insur-
ance companies, with the public sector focusing on 
facilitating and regulating the development of insur-
ance markets based on sound risk assessments and 

providing an enabling environment for investments 
in risk reduction.  Moreover, it is in the interest of na-
tional governments to use strong partnerships with 
the insurance sector to bolster its own financial li-
quidity  and  ensure  fiscal  stability  during  major  di-
sasters (see Box 13.5 and Chapter 5 of this report).  

13.2 Risk for sale:   

insurance-linked securities

 

 

Financial markets are now increasing the sup-
ply of capital to the insurance industry through 
insurance-linked  securities  and  similar  financial 
products.  This  increases  competition  and  the 
choice of insurance products available to manage 
disaster risks.   However, these advantages may be 
undermined  if  asset  managers  and  catastrophe 
bond  issuers  favour  short-term  gains  in  bond 
prices over the more sustainable long-term re-
turns  derived  from  potentially  more  realistic 
risk analysis.  

The  capital  market  around  insurance  and  reinsur-
ance  has  grown  rapidly  over  recent  years  (Figure 

Figure 13.1  Growth in the catastrophe bonds and insurance-linked securities market, 1996-2012

(Source: UNISDR, based on Artemis Catastrophe Bond & Insurance-Linked Securities Deal Directoryix)

205

13.1) —now one of the few markets with a net inflow 
of fundsvii.  In the first quarter of 2012, for example, 
the issuance of catastrophe bondsviii  reached a re-
cord level, driven by an ‘excess supply of capital’ for 
which  investment  opportunities  have  to  be  found 
(Aon Benfield, 2012d). The growing interest in these 
and other insurance-linked securities is expected to 
increase further (WCMA, 2012).

The use of capital markets is not limited to insurers 
seeking  alternatives  for  reinsurance.  To  smooth 
catastrophic  risk,  some  countries  issue  catastro-
phe  bonds  instead  of  purchasing  insurance,  as 
shown in the Mexico example. In addition, compa-
nies  such  as  Tokyo  Disney,  Universal  Studio  and 
Electricité de France have sponsored catastrophe-
linked securities (OECD, 2011). 

This market growth is neither driven by disaster risk 
reduction  objectives  nor  directly  requires  that  in-
sured  or  reinsured  parties  reduce  or  manage  their 
risks. The demand-side incentive comes from pen-
sion  funds  and  institutional  asset  managers  who 
seek to diversify their investment portfolios with al-
ternative products that have uncorrelated risks and 
yieldsx. The incentive for the insurance industry in-
cludes  the  spreading  of  disaster  risk  over  a  wider 
capital  base  through  a  diversity  of  securities  and 
other financial products. This extra capacity is espe-
cially attractive considering increased need to cover 
intensive  risk.  The  multi-year  fixed  price  capacity 
also makes investment planning of insurance com-
panies  more  sound  and  easy  compared  with  the 
usual  annual  term  coverage  of  reinsurance  (WEF, 
2008). 

Despite  significant  insurance  losses  in  recent  years, 
the 
insurance-linked  securities  market  remains 
strong as most contracts to date cover wind events in 
the United States of America rather than Asian earth-
quakes,  floods  and  tsunamis  (Aon  Benfield,  2012a; 
WCMA, 2012). However, this may change with an in-
creasing flow of capital into securities covering other 
regions and new hazards, and for which reliable ca-
tastrophe models are only now being developed. 

Catastrophe bonds have been diversified in line with 
increasing investment trends (WEF, 2008). Their indi-
ces  and  premiums  are  based  on  detailed  industry 
catastrophe  models  and  risk  assessments,  which 
are  regularly  revised  and  updated,  sometimes,  as 
Box 13.6 shows, in real time. However, this risk infor-
mation  is  very  difficult  for  potential  investors  to 

Box 13.6  Pricing risk in real time – lessons from Hurricanes Irene and Gustav

Insurance-linked securities are traded not just before or after disasters happen, but also during events. In such 
cases, the pricing of risk, via the pricing of securities, takes on a dynamic that is directly based on the evolution 
of the hazard event.  For example, when Hurricane Irene was categorised as a Category 3 storm in August 2011, 
the prices of several catastrophe bonds fell by 30–50 percent. Once Irene was downgraded to a Category 1 
storm and then subsided, prices quickly rebounded. 

Thus, while risk modelling underpins the pricing of insurance-linked securities, trading is reactive to real events 
and on a real-time basis.  So-called Live CAT Bonds have now been developed where trading takes place while 
the event, usually a hurricane, develops. Such Live CAT Bonds are commonly industry loss warranties, i.e. insur-
ance products where payout is triggered by a predefined loss limit across an entire industry rather than an indi-
vidual company’s loss.

During Hurricane Gustav in 2008, US$9 million Live CAT Bonds were made available based on a new real-time 
hurricane index, through contracts between reinsurers and investment banks, hedge funds, etc. 

The real-time aspect of the hurricane index and because it is fungible enabled the issuer to settle trades within 
three business days of hurricane landfall.  Although this meant a cash-flow benefit to clients on both sides of 
the process, the simplicity of the index trigger may imply that risk levels may have been underestimated or not 
correctly priced, encouraging risk-increasing investment behaviour.

(Source: UNISDR, based on Aon Benfield, 2012d and xii)

206

Part III - Chapter 13comprehend and is rarely disclosed to them xi owing 
to  over  the  counter  transactions  of  products  (see 
Chapter  12).  There  are,  however,  signs  of  change, 
with  information  being  provided  to  investors  at  a 
higher level of disaggregation (Aon Benfield, 2012d).  

In February 2011, leading catastrophe modeller Risk 
Management  Solutions  (RMS)  released  a  new  ver-
sion of its US hurricane risk model that significantly 
revised upwards the probability of hurricane risk. As 
a  result,  several  US  hurricane  catastrophe  bonds 
priced  using  the  RMS  model  were  downgraded  as 
concerns  of  their  profitability  in  light  of  the  new 
model’s  results  grew.    Bond  issuers  began  pricing 
new  bonds  on  the  risk  models  of  competitor  AIR 
Worldwide  (AIR),  which  estimated  lower  probabili-
ties (Aon Benfield, 2012d). 

This highlights the tendency of asset managers and 
bond issuers to favour short-term gains in catastro-
phe  bond  prices  over  the  more  sustainable  long-
term returns derived from potentially more realistic 
risk analysis.  RMS has since been forced to market 
its  revised  model  in  a  more  comprehensive  ‘Resil-
ient  Risk  Management’  strategy  that  raises  aware-
ness  about  exposure  not  only  to  hurricanes  and 

Note

i  Moral hazard is a case where insurance buyers become less risk 
adverse owing to the coverage purchased.  Adverse selection arises 
when risk–seekers are more likely to buy insurance than risk-averse 
individuals, potentially hiding real levels of risk.
ii  The  regional  approach  was  initiated  with  support  from  the 
Global Environment Facility, the Swiss government, UNISDR and the 
World Bank.
iii  http://www.economywatch.com/world_economy/china/struc-
ture-of-economy.html 
iv  When  assessing  risks,  any  insurer  or  reinsurer  must  take  into 
account the fundamental principles and limitations of insurability. 
Insurability is not a strict formula, but rather a set of basic criteria 
that must be fulfilled in order for a risk to be insurable. Disregarding 
these  constraints  ultimately  jeopardises  the  (re)insurer’s  solvency 
and its ability to honour its policy obligations. However, the strict 
criteria  required  for  insurability  can  mean  that  certain  exposures 
may remain uninsurable. Some basic principles considered include 
randomness of the event, quantifiable events and losses, mutuality 
of risk, and economic viability. For more information see:  
http://media.swissre.com/documents/The_Essential_Guide_to_
Reinsurance_EN.pdf 

earthquakes but to uncertainties in the catastrophe 
models (Ibid.).

Leading risk modellers, including AIR, are now com-
mitting to provide longer-term risk analysis in addi-
tion  to  medium-term  perspectives  on  potential 
losses by improving the use of historical data and 
future  projections  in  their  risk  models.  Several  in-
dustry  leaders  have  highlighted  the  need  to  make 
explicit the uncertainties associated with commer-
cial  risk  models  available  in  the  market  (Aon  Ben-
field, 2012d) to facilitate a more accurate pricing of 
risk. 

The development of capital markets for insurance-
linked  securities  is  desirable  considering  that  in-
creased competition within and between the mar-
ket and reinsurance companies would bring better 
product quality and affordability for insurance cov-
erage.  However,  to  increase  investors  and  expand 
market size in a way that does not increase disaster 
risk,  asymmetric  information  problems  must  be 
overcome by collecting and disseminating risk and 
loss  information.  Institutional  infrastructure,  such 
as  accounting  or  solvency  rules,  also  needs  to  be 
developed.

v  http://www.jetro.go.jp/world/asia/th/biznews/4f7d27132e248 
vi  http://www.jetro.go.jp/world/asia/th/biznews/4f7d27132e248 
vii  Luca  Albertinie,  CEO,  Leadenhall  Capital  Partners  LLP  in  Aon 
Benfield 2012a: p.42; and http://www.artemis.bm/deal_directory
viii Catastrophe bonds are high yield bonds that contain a provision 
which may cause the principal or interest payments to be delayed or 
lost to investors in the event of a specified loss such as a hurricane 
or earthquake (OECD, 2011).
ix  http://www.artemis.bm/deal_directory 
x  Niklaus Hilti, Head of Insurance Linked Securities, Credit Suisse 
Asset Management in Aon Benfield 2012a:p45.
xi  http://www.riskandinsurance.com/story.jsp?storyId=124326385 
xii  http://www.riskandinsurance.com/story.jsp?storyId=124326385 

207

Chapter 14
Risk Governance:  
In Search of the Missing 
Paradigm

 

209

Even in today’s globalised economy, national governments and local administrations remain one of 
the most important mediators and regulators of private investment and thus disaster risk manage-
ment. Governments report significant progress in achieving effective disaster response and pre-
paredness and are investing more in risk reduction.  Yet, the required shift towards prospective risk 
management remains a challenge for most. 

The future of disaster risk reductionxii will depend on governments and political leaders becoming 
more successful at combining the promotion of local and national economic growth with effective 
disaster risk management on the ground. Thus, they will have to expand their approach to risk gov-
ernance to include the creation of incentives for risk sensitive investment.

14.1 Evolving risk governance:  

evidence from the 2011–                      

 

 

             2013 HFA Monitor

Results from national self-assessments of progress 
against  the  Hyogo  Framework  for  Action  (HFA) 
confirm countries’ previously reported challenges, 
particularly in addressing the underlying drivers 
of risk.

Risk  governance,  understood  as  a  systemic  ap-
proach to decision-making related to physical and 
technological  hazards,  has  become  an  important 
concept for businesses and governments to effec-
tively manage disaster risks (Fra Paleo, 2009; Renn, 
2008; IRGC, 2005; IRGP-IHDP, 2010). Since the previ-
ous  Global  Assessment  Report  (UNISDR,  2011), 
which focused on public risk governance and asso-
ciated  government  strategies,  it  has  become  ap-
parent that risk governance structures and policies 
need to be expanded to include real consideration 
of the business sector, as well as civil society.  

This is particularly pertinent, owing to evidence of 
rising economic loss risk from business investments 
in hazard-exposed regions. As highlighted in previ-
ous  chapters,  economic  analyses  and  forecasts 
used by investors rarely mention disaster risk. More-
over, policy-makers in national government institu-
tions and international organisations, although be-
ginning to recognise changes in the nature of risks 
and risk management requirements, are still limited 
in their capacity to comprehensively assess and ad-

210

dress identified risks and future uncertainty (World 
Bank, 2012a; Kent, 2013). 

In  overall  terms,  HFA  Progress  Reports  2011–2013 
(see  Box  14.1)  highlight  broadly  similar  successes 
and  challenges  as  reported  in  the  2007–2009  and 
2009–2011 cycles.i 

Risk  governance  arrangements  established  by 
countries and cities to manage their disaster risks 
have evolved significantly since 2005v.  

From  the  1980s  onward,  a  growing  number  of 
countries reformed their legislation, policy and in-
stitutional  frameworks  for  disaster  risk  manage-
ment.  Civil defence and protection organisations, 
focused on response, gradually gave way to a sec-
ond generation of national systems for disaster risk 
management with common characteristics (UNDP, 
2012a and 2012b; World Bank, 2012a; ADPC, 2003).  
Multi-sector committees now provide coordination 
and articulation across different ministries and de-
partments; responsibilities are decentralised to lo-
cal  governments  and  dedicated  budget  lines  for 
risk reduction activities are established. 

As of December 2012, 85 countries had established 
multi-sectoral  national  platforms  for  disaster  risk 
management; 191 countries had a dedicated focal 
point for disaster risk reduction in a central govern-
ment department; and 121 countries enacted legis-
lation to establish policy and legal frameworks for 
disaster  risk  reductionvi.  But  with  notable  excep-

Part III - Chapter 14Box 14.1  Regional, national and local self-assessments of progress against the Hyogo Framework for Action

Since 2007, national governments have been assessing their progress against the five priorities of the Hyogo 
Framework for Action (HFA) in a systematic manner, through the HFA Review process and HFA Monitor. In 2009, 
a  regional  self-assessment  process  was  established  for  interested  inter-governmental  organisations  and  in 
2011, local governments began to use a similar process and tool to review progress at the provincial, district 
and municipal levels.

The  HFA  Review  process  is  entirely  voluntary.  The  self-assessment  process  is  led  and  owned  by  inter-
governmental  organizations,  and  governments  and  local  government  institutions  at  regional,  national  and 
local levels, respectively. It is designed to promote a multi-stakeholder appraisal progress in implementing the 
HFA.  It  is  intended  to  stimulate  an  inter-disciplinary  planning  process  that  ensures  that  disaster  risk  is 
appropriately considered in public and private investment portfolios, not least to reduce mortality, minimise 
fiscal exposure and losses, and contribute to sustainable development.

The  corresponding  HFA  Monitor  is  a  multi-tier  online  tool,  facilitated  by  UNISDR  and  led  by  country 
governments.ii  The tool provides a mechanism to capture responses against progress indicators of the HFA, 
ensuring some degree of comparability of data over time series and between countries. Achievements in each 
core indicator are rated by governments themselves on a scale of 1 to 5, with 1 representing ‘minor’ achievement 
and 5 indicating ‘comprehensive’ achievement. Figure 14.1 gives an overview of progress reported against each 
priority area from 2007–2013.

Figure 14.1  Progress against the five HFA priority areas, 2007–2013 (comprising three reporting cycles) 

(Source: UNISDR, based on HFA Monitor data)

More than 100 countries and territories used the HFA Monitor in 2007–2009 and 109 submitted final reports in 
the 2009–2011 review.  It should be underlined that strict comparisons across time periods are difficult, as not 
all countries participate in every reporting cycle. Only 45 percent of countries participating in the 2011–2013 
reporting  cycle  have  participated  in  all  three  progress  reviews  to  date.  At  the  time  of  writing,  94  national 
authorities have submitted reports covering June 2011 to January 2013, with a further 37 undergoing further 
assessments due to be published in mid-2013iii . Encouragingly, since the last reporting cycle the geographical 
balance of engaged countries has improved.

211

Figure 14.2  Breakdown of percentage of countries reporting by regioniv

(Source: UNISDR, based on HFA Monitor data)

Unless  cited  otherwise,  all  country-specific  information  in  this  chapter  is  based  on  the  quantitative  and 
qualitative  analysis  of  the  final  or  interim  national  HFA  progress  reports  that  countries  have  voluntarily 
submitted in the 2011–2013 cycle (as of March 2013). A more in-depth analysis is available in Annex 3 of the 
online version of this report and all national reports are available on Preventionweb.

(Source: UNISDR)

tions,  these  institutional  and  legislative  systems 
have remained focused on disaster preparedness 
and  response,  including  through  improved  plan-
ning, training and capacity building. This has con-
tributed to declining mortality risk in many coun-
tries, at least in weather-related disasters  (UNISDR, 
2007; UNISDR, 2009; UNISDR, 2011).  

Several countries have progressed in passing legis-
lation and policy that attempts to integrate disaster 
risk considerations into sector strategies and wider 
planning.  For  example,  a  policy  framework  for  re-
ducing  disaster  risk  has  been  incorporated  in  the 
National Development Plan 2011–2013 of the State 
of Palestine and integrated in the sectoral plans and 
strategies  of  the  agriculture,  health  and  security 
sectors. Some countries also highlight the success 

of integrating disaster risk reduction into broader 
frameworks; examples include Burkina Faso in its 
Strategy  for  Accelerated  Growth  and  Develop-
ment; Ethiopia and its Growth and Transformation 
Plan; Rwanda in its Vision 2020; and Bangladesh in 
its Perspective Plan 2012–2021, which ties together 
all investment plans for the Government of Bangla-
desh.

Countries  have  been  less  successful,  however,  in 
making substantial inroads to achieving risk-sensi-
tive investment. Papua New Guinea cites the exist-
ing Disaster Management Act and Disaster Manage-
ment  Plans  as  providing  legislative  and  regulatory 
provisions for disaster management in the country, 
but recognises that these need updating to reflect 
a  shift  in  government  policy  from  emergency  re-

212

Part III - Chapter 14sponse to integrating disaster risk. Lesotho notes 
that  the  sectoral  legal  framework  needs  further 
strengthening  and  greater  emphasis  required  to 
promote implementation of decentralized disaster 
risk reduction (DRR) activities.

Captured under HFA priority area 4, countries con-
tinue to make less progress across all three HFA re-
porting  cycles  since  2007  and  the  figures  are  so-
bering:  of  the  countries  that  reported,  only  half 
confirm having in place simple regulatory mecha-
nisms for providing safe land and housing for low-
income communities, for risk-sensitive land zoning 
and private real estate development, or for land ti-
tling  (Figure  14.3).  From  that  perspective  national 
policies,  institutional  frameworks  and  legislation 
on disaster risk management have been largely pe-
ripheral  in  addressing  the  underlying  risk  drivers, 
through which disaster risks accumulate.

In  many  countries,  legislation  that  mandates  risk-
sensitive  investment  and  development  is  in  place 
and  budget  allocations  for  disaster  risk  manage-

Box 14.2  Implementation gaps

Figure 14.3  Number of countries reporting on regulatory 
mechanisms for risk-sensitive land use

(Source: UNISDR, based on HFA Monitor data 2011–2013)

ment have increased. However, the HFA Prog-
ress Reports of 2011–2013 highlight the contin-
ued challenge of implementing these policies, 
strategies and laws.  As highlighted by previous 

China reports that, although it has a relatively coherent disaster prevention and reduction law and regulation 
system,  it  struggles  with  implementing  risk  reduction  efficiently  and  even  of  integrating  its  response 
mechanisms. 

India, owing to its federal state system, struggles with lack of synergy and complementarity of national and 
state policies and institutional structures. Relatively new state and district disaster management agencies may 
have limited capacity and lack authority vis-à-vis better-established national institutions. 

Germany faces similar challenges with strong federal states (or Länder) whose disaster management strategies 
are rarely coordinated with each other or with the national system.  

Niue reports that, although limited capacities in each sector can result in implementation problems, the key 
issue is lack of ownership for cross-sector coordination and local implementation.

Uruguay strengthened the risk management capabilities of municipalities, while recognising that decentralized 
management requires commitment and installed capacities at local and departmental levels.

Myanmar established an action plan on disaster risk reduction for 2009–2015, but will have difficulties enforcing 
it without policy guidance or directives for townships and villages, where gaps already exist. 

Pakistan  cites  a  dependency  syndrome  of  local  institutions  and  communities  on  provincial  and  federal 
governments in managing local disasters. 

Enforcement on the ground and accountability at all levels tend to be weak, confirming once again findings 
from the 2011 Global Assessment Report.  

(Source: UNISDR)

213

HFA reporting cycles (UNISDR, 2009; UNISDR, 2011), 
problems of articulation and coordination exist be-
tween  disaster  risk  management  agencies,  sector 
ministries and departments and local governments, 
compounded by lack of political muscle and techni-
cal  capacities.    As  Box  14.2  highlights,  there  has 
been a major gap between development of policy 
and  institutional  frameworks  and  implementation 
on the ground (GNDR, 2011). 

14.2 Attracting investment,  

constructing risk

As  governments  need  to  attract  domestic  and 
foreign  direct  investment  (FDI),  the  effective 
management  of  disaster  risk  can  be  compro-
mised. This may be mainly a result of the current 
disconnect between investment promotion and 
risk management functions within their admin-
istrations.

Governments  report  difficulty  in  regulating  invest-
ment and development in a way that reduces disas-
ter risk; this should be examined more broadly.  

Economic globalisation has been accompanied by 
radical  changes  in  the  role  of  the  state  in  many 
countries.  To maintain competitiveness and reduce 
financial  risk,  in  some  countries,  welfare  services 
and  national  industries  have  been  privatised  and 
state  regulation  has  been  reduced  (Hobsbawm, 
2011;  Loko  et  al.,  2003;  Rondinelli  and  Cheema, 
2003). Although this trend was briefly reverted at the 
outset of the global crisis in 2007 and 2008, pressure 
to deregulate and privatise services and infrastruc-
ture  management  in  particular  has  now  been  re-
newed (Gerulis-Darcy, 2012; Heise and Lierse, 2011; 
Lapvitsas et al., 2010). 

Across  many  low  and  middle-income  countries, 
structural  adjustment  programmes,  and  more  re-
cently,  poverty  reduction  strategy  papers  (PRSPs) 
were used as vehicles to remove barriers to invest-
ment and growth; to reduce government spending; 
and to ensure debt servicing (Dollar and Svensson, 
2000; Easterly, 2003; Craig and Porter, 2003). Conse-
quently,  state-owned  enterprises  were  privatised 
and  private  investment  and  participation  was  en-
couraged in sectors such as health, education, pen-
sions, banking, ports, airports and telecommunica-

Figure 14.4  Major sources of FDI into Thailand

(Source: Bank of Thailand, in: Thampanishvong, 2012)

214

Part III - Chapter 14tions,  which  were  previously  subject  to  state 
monopolies  (Kyrili  and  Martin,  2010;  Babb,  2005; 
Bouton  and  Sumlinski,  2000;  Epstein  et  al.,  2003).  
This shift in fiscal and economic policy has also char-
acterised  many  high-income  countries,  in  Europe 
and elsewhere (Gerulis-Darcy, 2012; Lapvitsas et al., 
2010; Elkins et al., 2006; Maarse, 2010; OECD, 2008).

In parallel, governments began to play an active and 
explicit role as promoter and facilitator of private in-
vestment.    Financial,  property,  labour  and  other 
markets were deregulated and liberalised; tariffs on 
trade  were  reduced  or  eliminated;  and  incentives 

were provided for foreign investment.  At the same 
time, in some countries, national mechanisms and 
institutions  for  development  planning  were  either 
weakened or wound down (UNCTAD, 2012; Cernea, 
2005; Likosky, 2009). 

As a result, the global economy is increasingly char-
acterised  by  geographical  competition  between 
countries and cities to attract investment on the ba-
sis of their real or perceived comparative advantages. 

As described earlier in this report, SIDS compete to 
attract tourism investment; other countries with sig-

Box 14.3  Attracting new risk in Thailand 

Thailand’s powerful Board of Investment (BOI) encouraged investment in three promotional zonesvii —through 
tax  privileges;  sectoral  incentives  through  BOI-identified  priority  projects;  and  privileges  provided  by  the 
Industrial Authority of Thailand (IEAT). Although privileges offered in Zone 1, the areas surrounding Bangkok, 
were lower than those offered in regions further inland, they were still substantial, including corporate tax 
exemption for 3 years and a 50 percent reduction on import duty for machinery (BOI, Government of Thailand, 
in: Thampishvong, 2012).

Although this policy was successful in attracting FDI, it led to massive increases in flood exposure.  As Figure 
14.5 shows, much of the investment took place in former rice paddies located in floodplains of the provinces 
Ayutthaya  and  Pathumthani  (Thampishvong,  2012),  which  paved  the  way  for  the  2011  Chao  Phraya  flood 
disaster (Marome, 2012).

Figure 14.5  Thailand map of investment zones and flood risk 

(Source: BOI, Government of Thailand (http://thailandboi.com/investment-zones.html) and Emerald Insight.viii)

(Source: UNISDR)

215

nificant reserves of natural capital offer broad con-
cessions  for  investment  in  primary  production,  in-
cluding  mining,  oil  and  gas,  timber  and  more 
recently agricultural production.  Yet others provide 
incentives  for  export-oriented  special  economic 
zones (SEZs) or similar mechanisms to allow the as-
sembly and export of products with imported com-
ponents  (World  Bank,  1998).    SEZs,  which  aim  to 
promote FDI, have expanded rapidly over 20 years—
from 176 zones in 47 countries in 1986 to 3,500 zones 
in 130 countries in 2006 (Boyenge, 2007). 

As inter-country and intra-country competition for 
increasingly  footloose  investment  has  increased, 
many  governments  now  have  a  competitiveness 
agenda in which they seek to strengthen their com-
parative  advantages  in  one  or  more  sectors.    The 
World  Economic  Forum  classifies  several  basic  re-
quirements for competitiveness, which includes in-
stitutional environment, sound infrastructure, mac-
roeconomic  stability  and  health  and  primary 
education;  efficiency  enhancers,  which 
include 
higher  education  and  training,  goods  and  labour 
market  efficiency,  a  developed  financial  market, 
technological  readiness,  market  size  and  innova-

tion;  and  sophistication  factors,  which  includes 
business sophistication and innovation (WEF, 2012).   

High  levels  of  disaster  risk  are  a  negative  competi-
tiveness  value  because  they  undermine  these  re-
quirements and pose risks to investors.  However, in-
stead  of  highlighting  success  in  managing  and 
reducing  these  risks,  many  governments  have  pre-
ferred to downplay or simply ignore them, contribut-
ing to the investor risk blindness already highlighted 
in  the  previous  chapter. 
Instead,  governments, 
through  promoting  the  advantages  of  low  labour 
costs, access to export markets and low taxes, may 
instead encourage investments in high-risk areas.  

Together  with  the  ineffectiveness  of  public  regula-
tion of development, particularly from a risk reduc-
tion perspective, highlighted in the previous section, 
this  implies  that  the  current  practice  of  risk  gover-
nance  does  not  provide  adequate  disincentives  to 
business investment that produces disaster risks. 

In Thailand, for example, since 1977, the government 
began to grant tax exemptions and import duty re-
ductions to companies investing in industrial activity 

Box 14.4  Guangzhou: producing risk over centuries of economic activity

As early as 200 AD, Indians and Romans came to the city also known as Canton, to trade, making Guangzhou 
China’s  oldest  trading  port.    In  the  18th  and  19th  centuries,  China  was  already  an  important  global 
manufacturing hub (Roy and Ong, 2011). Today, Guangzhou and its surrounding industrial areas are a major 
manufacturing and export hub and a global supplier of goods. 

However, it also ranks just behind Miami and much ahead of Shanghai, Mumbai, Tokyo, Hong Kong and Bangkok 
in a recent global index of port cities’ exposure of population to flooding (Nicholls et al., 2008). Moreover, it 
comes second in terms of assets exposed to flood risks projected for 2070 (Ibid.). In May 2010, extreme rains 
killed at least 86 people in Guangzhou and disrupted the lives of 8 million. The most damaging storm in 30 
years, which cost Guangzhou US$85 million, challenged the city’s flood-control drainage systems and damaged 
256,800 acres of farmland (Bloomberg, 2012). 

Yet, despite these apparent risks, investors and their advisors do not rank them on par with other investment 
considerations such as corporate tax breaks, labour laws and costs and other direct business costs. Recent risk 
analyses of Guangzhou and Guangdong provinces do not refer to disaster risk other than the possibility that 
companies could be held responsible by government or communities for environmental impacts or disasters. 

Instead, there are broad incentives for increased investment in flood-prone areas.  The government offers 100 
percent corporate tax relief for the first three years of an investment earning returns.  As a result, in 2005, assets 
worth US$84 billion and almost 3 million people were at risk; and these figures are estimated to increase to 
US$3.4 trillion of assets and more than 10 million inhabitants by 2070 (Bloomberg, 2012).

(Source: UNISDR)

216

Part III - Chapter 14Box 14.5  Investment-risk interactions in coastal India

Only six years after the occurrence of a category 5 cyclone in 1999, the Government of Orissa designated the 
coastal district of Jagatsinghpur to be the site for the largest FDI project in the history of India: a deal was signed 
with a South Korean company for the development of a major steel plant, mines, railway links and a captive 
port  to  exploit  the  state’s  rich  iron  ore  and  coal  deposits.  The  Memorandum  of  Understanding  provided 
investors with a 100 percent tax exemption for five years—part of a recent initiative to further boost FDI inflows. 

Without a clear risk-sharing framework in place, the Government of Orissa was potentially taking on unlimited 
liabilities  for  future  disaster  losses.    In  addition  to  the  social  and  environmental  costs  associated  with  the 
relocation of existing communities, the clearing of forests and farmlands and the loss of livelihoods for landless 
and fishing communities, the project would increase hazard exposure and probably act as a magnet for further 
risk-increasing development in the area.  

The controversial project has ignited protests from communities, the National Human Rights Commission and 
environmental agencies, forcing several reviews to be undertaken, most recently, in August 2012 by the Ministry 
of Environment and Forests.  The review resulted in environmental clearance for the project to be temporarily 
suspended; but the project remains a priority for both state and federal governments.

(Source: Patra, 2012)

in the country.   As Figure 14.4 shows, this led to a sig-
nificant  increase  of  FDI  flows  starting  in  the  mid-
1980s (Brimble, 2002), particularly from Japan.  

But as Box 14.3 shows, success in attracting this in-
vestment led to a rapid increase in exposure of eco-
nomic assets in flood-prone regions of the country 
(Thampanishvong, 2012).  

In Guangzhou, China, public incentives to attract in-
vestment  have  also  contributed  to  increasing  haz-
ard exposure and disaster risks (Box 14.4).   

On the western coast of India, in Jagatsinghpur Dis-
trict,  more  than  8,000  lives  were  lost  and  230,000 
homes destroyed during the 1999 Orissa Super Cy-
clone  (Patra,  2012).    Today,  as  Box  14.5  highlights, 
the  district  is  being  considered  for  the  largest  FDI 
project in the history of India. 

ment  flows,  then  many  governments  have  priori-
tised growth over risk reduction. In other countries 
where  vigorous  economic  growth  has  meant  that 
expected  annual  losses  from  disaster  (AAL)  repre-
sent only a small proportion of annual capital for-
mation  (GFCF),  governments  may  calculate  that 
they have the capacity to absorb the risks.  In this 
case,  the  implementation  of  policies  to  reduce  di-
saster risks may be postponed until growth has lead 
to a high level of economic development. 

At the same time, there is little evidence from any of 
the HFA progress reports since 2007 of the engage-
ment of investment boards, trade ministries and pri-
vate  investors  in  national  disaster  risk  governance 
frameworks. As a result, coordination between eco-
nomic promotion and growth policies, on the one 
hand, and disaster risk management strategies, on 
the other hand, is absent.  

In  some  countries,  therefore,  the  role  of  govern-
ments has been contradictory to the stated objec-
tive of the HFA to achieve substantial reduction in 
disaster risk. This paradox reflects a broader trade-
off between rapid economic growth and risk reduc-
tion, which ultimately reflects national political pri-
orities.  If perceived additional costs of disaster risk 
reduction have been considered a barrier to invest-

This lack of coordination may be exacerbated by a 
limited capacity for assessing the costs and benefits 
of  disaster  risk  reduction.    For  example,  while  56 
countries reporting through the HFA Monitor in 2013 
note that costs and benefits of disaster risk and risk 
reduction  are  taken  into  account  in  the  planning 
and operation of major development projects, only 
one third confirm that national science agendas and 

217

budgets include studies on the economic costs and 
benefits of DRR. Just under 80 percent of countries 
report that they assess what impact new develop-
ment investments may have on disaster risk; how-
ever,  how  these  assessments  are  translated  into 
policy and practice is rarely made explicit.  

14.3 Increased investment  

in disaster risk management

 

Countries do not know how much they currently 
invest in disaster risk management. Complexities 
in budgeting and accounting across sectors add 
to the challenge of tracking current investments, 
but  several  governments  have  begun  to  tackle 
this problem as well as significantly increasing in-
vestments, particularly in corrective disaster risk 
management.

If countries are to realistically assess the trade-offs 
between  disaster  risk  reduction  and  policies  that 
promote  rapid  economic  growth,  one  particular 
challenge is that few countries are able to quantify 
their  investments  in  disaster  risk  reduction  and 
hence estimate the resulting costs and benefits. 

In the 2011–2013 HFA progress reviews, 90 percent 
of countries report that they consider disaster risk in 
relation  to  national  and  sector  public  investment. 
However,  just  52  percent  report  having  systems  in 
place that allow them to do so.  Further, only 36 per-
cent  reported  dedicated  funding  to  risk  reduction 
and prevention versus response and preparedness.   

However, a number of countries in both Asia (India, 
Indonesia,  Philippines)  and  Latin  America  (Costa 
Rica,  Guatemala,  Mexico,  Panama  and  Peru)  have 
been involved in dedicated efforts to track and esti-
mate their investments in disaster risk reduction. 

Capturing  overall  annual  expenditure  in  dedicated 
disaster  contingency  or  reserve  funds  is  relatively 
straightforward.  However,  in  a  fiscal  environment 
where disaster risk reduction investments, particu-

218

larly  in  prospective  risk  management,  are  rarely 
classified in national budgets, and officials with fi-
duciary  responsibilities  have  little  familiarity  with 
disaster risk management, the accurate portrayal of 
budgetary  allocation  and  realised  expenditure  is 
particularly challenging. This is compounded when 
analysis is extended to local public investment. 

Although identification of expenditure managed by 
a national disaster risk management agency may be 
possible, identifying expenditure by other spending 
units in a government, for example across sectors, is 
complicated, as expenditure is seldom coded as di-
saster risk reduction (Box 14.6). For example, a proj-
ect  to  strengthen  water  management  may  reduce 
drought and flood hazard, but would probably not 
be  coded  as  disaster  reduction  expenditure.  This 
‘embedded’ expenditure on disaster risk reduction 
may be particularly hard to identify. Even more chal-
lenging is identifying whether public investment in 
general, to build schools, roads and health centres, 
for example, has integrated disaster risk reduction 
considerations.  

To track embedded expenditure, close coordination 
between the investment planning and the financial 
arms of national or even local government is critical.  
Investment plans that take disaster risk into account 
may  not  actually  be  translated  into  budget  plans 
(Orihuela, 2012). Budgetary officials may have excel-
lent  knowledge  about  budgeting,  but  little  knowl-
edge about investment projects from planning and 
sectoral  agencies.  This  contributes  to  difficulty  in 
tracking embedded investment (Ibid.).
 
As  Box  14.6  shows,  countries  have  taken  different 
approaches to identifying this investment.  

Investment tracking can allow better identification 
of costs and benefits of disaster risk reduction, but 
as the above examples highlight, requires significant 
efforts and resources. From this perspective, anoth-
er approach may be to embed disaster risk reduc-
tion  into  national  asset  management.  The  asset 
management approach has been adopted in some 

Part III - Chapter 14high-income  countries  to  reduce  expenditure  on 
public infrastructure while assuring and improving 
service levels. The first step is to create inventories 
of public assets, which can then be used for tracking 
investments in disaster risk reduction. This can align 
the interests of finance ministries with disaster risk 
reduction objectives. Inventories can then be used 
for risk assessment or to develop risk financing solu-
tions. For example, the Mexican Government has an 
inventory  database  of  buildings,  roads  and  other 
public assets and data are used for estimating expo-
sure  to  design  risk  transfer  strategies  (G20/OECD, 
2012). 

In countries where public infrastructure and servic-
es  have  been  privatised,  the  adoption  of  an  asset 
management  approach  to  disaster  risk  reduction 
investment tracking is challenging.  However, in the 
United  States  of  America,  the  national  asset  data-

base  maintained  by  the  Department  of  Homeland 
Security (DHS), which contains information on more 
than 77, 000 assets—including national critical infra-
structures, 
including  dams  and  nuclear  power 
plants (Moteff, 2007)—takes into account the 85 per-
cent operated by the private sector. 

Widely  varying  interpretations  of  terminology  also 
make  inter-country  comparison  difficult  (Gordon, 
2013). This makes it complicated to clearly differen-
tiate between expenditure on disaster response and 
expenditure on different kinds of risk reduction.  

Despite  these  difficulties  and  the  consistent  mes-
sage  by  countries  regarding  the  limited  resources 
available  over  the  long  term  to  make  the  required 
investments, there is anecdotal evidence, both from 
reviews  of  budget  allocations  as  well  as  from  the 
HFA Monitor, which highlights that overall expendi-

Box 14.6  Tracking investment in disaster risk reduction

In India, although the allocation to Dedicated Schemes on Disaster Management remained stable from 2005–
2006 to 2011–2012 (from US$5.09 billion in 2005–2006 to US$4.96 billion in 2011–2012), embedded disaster risk 
reduction investments has grown both in absolute terms and as a percentage of total budget (Dhar Chakrabarti, 
2012).  Figure  14.6  shows  estimated  budget  allocations  of  85  plan  and  non-plan  schemes  identified  in  35 
ministries and departments as having the potential for reducing risks of disasters.ix  

Figure 14.6  Total budget allocation and allocations on embedded schemes in India

(Source: Dhar Chakrabarti, 2012)

219

In Guatemala, as Figure 14.7 below shows, the Guatemalan Ministry of Finance has developed a tool to code its 
expenditure  in  four  categories:  risk  identification  and  analysis;  preparation  and  capacity  building;  disaster 
response; and disaster recovery. None of these categories explicitly identify strategies of either corrective or 
prospective  risk  management  although  related  activities  could  be  embedded  within  these,  particularly  in 
identification and analysis, recovery and capacity building.

Figure 14.7  Guatemala disaster risk management 
expenditure in 2010

(Source: Orihuela, 2012 (based on Expenditure Structure for Disaster Risk 
Reduction Management – Year 2010. Technical Budget Directorate (DTP), Vice 
Ministry of Financial Management, Ministry of Finance, Guatemala, 2012))

In  Panama,  the  Directorate  of  Investment  Planning  (DPI)  estimated  government  expenditures  on  disaster 
prevention,  mitigation,  response  and  reconstruction  over  the  last  decade.  Using  similar  categories  as 
Guatemala’s tracking system, total calculations amounted to about US$200 million for 2000 to 2010 (Orihuela, 
2012).  Results revealed that expenditure on prospective risk reduction was difficult to track and unreliable, 
whereas dedicated expenditure on emergency response and reconstruction was easier to identify, particularly 
when this required a specifically documented amendment to the national annual budget (Ibid.). 

In Mexico, the government, with support from the World Bank, has initiated assessment and monitoring of 
public investments in disaster risk reductionxi at the federal level.x  The project will analyse investments; the use 
of  hazard  and  risk  information  in  federal  decision-making  for  disaster  risk  reduction;  and  the  impacts  of 
investment through sectoral case studies. It will also develop a mechanism to follow up and better monitor 
future investments in disaster risk reductionxi.

(Source: UNISDR)

ture on disaster risk reduction is growing. 

Some countries are now skewing their budget allo-
cations  in  favour  of  investments  in  corrective  di-
saster risk management and strengthening finan-
cial  resilience  (see  Annex  3),  often  through  the 
establishment  of  dedicated  funds  and  budget 
lines, during post-disaster recovery or when faced 
with imminent events.     

US$6.4  billion  is  allocated  to  disaster  prevention 
management  and  US$9.5  billion  to  national  land 
conservation. In Australia, the National Partnership 
Agreement  on  Natural  Disaster  Resilience  (NPA) 
provides  state  governments  with  approximately 
US$27 million per year to invest in disaster risk re-
duction  projects  prioritised  in  accordance  with 
state-wide  risk  assessments  complementing  pri-
vate sector investments. 

For example, the HFA Monitor 2011–2013 highlights 
that in Sri Lanka, 60 percent of the Ministry of Disas-
ter Management’s annual allocation is dedicated to 
corrective  disaster  reduction  projects.    In  2012, 
Sweden allocated US$60 million for disaster reduc-
tion  in  the  transport  sector.  Japan’s  2012  disaster 
management  budget  is  US$46  billion,  of  which 

The  Government  of  Canada  allocated  almost 
US$100 million in its 2012 Budget to share the cost 
of  permanent  flood  mitigation  investments  made 
by  provinces  and  territories  affected  by  spring 
floods in 2011. In addition, the Building Canada pro-
gramme,  administered  by  Infrastructure  Canada, 
seeks to create a more competitive and prosperous 

220

Part III - Chapter 14Table 14.1  Disaster management budget as a percentage of Indonesia’s total budget, 2006–2012 (in percent)

(Source: Darwanto, 2012)

economy by investing in projects to reduce the vul-
nerability of communities or public infrastructure to 
hazards and climate change. 

in 

China has also made major investments, for exam-
ple,  US$10.5  billion 
flood  prevention  and 
drought  relief  in  2011  by  the  central  government; 
US$400 million per year for geological disaster pre-
vention  and  control,  with  23  provinces,  176  cities 
and 932 counties establishing special complemen-
tary funds amounting to an estimated US$2 billion 
since 2011. Central government has also invested 
just  under  US$600  million  in  agricultural  disaster 
prevention and reduction.  Its Comprehensive Di-
saster Prevention and Reduction Plan (2011–2015) 
aims to reduce direct economic losses from disas-
ters to less than 1.5 percent of GDP. 

Reviews of budget allocations also show that in the 
Philippines, for example, disaster risk reduction in-
vestments are trending upward, for example, from 
1.4 percent to 2.1 percent of the country’s national 
budget between 2009 and 2011 (Jose, 2012). 

In Indonesia, disaster risk reduction allocations al-
most doubled from 2006 to 2012 (Table 14.1) as a 
proportion  of  the  national  budget.  About  75  per-
cent is allocated to (mainly corrective) disaster risk 
management (Darwanto, 2012). 

More than half of the countries have also reported 
in the last two HFA review cycles that they specifi-
cally incorporate allocations to disaster risk reduc-
tion and resilient recovery into their post-disaster 
recovery  budgets.  However,  only  15  percent  are 
able to report on the percentage of this allocation.  

Box 14.7  Investments in risk reduction: the case of Tabasco, Mexico

The National Disaster Fund (FONDEN) of Mexico 
is  currently  investing  between  25  percent  and 
30 percent of its resources to rebuilding better.  
These investments in risk reduction can enable 
significant  reduction  in  disaster  losses.    The 
floods in the State of Tabasco in 2007 (UNISDR, 
2009) caused losses equivalent to 30 percent of 
the  state’s  GDP. 
  Following  the  disaster, 
FONDEN  financed  a  range  of  studies  of  the 
region’s  hydrology,  urban  development  and 
land use, which led to the implementation of 
an  integrated  programme  of  investments  to 
reduce  disaster  risk. 
  The  value  of  these 
investments  became  apparent  during  the 
state’s 2010 floods.  Even though rainfall levels 
in  2010  were  comparable  with  levels  in  2007, 
direct  and  indirect  losses  of  2010  were  only 
one-fifth of those in 2007 (Figure 14.8). 

Figure 14.8  Comparing losses from floods in 2007 
and 2010 in Tabasco, Mexico

(Source: FONDEN)

221

Poor  coordination  between  capital  and  mainte-
nance  expenditures  often  occurs  in  countries  that 
operate  dual  budgeting  systems,  which  separate 
capital  from  current  expenditure  (Orihuela,  2012). 
Though  this  practice  might  be  useful  to  make  in-
vestment priorities clearer, investment in infrastruc-
ture needs to be appraised in terms of both capital 
and operating (including maintenance) costs.

Notes

i  Unless cited otherwise, all data referring to national progress or 
challenges presented in this chapter are based on national self-as-
sessment reports of progress against the HFA as submitted through 
the HFA Monitor.
ii  http://www.preventionweb.net/english/hyogo/hfa-monitor-
ing/national/?pid:73&pih:2.
iii  As of 22 March 2013.
iv  Geographical regions are defined according to the ‘Composition 
of macro geographical (continental) regions’ of the United Nations 
Statistics Division, Standard Country and Area Codes Classification.
v  Forthcoming  UNISDR  summary  report  of  national  progress  in 
implementing the HFA 2005-2013 (for publication in 2013).
vi  Forthcoming  UNISDR  summary  report  of  national  progress  in 
implementing the HFA 2005-2013 (for publication in 2013).
vii  Government of Thailand, Board of Investment: http://thailand-
boi.com/investment-zones.html (accessed 30-10-2012).
viii Data  from  Emerald  Insight  in:  Community,  Environment  and 
Disaster Risk Management Journal, Vol. 8): http://www.emeraldin-
sight.com/books.htm?issn=2040-7262&volume=8&chapterid=1700
0011&show=html.
ix  The  disaster  risk  reduction  allocations  were  calculated  using 
embedded  investment  criteria  developed  by  Dhar  Chakrabarti, 
2012; they are not to be considered official statistics of the Govern-
ment of India.
x 
risk reduction (reduce existing risks).
xi 
2013 Global Assessment Report.
xii  Chief  of  the  National  Agency  for  Disaster  Management  (BNPB) 
regulation  No.  17/2011  on  rehabilitation  and  reconstruction;  the 
Disaster Management Plan 2010-2014 and National Action Plan for 
Disaster Risk Reduction 2010–2012.

Information  directly  contributed  to  UNISDR  in  support  of  the 

In Mexico, DRR is defined as prevention (to avoid new risks) and 

Indonesia, for example, after the experiences of the 
Yogyakarta  and  Central  Java  Earthquake  of  2006, 
the  West  Sumatra  Earthquake  of  2009  and  post 
Merapi Eruption of 2010, estimates that 5 percent of 
recovery and reconstruction funds are assigned to 
disaster  risk  reduction.xii    Estimates  in  other  coun-
tries vary considerably: Senegal estimates this at 2 
percent;  Bahrain,  5  percent;  Anguilla,  between  20 
percent and 40 percent; and Colombia, 60 percent.  
How these funds are used is currently not well docu-
mented. But as Box 14.7 shows, investments in cor-
rective  risk  management  in  recovery  and  recon-
struction programmes may contribute to reductions 
in disaster risks.
 
These  investments  in  corrective  risk  management 
are essential. Without appropriate maintenance and 
potentially required retrofitting, aging infrastructure 
becomes  a  risk  in  both  high-income  and  low-in-
come countries. The bridge collapse in Minnesota, 
United  States  of  America,  in  2007,  is  a  well-known 
example  that  aging  infrastructure  causes  deaths 
and injuries (National Transportation Safety Board, 
2007).  In  Africa,  on  average,  about  30  percent  of 
countries’ infrastructure assets need rehabilitation 
(Briceno-Garmendia et al., 2009). 

However, risks to the stock of existing infrastructure 
puts to the test even the most risk sensitive invest-
ment planning systems. For example, though Peru is 
at  the  forefront  of  building  disaster  risk  consider-
ations  into  public  investment  planning,  it  reports 
major challenges with assessing and addressing di-
saster-related risks to major development projects 
and its stock of infrastructure. It rates itself as hav-
ing  made  some  progress,  but  without  systematic 
policy and institutional commitment (progress level 
2 in the HFA Monitor). Similarly, Switzerland, a coun-
try  with  sophisticated  disaster  risk  management 
policy,  legislation  and  practices  in  place,  reports 
that  a  major  challenge  will  be  the  retrofitting  of  a 
large stock of existing buildings that are vulnerable 
to  earthquakes,  including  a  number  of  historical 
buildings.

222

Part III - Chapter 14Chapter 15
Anticipating Risk 

223

Countries are yet to embrace a forward-looking and proactive approach to disaster risk manage-
ment. A key component of such prospective risk management is the identification of appropriate 
risk management and financing strategies for different layers of risk. For events with low to medi-
um-sized losses, it is more cost-effective to reduce risks than to rely on risk transfer strategies. And 
prospective risk management, involving factoring risk reduction into investment planning is more 
cost-effective than having to correct risk levels once the investment is made.  

Many national risk-financing strategies still reflect a vision of disasters as exogenous shocks rather 
than of risk as an endogenous characteristic of investment flows. As such, the cost of risk financing is 
likely to grow except in countries that are making major investments in risk reduction.  

15.1 How prospective is  

prospective enough?

 

Without  prospective  risk  management,  coun-
tries will lose competitiveness and the inability 
to guarantee the infrastructure that business re-
quires to be competitive itself. A number of na-
scent shifts in approach, however, are emerging 
from several countries that contribute to a move 
towards  prospective  disaster  risk  manage-
ment—in the areas of legalisation, institutional 
arrangements and strategic programming. 

More than ever, it is recognised that ultimately, disas-
ter risk will be reduced only if mechanisms are imple-
mented  to  avoid  risk  accumulation  in  new  public 
and private investment (Heitzmann et al., 2002; Blai-
kie  et  al.,  2004;  UNDP,  2004;  UNISDR,  2007;  DFID, 
2006; Thomalla et al., 2006; UNISDR, 2011). Although 
the  trend  of  growing  investment  in  corrective  risk 
management noted in the previous chapter is posi-
tive and encouraging, to be effective, it needs to be 
matched  by  prospective  disaster  risk  management 
(UNISDR, 2011; Lavell, 2003), which means employing 
a truly anticipatory rather than reactive or corrective 
approach  to  disaster  risk.  Without  prospective  risk 
management,  countries  will  lose  competitiveness 
and  the  inability  to  guarantee  the  infrastructure 
that business requires to be competitive itself. 

The  Hyogo  Framework  for  Action  (HFA)  identified 
several key components that contribute to a truly 
prospective  approach,  including  understanding 

224

the risk footprint of a country; providing full access 
to risk information; and addressing the underlying 
drivers of risk. Prospectively managing risks relat-
ed  to  business  investment,  however,  has  not  yet 
been given full consideration in the HFA.  

Progress in adopting a prospective approach to di-
saster risk reduction is still limited. Costa Rica, Pan-
ama and Peru (Bernal, 2012), for example, have now 
incorporated an analysis of disaster risk into public 
investment planning (UNISDR, 2009; UNISDR, 2011).   

These efforts, however, are still challenging.  In Pan-
ama, disaster risk analysis applies only to large-scale 
projects and national investments.i This means that 
smaller-scale  local  level  investment  decisions  are 
not included. And because most disaster losses in 
Panama are associated with damage to local infra-
structure,  this  weakens  the  effectiveness  of  the 
measure. 

Where political pressure exists in favour of invest-
ment in particular industries or regions of a coun-
try,  these  imperatives  may  override  the  risk  and 
project analysis promoted by technical units of fi-
nance ministries (Orihuela, 2012). If systems of na-
tional investment planning are bypassed, disaster 
risk  criteria  lose  their  relevance,  and  investment 
projects may get the green light even without man-
dated risk assessments completed.

Land-use planning is another area with unresolved 
challenges. Few disaster risk management systems 

Part III - Chapter 15have been able to employ land-use planning and 
management and influence investment policies to 
encourage  effective  disaster  risk  management 
(Johnson,  2011;  UNISDR,  2011).  Instead,  different 
public and private institutions transform the land-
scape of city regions; they push different agendas 
and  operate  outside  of  an  overall  coherent  risk 
management framework. 

In Costa Rica, for example, for more than 44 years, 
successive governments have not been able to fi-
nalise and implement the National Land-Use Plan 
(Brenes and Bonilla, 2012). The Controller’s office 
considers  that  the  absence  of  this  Plan  contrib-
utes to development that is characterised by high 
social  costs,  deficient  infrastructure  and  urban 
development  in  ecologically  fragile  and  hazard-
exposed  areas.  Unregulated  urban  development 
has  increased  flood  risk  in  many  areas  and  has 
been identified by the National Emergency Com-
mission as a principal cause of the severe losses 
registered during the 2010–2011 ENSO episode in 
Costa Rica. 

A number of nascent shifts in approach, however, 
are emerging from several countries that contrib-
ute  to  a  move  towards  prospective  disaster  risk 
management—in the areas of legalisation, institu-
tional arrangements and strategic programming. 

For example, Colombia passed a new disaster risk 
management framework, including establishment 
of  a  multi-sector  and  multi-stakeholder  national 
committee that will be in charge of both prospec-
tive  and  corrective  risk  management.  Peru  has 
moved responsibility for disaster risk management 
to a new agency located in the Ministry of the Pres-
idency. Also, about 25 percent of countries that as-
sessed their progress against the HFA in 2011–2013 
reported that responsibility for oversight of disas-
ter risk management was located in the highest of-
fice, i.e. of the Prime Minister or President. Another 
13 percent reported that these functions reside in 
a central planning or coordination unit. 

The 2011–2013 HFA review also highlights new poli-
cies,  strategies  and  laws  for  disaster  risk  manage-
ment; many provide for sharper focus on both pro-
spective  and  corrective  risk  management  and  an 
integration  of  disaster  risk  management  with  cli-
mate change adaptation. 

Ethiopia,  for  example,  adopted  policies  for  inte-
grated  environmental  management  and  rural  de-
velopment,  which  include  disaster  risk  reduction 
elements.  One  such  policy,  the  five-year  Growth 
and Transformation Plan, has integral elements on 
disaster risk reduction and climate change adapta-
tion;  the  forthcoming  DRM  Strategic  Programme 
and Investment Framework also integrates disas-
ter risk reduction with climate change adaptation. 

Namibia in 2012 passed a new Disaster Risk Man-
agement Act establishing a new National Disaster 
Fund that supports not only relief and recovery but 
also disaster risk management (Government of Na-
mibia, 2012).

The  United  States  of  America  recognizes  that  di-
saster resilience is an important aspect of overall 
economic health of the nation and sustainability of 
communities (National Academies, 2012). Commu-
nity resilience indicators are being explored to help 
drive  more  effective  integration  of  disaster  risk 
considerations into sustainable development poli-
cies, planning and programming (CSRI, 2011). 

In Vanuatu, the National Disaster Risk Management 
Office (NDMO) has been strengthened and new ar-
rangements finalised for integrating governance of 
disaster risk reduction and climate change adapta-
tion  efforts.  In  addition,  a  new  National  Advisory 
Board  for  disaster  risk  reduction  and  climate 
change adaptation will soon be approved.

225

15.2  Growing commitment  

to risk financing

 

As long as risk financing strategies reflect a vi-
sion  of  disasters  as  exogenous  shocks  rather 
than of risk as an endogenous characteristic of 
investment  flows,  the  cost  of  risk  financing  is 
likely to grow—except in countries that are mak-
ing major investments in risk reduction.  

In times of constrained public budgets, strengthen-
ing financial resilience is becoming a critical task for 
hazard-exposed  economies  worldwide  (Govern-
ment  of  Mexico  and  World  Bank,  2012).  As  Figure 
15.1 highlights, for events with low to medium-sized 
losses, it is more cost-effective to reduce risks than 
to  rely  on  risk-financing  strategies.  And  factoring 
risk  reduction  into  investment  planning  is  more 
cost-effective than having to correct risk levels once 
the investment is made (UNISDR, 2011).  

ery and reconstruction.  As Chapter 4 of this report 
highlighted,  many  countries  with  high  levels  of  di-
saster risk would face a serious financing gap in the 
event of a major disaster.

Table 15.1 shows the diversity of recent experience 
in  risk  financing.  For  example,  Mexico  is  transfer-
ring risk to capital markets via catastrophe bonds. 
The  parametric  index  used  in  this  case  allows 
prompt payment, made as soon as the predefined 
event occurs while ensuring relatively high levels of 
transparency  (Swiss  Re,  2011b;  G20/OECD,  2012). 
Although the Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance 
Facility was the first regional scheme to use a para-
metric  mechanism,  the  Central  America  Natural 
Disaster  Insurance  Facility  has  introduced  a  new 
approach  based  on  an  estimation  of  the  popula-
tion normally affected by a disaster. This scheme is 
expected to be applied to more countries and be-
yond physical hazards (Swiss Re, 2011b).

In the case of medium-sized to extreme losses, how-
ever, risk financing is essential to ensure macroeco-
nomic stability and to facilitate financing of recov-

There  are  other  examples  reported  by  countries 
through the HFA Monitor. The Government of Ethio-
pia has established robust mechanisms to finance 

Figure 15.1  Efficiency of risk management instruments and occurrence probability

(Source: Mechler et al., 2012)

226

Part III - Chapter 15Table 15.1  Risk financing in selected countries

(Source: UNISDR, based on Swiss Re, 2011)

preparedness measures, including the National Di-
saster Prevention and Preparedness Fund and the 
Risk  Financing  Mechanism—the  latter,  a  multi-mil-
lion dollar contingent fund employed at the time of 
major droughts.

As highlighted in Chapter 7, the Pacific Catastrophic 
Risk Assessment and Financing Initiative (PCRAFI) is 
currently being developed and will be tested in the 
Marshall  Islands.  The  PCRAFI  assists  the  Pacific  Is-
land Countries (PICs) in shifting from post-disaster 
donor  assistance  to  ex  ante  budget  planning.  The 
Pacific  Disaster  Reserve  Fund  is  being  established 
as a prototype risk pooling mechanism. This joint re-
serve mechanism would allow PICs to build up re-
gional reserves against intensive disasters, support-
ed by initial donor contributions and, if necessary, 
protected by global reinsurance. The Fund will pro-
vide incremental resources to restore essential ser-
vices  to  countries  after  disasters  and  would  help 
them in their recovery and reconstruction.

Colombia has emerged as a leader in its efforts to 
fully assess its contingent liabilities. It has begun to 
integrate liabilities emanating from disaster risk into 
its management of government liabilities; the effort 

is  led  by  the  Deputy  Directorate  of  Risk  within  its 
Ministry of Finance and Public Credit (MHCP) (Gov-
ernment of Mexico and World Bank, 2012). It is also 
developing a strategy to deal with fiscal vulnerabili-
ty  to  disaster  risk,  which  would  align  with  existing 
risk management strategies related to contingent li-
abilities from credit operations, public-private part-
nerships  (PPPs)  and  legal  proceedings  against  the 
nation (Ibid.). 

Although  this  momentum  in  selected  countries  is 
encouraging, the global debate still reflects a vision 
of disasters as exogenous shocks (G20/OECD, 2012) 
rather than of risk as an endogenous characteristic 
of investment flows. As such, the cost of risk financ-
ing is likely to grow except in countries that are mak-
ing major investments in risk reduction.  This high-
lights  that  while  risk  financing  is  an  important 
component of a comprehensive disaster risk man-
agement  strategy,  to  be  successful,  it  depends  on 
complementary efforts to reduce risks. 

227

15.3 Expanded risk governance: 

integrating public and  

                           private approaches

 

Governance structures, particularly at the local 
level, can build on the experience and vested in-
terest of businesses with large fixed assets, such 
as  real  estate  companies,  developers,  invest-
ment banks, large stores and property manage-
ment firms to more effectively manage disaster 
risk.  The  successful  partnering  of  such  large 
companies, as well as small and medium suppli-
ers, with public planning bodies should play an 
important role in reducing vulnerability and ex-
posure to physical hazards. 

Progress in truly prospective disaster risk manage-
ment  may  be  incipient  at  best.  However,  disaster 
risk management and reduction is starting to gain 
some  space  on  the  competitiveness  agendas  of 
governments.  Policy-makers  responding  to  a  re-
cent survey on perceptions of disaster risk and fu-
ture uncertainty noted the increasing interconnect-
edness of economies and resulting vulnerability to 
synchronous  and  cascading  failures  and  shocks 
(Kent, 2013; Ipsos MORI, 2013). It is also increasingly 
recognised that the more long term the perspective 
is on risk and uncertainty, the more it becomes an 
international and trans-boundary concern and less 
a national capacity issue (Ipsos MORI, 2013).

The focus on longer-term risks in governments and 
many  international  organisations  is  still  relatively 

new (Kent, 2013). Countries are just beginning to de-
velop  a  more  strategic  approach  to  planning  for 
risks, and some are indicating that a cultural change 
is  taking  place  in  which  awareness,  supported  by 
greater media coverage and open debate of disaster 
risk, is increasing (Box 15.1).

The impact of Hurricane Sandy in 2012 highlighted 
how risk governance frameworks need to consider 
these new dimensions of risk.  

New York dealt comparatively well with the severe 
impacts of Hurricane Sandy, but the sheer scale of 
losses, such as the estimated US$10 billion to the 
New  York  subway  system  alone—the  worst  dam-
age in its history, confirm that new dimensions of 
risk and resilience may need to be considered, par-
ticularly in large urban areas with interconnected 
and interdependent infrastructure systems.ii  

Both  Super-storm  Sandy  in  2012  and  the  Great 
East Japan Earthquake in 2011 were characterised 
by  the  breakdown  of  electricity  generation  and 
supply systems. In today’s global economy, almost 
all critical infrastructures, including ICT and trans-
portation, depend on electricity (OECD, 2011). This 
corresponds with the survey conducted in six cities 
of  the  Americas,  described  in  Chapter  10,  where 
more  than  half  of  the  1,197  businesses  identified 
business disruptions owing to power outages as a 
main  concern  when  disasters  hit  (Sarmiento  and 
Hoberman,  2012).  Therefore,  local  and  national 
governments  need  to  identify  key  risk  amplifiers 

Box 15.1  Making futures real – the importance of risk perceptions at senior policy levels

An innovative initiative looking at perceptions of current and long-term risks, conducted in partnership with 
two leading research institutes—Kings College and Ipsos MORI—and UNISDR, reached out to 30 senior policy-
makers in planning and finance ministries of national governments and in relevant multilateral organisations. 
The initiative completed in-depth qualitative interviews that form the basis for a more systematic and regular 
assessment of changing risk perceptions among senior policy-makers. 

Results from initial interviews mirror the findings of the HFA Monitor, and highlight the importance of continu-
ing promotion of risk identification, data collection and risk assessment at the country level. Few country rep-
resentatives reported engaging in a full risk identification process, meaning that their assessments and conse-
quent decision-making are based mainly on known risks and uncertainty and future risks are not considered.

(Source: Kent, 2013; Ipsos MORI, 2012)

228

Part III - Chapter 15and  understand  the  interdependencies  of  the 
many systems that carry today’s societies (Menoni 
et al., 2012) and which create systemic vulnerabili-
ties  characterised  by  interconnectedness,  lack  of 
redundancy and transferability (Van der Veen and 
Logtmeijer, 2005).

For  example,  financial  service  organisations  run-
ning business-critical applications need to ensure 
low  latency  for  data  transition,  such  as  the  sub-
millisecond transactions required by the New York 
Stock  Exchange.  The  closer  the  data  centre  is  to 
the  user,  the  faster  data  are  transmitted.  Thus 
these facilities tend to be heavily concentrated in 
or  near  urban  areas.  The  impact  of  Sandy  was  a 
stark reminder that disasters can wreak havoc on 
these critical data centres and the companies that 
rely on them. In the United States of America, these 
facilities  are  all  located  in  the  same  areas  where 
over the last 50 years FEMA has declared a disaster 
at least once.iii  Clearly, the need for backup strate-
gies is crucial.iv 

In Japan, during and after the 2011 Great East Ja-
pan  Earthquake,  several  policies  were  reviewed, 
which resulted in changes to the existing risk gov-
ernance  structure.  These  have  since  been  imple-
mented (Box 15.2). 

Changes  such  as  these  are  occurring  in  other  re-
gions,  based  on  experience  of  disasters  and  con-
cerns about future uncertainty.  The role of the pri-
vate sector, both in response and recovery as well 
as in prospective disaster risk management, is gain-
ing importance. 

Local  governments  and  in  particular  large  munici-
palities  can  find  strong  allies  among  businesses 
with large fixed assets, such as real estate compa-
nies,  developers,  investment  banks,  large  stores 
and property management firms to more effectively 
manage disaster risks (Elkin, 1987; Kataria and Zer-
jav, 2012; Johnson et al., 2012). ‘Communities of in-
terest’ (Kataria and Zerjav, 2012) are being formed 
by  businesses  and  local  governments,  which  can 

Box 15.2  Rethinking governance structures during and after the 2011 Great East Japan Earthquake

The unprecedented scale of the disaster following the Great East Japan Earthquake of 2011 meant that not only 
national and local governments but also private sector and civil organizations participated in recovery.  Les-
sons learned from this integrated approach are being fed into new policies.

1.  Strengthened  Regional  Cooperation:    The  disaster  overwhelmed  the  capacity  of  individual  local  govern-
ments, which received support from other less-affected municipalities. Partnerships between local govern-
ments from different provinces have since been formalised.

2. Role of National Government to Support Local Government: The disaster impacted directly on the function-
ing of local government and in many cities the subsequent lack of capacity, particularly of officials with experi-
ence in managing urban development projects, was an obstacle to recovery.  In response, the national govern-
ment mobilised experienced officials from all over Japan.

3. Horizontal Cooperation at National Level:  The reconstruction process has also strengthened horizontal co-
operation between all sectors. Established in February 2012, a Reconstruction Agency headed by the Prime 
Minister coordinates aligned activities as for example a joint effort of the Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Trans-
port and Tourism (MLIT) and the Ministry of Education to develop schools as community centres and shelters 
for times of crisis.

4. Public-Private Partnerships (PPPs): Even the capital region of Tokyo faced challenges from the disaster. The 
government has amended legislation to allow Urban Renaissance Councils, consisting of national and local gov-
ernments, real estate developers, railway companies and property owners, to develop plans for urban safety. 

5. Public Involvement: The national government is also promoting transmission of disaster history and its les-
sons to future generations to decrease vulnerability; for example, through constructing archives in the National 
Diet Library.

(Source: Government of Japan, 2012b, 2012c)

229

play an important role in reducing vulnerability and 
exposure to physical hazards. 

As  identified  in  Chapter  14,  however,  the  potential 
for prospective risk management is limited because 
those  parts  of  government  promoting  investment 
rarely participate in national disaster risk manage-
ment platforms or committees. Further, private sec-
tor participation is usually restricted to emergency 
management  and  preparedness  (Johnson  et  al., 
2012; IIHS, 2012).  

Countries’  self-assessments  reflect  this  limitation, 
with  only  36  countries  out  of  94  reporting  on  the 
number of private sector bodies represented in their 
national  platforms.  Of  these  36,  19  countries  have 
only 1-3 private sector representatives. Canada is a 
notable exception, with 20 private sector represen-
tatives; 24 academic institutions; 18 federal depart-
ments and agencies, including national finance and 
planning institutions; 9 provinces and territories; 15 
municipalities and 2 representatives of the general 
public participating in its national coordination plat-
form for disaster risk management. 

In their self-assessment of progress against the HFA 
in 2011–2013, 52 percent of governments report on 
cooperation  with  the  private  sector  in  emergency 
preparedness  and  response.  However,  only  a  few 
describe a more proactive role of private businesses 
and ex-ante partnerships. Bangladesh, for example, 
reports investments to create new PPPs for integrat-
ed development with a focus on disaster risk reduc-
tion.  Mauritius  has  made  engagement  in  disaster 
risk management compulsory for businesses under 
a  law  on  corporate  social  responsibility.  Colombia 
has  developed  a  new  disaster  risk  management 
framework under which it explicitly sees the private 
sector  as  a  strategic  partner.  The  United  States  of 
America  is  addressing  business  interruption  and 
helping  to  build  resilience  to  disasters  through  a 
number of programmes, including ‘Ready Business’. 

Interestingly,  the  number  of  private  sector  entities 
included in national coordinating bodies is highest 

230

in Africa. This means that governments are looking 
to  the  private  sector  for  support  in  disaster  risk 
management,  where  risk  governance  budgets  are 
limited and capabilities are weakest.

15.4 Filling the information  

vacuum

Revealing the ownership of risk and taking on 
joint responsibilities among private and public 
actors  is  a  key  step  towards  effective  risk  re-
duction.  However,  this  can  only  be  achieved 
when disaster risk information is available and 
accessible  to  make  visible  the  risks  generated 
by the investment decisions of businesses, gov-
ernments and households.

The most important area for private sector engage-
mentmay  be  around  hazard  information  and  joint 
public-private risk assessments. PPPs to manage di-
saster risk will only be effective when underpinned 
by open and accessible risk information and disas-
ter loss data. This is in the interest of both govern-
ments and businesses, particularly small and medi-
um  local  enterprises  that  lack  the  capacity  to 
undertake their own risk analysis (Marome, 2012).

Lack of visibility of disaster risk, and clarity over who 
owns  what  risk,  remains  a  major  barrier  to  taking 
risk into account in investment decisions.  Disaster 
losses  are  often  not  systematically  accounted  for; 
disaster risk information is rarely available to guide 
either private or public decision-making; and trans-
fer  of  risk  between  the  private  and  public  sectors 
and  between  both  and  civil  society  are  rarely    ex-
plicit (UNISDR, 2011; Kent, 2013). In the survey con-
ducted among senior policy-makers in 2012, inade-
quate  availability  of  disaster  data  was  one  of  the 
most commonly stated barriers to risk assessment 
and planning at the national level (Kent, 2013).

Of  the  countries  undertaking  self-assessments  of 
progress against the Hyogo Framework for Action in 
2011–2013, less than half report that national and lo-

Part III - Chapter 15cal risk assessments based on hazard data and vul-
nerability information are available and include risk 
assessments for key sectors.v And only 44 of 94 coun-
tries  assess  future  and  probable  risk,  whereas  45 
countries undertake multi-hazard risk assessments.

Only 40 percent of countries reporting through the 
HFA  Monitor  in  2011–2013  note  that  they  have 
agreed national standards for multi-hazard risk as-
sessments.  However, this  already  represents  prog-
ress  compared  with  the  last  review  cycle  in  2009–
2011 when only 25 percent confirmed having such 
standards in place. In 2013, 32 countries report they 
have a common format for risk assessments and 31 
report the existence of risk assessment formats that 
are customised for users. Of all countries, only 18 re-
port having both.

Although far from the majority of countries world-
wide  have  mechanisms  for  collecting,  storing  and 
analysing disaster loss data regularly and systemati-
cally,  a  fast-growing  number  have  recognised  the 

importance of this relatively low-cost, high-benefit 
strategy. Out of 94 countries, 73 report that they col-
lect, monitor and analyse disaster loss data, and 58 
countries confirm the existence and regular updat-
ing of national disaster loss databases. Of these, 46 
make use of reports based on loss data for planning 
in finance, planning and sector line ministries.

Several  low  and  middle-income  countries  report 
that  systematic  data  collection  and  sharing  de-
pends on resources provided through bilateral and 
multilateral cooperation. Efforts in establishing sys-
tematic disaster information systems, therefore, are 
hampered by short-term, one-off project approach-
es, which are difficult to institutionalise and sustain 
(UNISDR, 2012). 

Progress,  however,  is  being  made,  as  seen  in  Box 
15.5,  which  provides  examples  on  partnerships  in 
building  information  bases  for  earthquake  risk  re-
duction.

Box 15.5  Improving the information base on building vulnerability to earthquakes

Assessing the vulnerability of the built environment to earthquakes is extremely important in assessing poten-
tial consequences of an event, as well as mainstreaming earthquake risk reduction into the local development 
planning  process.  Understanding  the  response  of  existing  structures  to  potential  earthquakes  requires  the 
knowledge of building materials and engineering practices, which vary widely at the local level. This informa-
tion base can only be reliably and sustainably developed at the local level; however, this is rarely done.

Buildings’ exposure and vulnerability is an important part of the Rapid Earthquake Damage Assessment Sys-
tem (REDAS) developed by PHILVOLC, the Philippine Institute of Volcanology and Seismology. The Institute, in 
partnership with Geoscience Australia and supported by the Australian Agency for International Development 
(AusAID), has been developing the first national-scale building exposure database. Validation and enhance-
ment of this database at the local level started with Iloilo City, facilitated by the Institute of Civil Engineering of 
the University of the Philippines Diliman (UPD-ICE) with the support of professional structural engineering soci-
eties in the Philippines.  Through this engagement, the local engineering community agreed to deliver a build-
ing classification schema and corresponding earthquake vulnerability models. 

Another example of successful and long-term partnership in enhancing the information base for earthquake 
risk reduction is the Australia Indonesia Facility for Disaster Risk Reduction (AIFDR).vi  After the September 2009 
earthquake that struck West Sumatra in Indonesia, AIFDR supported a team of Indonesian and international 
engineers and scientists who collected and analysed damage information. This team, co-led by Geoscience 
Australia  and  the  Institute  of  Technology,  Bandung,  examined  damaged  buildings  to  identify  the  structural 
characteristics that may have contributed to their damage state, and provided a systematic survey of the com-
plete populations of both damaged and undamaged structures.  The project has provided a broad categorisa-
tion of the Indonesian building stock and it provides the basis for developing for a national model of the vulner-
ability of building structures in Indonesia.

(Source: Geoscience Australia)vii

231

Importantly, new initiatives bridging public and pri-
vate  risk  assessment  are  emerging.  Several  new 
tools are now offered for business, including Swiss 
Re’s  Global  Flood  Zones  component  of  its  CATNet 
information  platform  or  Maplecroft’s  Natural  Haz-
ards Risk Atlas.viii Although these are based on pro-
prietary risk information and models, the insurance 
industry is now beginning to use public domain risk 
information, including information produced for the 

GAR, to produce new applications for corporate cli-
ents (Box 15.6). 

New PPPs are emerging for risk modelling, such as 
the Global Earthquake Model (GEM), which will gen-
erate common standards and platforms for both us-
ers and producers of risk information (Box 15.7).

In addition, also at local levels, alternative assess-

Box 15.6  Atlas empowers risk managers

Willis, one of the world’s largest insurance brokers, has developed a unique risk management solution for com-
pany boards, CFOs and corporate risk managers.  Atlas is a platform that assists clients to assess disaster risks 
across their asset base to limit their exposure to direct losses or business interruption.  It gathers and interprets 
a range of open source and proprietary datasets, which are blended with a client’s own risk information, to de-
liver deep insights into a company’s risk profile around the world.  In the development of Atlas, Willis worked 
closely with UNISDR and used information produced for the GAR by UNEP/GRID-Geneva from 2007 to 2011.

By using Atlas as part of their regular workflow, corporate risk managers can visualise how a range of risks can 
adversely affect their property and asset portfolios.  The UNISDR data are used in Atlas to score each site loca-
tion against a catastrophe risk index. The risk manager is also able to visually explore the sites and each global 
hazard within the Atlas map to quickly illustrate how, why and where the company is exposed, thereby enabling 
the identification of risk hotspots.

Atlas empowers risk managers to take proactive control of the risks they face.  It highlights strengths, weak-
nesses and where improvements need to be made in a company’s risk management programme.  This helps a 
risk manager prioritise investments in risk reduction and improves business resilience and performance.  At the 
same time, increased risk visibility and an enhanced risk management programme enables brokers, such as 
Willis, to secure more competitive insurance premiums from the commercial market.

(Source: Willis Reix)

Box 15.7  Global partnership, forefront science and standardisation to characterise earthquake risk: the collaborative GEM initiative  

The Global Earthquake Model (GEM) was launched in 2006 and has since brought together an extensive com-
munity of earthquake scientists, social scientists, including economists, as well as IT specialists, in consultation 
with the private sector and governments. Together they are developing a global model of earthquake hazard, 
exposure, vulnerability and risk, as well as tools and resources to use the model and its outputs. GEM is a non-
profit  initiative,  driven  by  a  PPP  whose  mission  is  to  “raise  risk  awareness  and  promote  preparedness”  on 
earthquake risk. 

The project is continuously evolving, and the outcome will include exposure databases containing information 
on socio-economic characteristics as well as physical features such as building types; an extensive catalogue of 
past earthquakes; and tools for characterising earthquake hazard, including modelling global stress, subduction 
zones and active faults, ground motion, etc. As these products become available through an open source and 
dynamic platform, they will be constantly updated as the science evolves and new data are collected. The GEM 
project further aims to develop and promote standards that will enable improved data and knowledge exchange. 

(Source: GEMx)

232

Part III - Chapter 15Box 15.8  A ‘Public Hurricane Loss Model’ for Florida

To address the challenge of limited access to proprietary risk models available from the insurance industry, 
Florida International University (FIU) in Miami has begun developing a public loss model to assess hurricane 
risk in Florida. The model provides results on expected annual insured losses for specific properties or by cover-
age, construction type, ZIP code and county for the state of Florida. It also calculates the probable maximum 
loss that should be insured for any specific property that can then be compared with results and premiums 
proposed by insurance companies. 

This model does not compete with proprietary models, but instead seeks to complement them and provide ad-
ditional sources of information. Thus, it was developed with the support of nine public institutions and private 
sector organisations and certified by the Florida Commission on Hurricane Loss Projection Methodology. Al-
though the model already includes the quantification of economic benefits of hurricane mitigation, FIU is work-
ing to enhance the model with storm surge and flood hazard components.

(Source: Florida International University, Extreme Events Institutexi)

ment instruments and risk models are being em-
ployed to provide checks and balances to proprie-
tary models that for public entities, such as local 
governments  or  scientific  institutions,  can  be  a 
‘black  box’  (see  Box  15.8).  These  new  initiatives 
open the path to improved access to multi-dimen-
sional risk information for a variety of stakeholders.

Notes

i 
For  example,  in  Panama,  the  System  for  National  Investment 
Planning  (SNIP)  regulation  only  applied  to  large-scale  projects  of 
more than US$10 million (Orihuela, 2012).
ii  The statement made by New York’s Metropolitan Transit Author-
ity chairman Joseph J. Lhota in the aftermath of Sandy could not 
be clearer. On the morning of 30 October 2012, he said: “The New 
York City subway system is 108 years old, but it has never faced a di-
saster as devastating as what we experienced last night. Hurricane 
Sandy wreaked havoc on our entire transportation system, in every 
borough and county of the region.” (http://live.reuters.com/Event/
Tracking_Storm_Sandy/54277687).
iii  http://www.fema.gov/disasters/grid/year. 
iv  http://gigaom.com/2013/01/10/the-states-with-the-most-da-
ta-centers-are-also-the-most-disaster-prone-maps. 
v  41 of 94 countries, as of January 2013.
vi  The Australia Indonesia Facility for Disaster Risk Reduction is a 
partnership  between  the  Australian  and  Indonesian  governments 
aiming to reduce the impact from natural disasters by “strengthen-
ing national and local capacity in disaster management in Indone-
sia, and promoting a more disaster resilient region”.
vii  Information provided directly to UNISDR by Geoscience Austra-
lia in Support of the 2013 Global Assessment Report.
viii www.globalquakemodel.org.  
http://www.swissre.com/reinsurance/insurers/property_casualty/
Swiss_Re_Global_Flood_Zones_enabling_better_business_deci-
sions.html and http://maplecroft.com/themes/nh/. 
ix 
of the 2013 Global Assessment Report.

Information provided directly to UNISDR by Willis Re in support 

x 
Information provided directly to UNISDR by GEM in support of 
the 2013 Global Assessment Report. For more information on GEM, 
see: http://www.globalquakemodel.org/. 
xi  Submitted as an unpublished case study to the 2013 Global As-
sessment Report. For more information on the Model, see: http://
www.cis.fiu.edu/hurricaneloss/.

233

 Chapter 16  
Conclusion: 
From Shared Risk to Shared Value

As the ongoing global economic crisis has put a spotlight on hidden risks in the global economic sys-
tem,  landmark disasters, such as Hurricane Sandy in 2012 and the East Japan Earthquake and Chao 
Phraya river floods in Thailand in 2011, may have contributed to a turning point in business aware-
ness of disaster risks.  

Businesses and governments are beginning to recognise a new category of toxic assets as an unfore-
seen consequence of economic globalisation.  While these toxic assets do not currently appear on 
their balance sheets, embedding disaster risk management in business processes is increasingly 
seen as a key to resilience, competitiveness and sustainability: a business survival kit in an increas-
ingly unpredictable, complex and fast-changing world.

But this change is recent, and there are few blueprints or well-worn paths to follow.  In the coming 
years, as more businesses innovate and gain experience in this area, new paradigms will emerge 
that in turn will help to redefine the future of disaster risk reduction.  

The transformation of the global economy over the 
last  40  years  has  created  unprecedented  wealth:  
Global GDP grew by 75 percent between 1992 and 
2011 and global GDP per capita by 40 percent, while 
the  proportion  of  the  world’s  population  living  in 
extreme poverty fell from 46 percent in 1990 to 27 
percent  in  2005.  Global  life  expectancy  increased 
by 3.5 years between 1990 and 2010, and an esti-
mated 90 percent of the global population will have 
access to clean water by 2015, up from 77 percent 
in 1990 (United Nations Secretary General, 2012). 

At the same time, and as demonstrated in this re-
port,  business  practices  that  have  accompanied 
economic  globalisation  have  often  led  to  an  un-
sustainable  accumulation  of  disaster  risk.  Large 
businesses  felt  the  magnitude  of  this  unrealised 
risk  in  the  disasters  associated  with  Super-Storm 
Sandy in 2012 and the East Japan Earthquake and 
Chao Phraya river floods in Thailand in 2011. Small-
er  businesses,  particularly  in  low  and  middle-in-
come  countries,  are  reminded  more  regularly  of 
the accumulation of  extensive risk through recur-

rent  disasters  that  damage  the  infrastructure  on 
which  they  depend.  As  a  result,  both  businesses 
and governments begin to recognise a new cate-
gory of toxic assets as an unforeseen consequence 
of  economic  globalisation.  These  toxic  assets  do 
not currently appear on their balance sheets.

This recognition has yet to trigger a paradigm shift 
in the values that underpin business decision-mak-
ing.    Hazard-exposed  locations  offer  comparative 
advantages,  creating  powerful  imperatives  to  run 
the risk. But this risk is slowly but surely appearing 
on business radar screens, especially when assess-
ing trade-offs between costs and opportunities in-
volved in any new investment.  

In recent years, intensive disasters have revealed di-
saster  risks  embedded  in  the  contemporary  eco-
nomic landscape. As the ongoing global economic 
crisis has put a spotlight on hidden risks in the glob-
al economic system, these landmark disasters may 
have  contributed  to  a  turning  point  in  business 
awareness  of  disaster  risks.  As  such,  disaster  risk 

235

management is being increasingly viewed less as an 
additional cost and more as an opportunity to en-
hance business resilience, competitiveness and sus-
tainability.

But  this  change  is  recent,  and  there  are  few  blue-
prints  or  well-worn  paths  to  follow.    As  such,  this 
concluding  chapter  offers  a  compass  rather  than 
detailed navigational charts.  In the coming years, as 
more  businesses  innovate  and  gain  experience  in 
this area, a new practice will emerge that in turn will 
help to redefine the future of disaster risk reduction.    

16.1 Intersecting global  

crisis

 

Any economic system is underpinned by values 
(Castells et al., 2012).  The increases in productiv-
ity and growth achieved during 40 years of eco-
nomic globalisation have been nothing short of 
spectacular. But this growth has been achieved 
at  the  cost  of  an  over-accumulation  of  shared 
risks that now threaten competitiveness and sus-
tainability.  Markets have placed greater value on 
short-term  returns  on  capital  than  on  sustain-
ability and resilience. And businesses achieving 
these returns have been deemed competitive by 
investors. 

Evidence  gathered  for  GAR13  attests  that  this  ve-
neer of competitiveness may often be illusory. Busi-
nesses  have  exploited  comparative  advantages  of 
different locations by decentralizing and outsourc-
ing production, and have accelerated turnover time 
by fine-tuning the efficiency of their supply chains.  
In the process, however, they have increased their 
own  exposure  and  vulnerability  to  earthquakes, 
storms,  tsunamis,  floods  and  droughts.    In  many 
cases, they have also generated significant shared 
social and environmental risks and costs.  

As a result, many apparently productive and profit-
generating assets on business accounts may really 
be  disaster-prone  contingent  and  potential  liabili-

236

ties.  This contingent liability extends to (i) financial 
institutions—such  as  pension 
funds,  sovereign 
wealth  funds—that  have  invested  significant  parts 
of their portfolio in businesses whose assets are at 
risk;  and  (ii)  cities  and  countries  that  have  hidden 
and  dissimulated  their  disaster  risks  to  attract  in-
vestment. Imagery used by cities and countries to 
highlight  their  comparative  advantages  is  increas-
ingly  sophisticated  and  now  relies  as  much  on  in-
tangible values, related to quality of life, as on the 
basic conditions of competitiveness, such as infra-
structure  and  the  labour  force.  But  in  hazard-ex-
posed locations, these comparative advantages are 
also illusory and can be dispelled with a single in-
tensive disaster.  GAR13 opened with the example of 
the decline of the Port of Kobe following the 1995 
earthquake—once the spell is broken and business 
leaves, it may never return. 

The  global  financial  crisis  that  began  in  2007  has 
metamorphosed into a broader economic, political 
and social crisis, particularly in Europe and the Unit-
ed States of America.  One of the visible causes of 
the crisis was an over-accumulation of financial risk 
through large flows of capital into speculative, debt-
financed  urban  development.    This  debt—and  the 
risks  it  internalized—was  then  sold  and  shared 
through  opaque  investment  vehicles  that  had  not 
been assessed or valued.   

institutional 

The accumulation of disaster risk in recent decades 
is analogous.   In many hazard-exposed countries, 
governments, 
investors,  businesses 
and households are now sitting on another moun-
tain of hidden debt—the contingent liabilities repre-
sented  by  unrealized  disaster  risk.    This  disaster-
prone  capital  stock,  whether  privately  or  publicly 
owned, represents another category of toxic assets, 
which do not appear on any balance sheets.  

In  addition,  the  contemporary  world  is  character-
ized by unmitigated climate change, volatile energy 
markets, material resource, water and food scarcity, 
unequal  wealth  distribution,  increasing  consump-
tion,  increasing  urbanization,  ecosystem  decline, 

Chapter 16economic and political turmoil, rapid technological 
change  and  the  increasing  interconnectedness  of 
global  trade,  financial  markets,  and  supply  chains 
(PwC,  2012,  KPMG,  2012),  among  other  factors.  
These  processes  interact  with  each  other  and  are 
underlying  drivers  of  disaster  risk.  In  this  context, 
the ripple effects of recent intensive disasters have 
contributed to a world viewed more and more as a 
set of intersecting crises where it is increasingly dif-
ficult  to  separate  cause  from  consequence  (Wil-
liams, 2012). Many future disasters will form part of a 
challenging  terrain  of  improbable  and  un  predict-
able events. 

The  number  of  business  surveys  released  in  the 
last  years  (Deloitte,  2012;  Ernst  and  Young,  2012; 
Forbes, 2012; Aon Benfield, 2011) all highlight that 
businesses perceive an increasingly riskier market-
place  characterized  by  complexity,  uncertainty, 
unpredictable events, and sudden change in which 
risks  can  manifest  themselves  swiftly  and  unex-
pectedly, with far-reaching ramifications. 

In this environment of uncertainty and volatility, the 
values  that  underpin  business  are  starting  to 
change.  Many  businesses  are  becoming  more  risk 
averse  and  are  strengthening  their  risk  manage-
ment capacities. Risk management is being increas-
ingly perceived less as a cost and more as an oppor-
tunity  and  value  proposition.  Risk  perception, 
therefore, seems to have gone through a point of in-
flection.  Businesses  are  beginning  to  see  effective 
risk  management  as  a  key  competitive  advantage 
that  can  enable  long-term  profitable  growth  and 
sustained future profitability.  Many more large busi-
nesses report having a dedicated risk management 
department,  and  responsibility  and  accountability 
for risk management is increasingly being vested in 
the top layers of management (Deloitte, 2012). 

Recent  business  surveys  highlight  the  value  of 
strong and effective risk management, including re-
duced operational, credit, or market losses, and im-
proved  reputation  and  analyst  ratings  (Accenture, 
2011).  There are at least three interrelated ways in 

which  investing  in  risk  management  generates  re-
sults for businesses (Ernst and Young, 2012).  First, 
identifying,  assessing  and  addressing  critical  risks 
increases  ownership  and  accountability,  reducing 
uncertainty and strengthening confidence not only 
within the business but also among investors, ana-
lysts  and  regulators.  Second,  addressing  critical 
risks also can lead to important cost reductions and 
savings, which are critical to business performance.  
These  include  avoided  losses  from  business  inter-
ruption, avoided costs of rehabilitation or relocation 
of damaged plant and facilities, as well as efficien-
cies gained from taking anticipatory or preventative 
actions. And third, risk management can also be key 
to value creation.  

By analysing and valuing risks correctly, businesses 
can  accept  and  own  certain  risks,  which  provide 
competitive  advantage;  savings  from  effective  risk 
management can fund other strategic corporate ac-
tivities; and investments in risk reduction may lead 
to higher returns. 

Businesses that have invested the most in risk man-
agement may ﬁnancially outperform their peers. A 
survey  carried  out  among  576  companies  and  re-
viewing almost 3,000 analyst and company reports 
highlighted  that  the  20  percent  of  businesses  that 
had invested most heavily in risk management had 
implemented on average twice as many key risk ca-
pabilities as the 20 percent that had least invested 
and  on  average  had  earnings  three  times  greater 
(Ernst and Young, 2012).  Embedding risk manage-
ment in business processes is increasingly seen as a 
key to resilience, competitiveness and sustainabili-
ty: a business survival kit in an increasingly unpre-
dictable, complex and fast-changing world.

As  highlighted  in  Chapter  11,  although  corporate 
risk  management  is  usually  focused  on  financial, 
economic,  market  and  legal  risks,  there  are  signs 
that  disaster  risk  management  is  becoming  a  real 
concern. One business survey now lists disaster risk 
as the 16th most important out of the top 50 risks, 
and as the 6th most important driver strengthening 

237

risk management (Aon Benfield, 2011). Some large 
global  consultancies  and  brokers  are  investing  to 
develop  decision  platforms  for  disaster  risk  man-
agement  for  the  business  sectori,  highlighting  that 
this will be a growing market as businesses increase 
their investments in disaster risk management. 

Businesses  and  their  investors,  therefore,  are  just 
starting to perceive disaster risk as a critical threat 
and the need to include disaster risk management 
as an integral component of corporate risk manage-
ment.  Evidence  showing  that  investing  in  disaster 
risk  management  can  give  business  a  competitive 
edge is mounting. At the same time, as the market 
for  corporate  disaster  risk  management  begins  to 
develop, it creates major multiplier effects, as more 
and more business take investment decisions that 
reduce  rather  than  increase  disaster  risk.  In  the 
same way that individual business investments over 
time can accumulate to generate systemic disaster 

risk,  risk-informed  investments  can  over  time  re-
duce that systemic risk.   

Global foreign direct investment (FDI) is projected 
to reach US$1.8 trillion in 2013 and US$1.9 trillion 
in 2014 (UNCTAD, 2012). In 2011, 46 percent of this 
investment went into manufacturing and another 
40  percent  into  services,  including  infrastructure.  
And approximately US$777 billion or half of all FDI 
flowed  into  low  and  middle-income  countriesii.  
Whether or not these trillions of dollars of new in-
vestment flow into hazard-exposed areas and how 
the resulting disaster risks are managed will have a 
decisive impact on the future of disaster risk.

Businesses  able  to  estimate  and  manage  their  di-
saster  risks  will  be  less  likely  to  invest  in  hazard-
prone areas. And if they do, they will more likely in-
vest in measures to reduce the vulnerability of their 
plants  and  facilities.  The  same  businesses  will  be 

Figure 16.1  Key areas for the future of risk governance

(Source: UNISDR)

238

Chapter 16more likely to have addressed disaster risks in their 
supply chains and to have increased their resilience.  
And the disaster risks they have decided to accept 
will be explicit rather than hidden on their balance 
sheets.  More importantly, they will have recognised 
that investing to avoid shared risks and costs and to 
address  the  underlying  risk  drivers,  in  partnership 
with the public sector and civil society, is not only 
good but essential for business itself. Unless those 
shared risks are transformed into shared values fu-
ture  business  will  be  neither  competitive  and  sus-
tainable nor resilient. 

Already, nascent practices are starting to bring this 
emerging  paradigm  shift  from  generating  shared 
risks  to  creating  shared  value  into  focus,  opening 
new  doors,  encouraging  further  questioning,  ex-
ploratory practices and innovative research. As Fig-
ure 16.1 shows, these practices suggest five broad 
areas of opportunity for business that in time may 
redefine the practice of disaster risk management.  

16.2 Putting the disaster into 

corporate risk management

As  business  awareness  of  disaster  risk  grows, 
more and more businesses will expand their ex-
isting risk management strategies to include di-
saster risk.  While they are currently addressing 
disaster risk through the lens of business conti-
nuity planning, several businesses are gradually 
shifting  their  focus  from  preparing  for  and  re-
sponding  to  disasters  to  identifying,  analysing 
and managing disaster risks.   

From business continuity planning to disaster 
risk management
As  discussed  in  Chapter  11,  most  businesses  are 
currently addressing disaster risk through the para-
digm of business continuity planning.   Analogous to 
emergency preparedness and response approach-
es in the public sector, business continuity planning 
enables  businesses  to  identify  potential  threats  to 
their operations and supply chains and to develop 

contingency  plans  that  enable  business  to  be  re-
sumed quickly and with minimal disruption. By of-
fering  immediate  and  visible  benefits,  in  terms  of 
predictability and reduced losses, business continu-
ity planning is essential to any corporate risk man-
agement strategy.

But  while  essential,  it  is  only  a  part  and  not  the 
whole. Businesses not only need to strengthen their 
resilience  when  disasters  occur  but  also  measure 
how  their  investment  decisions  are  modifying  the 
levels of disaster risk they face. By shifting their fo-
cus  from  exogenous  threats  to  how  risks  are  con-
structed  through  investment  decisions,  firms  will 
achieve a major conceptual shift in business culture 
with implications for where risk management func-
tions are located in an organisation and the profile 
of risk managers.  

As Chapters 11 and 15 highlighted, investments are 
currently  being  made  in  developing  new  applica-
tions  and  platforms  for  visualizing  and  managing 
the  disaster  risks  businesses  face.  As  these  and 
other platforms are brought to the market, corpo-
rate  risk  managers  will  have  access  to  tools  that 
can  enable  disaster  risk  to  be  integrated  into 
broader risk management efforts, beyond the nar-
row  focus  on  business  continuity  planning.  Such 
frameworks  and  platforms  can  also  facilitate 
knowledge networking with peers, scientific insti-
tutions and the public sector. 

The  conceptual  shift  from  managing  disasters  to 
managing  risks  will  be  facilitated  in  businesses 
where risk management is already viewed as an in-
tegral  part  of  investment  planning  and  corporate 
strategy  rather  than  as  a  specialised  department 
that helps the business plan and manages contin-
gencies.  The  shift  will  also  be  facilitated  in  those 
businesses  where  the  risk  management  function 
includes staff with a broader understanding of the 
dynamics  of  risk  rather  than  staff  with  a  security 
and emergency management background. 

239

Increasing awareness of disaster risks
One  obstacle  to  integrating  disaster  risk  consider-
ations into broader corporate risk management is a 
lack of awareness of its critical importance among 
corporate leaders and senior executives. Until there 
is greater awareness of the risks that they currently 
face and that may have been created through unin-
formed  investment  decisions,  businesses  will  con-
tinue to be surprised by disasters. 

At present, disaster risk management is not explic-
itly included in the risk management curriculum of 
a  majority  of  business  schools  and  is  rarely  fea-
tured in leading business journals. By adding risk 
management to existing business school curricula, 
the way that risks are managed in businesses could 
begin to shift. 

If levels of disaster risk and its management were 
included systematically as an indicator in surveys 
of  risk  and  business  performance,  and  in  analyst 
forecasts and reports, this would equally provide a 
strong incentive for businesses to strengthen their 
disaster risk management function. As further ex-
plored  below,  it  would  also  encourage  govern-
ments to invest in more effective disaster risk man-
agement. 

Strengthening disaster risk management in 
small and medium enterprises (SMEs)
As  Chapter  11  highlighted,  although  large  global 
corporations have risk management departments, 
few SMEs have the capacities to analyse or address 
their disaster risk. However, the growing concern of 
large  businesses  with  supply  chain  vulnerability 
and  resilience  may  provide  a  vehicle  to  support 
and strengthen disaster risk management in SMEs.  

Rapid progress is currently being made in analysing 
and modelling supply chain risks.  Businesses are 
examining  different  strategies  to  reduce  supply 
chain risk including adding inventories; shortening 
supply chains and increasing supply chain visibility; 
design information portability; diversifying risks by 
creating redundancy; defining alternative distribu-

240

tion  channels  and  suppliers;  enhancing  relation-
ships with supply chain partners; relocating or pro-
tecting high-risk facilities; and working closely with 
the public sector. For example, sourcing from only 
one supplier can reduce production costs, but in-
creases risk if that supplier is affected in a disaster.  
Although  having  multiple  suppliers  in  different  lo-
cations may raise transaction costs, it reduces the 
risk  of  disruption  by  securing  supply  substitutes.  
Similarly, businesses are now increasingly selecting 
suppliers  on  the  basis  of  risk  criteria  rather  than 
purely on cost minimization.  

SMEs  play  a  critical  role  in  most  supply  chains.  
Large businesses have a vested interest in ensuring 
that  their  supply  chain  partners,  including  SMEs, 
are managing their disaster risks. Supply chain risk 
management  may  therefore  become  a  vehicle 
through which large businesses with the necessary 
capacities  can  strengthen  disaster  risk  manage-
ment in SMEs, which lack those capacities. 
 

16.3 Eyes wide open: integrating 

disaster risk information into   
                     business investment decisions

 

Businesses  will  continue  to  invest  in  hazard-ex-
posed locations given the comparative advantag-
es  that  many  of  these  places  offer  and  because 
infrastructure  and  supply  chains  are  already  in 
place. Often, accepting a certain level of risk in a 
location can give a business a competitive advan-
tage. But by integrating disaster information into 
a broader analysis, using appropriate risk metrics 
and  open  access  information  can  mean  that  in-
vestment  decisions  are  taken  with  eyes  wide 
open. 

Identifying risk appetite
Businesses in the tourism sector will continue to in-
vest in SIDS; in the agribusiness sector, in countries 
with large areas of potentially productive farmland; 
and in the urban development sector, in rapidly ex-
panding cities in low and middle-income countries.   

Chapter 16But some businesses are now starting to include di-
saster risks when considering the costs and benefits 
and  trade-offs  implicit  in  these  investment  deci-
sions. 

Integrating  disaster  risk  estimates  into  a  broader 
analysis,  which  takes  into  account  other  consider-
ations such as labour costs, access to markets, sta-
bility  and  infrastructure,  would  enable  businesses 
to identify which risk layers can be reduced (for ex-
ample, through investments in strengthened build-
ing or protective measures); which risks cannot be 
reduced;  and  which  would  have  to  be  managed 
through  other  mechanisms,  such  as  insurance,  or 
those that can neither be reduced nor shared.  By 
analysing  the  cost-effectiveness  of  these  different 
disaster  risk  management  strategies,  businesses 
can  decide  how  much  disaster  risk  to  accept  and 
how much to invest in reducing or sharing that risk; 
in  other  words,  businesses  can  now  identify  how 
much risk appetite is appropriate for their goals and 
objectives.  

Integrating disaster risk metrics into invest-
ment planning
To  factor  disaster  risks  into  their  investment  deci-
sions,  businesses  need  access  to  risk  information 
and  up-to-date  estimates  that  can  be  easily  inte-
grated into planning and decision-making.  As a first 
step,  this  may  consist  of  horizon  scanning  of  the 
countries and cities they are considering for their in-
vestment.  Developing such disaster risk profiles re-
quires risk information and metrics at an appropri-
ate scale and format.  

At present, the growing volume of risk information 
being produced at different scales—by universities, 
scientific  and  technical  institutions  and  others—is 
rarely  standardised,  compiled  or  aggregated  in  a 
way that can be used by corporate risk managers, 
finance  or  planning  ministries  or  by  city  planners 
and administrators. 

tion  and  convergence  between  private  and  public 
risk modelling, as evidenced by the Understanding 
Risk  conferences  organised  by  the  World  Bank  in 
2010 and 2012iii  and new platforms such as the Willis 
Re. Atlas platform (see Chapter 15).  The GAR global 
risk  model  and  national  disaster  loss  databases, 
now  being  published  by  an  increasing  number  of 
countries,  are  helping  to  provide  open  access  risk 
metrics  that  can  be  used  for  business  investment 
decisions.  

The integration of disaster risk metrics into analyti-
cal business forecasts will be another critical path 
for  improving  the  availability  of  risk  information, 
particularly for businesses that are not able to man-
age  their  own  risk  identification  and  estimation 
platforms. 

Opening the black box:  open source and open 
access disaster risk information
Proprietary risk models produced by the risk model-
ling industry are designed to provide detailed infor-
mation  to  value  the  prime  of  specific  portfolios  of 
assets for the insurance industry and to identify po-
tential  risks  of  insolvency.    These  models  are  not 
necessarily  designed  to  support  investment  deci-
sions by businesses or governments.  As highlighted 
in  Chapter  13,  this  contributes  to  an  information 
asymmetry  in  which  purchasers  of  insurance,  in-
cluding businesses and governments, do not have 
access to the information that the insurance indus-
try is using to determine pricing levels.  

As  open  source  and  open  access  risk  information 
becomes more readily available and improved, the 
situation may begin to change.  Increased risk infor-
mation  availability  will  facilitate  a  healthy  debate 
between businesses, governments and insurers re-
garding risk levels, patterns, trends and pricing.   It 
may also encourage governments to develop more 
appropriate  regulatory  frameworks  for  the  insur-
ance industry.   

But this scenario is changing rapidly. As highlighted 
in  Chapter  15,  new  efforts  are  stimulating  interac-

Most important, it will enable a greater social aware-
ness  of  disaster  risks,  which  in  turn  may  lead  to 

241

greater investments in disaster risk reduction from 
all  levels—businesses;  local  and  national  govern-
ments; communities; and households.  

16.4 Towards public-private  

risk governance 

 

As businesses start to scrutinize the levels of di-
saster  risk  internalised  in  cities  and  countries 
before  making  investment  decisions,  this  will 
change their investment behaviour over time. In 
turn, risk-sensitive business investment will pro-
vide an important incentive for improved disas-
ter risk management and increased investment 
in  risk  reduction  by  national  and  local  govern-
ments.  

Managing risks to strengthen competitiveness
At present, hazard-exposed cities and countries of-
ten hide or dissimulate their disaster risk to attract 
investment.  There  is  only  anecdotal  evidence  that 
cities and countries that effectively manage their di-
saster risk are more successful at attracting invest-
ment  than  those  who  understate  and  underplay 
their risk levels. However, as open access risk infor-
mation becomes increasingly available to business, 
and  as  business  becomes  more  aware  of  disaster 
risk, competitiveness strategies based on risk denial 
will become less  effective.  

As disaster risk starts being factored into business 
investment decisions, countries with lower risks or 
which can demonstrate that their disaster risks are 
effectively managed will have a comparative advan-
tage to attract investment.  From this perspective, 
attracting continued investment is likely to become 
one of the primary motivations for strengthening di-
saster  risk  management  at  the  national  and  local 
levels. 

Some  governments  are  already  beginning  to  in-
clude  disaster  risk  management  as  part  of  their 
competitiveness agenda. This implies that disaster 
risk management will have to be integrated into the 

242

work  of  trade  and  investment  boards  and  minis-
tries.  For example, information should be provided 
on disaster risks and how they are being managed 
to potential investors and that information needs to 
be factored into the planning vehicles aimed at at-
tracting investment in manufacturing and services, 
such as special economic zones, and into the grant-
ing  of  concessions  for  mining,  oil  and  gas,  timber 
and agriculture. 

Risk-sensitive  business  investment  will  also  gener-
ate a demand for analysis and forecasts that include 
rather than ignore disaster risk.  And as that analysis 
is  generated,  it  will  encourage  countries  to  invest 
further in disaster risk management. If, at the same 
time,  disaster  risk  management  is  integrated  into 
the  many  different  competitiveness  indices,iv  this 
will provide further incentives, generating a virtuous 
circle in which countries and cities invest in disaster 
risk management to enhance their competitiveness, 
and businesses invest more in those countries that 
can demonstrate effective risk management.  

In the case of some very high-risk countries, such as 
SIDS, strengthening disaster risk management may 
be the most effective way to increase competitive-
ness.  As highlighted in Chapter 7, given their geog-
raphy and small size of their economies, SIDS have 
many  constraints  to  enhancing  competitiveness.  
Precisely  because  such  a  large  proportion  of  their 
capital and investment is at risk, reducing that risk 
can be their best chance to strengthen competitive-
ness and attract investment.  

New approaches to risk governance
GAR11 laid out the case for integrating disaster risk 
management  into  public  investment  planning  and 
called  for  the  strengthening  of  risk  governance  in 
which  finance  and  planning  ministries  play  a  key 
role.  This built on the findings of GAR09, which high-
lighted the need for strengthened partnerships be-
tween  national  and  local  governments  and  local 
communities.  

Evidence  presented  in  this  report  shows  that  risk 

Chapter 16governance at the national and local levels is unlike-
ly to be effective without the involvement of busi-
ness.  Ineffective land-use planning, vulnerable in-
frastructure and environmental degradation erode 
business  competitiveness.    SMEs  in  particular  are 
heavily dependent on publicly managed and regu-
lated infrastructure and services.  At the same time, 
public regulation alone is rarely effective to regulate 
business investment in a way that contributes to risk 
reduction.  Businesses, therefore, have a vested in-
terest in the effective management of disaster risks 
in  the  city  regions  where  they  are  located.  And  to 
manage  those  risks,  national  and  particularly  city 
and  local  governments  need  the  participation  of 
business.  

Examples of successful coordination between pub-
lic administrations and small and large businesses 
abound  (Wedatta  et  al.,  2012;  Ingirige  and  Amara-
tunga, 2012).  However, as highlighted by the nation-
al  HFA  reports,  there  is  still  an  enormous  gap  be-
tween  policy  and  strategy,  on  the  one  hand,  and 
between  implementation  and  accountability,  on 
the other hand, which needs to be bridged.  At the 
same time, many public-private partnerships (PPPs) 
are  still  limited  to  emergency  response,  reflecting 
the current focus on disasters rather than on risks in 
both public and private sectors. 

Actions  by  the  public  sector  are  critical  to  all  sec-
tors.  They  include  creating  conditions  for  a  well-
structured and functioning local insurance market; 
producing  and  making  available  accurate,  up-to-
date  and  relevant  risk  information;  and  working 
jointly with business and civil society on regulating 
land-use, building and ecosystem services. Given its 
role in providing employment, public sector action 
to  reduce  risks  faced  by  SMEs  are  particularly  im-
portant.  

The counterpart to these actions would be business 
participation in national and local risk governance 
frameworks on a strategic basis that goes beyond 
collaborating in emergencies through the corporate 
social  responsibility  function.    This  participation 

could include, for example, reaching consensus on 
land-use  planning  and  zoning  decisions  in  a  way 
that commits both business sectors and local and 
national governments; providing technical support 
to  designing  and  implementing  disaster  risk  man-
agement strategies and plans; and investing in risk 
reduction measures that benefit both business and 
the wider community. 

16.5 Disclosing the disaster  

risk balance sheet 

 

Reporting on disaster risk by business is current-
ly largely unregulated, but will become increas-
ingly  important  in  future.  Businesses  begin  to 
undertake integrated reporting that includes in-
formation on sustainability and risks in the full 
picture  of  business  performance.  As  disaster 
risks  become  factored  into  the  decisions  of  in-
vestors, businesses will then have powerful in-
centives to invest in effective disaster risk man-
agement. 

Reporting risks
As  highlighted  in  Chapter  12,  increasing  pressure 
from  government  regulators  is  likely  to  provide  a 
powerful incentive for businesses to identify, esti-
mate  and  disclose  both  their  internal  and  shared 
risks. These regulators are confronting businesses 
with  additional  sustainability-related  legislation 
and fiscal instruments.  At present, these addition-
al regulatory requirements are largely focused on 
climate  change.  However,  the  scope  of  these  in-
struments  could  easily  be  expanded  to  address 
other kinds of disaster risks, including those asso-
ciated with geological and not just weather-related 
hazards. Increasingly, business, investors and gov-
ernments are recognizing that more transparency 
is good for business.  Image is improved and repu-
tational risk diminished, which is critical given the 
increasing  sophistication  of  the  global  media  in 
exposing practices that increase or share disaster 
risk.  Also  the  risk  or  litigation  from  those  sharing 
the disaster risks generated by business would be 

243

reduced.  This  is  particularly  important  give  new  
and emerging perspectives on claims and compen-
sation.  

income, there is a strong incentive to make invest-
ments that avoid the generation of shared disaster 
risks. 

If  both  disaster  risks  internalised  in  a  business’s 
own assets and operations as well as shared risks 
that  are  transferred  to  others  are  accounted  for 
and reported, then investors would be able to fac-
tor  these  risks  into  their  investment  decisions, 
avoiding businesses with high and unmanaged di-
saster risk. Improved reporting would also encour-
age  disaster  risk  to  be  factored  into  analyst  and 
credit  ratings,  which  would  further  encourage 
businesses to invest in effectively managing their 
disaster risks.

Similarly,  improved  reporting  may  contribute  to 
more sensitive insurance pricing.  Insurance pricing 
could then become another important catalyst for 
greater  transparency  in  equity  markets  and  more 
prudent  investment  practices  (Stahel  and  Orie, 
2012). 

One issue that needs to be addressed is agreement 
on  common  standards  and  metrics  for  measuring 
and quantifying disaster risks.  Estimating the cost 
of  shared  risks  is  not  a  trivial  exercise,  particularly 
when it comes to valuing natural capital.  As a result, 
performance  criteria  for  investment  contracts  and 
loans  that  take  natural  capital—and  disaster  risk 
considerations—into account have yet to be identi-
fied  (Cambridge  Programme  for  Sustainable  Lead-
ership, 2011b).  Recent initiatives are now address-
ing  this  gap  (TEEB,  2010)  although  there  is  still  a 
need to link the real costs of externalities, such as 
environmental  pollution  or  destruction  of  natural 
capital, to the cost of increased shared disaster risk. 

Universal ownership of disaster risks
Other concepts such as ‘universal ownership’ have 
the  potential  to  encourage  risk-aware  investing  by 
large institutional investors, such as pension funds 
and sovereign wealth funds.  Given that these funds 
have a fiduciary responsibility to their beneficiaries 
for prudence and to provide sustainable long-term 

244

In  principle,  fund  beneficiaries  can  gain  from  re-
duced environmental costs associated with fund in-
vestments, i.e. by reducing the corporate externali-
ties of business investments, the value of the funds 
can  increase,  and  costs—such  as  higher  taxes  to 
compensate  for  externalities—can  be  significantly 
reduced (UNEP FI and PRI, 2011).

The  effectiveness  of  universal  ownership  will  de-
pend  on  overcoming  information  asymmetry,  in 
which  providers  of  investment  opportunity  know 
more than investors and control the information of 
those whose money they manage. Although fund 
managers  may  have  fiduciary  responsibility  for 
prudence, this will be reinforced if beneficiaries ac-
tively  encourage  investments  that  do  not  lead  to 
increasing disaster risk. 

Given the volume of capital under the management 
of large pension and sovereign wealth funds, the ef-
fective application of the principal of universal own-
ership could provide a major incentive for business-
es  to  manage  their  disaster  risks  more  effectively 
and  to  ensure  that  their  investments  are  risk-neu-
tral.  Stronger emphasis and direction of asset own-
ers to their managers to integrate disaster risks into 
their investment strategies across all asset classes 
could generate significant change (IIGCC et al., 2010).

16.6  The business of  

managing disaster risks 

 

 

The size of the market for disaster risk reduction 
is potentially huge. The World Bank, for example, 
estimates that climate change adaptation will re-
quire  investments  of  US$75–US$100  billion  an-
nually  between  2010  and  2050  (World  Bank, 
2010). The costs of corrective disaster risk man-
agement may be similar.  But in reality, the mar-
ket  is  much  greater.  If  all  the  US$1.9  trillion  of 

Chapter 16FDI  foreseen  for  2014  were  disaster-risk  sensi-
tive, this would represent an enormous business 
opportunity. And FDI is only a small proportion 
of total investment in produced, natural and in-
tangible capital.   

Disaster risk management as a business sector
Many businesses now see disaster risk management 
as both an opportunity and a key sector for develop-
ment.  Among  companies  polled  by  the  Economist 
Intelligence  Unit,  63  percent  saw  opportunities  to 
generate value from disaster risk reduction (for ex-
ample, developing new crop-insurance products or 
designing more resilient structures) and 20 percent 
had already generated new revenue (UKTI, 2011).   

As highlighted in this report, these opportunities in-
clude  the  development  of  applications  to  provide 
risk  estimates  and  information  and  platforms  for 
corporate risk management.  They will also increas-
ingly  embrace  the  design  of  infrastructure  and 
buildings, of ecosystem approaches to disaster risk 
management, and the provision of advice and tech-
nical assistance to the public sector. 

But  the  scope  is  not  restricted  to  those  activities 
explicitly  labelled  disaster  risk  management.  A 
large  and  growing  number  of  business  initiatives 
are unfolding in all regions. They are creating value 
from the sustainable management of natural capi-
tal  and  the  environment,  from  reducing  energy 
consumption  and  investing  in  renewable  energy 
and from involving and benefiting local communi-
ties and households.   

Although many of these initiatives contribute to cli-
mate  change  mitigation  and  adaptation,  environ-
mental sustainability and increasing local incomes 
and employment, some already generate co-bene-
fits vis-à-vis reduced disaster risk.  The green build-
ing movement is a good example of a new business 
area  that  generates  benefits  in  all  these  domains.  
The vast scope of these initiatives not only includes 
businesses but designersv  and others that stimulate 
business innovation. 

Many of these initiatives are now being driven under 
the sustainability agenda of businesses rather than 
through the risk management agenda.   However, to 
the extent that they address underlying drivers of di-
saster  risk—such  as  declining  ecosystem  services 
and  badly  planned  and  managed  urban  develop-
ment—they will also have a major impact on the fu-
ture of disaster risk. They often reflect a change of 
core values in a new generation of professionals en-
tering  business,  which  are  more  likely  to  embrace 
concepts  such  as  sustainability  and  equity  more 
than their peers of previous generations.  But they 
also recognise that change requires investment and 
investment can mean business opportunity.   

Businesses investing in these initiatives often recog-
nise  that  the  creation  of  shared  value  rather  than 
shared risk is essential for longer-term business re-
silience,  competitiveness  and  sustainability,  while 
presenting  immediate  opportunities  to  generate 
revenue and new business opportunities. 

Certification and standards
The development of disaster risk management as a 
business  sector  that  creates  shared  value  will  be 
stimulated by the introduction or adoption of certi-
fication or similar types of ‘seals of approval’ (Joha-
nesson et al., 2013; FM Global, 2010; Mahon et al., 
2012).  This may include the development of inter-
national standards, such as ISO, but also voluntary 
industry sector-specific certification programmes. 

Certification programmes already exist in a number 
of sectors, for example, in sustainable tourism and 
forestry and in energy-efficient building.  At present, 
these programmes rarely make explicit mention of 
disaster risk management, though reducing disaster 
risks may be an important co-benefit. For example, 
certification of sustainable urban development can 
be adapted to include assessment of drainage and 
run-off capacity, flood risk and heat absorption.  

The benefits of certification are that businesses in-
vesting is hazard-resistant building or infrastructure, 
for example, would probably see higher growth and 

245

Notes

PwC and Willis Re., for example.

i 
ii  The  UNCTAD  report  refers  to  developing  countries,  which  are 
low and middle-income countries.
iii  https://www.understandrisk.org. 
iv  WEF competitiveness index; UN HABITAT urban prosperity index 
and UNCTAD FDI attractiveness index.
v  http://inhabitat.com/how-americas-infrastructure-can-be-
strengthened-against-future-natural-disasters/3/, 
http://www.
worldchanging.com/cities/,  http://www.ecogeek.org/,  http://gree-
nopolis.com/.

returns than those that do not, as certification is in-
creasingly  recognised  and  valued  by  consumers.  
This  would  provide  a  tangible  incentive  for  busi-
nesses to invest in a way that reduces rather than 
creates shared disaster risks. 

16.7  

                                      

Epilogue 

This report has made the business case for disaster 
risk reduction.  The factoring of disaster risk consid-
erations into business investment decisions is criti-
cal to achieve more resilient, competitive and sus-
tainable  economies  and  societies.  And  creating 
shared  value  through  investing  in  disaster  risk  re-
duction can itself be a huge business opportunity.  
Perhaps  the  most  important  achievement  of  the 
HFA  is  an  enhanced  global  understanding  of  the 
principal  pillars  of  disaster  risk  management,  par-
ticularly  among  national  and  local  governments 
and civil society. This now has to mature into a real 
understanding of disasters not as exogenous threats 
to  an  otherwise  functioning  economic  and  social 
system, but as a material expression of serious fis-
sures in our approach to economic growth and de-
velopment.

This report highlights that unless this understanding 
is now integrated into business investment, the pos-
sibility that the HFA goal will be achieved is remote.  
The  future  of  disaster  risk  hinges  on  the  extent  to 
which business embraces disaster risk reduction. 

As we now approach 2015, international efforts are 
intensifying to formulate a new framework for disas-
ter risk reduction:  HFA2.  Ensuring that the business 
case for disaster risk reduction is explicitly included 
in that framework will provide a critical incentive for 
the constructive engagement by business, on which 
future resilience, competitiveness and sustainability 
depend. 

246

Chapter 16Glossary

GAR13 uses an expanded set of terms and defini-
tions  building  on  those  included  in  GAR09  and 
GAR11.

Disaster risk is considered to be a function of haz-
ard,  exposure  and  vulnerability.  Disaster  risk  is 
normally expressed as the probability of loss of life, 
injury or destroyed or damaged capital stock in a 
given  period  of  time.  Generic  definitions  of  these 
and  other  terms  are  available  in  the  UNISDR 
Glossary.i The way these terms are used in GAR13 is 
explained below.

GAR11 uses the term physical (rather than natu-
ral) hazard to refer to hazardous phenomena such 
as floods, storms, droughts and earthquakes. Pro-
cesses such as urbanization, environmental degra-
dation  and  climate  change  shape  and  configure 
hazards; therefore, it is becoming increasingly dif-
ficult to disentangle their natural and human attri-
butes. Major  hazard  is  used  to  refer  to  global  or 
regionally important hazards such as earthquakes, 
tsunamis, flooding in large river basins and tropical 
cyclones.  Localized  hazard  is  used  to  refer  to 
smaller-scale hazards such as flash or surface wa-
ter  flooding,  fires,  storms  and  landslides,  which 
tend  to  affect  particular  localities.    Exposure  is 
used to refer to the location and number of people, 
factories,  offices  or  other  business  assets  in  haz-
ard-prone areas. Vulnerability is used to refer to 
the degree of susceptibility of these assets to suf-
fer  damage  and  loss,  for  example,  due  to  inade-
quate  design  and  construction,  lack  of  mainte-
nance,  unsafe  and  precarious  living  conditions, 
lack  of  access  to  emergency  services  etc.  Resil-
ience  is  used  to  refer  to  the  capacity  of  systems 
(ranging from national, local or household econo-
mies to businesses and their supply chains) to ab-
sorb or buffer losses, and recover.

ccxlviii

Extensive risk is used to describe the risk of low-
severity, high-frequency disasters, mainly but not 
exclusively  associated  with  highly  localized  haz-
ards. Intensive risk is used to describe the risk of 
high-severity,  mid  to 
low-frequency  disasters, 
mainly  associated  with  major  hazards.  Emerging 
risk is used to describe the risk of extremely low-
probability disasters associated with new patterns 
of hazard and vulnerability. Geomagnetic storms, 
for example, have always occurred, but the associ-
ated  risks  are  now  magnified  by  the  growing  de-
pendence of modern societies on vulnerable ener-
gy and telecommunications networks. Underlying 
risk  drivers  are  development-related  processes 
such as badly planned and managed urban and re-
gional  development,  environmental  degradation, 
poverty,  climate  change  and  weak  governance, 
which shape risk patterns and trends.

In this report, data on direct disaster losses refer to 
damage  to  human  lives,  buildings,  infrastructure 
and natural resources. Direct disaster losses to busi-
ness  refer  to  the  damages  to  factories,  offices, 
equipment and stocks. Indirect disaster losses are 
declines in business output or revenue incurred ow-
ing  to  business  interruption,  as  a  consequence  of 
direct  losses  or  owing  to  impacts  on  a  business’ 
supply chain. Wider impacts refer to, for example, 
loss of market share or damage to a business repu-
tation as clients take their business to competitors, 
skilled workers move to other employers and rela-
tionships  with  suppliers  are  severed.  Macroeco-
nomic effects can be felt as a consequence of all 
three types of losses and impacts and can in turn 
negatively  affect  business  performance  through  a 
constrained  enabling  business  environment. 
Shared risks or costs refer to risks that are trans-
ferred  in  time  or  space  to  other  sectors  or  to  the 
wider economy. They can also be referred to as ex-
ternalised social and environmental costs.  

GlossaryThe risk assessment for GAR13 uses a probabilis-
tic  approach. Probability  is  defined  as  the  likeli-
hood  of  an  event  occurring  compared  to  all  the 
possible events that might occur. The exceedance 
probability is the likelihood of one event of a given 
magnitude  occurring  or  being  exceeded  within  a 
defined  time  span.  Frequency  is  the  expected 
number of times that a particular event occurs in a 
defined  time  span.  Return  period  is  the  average 
frequency with which a particular event is expect-
ed to occur. It is usually expressed in years, such as 
1 in X number of years. This does not mean that an 
event will occur once every X numbers of years, but 
is another way of expressing the exceedance prob-
ability: a 1 in 200 years event has a chance of 0.5 
percent to occur or be exceeded every year.

Annual average loss (AAL) is the estimated aver-
age loss per year over a long time period consider-
ing the range of loss scenarios relating to different 
return  periods.  The  probable  maximum  loss 
(PML) is the maximum loss that could be expected 
for a given return period, for example of 250 years.

quakes and tropical cyclones with urban produced 
capital  and  gross  fixed  capital  formation.  In  the 
case of tsunamis, relative disaster risk is estimated 
using the proportion of urban produced capital ex-
posed to tsunamis. 

Disaster risk reduction (DRR) describes the poli-
cy  objective  of  reducing  risk.  Disaster  risk  man-
agement (DRM) describes the actions that aim to 
achieve  this  objective.  Actions  include  prospec-
tive  risk  management,  such  as  better  planning, 
designed  to  avoid  the  construction  of  new  risks; 
corrective  risk  management,  designed  to  ad-
dress pre-existing risks; compensatory risk man-
agement,  such  as  insurance  that  shares  and 
spreads  risks;  and  disaster  management  mea-
sures  such  as  business  continuity  planning,  pre-
paredness and response. Risk governance is used 
to  describe  how  national  or  local  governments 
work with business, civil society and other actors 
to  organize  DRM,  including,  for  example,  through 
institutional  arrangements, 
legislation,  policies 
and strategy.

Capital  stock  is  made  up  of  produced  capital, 
natural capital and intangible capital.ii   

 

See UNISDR, 2009. Terminology on Disaster Risk Reduction. Ge-

i 
neva, Switzerland: UNISDR.
ii  Based  on  a  definition  developed  by  the  World  Bank  to  esti-
mate the wealth accumulated historically in a country (World Bank, 
2010a).

Produced capital is the total value of machinery, 
equipment,  structures  (including  infrastructure) 
and urban land.  GAR 13 analyses urban produced 
capital, defined as the produced capital in urban 
areas  with  more  than  2,000  inhabitants.  Exposed 
produced  capital  refers  to  the  urban  produced 
capital  stock  that  is  exposed  to  natural  hazards. 
Natural capital is the total value of existing non-
renewable  resources  (including  oil,  natural  gas, 
coal  and  mineral  resources)  as  well  as  cropland, 
pastureland, forests and protected areas. Intangi-
ble capital includes values such as human capital, 
institutional infrastructure and social capital. 

Gross fixed capital formation is the total value of 
capital  investment  by  the  private  and  public  sec-
tors in a given year. In GAR13, relative disaster risk 
is  estimated  by  comparing  the  AAL  for  earth-

ccxlix

Acknowledgements

Advisory Board
Chair
Margareta  Wahlström,  Special  Representative  of 
the Secretary-General for Disaster Risk Reduction 

for 

Members
Wadid Erian, Head of Land Resource Studies, The 
Arab  Center  for  the  Study  of  Arid  Zones  and  Dry 
Lands, Damascus, Syrian Arab Republic 
Virginia  Garcia  Acosta,  Director,  Centre  for  Re-
search and Advanced Studies in Social Anthropolo-
gy, CIESAS, Mexico DF, Mexico
Michelle Gyles-McDonnough, United Nations Resi-
dent  Coordinator 
the  Eastern  Caribbean,  
Bridgetown, Barbados
John Holmes, Director, Ditchley Foundation, Ditch-
ley, United Kingdom. 
Michel Jarraud, Secretary General, World Meteoro-
logical Organization, Geneva, Switzerland
Randolph  Kent,  Director,  Humanitarian  Futures 
Programme,  King’s  College,  London,  United  King-
dom
Allan Lavell, Coordinator, Programme for Environ-
mental and Disaster Risk, Latin America Social Sci-
ence Faculty (FLACSO), San Jose, Costa Rica
Patrick Liedke, Former Secretary General, the Ge-
neva Association for Risk and Insurance Economics, 
Switzerland
Ibrahim  Osman,  Former  Deputy  Secretary-Gener-
al,  International  Federation  of  Red  Cross  and  Red 
Crescent Societies, Geneva, Switzerland
Aromar  Revi,  Director,  Indian  Institute  for  Human 
Settlements, New Delhi, India
Johan Schaar, Co-Director, Vulnerability and Adap-
tation Initiative, World Resources Institute, Washing-
ton DC, USA
Youba Sokona, Coordinator, African Climate Policy 
Centre,  United  Nations  Economic  Commission  for 
Africa, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia
Dennis  Wenger,  Programme  Director,  Element 

ccl

1638, National Science Foundation, Arlington, USA
Sandra Wu, Chief Executive Officer, Kokusai Kogyu 
Corporation, Japan

Coordinating Lead Authors
Andrew  Maskrey  and Bina  Desai,  United  Nations 
Office for Disaster Risk Reduction (UNISDR), Geneva, 
Switzerland

GAR project team at UNISDR
Julio Serje, national disaster loss data and analysis, 
Annex 2, on-line tools; Marc Gordon,  HFA Monitor-
ing,  disaster risk reduction investment tracking, An-
nex 3;  Kazuko Ishigaki, economic analysis and re-
search;    Manuela  Di  Mauro,  global  risk  analysis, 
Annex 1;  Sylvain Ponserre, geospatial data visuali-
sation and on-line products;  Frederic Delpech, ed-
itorial assistance, production coordination and ad-
ministrative  support;  Vicente  Anzellini,  research 
assistance,  references  and  case  studies;  Vincent 
Fung: case studies and online products.

Collaborating Institutions
The following institutions and individuals coordinat-
ed,  developed  and  supported  research,  studies, 
workshops and peer reviews for GAR13:  

Arab Centre for the Study of Arid Zones and Dry 
Lands – ACSAD, Syria (Wadid Erian);  Blended Capi-
tal Group, Switzerland (Paul Clements-Hunt); CIMA 
Foundation, Italy (Roberto Rudari); CIMNE and As-
sociates  (ITEC  S.A.S.  INGENIAR  LTDA.  EAI  S.A.), 
Colombia and Spain (Omar Dario Cardona); Centro 
Internacional de Metodos Numericos en Ingenie-
ria – CIMNE and Associates, Universitat Politec-
nica  de  Catalunya  (Alex  Barbat);    Corporacion 
OSSO,  Colombia,  (Andres Velasquez, Cristina Ro-
sales);  DARA  International,  Spain  (Nicolai  Steen); 
Earth Literacy Programme, Japan (Shin’ichi Take-
mura); Famine Early Warning Systems Network – 

AcknowledgementsFEWSNET,  USA  (Jim  Verdin  and  Greg  Husak);  the 
Geneva Association for Risk and Insurance Eco-
nomics,  Switzerland  (Walter  Stahel,  Meghan  Orie); 
Geoscience  Australia,  Australia  (John  Schneider); 
Global Earthquake Model – GEM, Italy (Rui Pinho); 
Global Fire Monitoring Centre, Germany (Johann 
Goldhammer);  Government  of  Mexico,  Sistema 
Nacional de Proteccion Civil, Mexico (Laura Gurza 
Jaidar);  Humanitarian Futures Programme, Unit-
ed Kingdom (Randolph Kent); Indian Institute for 
Human Settlements – IIHS, India (Aromar Revi); In-
tegrated Research on Disaster Reduction – IRDR, 
China  (Jane  Rovins);    International  Institute  for 
Applied  Systems  Analysis  –IIASA,  Austria  (Rein-
hard Mechler, Stefan Hochrainer): Ipsos Mori, Unit-
ed Kingdom ( Laura Cunningham);  Latin America 
and Caribbean Center,  Florida International Uni-
versity - FIU, USA (Juan Pablo Sarmiento); Lincoln 
University,  New  Zealand  (Roche  Mahon);  Norwe-
gian Geotechnical Institute- NGI, Norway (Farrokh 
Nadim);  Price  Waterhouse  Coopers  –  PwC,  Swit-
zerland and United Kingdom (Oz Ozturk and Madiha 
Bakhir); Risk Management Solutions – RMS, Lon-
don (Robert Muir-Wood); Save the Children Inter-
national, Kenya (Johara Bellali); University College 
London,  Development  Planning  Unit,    United 
Kingdom  (Cassidy  Johnson);    University  of  Sao 
Paolo, Brazil (Marcos Fava Neves), United Nations 
Development  Programme,  USA  (Angeles  Arenas 
and Chiara Melluchi); United Nations Educational 
Scientific  and  Cultural  Organization  –  UNESCO, 
France  (Alexandros  Makarigakis),  United  Nations 
Environment  Programme  -  UNEP-GRID,  Switzer-
land  (Pascal  Peduzzi);  Willis  Research  Network, 
London (Rowan Douglas); World Agency for Plane-
tary Monitoring and Earthquake Risk Reduction 
– WAPMERR, Switzerland (Max Wyss); World Bank, 
USA    (Francis  Ghesquiere);  World  Meteorological 
Organisation  –  WMO,  Switzerland  (Maryam  Gol-
naraghi, Robert Stefanski).

Contributors and Authors  
Yoganath Adikari (ICHARM); Mairun Alves Pinto (Uni-
versity of Sao Paulo); Dilanthi Amaratunga (Univer-
sity of Salford);  Angeles Arenas (UNDP); Craig Arthur 

(Geoscience Australia);  Beatriz Asensio (DARA Inter-
national);  Ali  Asgary  (York  University);  Funda  Atun 
(Polytechnic  University  of  Milan);  Madiha  Bakir 
(PwC); Haider  Awad, (ACSAD); Murat Balamir (Middle 
East Technical University); Alex Barbat (CIMNE and 
Associates);    Abdul  Bashir  (Instituto  de  Altos  Estu-
dios,  Corporacion  OSSO);  Adele  Bear-Crozier  (Geo-
science Australia); Susanne Becken (Lincoln Univer-
sity); Johara Bellali (Save the Children International); 
Gabriel Bernal (CIMNE and Associates);  Karen Ber-
nard (UNDP); Sanjaya Bhatia (International Recovery 
Platform); Guido Biondi (CIMA Foundation); Adriana 
Bonilla (Latin American Faculty of Social Sciences – 
FLACSO);    Timothy  Boothman  (PwC);  Alice  Brenes 
(Universidad  Nacional  de  Costa  Rica);  Octavia  de 
Cadiz (Corporacion OSSO);  Belén Camacho (DARA 
International);  Alice  Caravani  (Overseas  Develop-
ment  Institute  -  ODI);  Omar  Dario  Cardona  (CIMNE 
and Associates); Ann Carpenter (Georgia Institute of 
Technology); Carlos Castillo (PwC); José M. Cepeda 
(NGI);  Martha-Liliana  Carreño  (CIMNE  and  Associ-
ates); PG Dhar Chakrabarti; Alexandre Cherix (PwC); 
Donna  Childs  (Prisere  LLC);  Paul  Clements-Hunt 
(The Blended Capital Group); Samantha Cook (Sec-
retariat  of  the  Pacific  Community  –  SPC);  Jimena 
Cuevas (CIESAS); Andrea DeBono (UNEP-GRID); Do-
menico del Re (PwC); Patrick Dahmen (PwC); Herry 
Darwanto; Nigel Davis (Willis Re); Fabio Delogu (CIMA 
Foundation);  Manuel  Díaz  (Ministry  of  Environment 
and Natural Resources of El Salvador); Daniel Dowl-
ing (PwC); Mark Edwards (Geoscience Australia); Wa-
did Erian (ACSAD); Miguel Esteban (Waseda Univer-
sity);  Marisol  Estrella  (UNEP);  Marcos  Fava  Neves 
(University  of  Sao  Paulo);  Aurélien  Feix  (PwC);  Al-
mudena  Fernandez  (UNDP);  Vanessa  Foo  (Econo-
mist Intelligence Unit); Urbano Fra Paleo (University 
of Santiago de Compostela); Chris Funk (FEWS NET); 
Simone Gabellani (CIMA Foundation); Matthias Gars-
chagen  (United  Nations  University);  Ebru  Gencer 
(Columbia University); Marci Gerulius-Darcy (Metro-
politan State University and Augsburg College) Kari-
mi Gitonga (Save the Children International); Sylfest 
Glimsdal (NGI); Johann Goldhammer (GFMC); Diana 
M. González (CIMNE and Associates); Peter Gubbels 
(Groundswell  International,  Ghana);  Fadi  Hamdan 

ccli

(Institute 

(Disaster Risk Management Centre, Lebanon); Guoyi 
Han  (Stockholm  Environment  Institute);  Masahiko 
Haraguchi  (Columbia  University);  Carl  B.  Harbitz 
(NGI);  Christian Herold (UNEP-GRID); Celine Herwei-
jer  (PwC);  Harvey  Hill  (Agriculture  and  Agri-Food 
Canada,  Government  of  Canada);  Gabriela  Hober-
man  (FIU);  Stefan  Hochrainer  (IIASA);  Rubem  Hofli-
ger  (Government  of  Mexico);  Solomon  M.  Hsiang 
(Princeton University); Alvaro I. Hurtado (CIMNE and 
Associates); Greg Husak (FEWSNET); Sanaa  Ibrahim 
(ACSAD), Bingu Ingirige (University of Salford); Oscar 
Ishizawa (World Bank); Michel Jaboyedoff (Universi-
ty of Lausanne); Garima Jain (IIHS, India); Harikishan 
Jayanthi  (FEWSNET);  Rohit  Jigyasu  (IIHS);  Nayibe 
Jimenez (Corporacion OSSO); Amir S. Jina (Colum-
bia  University);  Ase  Johannessen  (Stockholm  Envi-
ronment Institute); Cassidy Johnson (University Col-
lege  London);  David  Johnston 
for 
Geological and Nuclear Sciences, Massey University, 
New Zealand); Susan Rachel Jose; Irene Karani (LTS 
Africa, Kenya); Bassem Katlan (ACSAD); Jan Kellett; 
Randolph Kent (Humanitarian Futures Programme, 
Kings  College);  Hanne  Louise  Knaepen  (Kyoto  Uni-
versity);  Jeremie  Kreitz  (Economist 
Intelligence 
Unit);  Oded  Kunik  (Syngenta,  Kenya);  Upmanu  Lall 
(Columbia  University);  Joanne  Linnerooth-Bayer 
(IIASA);  Finn  Løvholt  (NGI);  Roché  Mahon  (Lincoln 
University);  Ana  Maria  Majano  (INCAE  Business 
School,  Costa  Rica);  Tariq  Maqsood  (Geoscience 
Australia); Mabel-Cristina Marulanda (CIMNE and As-
sociates); Reinhard Mechler (IIASA), Chiara Melluchi 
(UNDP);  Ouejdane  Mejri  (Polytechnic  University  of 
Milan);  Scira  Menoni  (Polytechnic  University  of  Mi-
lan); Takahito Mikami (Waseda University); Kazu Mi-
yamura 
(ISET,  Nepal); 
Giovanni Molina (Ministry of Environment and Natu-
ral  Resources  of  El  Salvador);  Miguel  Mora  (CIMNE 
and  Associates);  Farrok  Nadim  (NGI,  Norway);  Ta-
dashi Nakasu (ICHARM); Tristan Nguyen (WHL Grad-
uate  School  of  Business  and  Economics);  Bettina 
Ngweno (Aga Khan University, Kenya); Toshio Oka-
zumi  (ICHARM);  Juan  C.  Olaya  (CIMNE  and  Associ-
ates);  Onesmo  oleMoiYoi  (Nairobi  University);  Rich-
ard Olson (FIU); Mario Ordaz (UNAM CIMNE advisor); 
Meghan Orie (The Geneva Association for Risk and 

(PwC);  Marcus  Moench 

cclii

Australia); 

(Geoscience 

Insurance Economics); Jose Carlos Orihuela (Pontifi-
cia  Universidad  Católica  del  Perú);  Bassem    Ould-
bedy (ACSAD), Oz Ozturk (PwC); Belén Paley (DARA 
International);  Jyotiraj  Patra  (Concern  Worldwide); 
Marco  Pagani  (GEM);  Abhilash  Panda  (UNISDR);  Di-
ego  Pedreros  (FEWS  NET);  Pascal  Peduzzi  (UNEP-
GRID and University of Geneva); Giulia Pesaro (Poly-
technic University of Milan); Georg Pflug (IIASA); Rui 
Pinho (GEM, Italy); Jeremy Pittman; Soledad Posada 
(DARA  International);  Juan  Pujadas  (PwC);  Byron 
Quan  Luna  (NGI);  Fernando  Ramirez  (Coporacion 
OSSO);  Raj  Rana  (The  Wolfgroup);  Fabrice  Renaud 
(United Nations University); Hamish Rennie (Lincoln 
University);  Joseph  Rizzo  (PwC);  Cristina  Rosales 
(Corporacion  OSSO);  Arno  Rosemarin  (Stockholm 
Environment Institute); Philippe Rosset (WAPMERR); 
Laura Rossello (CIMA Foundation); James Rowland 
(FEWS NET); Roberto Rudari (CIMA Foundation); Kei-
ko  Saito  (World  Bank);  Mario  Salgado  (CIMNE  and 
Associates);  Juan  Pablo  Sarmiento  (FIU);  John 
Schneider 
Barbara 
Schwendtner (NGI); Alpesh Shah (PwC); Shri K. Singh 
(UNAM  CIMNE  advisor);  Francesco  Silvestro  (CIMA 
Foundation); Walter Stahel (The Geneva Association 
for  Risk  and  Insurance  Economics);  Nicolai  Steen 
(DARA  International);  Thor  Axel  Stenström  (Stock-
holm  Environment  Institute);  Jan  Sturesson  (PwC); 
Karen  Sudmeier-Rieux  (University  of  Lausanne); 
Megumi Sugimoto (ICHARM,); Asa Gerger Swartling 
(Stockholm  Environment  Institute);  Hiroshi  Tagaki 
(Tokyo  Institute  of  Technology);  Tran  Thu  Tam  (Ho 
Chi  Minh  City  University  of  Technology);  Kannika 
Thampanishvong (Thailand Development Research 
Institute); Nguyen Danh Thao (Ho Chi Minh City Uni-
versity of Technology); Andrew Thurley (PwC); Stav-
ros  Tolis  (WAPMERR);  Peeranan  Towashiraporn 
(Asian Disaster Preparedness Centre); Stefania Tra-
verso (CIMA Foundation); Andres Velasquez (Corpo-
racion OSSO); César Velasquez (CIMNE and Associ-
ates); James Verdin (FEWS NET); Claudia P. Villegas 
(CIMNE  and  Associates);  Gregor  Vulturius  (Stock-
holm  Environment  Institute);  Scott  Williams  (PwC); 
Keith Williges (IIASA); Neville Wright; Max Wyss (WAP-
MERR); Lilian Yamamoto (United Nations University); 
Luis Yamin (CIMNE and Associates), Ebrahim  Zaghti-

Acknowledgementsty (ACSAD), Othon Zevallos (Empresa de Aguas y Al-
cantarillado de Quito, Ecuador), Paola Zuddas (Uni-
versity of Cagliari, Italy), Daniela Zuloaga (CIMNE and 
Associates).  

2011 – 2013 HFA Progress Review 
National progress reports as of 25 March 2013 were 
submitted by the governments of: 

Anguilla,  Argentina,  Armenia,  Australia,  Bahrain, 
Bangladesh,  Barbados,  Belarus,  British  Virgin  Is-
lands, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Canada, 
Chile,  China,  Colombia,  Comoros,  Cook  Islands, 
Croatia,  Czech  Republic,  Djibouti,  Dominican  Re-
public,  Ecuador,  Ethiopia,  Fiji,  Finland,  France, 
Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guate-
mala,  Hungary,  India,  Indonesia,  Iran  (Islamic  Re-
public of), Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, 
Kiribati,  Lebanon,  Lesotho,  Malawi,  Malaysia,  Mal-
dives, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexi-
co,  Micronesia  (Fed.  States  of),  Monaco,  Morocco, 
Myanmar, Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, 
Niue, Norway, Pakistan, Palau, Palestine (State of), 
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Poland, Portu-
gal,  Republic  of  Korea,  Romania,  Rwanda,  Saint 
Kitts and Nevis, Samoa, Senegal, Serbia, Slovenia, 
Solomon Islands, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, 
Togo,  Tonga,  Trinidad  and  Tobago,  Turkey,  Turks 
and  Caicos  Islands,  Tuvalu,  Uganda,  United  King-
dom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United 
Republic  of  Tanzania,  United  States  of  America, 
Uruguay and Vanuatu.

The HFA Review Process was supported by UNISDR 
Regional Offices:
•	

 Africa (Pedro Basabe, Youcef Ait-Chellouche and 
Rhea Katsanakis); 

•	 Americas  (Ricardo  Mena,  Jennifer  Guralnick, 

Raul Salazar and Sandra Amlang); 

•	 Arab  States 

(Amjad  Abbashar,  Luna  Abu-

Swaireh, Lars Bernd and Ragy Saro);

•	 Asia and Pacific (Jerry Velasquez, Madhavi Ary-
abandu, Hang Thi Thanh Pham, Sujit Mohanty, 
Glenn Dolcemascolo, Yongkyun Kim, Laura Nis-
kanen and Akapusi Tuifagalele); and
Europe and Central Asia (Paola Albrito, Stefanie 

•	

Dannenmann,  Abdurahim  Muhidov  and  Goul-
sara Pulatova).

 And by the UNISDR Information Management Unit 
(Craig  Duncan,  Joel  Margate,  Revati  Mani  Badola 
and John Ravi Hayag). 

National disaster loss data 
Bolivia: Vice Ministerio de la Defensa Civil - VIDECI 
(Carlos  Mariaca  Ceballos,  Omar  Pedro  Velazco); 
Chile: Universidad de Chile  (Alejandro León, Caroli-
na  Clerc);  Colombia:  Corporación  OSSO  (  Nayibe 
Jimenez, Cristina Rosales, Yuliana Diaz); Costa Rica: 
Programa Integral de Gestión de Riesgos de Desas-
tres de la Universidad Nacional - PRIGD UNA (Alice 
Brenes  Maykall,  David  Smith);  Djibouti:  Centre 
d’Études et de Recherches de Djibouti - CERD (Sa-
matar Abdi Osman, Ahmed Madar); Ecuador: Secre-
taría Nacional de Gestión de Riesgos - SNGR (Dalton 
Andrade Rodríguez); El Salvador: Dirección General 
del Observatorio Nacional -DGOA, del Ministerio del 
Medio Ambiente y Recursos Naturales - MARN (Ivo-
nne Jaimes, Tere Isabel Flores); Ethiopia: Ministry of 
Agriculture and World Food Programme – WFP (An-
imesh  Kumar,  Workneh  Hundessa,  Edget  Tilahun, 
Getnet  Kebede);  Guatemala:  La  Red  de  Estudios 
Sociales en Prevención de Desastres - LA RED (Gise-
la Gellert); Guyana: Civil Defence Commission - CDC 
(Kester Craig, Sherwin Felicien, Salita Pooran); Hon-
duras: Instituto Hondureño de Ciencias de la Tierra 
-  IHCIT  de  la  Universidad  Nacional  Autónoma  de 
Honduras - UNAH (Jessica Velásquez, Carmen María 
Rodríguez,  Roberto  Antonio  Ortiz  Nelson  Sevilla, 
Oscar Elvir); Indonesia: Indonesian National Board 
for Disaster Management BNPB (Ridwan Yunus); Is-
lamic  Republic  of  Iran:  Ministry  of  Interior  and 
UNDP  (Amin  Shamseddini,  Victoria  Kianpour);  Ja-
maica: Office for Disaster Preparedness and  Emer-
gency Managament – ODPEM (Leiska Powell, Anna 
Tucker,  Rashida  Green,  Sherese  Gentles,  Sashekia 
Powell,  Fredene  Wilson);  Jordan:  Civil  Protection 
(Waleed Al-So’ub); Kenya: National Disaster Opera-
tions Center (Rhea Katsanakis, Oliver Madara, Isabel 
Njihia,  Faith  Langat);  Laos:  National  Disaster  Man-
agement  Organization  -  NDMO,  Laos  (Sisomvang 

ccliii

Vilayphong, Bouasy Thammasack, Thitiphon Sinsu-
pan, Hang Thi Thanh Pham, Thanongdeth Insisieng-
may, Somvath); Lebanon: Office of the Prime Minis-
ter  and  UNDP  (Nathalie  Zaarour,  Lama  Tabbara, 
Bilal El-Ghali); Mali: Protection Civil du Mali (Mama-
dou  Traore,  Diawoye  Konte,  Aboudra  Koungoulba, 
Savane  Foulematou  SY);  Mexico:  La  Red  de  Estu-
dios Sociales en Prevención de Desastres - LA RED 
(Elizabeth Mansilla); Mozambique: Instituto Nacio-
nal  de  Gestão  de  Calamidades  -INGC  and  UNDP 
(Dulce Chilundo, Eunice Mucache, Antonio Queface); 
Nepal: National Society for Earthquake Technology 
–NSET (Amod Dixit, Gopi Bashal); Nicaragua: Siste-
ma Nacional para la Prevención, Mitigación y Aten-
ción de Desastres - SINAPRED (Ana Isabel Izaguirre, 
Mercedes Martínez, Gisela Guevara, Carlos Olivares, 
Noé Ubau, Ernesto González); Orissa: State Disaster 
Management  Authority  (Kalika  Mohapatra,  Ambika 
Prasad); Pacific Islands: SPC/SOPAC (Jutta May, Ni-
cole  Daniels,  Litea  Biukoto); Panamá:  Sistema  Na-
cional  de  Protección  Civil  –  SINAPROC  (Eric  Reyes, 
Kenat Saarim Camaño Guerra); Perú: Centro de Es-
tudios de Prevención de Desastres - PREDES (José 
Sato  Onuma,  Alfonso  Diaz  Calero,  Julio  Meneses 
Bautista, Yeselín Díaz Toribio, Ingrid Azaña Saldaña); 
Sri Lanka: Ministry of Disaster Managemen ( Dinesh 
Rajapaksha); Syrian Arab Republic: Ministry of Lo-
cal  Administration  (Kinda  Muhana,  Claude  Amer); 
Timor  Leste  National  Disaster  Operation  Centre  – 
NDOC,  Ministry  of  Social  Solidarity  (Lourenco 
Cosme  Xavier,  Maarten  Visser);  Uganda:  Office  of 
the  Prime  Minister,  Department  of  Disaster  Pre-
paredness and Management (Samuel Akera, Charles 
Odok); Uruguay: Sistema Nacional de Emergencias 
de la Presidencia de la República – SINAE (Virginia 
Fernandez,  Sabrina  Pose,  Soledad  Camacho,  Ana 
Maria Games, Pablo Capurro); Venezuela: Dirección 
Nacional  de  Protección  Civil  y  Administración  de 
Desastres  –  DNPCAD  (Jairo  Sanchez,  José  Scire); 
Vietnam: Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Develop-
ment  and  UNDP  (Ian  Wilderspin,  Miguel  Coulier, 
Oanh  Luong  Nhu,  Nguyen  Thi  Thu  Thuy);  Yemen: 
Ministry of Environment (Majed Alrefai).

ccliv

The updating and compilation of disaster loss data 
was  coordinated  in  Latin  America  by  Raul  Salazar 
and Ricardo Mena (UNISDR LAC) in close collabora-
tion  with  Mauricio  Bautista,  Jhon  Henry  Caicedo, 
Maria Isabel Cardona, Natalia Diaz, Nayibe Jimenez, 
Cristina Rosales, Alexander Torres and Andres Velas-
quez (Corporacion OSSO, Colombia); in Asia and Af-
rica  by  Julio  Serje  (UNISDR)  in  collaboration  with 
Luna  Abu-Swaireh  (UNISDR  Arab  States)  and  Rhea 
Katsanakis  (UNISDR  Africa);  in  Asia  Sanny  Jegillos 
and  Rajesh  Sharma  (UNDP,  Regional  Centre  Bang-
kok) and in the Pacific Jutta May and Nicole Daniels 
(SPC/SOPAC).

Peer reviewers
Scientific peer review of the global hazard models 
were coordinated by WMO (drought, flood and trop-
ical cyclone, led by Maryam Golnaraghi) and UNES-
CO (earthquake, tsunami and landslides, led by Al-
exandros  Makarigakis  and  coordinated  by  Kristine 
Tovmasyan).   

Reviewers: Irasema Alcantara-Ayal (UNAM, Mexico), 
Zeljiko  Arbanas  (University  of  Rijeka,  Croatia)  Jörn 
Behrens (Alfred Wegener Institute for Polar and Ma-
rine  Research,  Germany),  Antônio  Cardoso  Neto 
(Agência Nacional de Aguas (ANA), Brazil), Timothy 
A.  Cohn  (U.S.  Geological  Survey),  Johannes  Cull-
mann  (Federal  Institute  of  Hydrology,  Germany), 
Russel Elesberry (Naval Postgraduate School, USA), 
Mihail Garevski (Institute of Earthquake Engineering 
and  Engineering  Seismology,  Former  Yugoslav  Re-
public of Macedonia), Mohsen Ghafory-Ashtiany (In-
ternational Institute of Earthquake Engineering and 
Seismology,  Iran),  Wolfgang  Grabs  (WMO),  Kazuyo-
shi  Kudo  (Nihon  University,  Japan),  Koji  Kuroiwa 
(WMO), Brad Garanganga (SADC, Botswana), Bruce 
Harper (GHD, Australia), Rami Hofstetter (Seismolo-
gy Division Geophysical Institute of Israel), Christo-
pher  Oludhe  (University  of  Nairobi,  Kenya),  Kyoji 
Sassa    (University  of  Kyoto,  Japan),  Kenji  Satake 
(University of Tokyo, Japan), Yuri Simonov (State Hy-
drological Institute, Russia), Robert Stefanski (WMO), 
Alexander  Strom  (Geodynamics  Research  Center, 
Russia),  Stefano  Tinti  (University  of  Bologna,  Italy), 

AcknowledgementsFawu Wang (Graduate School of Shimane Universi-
ty, Japan), Donald A. Wilhite, (University of Nebras-
ka, USA), Liu Zhiyu (Bureau of Hydrology, Ministry of 
Water Resources of China). Additional reviews of the 
global risk modelling were provided by Geoscience 
Australia  (John  Schneider,  Nick  Horspool,  Tariq 
Maqsood and Andrew Jones) and by Risk Manage-
ment Solutions (Robert Muir-Wood).    

Irasema  Alcantara-Ayala 

Review comments on the Zero Order Draft were re-
ceived from:  Yoshiko Abe (Kokusai Kogyo Co. Ltd., 
Japan); 
(Unversidad 
Naciónal Autonoma de México); Dilanthi Amaratun-
ga  (University  of  Salford,  United  Kingdom);  Adel 
Bear-Crozier  (GeoSciences  Australia);  Djillali  Ben-
ouar (University of Bab Ezzouar , Algeria); Charlotte 
Benson  (Asian  Development  Bank);  David  Bresch 
(Swiss  Re,  Switzerland);  Sálvano  Briceño  (IRDR); 
Christopher Burton (Global Earthquake Model,  Ita-
ly); Chen Liu Shaw (Academia Sinica, Taiwan); Susan 
Cutter  (University  of  South  Carolina,  USA);  Glenn 
Dolcemascolo (UNISDR); Rowan Douglas (Willis Re); 
Elizabeth Ferris (Brookings Institution); Vincent Fung 
(UNISDR);  Dirk  Glaesser  (UNWTO);  Peter  Gubbels 
(Groundswell  International);  Stephane  Hallegatte 
(World  Bank);  Debbie  Hillier  (Oxfam,  United  King-
dom);  Demetrio  Innocenti  (UNISDR);  Nicole  Keller 
(Global Earthquake Model, Italy); Kaushal Keramini-
yage (University of Salford); Daniel Kull (World Bank); 
Abinash Lakhar (Indian Institute for Human Settle-
ments,  India);  Bernard  Laporte  (AXA  Matrix  Risk 
Consultants); Allan Lavell (FLACSO); Elizabeth Long-
worth  (UNISDR);  Darío  Luna  Plá  (Government  of 
Mexico); Tariq Maqsood (GeoSciences Australia); Da-
vid  Maréchal  (Allianz  Re);  Neil  McFarlane  (UNISDR); 
Matthew McKinnon (DARA International); James Mc 
Lean (Kokusai Kogyo Co. , Ldt., Japan); Calvin Miller 
(FAO);  Sujit  Mohanty  (UNISDR);  Robert  Muir-Wood 
(RMS, United Kingdom); Lee Müller (Swiss Re, Swit-
zerland); Pablo Munoz (IHDP, United Nations Univer-
sity); Virginia Murray (IRDR); Jaroslav Mysiak (FEEM); 
Bettina Ngweno (Aga Khan University, Kenya); Rich-
ard  Olson  (Florida  International  University,  USA); 
Aris  Papadopoulos  (Titan  America);  Dennis  Parker 
(Flood  Hazard  Research  Centre,  United  Kingdom); 

Chaminda  Pathirage  (Salford  University,  United 
Kingdom);  Patrick  Pigeon  (Université  Savoie);  Sally 
Priest (Flood Hazard Research Centre, United King-
dom)  Alasdair  Ross  (Economist  Intelligence  Unit); 
Jane Rovins (IRDR); Tarek Sadek (ESCWA, Lebanon); 
Paul  Samuels  (HR  Wallingford  Ltd.,  United  King-
dom);  David  Sarabacha  (Deloitte);  Rachel  Scott 
(OECD);  Alanna  Simpson  (World  Bank);  David  A. 
Smith  Wiltshire  (National  University  of  Costa  Rica); 
Zuzana  Stanton-Gedde  (World  Bank);  Swenja  Sur-
minski (London School of Economics, United King-
dom);  Régis  Thepot  (Seine  Grands  Lacs,  Etablisse-
ment  Public  Territorial  de  Bassin);  Anna  Timonina 
(IIASA,  Austria);  John  Tobin  (Crédit  Suisse,  Switzer-
land);  German  Velasquez  (UNISDR);  Eva  Wuttge 
(GIZ).

Special acknowledgement for advice received from: 
Yvo de Boer (KPMG) and Professor John Urry (Lan-
caster University).

Design Concept
Earth Literacy Program (NPO)

Design and production (printed GAR)
Design concept, cover and style guide: Mitsuhiro 
Miyazaki and Masashi Tomura (AXIS), Shin’ichi Take-
mura (Earth Literacy Programme – ELP), Taku Satoh 
(Taku  Satoh  Design  Office);  Inverted  umbrella 
symbol:  Taku  Satoh  and  Shin’ichi  Takemura,  in-
spired by the work of Makoto Murase and the Insti-
tute on Sky Water Harvesting; Design realisation: 
Mitsuhiro  Miyazaki  and  Masashi  Tomura  (AXIS), 
Shin’ichi  Takemura  (ELP);  Layout:  Takae  Ooka; 
Maps and graphs: Manuela di Mauro, Sylvain Pon-
serre and Julio Serje (UNISDR), David Lazarus (Mtn.
Design) and Stephane Kluser (UNDP); Editing: Mar-
tha Bonilla; Printing: Imprimerie Nouvelle Gonnet; 
Production Coordination: David d’Heilly (2dk/ELP) 
and Frederic Delpech (UNISDR); Procurement: UN-
OPS, Bangkok.

Tangible Earth (TE) and GAR for Tablet (GfT)
TE  platform  design  and  GfT  scenario  develop-
ment: Shin’ichi Takemura; TE systems architecture: 

cclv

Takahiro  Shinkai;  GfT  systems  architecture:  Jun 
Nishimura;  GfT  scenario  development:  Yoshiyuki 
Inaba;  David  d’Heilly;  Production  management: 
Kensuke  Arakawa;  Case  studies  for  GfT:  Vincent 
Fung, Sylvain Ponserre and Vicente Anzellini (UNIS-
DR); GfT interface design: Takurou Okuyama, Ken-
suke Arakawa; International research and facilita-
tion:  David  d’Heilly;  General  administration:  
Shoko Takemura.

On-line GAR
Julio Serje, Sylvain Ponserre, Joel Margate and An-
dris Valums (UNISDR).

Resources
Financial  resources  were  provided  by  the  Govern-
ments  of Australia, Japan,  Norway  and  the United 
States of America and by the European Commission 
(DG ECHO and DG Development).  Other in-kind re-
sources were provided by  FEWSNET,  Florida Inter-
national University, Geneva Association for Risk and 
Insurance  Economics,  PricewaterhouseCoopers,  
Save  the  Children  International,    UNDP  and  the 
World Bank.

cclvi

Acknowledgementscclvii

References

Accenture.  2011.  Risk  management  as  a  source  of 
competitive advantage and high performance. Re-
port on the Accenture 2011 Global Risk Manage-
ment Study.

Adelekan, I. 2012. Private Sector Investment Decisions 
in  Building  and  Construction:  Increasing,  manag-
ing and transferring risks. Case study of Lagos, Ni-
geria. Case study prepared for the 2013 Global As-
sessment  Report  on  Disaster  Risk  Reduction. 
Geneva,  Switzerland:  UNISDR.    http://www.pre-
ventionweb.net/gar

ADPC (Asian Disaster Prepardness Center). 2003. Di-
saster  Management  in  South  East  Asia  -  an  over-
view. Bangkok, Thailand 

W.H.  2011. A review of Sustainable Development 
of  bioenergy  in  Africa:  an  outlook  for  the  future 
bioenergy  industry.  Sceintific  Research  and  Es-
says, Vol 6 (8): 1697-1708. 

Aniekwu,  N.  and  Ozochi,  C.A.  2010.  Restructuring 
education,  training  and  human-resource  devel-
opment  in  the  Nigerian  construction  industry.
Journal of Science and Technology Education Re-
search, Vol. 1(5): 92-98. 

Anseeuw,  W.,  Boche,  M.,  Breu,  T.,  Giger,  M.,  Lay,  J., 
Messerli,  P.,  and  Nolte,  K.  K.  2012.  Transnational 
Land  Deals  for  Agriculture  in  the  Global  South. 
Analytical Report based on the Land Matrix Data-
base. Number 1: April 2012.

African Development Bank.   2012. Ethiopia 2012. Af-

Aon Benfield. 2011. Global Risk Management Survey 

rican Economic Outlook.

Albala-Bertrand.  1993.  Political  Economy  of  Large 
Natural Disasters With Special Reference to Devel-
oping Countries. Oxford, UK: Clarendon Press. 

Albala-Bertrand.  2006.  The  Unlikeliness  of  an  Eco-
nomic  Catastrophe:  Localization  &  Globalization. 
Working  Papers  576,  Queen  Mary,  University  of 
London, Department of Economics. London, UK

Albreht,  T.  2009.  Privatization  processes  in  health 
care  in  Europe:  a  move  in  the  right  direction,  a 
‘trendy’ option, or a step back? European Journal 
of  Public  Health,  Vol.  19,  No.  5,  448–451.  Oxford 
University Press on behalf of the European Public 
Health Association.

Aldersley, A. Murray, S.J. and Cornell S.E. 2011. Glob-
al and regional analysis of climate and human driv-
ers of wildfire. School of Earth Sciences, University 
of Bristol. Bristol, UK.

Alexander, E. R. 1986. Approaches to Planning: Intro-
ducing  Current  Planning.  Theories,  Concepts,  and 
Issues.  New  York,  USA.  Gordon  and  Breach  Sci-
ence Publishers. 

Altieri, M.A. 1987. Agroecology: the scientific basis of 

alternative agriculture. Boulder: Westview Press.

Ambali, A., Chirwa, P.W., Chamdimba O. and Van Zyl, 

2011.  Chicago, USA: Aon Risk Solutions.

Aon Benfield. 2012a. 2011 Thailand Floods Event Re-
cap Report: Impact Forecasting, March 2012. http://
thoughtleadership.aonbenfield.com/Documents/ 
20120314_impact_forecasting_thailand_flood_
event_recap.pdf 

Aon  Benfield.  2012b.  Impact  Forecasting:  May  2012 
Global  Catastrophe  Recap.  http://thoughtleader-
ship.aonbenfield.com/Documents/201206_if_
monthly_cat_recap_may.pdf

Aon Benfield. 2012c. Impact Forecasting: November 
2012 Global Catastrophe Recap. http://thoughtlead-
ership.aonbenfield.com/Documents/201212_if_
monthly_cat_recap_november.pdf 

Aon  Benfield.  2012d.  Insurance-Linked  Securities. 
Evolving Strength 2012. Aon Benfield Securities Re-
port. Chicago, USA: Aon Benfield Securities.

Asano, K. 2012. Rethinking a Business Continuity plan 
(BCP):  What  Should  Companies  Learn  from  the 
Great  East  Japan  Earthquake?  Nomura  Research 
Institute paper No. 173, May 1, 2012. Nomura Re-
search Institute, Ltd. Japan. 

Asgary, A., Anjum, M.I. and Azimi, N. 2012. Disaster 
recovery  and  business  continuity  after  the  2010 
flood in Pakistan: Case of small businesses. Inter-

cclviii

Referencesnational  Journal  of  Disaster  Risk  Reduction, 
2(2012): 46-56.

Atradius.  2011.  Country  Report:  Thailand  December 

2011. Atradius Country Report, December 2011.

Australian Bureau of Meteorology and CSIRO (Com-
monwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Or-
ganization).  2011.  Climate  Change  in  the  Pacific: 
Scientific  Assessment  and  New  Research.  Volume 
1: Regional Overview. Volume 2: Country Reports.
Babb,  S.  2005.  The  Social  Consequences  of  Struc-
tural  Adjustment.  Recent  Evidence  and  Current 
Debates. Annual Review of Sociology, Vol. 31 (2005): 
199-222.

Baiphethi, M.N. and Jacobs P.T.  2009.  The contribu-
tion  of  subsistence  farming  to  food  security  in 
South Africa. Agrekon, Volume 48, Number 4 (De-
cember): 459-482. 

 

 

Baker, J. L. and McClain, K. 2009. Private Sector Initia-
tives  in  Slum  Upgrading.  Urban  Papers  8,  May 
2009. World Bank. Washington DC, USA. 

Balamir, M. 2012. Obstacles in the Adoption of Inter-
national  DRR  Policies:  The  Case  of  Turkey.  Back-
ground  Paper  prepared  for  the  2013  Global  As-
sessment  Report  on  Disaster  Risk  Reduction.  
Geneva,  Switzerland:  UNISDR.    http://www.pre-
ventionweb.net/gar

Barclay, C.  2012.  Planning and Flooding.  House of 
Commons  Library.  SN/SC/4100.  UK  Parliament. 
London, UK.

Bassi, S. and Kettunen, M.  2008.  Forest Fires: causes 
and contributing factors in Europe.  Policy Depart-
ment and Scientific Policy. IP/A/ENVI/ST/2007-15.   
London, UK.

Battisti, M. and Deakins, D.  2012.  Business Measure 
Perspective from New Zealand Small Firms: Crisis 
Management  and  the  Impact  of  the  Canterbury 
Earthquakes.  New Zealand Center for Small and 
Medium Enterprise Research, Massey University.

BCI (Business Continuity Institute).  2011.  Business 
Continuity Institute Survey Reveals the High Levels 
and  Deep-routed  Nature  of  Supply  Chain  Failure. 
http://www.thebci.org/index.php?option=com_
content&view=article&id=168&Itemid=256

Beck, U.   1992.  Risk Society: Towards a New Moder-

nity.  London, UK: Sage Publications. 

Becken, S., Hay, J. and Espiner, S.  2011.  The risk of 
climate  change  for  tourism  in  the  Maldives.    In: 
Butler, R. and Carlsen, J., (eds): Island Tourism De-
velopment. Journeys towards Sustainability.  Wall-
ingford, UK: CABI. 

Bennett,  O.  2012.    Flood  Defense.    House  of  Com-
mons Library. SN/SC/5755. UK Parliament.  Lon-
don,  UK.

Berger, A., Brown, C., Kousky, C. and Zeckhauser, R. 
2010.    The  Five  Neglects:  Risks  Gone  Amiss.    In: 
Kunreuther,  H.  And  M.  Unseem  (eds.),    Learning 
from Catastrophes. Strategies for Reaction and Re-
sponse.  New Jersey: Wharton School Publishing: 
83-99. 

Bernard, K. and Cook, S.  2012.  Tourism Investment 
Choices and Flood Risk: Illustrative Case Study on 
Denarau  Island  Resort  in  Fiji.    Background  Paper 
prepared for the 2013 Global Assessment Report 
on Disaster Risk Reduction.  Geneva, Switzerland: 
UNISDR.  http://www.preventionweb.net/gar

Bhinda, N. and Martin, M.  2009.  Private capital flows 
to  low  income  countries:  Dealing  with  boom  and 
bust.    Foreign  Private  Capital  Capacity  Building 
Programme.  FPC  CBP  Series  no  2.  November. 
2009. Debt Relief International Ltd.  London, UK

Blaikie, P., Cannon, T. Davis, I. and Wisner, B.  2004.  
At Risk: Natural Hazards, People’s Vulnerability and 
Disasters. London: Routledge. 

 

Bloomberg.  2012.  Top 20 Cities with Billions at Risk 
from Climate Change. Slide show by Eric Roston, 6 
July  2012.  http://www.bloomberg.com/slide-
show/2012-07-06/top-20-cities-with-billions-at- 
risk-from-climate-change.html#slide20 

Borgonovi,  V.,  Meier,  S.,  Sharda  M.  and  Vaidyana-
than, L. 2011.  Creating shared value in India: How 
Indian  corporations  are  contributing  to  inclusive 
growth  while  strengthening  their  competitive  ad-
vantage.  Executive Summary. October 2011.  Bos-
ton, USA: FSG.

Bosher,  L.    2012.    Flood  Risk  Management  and  the 
Roles of the Private Sector in England.  Case study 
prepared for 2013 Global Assessment Report on 
Disaster  Risk  Reduction.    Geneva,  Switzerland: 
UNISDR.  http://www.preventionweb.net/gar

Bouis,  H.  and  Welch,  R.M.    2010.    Biofortification. 

cclix

Sustainable Agricultural Strategy for Reducing Mi-
cronutrient Malnutrition in the Global South.  Crop 
Science, Vol.50, March-April 2010: S20-S32.

Bouton, L. and Sumlinski, M.A.  2000.  Trends in Pri-
vate Investment in Developing Countries. Statistics 
for 1970-1998.  IFC Discussion Paper No.41. World 
Bank.  Washington D.C, USA. 

Bouvier, A. and Konold, C.  2011.  Pre-crisis and emer-
gency risk communication in the hotel industry in 
partnership with non-Governmental organizations. 
http://extranet.eshotel.com/documents/ESHotel_
Project_CHME_2011.pdf

Boyenge, J-P. S.  2007.  International Labour Office. 
ILO  database  on  export  processing  zones  (Re-
vised).    WP.251:  Sectoral  activities  programme  - 
Working Paper.  Geneva.  Switzerland.

Brenes, A. and Bonilla A.  2012.  Estudio de caso Cos-
ta  Rica.  El  Fenómeno  La  Niña  2010-2012.    Back-
ground  Paper  prepared  for  the  2013  Global  As-
sessment  Report  on  Disaster  Risk  Reduction.  
Geneva,  Switzerland:  UNISDR.    http://www.pre-
ventionweb.net/gar

Briceño-Garmendia, C., Smits, K. and Foster, V.   

2009.  Financing Public Infrastructure in Sub-Saha-
ran Africa: Patterns and Emerging Issues.  Africa In-
frastructure  Country  Diagnostic,  Background  Pa-
per 15 (Phase 1).  Washington, DC: The International 
Bank for Reconstruction and Development / World 
Bank.

Brimble, M.  2002.  Foreign Direct Investment: Perfor-
mance and Attraction. The Case of Thailand.  Paper 
prepared for Workshop on Foreign Direct Invest-
ment  Opportunities  and  Challenges  for  Cambo-
dia,  Laos  and  Vietnam  in  Hanoi,  August  16-17, 
2002.   The Broer Group, PLC.

Brugmann, J.  2012.  Financing the resilient city.  En-

vironment and Urbanization. Vol 24(1): 1-8.  

Burchi, F. Fanzo, J. and Frison, E.  2011.  The Role of 
Food  and  Nutrition  System  Approaches  in  Tack-
ling Hidden Hunger.  International Journal of Envi-
ronmental  Research  and  Public  Health  2011,  8: 
358-373.  

Cabot Venton, C., Fitzgibbon, C., Shitarek, T., Coulter, 
L. and Dooley, O.  2012.  The Economics of Early Re-
sponse and Disaster Resilience: Lessons from Kenya 

cclx

and  Ethiopia.    Economics  of  Resilience  Final  Re-
port. June 2012. 

Calvert, Ceres and Oxfam.  2012.  Physical Risks from 
Climate Change. A guide for companies and inves-
tors on disclosure and management of climate im-
pacts.    Report  prepared  by  Prepared  by  David 
Gardiner & Associates, LLC for Calvert, Ceres and 
Oxfam. 

Cambridge Programme for Sustainable Leadership.  
2011a.  Increasing  mainstream 
investor  under-
standing  of  natural  capital.  Part  A:  Main  Report. 
The Cambridge Natural Capital Programme. Uni-
versity of Cambridge.  Cambridge,  UK.

Cambridge Programme for Sustainable Leadership.  
2011b.  Increasing  mainstream 
investor  under-
standing of natural capital. Part B: Evidence.  The 
Cambridge Natural Capital Programme. Universi-
ty of Cambridge. Cambridge,  UK. 

Carminati, E., and Martinelli, G.  2002.  Subsidence 
rates in the Po Plain (Northern Italy): the relative 
impact of Natural and Anthropic causation.  The 
Journal of Engineering Geology Vol. 66, 241–55.  

Carpenter, A.  2013.  Resilience in the Social and Phys-
ical  Realms:  Lessons  from  the  Gulf  Coast.    Back-
ground  Paper  prepared  for  the  2013  Global  As-
sessment  Report  on  Disaster  Risk  Reduction.  
Geneva,    Switzerland:  UNISDR.    http://www.pre-
ventionweb.net/gar

Castells, M., Caraca, J. and Cardoso, G.  2012.  After-
math. The Cultures of the Economic Crisis.  Oxford, 
UK: Oxford University Press.

Cattaneo.    2002.    Balancing  agricultural  develop-
ment  and  deforestation  in  the  Brazilian  Amazon. 
Research  Report  129.    Washington.  DC:  Interna-
tional Food Policy Research Institute

CCRIF  (The  Caribbean  Catastrophe  Risk  Insurance 
Facility).  2010.  Enhancing the climate risk and ad-
aptation  fact  base  for  the  Caribbean:  Preliminary 
results of the ECA Study.  CCRIF’s Economics of Cli-
mate Adaptation (ECA) Initiative.  Grand Cayman,  
Cayman Islands.

CDP (Carbon Disclosure Project).   2011.  DP Water 
Disclosure  Global  Report  2011:  Raising  corporate 
awareness of global water issues.  Report written 
for  Carbon  Disclosure  Project  by  Deloitte.    Lon-

Referencesdon, UK.

CEPAL (Comisión Económica para América Latina y 
el Caribe).  2012.  Valoración de Daños y pérdidas: 
Ola invernal en Colombia, 2010-2011.  Misión BID-
CEPAL enero 2012.  Bogotá, Colombia.

Cernea, M.  2005.  The ‘ripple effect’ in social policy 
and its political content.  In: Likosky, M.B. (ed.) Pri-
vatising  Development:  Transnational  Law,  Infra-
structure and Human Rights.  Leiden: Martinus Ni-
jhoff. 

Chang, S.E.  2000a. Disasters and transport systems: 
loss,  recovery  and  competition  at  the  Port  of 
Kobe after the 1995 earthquake.  Journal of Trans-
port Geography 8 (2000): 53-65. 

Chang, S.E.  2000b.  Transportation Performance, Di-
saster Vulnerability and Long-term effets of Earth-
  Second  EuroConference  on  Global 
quakes. 
Change  and  Catastrophe  Risk  Management,  6-9 
July 2000.  Laxenburg, Austria.

Chatenoux, B. and Peduzzi, P.  2013.  Forest fires: Pre-
liminary  estimation  of  ecosystems  global  losses.  
Background  Paper  prepared  for  the  2013  Global 
Assessment  Report  on  Disaster  Risk  Reduction.  
Geneva,  Switzerland:  UNISDR.    http://www.pre-
ventionweb.net/gar

Chocrane.  2003.  Fire Science for rainforests.  Na-

ture, Vol. 421 (27 february 2003): 913-919. 

Christchurch  Engineering  Lefelines  Group.    1997.  
Risks and Realities: A Multi-Disciplinary Approach to 
the  Vulnerability  of  Lifelines  to  Natural  Hazards.  
New  Zealand  Centre  for  Advanced  Engineering.  
Chirstchurch, New Zealand.

CIMNE (Centro Internacional de Métodos Numéricos 
en  Ingeniería),  EAI,  INGENIAR  and  ITEC.    2013a.  
Probabilistic Modeling of Natural Risks at the Glob-
al  Level:  Global  Risk  Model.    Background  Paper 
prepared for the 2013 Global Assessment Report 
on Disaster Risk Reduction.  Geneva,  Switzerland: 
UNISDR.  http://www.preventionweb.net/gar

CIMNE (Centro Internacional de Métodos Numéricos 
en  Ingeniería),  EAI,  INGENIAR  and  ITEC.    2013b.  
Probabilistic Modelling of Natural Risks at the Glob-
al Level: The Hybrid Loss Exceedance Curve. Back-
ground  Paper  prepared  for  the  2013  Global  As-
sessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction.  

Geneva,  Switzerland:  UNISDR.    http://www.pre-
ventionweb.net/gar

City  Government  of  Kobe.  2010.    Comprehensive 
Strategy for Recovery from the Great Hanshin-Awaji 
Earthquake. March 2010. Kobe, Japan.

Clayton, A.  2003.  Policy Coherence and Sustainable 
Tourism in the Caribbean.  International Journal of 
Contemporary Hospitality Management. 2003,Vol-
ume 15, Number 3: 188-191.

Clements-Hunt, P.   2012.    Investment,  Finance  and 
Capital Market Perspectives. The Blended Capital 
Group.  Background  Paper  prepared  for  the  2013 
Global  Assessment  Report  on  Disaster  Risk  Re-
duction.    Geneva,  Switzerland:  UNISDR.    http://
www.preventionweb.net/gar

Committee  on  Climate  Change.    2012.    Adaptation 
Sub-Committee  Progress  Report  2012:  Climate 
Change. Is the UK preparing for flooding and water 
scarcity? London, UK.

Containerisation  International.    1998.    Japanese 
port study initiated.  Containerisation Internation-
al, 1 August 1998. 

Containerisation International.  2003.  The great cull. 
Containerisation International, 1 September 2003. 
Corey, C. and Deitch. E.  2011.  Factor Affecting Busi-
ness  Recovery  Immediately  After  Hurricane  Ka-
trina. Journal of Contingencies and Disaster Man-
agement,  Volume  19,  No.  3,  September  2011: 
169-181. 

Cosgrave, J.  2007. Synthesis Report: Expanded Sum-
mary.    Joint  Evaluation  of  the  International  Re-
sponse to the Indian Ocean Tsunami.   London: Tsu-
nami Evaluation Coalition.

Cotula, L., Dyer, N. and Vermeulen, S.   2008.  Fuelling 
exclusion? The biofuels boom and poor people’s ac-
cess to land.  Rome: Food and Agricultural Organi-
zation  of  the  United  Nations  and  International 
Fund for Agricultural Development, and London: 
International Institute for Environment and Devel-
opment.

Courbage, C., Orie, M. and Stahel, W.   2012.   2011 
Thai floods and insurance.   Capter 9.  In: Extreme 
events  and  insurance:  2011  annus  horribilis.    The 
Geneva Reports No 5, March 2012.  Geneva, Swit-
zerland: The Geneva Association.  

cclxi

Craig  D.  and  Porter  D.    2003.    Poverty  Reduction 
Strategy Papers: A New Convergence.  World De-
velopment Vol.31, No. 1: 53-69.

Crespo Cuarisma, J., Hlouskova, J. and Obersteiner, 
M.  2008.  Natural disasters as creative destruction? 
Evidence from developing countries.  Economic In-
quiry, Vol. 46, Issue 2 (April 2008): 214-226. 

 

Crichton, D.  2012.  Flood Plain Speaking.  The Char-

tered Insurance Institute.   London,  UK.

Cuevas, J.  2012. Good practices used at the Peninsu-
la de Yucatan, Mexico.  CIESAS. Background Paper 
prepared for the 2013 Global Assessment Report 
on Disaster Risk Reduction. Geneva, Switzerland: 
UNISDR. http://www.preventionweb.net/gar

Dalberg.  2011.  Report on Support to SMEs in Devel-
oping Countries through Financial Intermediaries.  
Dalberg Global Development Advisors. 

DARA.   2012.  Risk Reduction Index.  Updated global 
data table provided to UNISDR in support of the 
Global  Assessment  Report  on  Disaster  Risk  Re-
duction.  http://www.preventionweb.net/gar

DARA.  2013.  Brief on Dara’s Risk Reduction Index West 
Africa  Phase.    DARA  International.    Madrid,  Spain.  
http://daraint.org/wp-content/
uploads/2012/01/RRI-West-Africa-brief.pdf 

Darwanto, H.  2012.  Understanding Existing Method-
ologies  for  Allocating  and  Tracking  National  Gov-
ernment Budget for Disaster Risk Reduction in Indo-
nesia.  Study commissioned by UNISDR under the 
ADB supported RETA 6511 (Regional Stocktaking 
and Mapping of Disaster Risk Reduction Interven-
tions in Asia and the Pacific).  http://www.preven-
tionweb.net/gar

De Bono, A. 2013.  The Global Exposure Database for 
GAR  2013.    Background  Paper  prepared  for  the 
2013 Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk 
Reduction.  Geneva,  Switzerland : UNISDR.  http://
www.preventionweb.net/gar

Deloitte.    2012.    Aftershocks:  Adjusting  to  the  new 
World of Risk Management.  Deloitte Development 
LLC.  

Devereux, S.  2003.  Policy Options for Increasing the 
Contribution of Social Protection to Food Security.  
Institute  for  Development  Studies,  Forum  for 
Food Security in Southern Africa.  Brighton: IDS.

cclxii

DFID  (Department  for  International  Development). 
2006.  Reducing the Risk of Disasters – Helping to 
Achieve Sustainable Poverty Reduction in a Vulner-
able World.  A DFID policy paper’, DFID.  London, 
UK. 

Dhar Chakrabarti, P.G.  2012.  Understanding existing 
methodologies for allocating and tracking DRR re-
sources in India.  Study commissioned by UNISDR 
in  collaboration  with  ADPC.    Bangkok,  Thailand 
http://www.preventionweb.net/gar

Di Martire, D. De Rosa, M. Pesce, V.  Santangelo M. A. 
and  Calcaterra,  D.    2012.    Landslide  Hazard  and 
Land Management in High-density Urban Areas of 
Campania  Region,  Italy.    Natural  Hazards  Earth 
System Sciences, 12: 905–926. 

DKKV  (Deutsches  Komitee  Katastrophenvorsorge).  
2012. Mobilisierung des Privatsektors zur katastro-
phenpräventiven Anpassung an den Klimawandel.  
Teilstudie  Deutschland.    Bonn,  Germany:  BMZ, 
GIZ and DKKV. 

Dollar, D. And Svensson, J.  2000.  What explains the 
success  or  failure  of  structural  adjustment  pro-
grammes?  The Economic Journal, 110 (October): 
894-917.

Drabek,  T.E.    2000.    Disaster  evacuations:  Tourist-
business  managers  rarely  act  as  customers  ex-
pect.  Cornell Hotel and Restaurant Administration 
Quarterly, August 2000: 48-57.  

Dreze, J.and Sen, A.K.  1989.  Hunger and Public Ac-

tion.   Oxford, UK: Clarendon Press. 

Easterly, W.  2003.  IMF and World Bank Structural 
Adjustment Programs and Poverty.  In: Managing 
Currency Crises in Emerging Markets of the Nation-
al Bureau of Economic Research. M. Dooley and J. 
A.  Frankel  (eds.).    Chicago:  University  of  Chicago 
Press.  

ECA  (Economics  of  Climate  Adaptation). 

  2009.  
Shaping  Climate-Resilient  Development.  A  Frame-
work  for  décision-making.  A  Report  of  the  Eco-
nomics of Climate Adaptation Working Group.  

ECLAC  (United  Nations  Economic  Commission  for 
Latin America and the Caribbean).  2002.  Handbook 
for  estimating  the  socio-economic  and  environ-
mental effects of disasters.  Report LC/MEX/L.519.  
Mexico DF,  Mexico.  

ReferencesECLAC  (United  Nations  Economic  Commission  for 
Latin America and the Caribbean).  2003.  Hand-
book  for Estimating the Socio-economic and Envi-
  LC/MEX/G.5 
ronmental  Effects  of  Disasters. 
LC/L.1874. 

ECLAC  (United  Nations  Economic  Commission  for 
Latin America and the Caribbean).  2011.  The eco-
nomics of climate change in the Caribbean.  Carib-
bean Development Report, Vol. III.  Port-of-Spain,  
Trinidad and Tobago. 

Ede, A.N.  2011.    Measures  to  reduce  the  high  inci-
dence of structural failures in Nigeria.  Journal for 
Sustainable Development in Africa,  Vol.  13,  No.  1, 
2011: 153-161.

EIU  (Economist  Intelligence  Unit).    2011a.  Thailand 

Country Report October 2011.  London, UK.

EIU  (Economist  Intelligence  Unit).    2011b.  Thailand 

Country Report November 2011.  London, UK.

EIU (Economist Intelligence Unit).  2011c.  Thailand 

Country Report December 2011.  London, UK.

EIU (Economist Intelligence Unit).  2012a.  Indonesia 

Country Report December 2012.  London, UK.

EIU  (Economist  Intelligence  Unit).    2012b.  Kenya 

Country Report December 2012. London, UK.

EIU (Economist Intelligence Unit).  2012c. Haiti Coun-

try Report 4th quarter 2012.  London,  UK.

EIU  (Economist  Intelligence  Unit).    2012d.    The  EIU 
Methodology.  Internal Briefing Paper prepared for 
the  2013  Global  Assessment  Report  on  Disaster 
Risk Reduction.  Geneva, Switzerland: UNISDR. 
http://www.preventionweb.net/gar

EIU (Economist Intelligence Unit).  2012e.  Thailand 
politics:  Quick  View  -  Flooding  flashpoint.    EIU 
Viewswire, 3rd September 2012.  London, UK.

Elkin, S.  1987.  City and Regime in the American Re-
public.  Chicago,  USA: The University of Chicago 
Press.

Elkins, Z., Guzman, A. and Simmons, B.  2006.  Com-
peting for capital: the diffusion of bilateral invest-
ment treaties, 1960-2000.  International Organiza-
tions, Vol. 60. No. 4 (Autumn 2006): 811-846.

Enz, R.  2000.    The  S-Curve  Relation  between  Per-
Capita  Income  and  Insurance  Penetration.    The 
Geneva Papers on Risk and Insurance, 25 (3): 396-
406.

Epstein, G., Grabel, I. and Jomo, K.S.  2003.  Capital 
management  techniques  in  developing  countries: 
an assessment of experiences from the 1990s and 
lessons for the future.  Presented at the XVIth Tech-
nical  Group  Meeting  (TGM)  of  the  G-24.  Port-of-
Spain,  Trinidad and Tobago. 

Erian, W., Katlan, B., Ouldbedy, B., Awad, H., Zaghti-
ty, E. and Ibrahim, S.  2012.  Agriculture Drought in 
Africa and Mediterranean.  Background Paper pre-
pared for the 2013 Global Assessment Report on 
Disaster  Risk  Reduction.    Geneva,  Switzerland:  
UNISDR.  http://www.preventionweb.net/gar

ERN-AL (Consortium Evaluación de Riesgos Natura-
les – America Latina).  2011.  Probabilistic model-
ling of disaster risk at global level: development of a 
methodology  and  implementation  of  case  studies. 
Phase 1A: Colombia, Mexico and Nepal.  Background 
Paper  prepared  for  the  2011  Global  Assessment 
Report on Disaster Risk Reduction.  Geneva, Swit-
zerland: UNISDR.  http://www.preventionweb.net/
gar

Ernst and Young.  2012.  Turning risk into results. How 
leading  companies  use  risk  management  to  fuel 
better  performance.    http://www.ey.com/Publica-
tion/vwLUAssets/Turning_risk_into_
results/$FILE/Turning%20risk%20into%20results_
AU1082_1%20Feb%202012.pdf

Escaleras, M. and Register, C.A.  2011.  Natural Disas-
ters  and  Foreign  Direct  Investment.    Land  Eco-
nomics Vol. 87(2): 346-363.  

European Commission.  2011.  Draft Amending Bud-
get N° 7 to the General Budget 2011, Statement of 
Expenditure  by  Section.    COM(2011)  796  final.  
Brussels. 

European Commission.  2012.  Draft Amending Bud-
get N° 2 to the General Budget 2012, Statement of 
Expenditure  by  Section.    COM(2012)  125  final.  
Brussels. 

FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization) and UNIDO 
(United Nations Industrial Development Organiza-
tion).  2009.  Agro-Industries for Development.  CAB 
International and FAO.  Rome,  Italy.

FAO  (Food  and  Agriculture  Organization),  IFAD  (In-
ternational  Fund  for  Agricultural  Development), 
IMF (International Monetary Fund), OECD (Organ-

cclxiii

isation  for  Economic  Cooperation  and  Develop-
ment).  2011.  Price Volatility in Food and Agricul-
tural  Markets:  Policy  Responses.    Policy  Report 
including  contributions  by  FAO,  IFAD,  IMF,OECD, 
UNCTAD,  WFP,  World  Bank,  the  WTO,  IFPRI  and 
the UN HLTF, 2 June 2011.  

FAO  (Food  and  Agriculture  Organization).  2009.  
FAO’s role in the Syria drought response plan 2009.  
Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United 
Nations (FAO).  Rome,  Italy.

FAO  (Food  and  Agriculture  Organization).    2010.  
Price surges in food markets.  Economic and Social 
Perspectives,  Policy  Brief  9,  June  2010.    http://
www.fao.org/docrep/012/al296e/al296e00.pdf 

FAO  (Food  and  Agriculture  Organization).    2011a.  
Global  Food  Losses  and  Food  Waste.    Extent, 
Causes and Prevention.  Study conducted for the 
International  Congress  “Save  food”  at  Interpack 
2011, Düsseldorf, Germany.  Rome,   Italy.  

FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization). 2011b.  Sit-
uation analysis: improving food safety in the maize 
value chain in Kenya.  Report prepared for FAO by 
Prof. Erastus Kang’ethe, College of Agriculture and 
Veterinary Science.  Nairobi, Kenya.

FAO  (Food  and  Agriculture  Organization).    2012a.  
The State of Food and Agriculture. Investing on ag-
riculture for a better future.  Office of Knowledge 
Exchange, Research and Extensio  Rome,  Italy. 

FAO  (Food  and  Agriculture  Organization).  2012b.  
Price Monitoring and Analysis Country Brief Ethio-
pia. September 2011 - February 2012.  Food Securi-
ty Information for Decision Making.  http://www.
fao.org/docrep/015/an612e/an612e00.pdf

FAO  (Food  and  Agriculture  Organization).    2012c.  
Price volatility from a global perspective.  Technical 
background  document  for  the  high-level  event 
on: “Food Price volatility and the role of specula-
tion”,  6  July  2012.  Paper  prepared  by  the  FAO 
Trade and Markets Division (EST).  Rome, Italy.

Farrington, J., Holmes, R. and Slater, R.  2008.  Link-
ing Agriculture Growth and Social Protection: Con-
ceptual framework.  ODI Background Paper.  
London: Overseas Development Institute.

Fasecolda (Federation de Aseguradores Colombia-
nos).  2011.  Siniestros reportados a las asegurado-

cclxiv

ras por ola invernal superan los $500.000 millones.  
Las noticias del sector asegurador, en linea 31 de 
mayo de 2011.   Colombia.

Fava Neves, M.  2011.  Food chains and the reasons 
behind rising food prices.  Food  Chain,  Vol.  1,  No. 
1. (May 2011): 52-70.  

 

 

Fava Neves, M. and Alves Pinto M.  2012.  Analysis of 
the relationship between public regulation and in-
vestment decisions for disaster risk reduction in the 
agribusiness sector.  Background Paper prepared 
for the 2013 Global Assessment Report on Disas-
ter Risk Reduction.  Geneva, Switzerland: UNISDR.  
http://www.preventionweb.net/gar

Ferris, E. and Petz, D.  2012.  The Year that Shook the 
Rich: a review of natural disasters in 2011.  The Bro-
ings Institution and London School of Economics 
Project on Internal Displacement. 

Feyen, E., Lester, R. and Rocha, R.  2011.  What Drives 
the Development of the Insurance Sector? An Em-
pirical Analysis Based on a Panel of Developed and 
Developing Countries.  World Bank, Working Paper 
S5572.  

FM Global.  2010.  Why Companies Risk it All ? Flirting 
with Natural Disasters.  http://www.fmglobal.com/
assets/pdf/P10168.pdf

Forster,  J.,  Schuhmann,  P.W.,  Lake,  I.R.,  Watkinson, 
A.R. and Gill, J.A.  2012.  The influence of hurricane 
risk on tourist destination choice in the Caribbe-
an.  Climate Change, Vol. 114, Issue 3-4: 745-768. 

Foster, V. and Briceño-Garmendia, C.  2010.  Africa’s 
insfrastructure.  A  time  for  transformation.    A  co-
publication of the Agence Fraçaise de Développe-
ment and World Bank. 

Fra Paleo, U. (ed.).  2009.  Building Safer Communi-
ties.  Risk  Governance,  Spatial  Planning  and  Re-
sponses  to  Natural  Hazards.    Amsterdam,  The 
Netherlands: IOS Press. 

Fujimoto,  T.    2011.    Supply  Chain  Competitiveness 
and  Robustness:  A  Lesson  from  the  2011  Tohu 
Earthquake  and  Supply  Chain  “Virtual  Dualiza-
tion”.   Tokyo, Japan. 

Funabashi, Y. and Takenaka, H.  2012.  Lessons from 
Japan’s  Disaster.    Risk  management  and  the 
compound  crisis  presented  by  the  Great  East 
Japan  Earthquake.    http://www.chathamhouse.

Referencesorg/publications/papers/view/182634

Funk et al.  2010.  A Climate Trend Analysis of Kenya.  
Famine  Early  Warning  Systems  Network  (FEWS-
NET) —Informing Climate Change Adaptation Se-
ries.  Denver, USA. 

Funk et al.  2012a.  A Climate Trend Analysis of Ethio-
pia.    Famine  Early  Warning  Systems  Network 
(FEWSNET)  —Informing  Climate  Change  Adapta-
tion Series.  Denver,  USA. 

Funk et al.  2012b.  A Climate Trend Analysis of Ugan-
da.    Famine  Early  Warning  Systems  Network 
(FEWSNET)  —Informing  Climate  Change  Adapta-
tion Series.  Denver, USA. 

G20/OECD. 2012.  Disaster Risk Assessment and Risk 
Financing.  A  G20/OECD  Methodological  Frame-
work.   Paris,  France:  OECD.  http://www.oecd.
org/gov/risk/G20disasterriskmanagement.pdf. 

Gencer, E.  2012.  The Impact of Globalization on Di-
saster Risk Trends: A Macro- and Urban- Scale Anal-
ysis.  Background  Paper  prepared  for  the  2013 
Global  Assessment  Report  on  Disaster  Risk  Re-
duction.    Geneva,    Switzerland:  UNISDR.    http://
www.preventionweb.net/gar

Gerulis-Darcy,  M.    2012.    Implications  of  the  Global 
Political Economy on Vulnerability to Disasters: The 
Case of Long-Term Structural Adjustment Policies in 
Nicaragua.    Background  Paper  prepared  for  the 
2013 Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk 
Reduction.  Geneva,  Switzerland: UNISDR. http://
www.preventionweb.net/gar

GFMC (Global Fire Monitoring Centre).  2012.  White 
Paper on Vegetation Fires and Global Change.  Fi-
nal draft, 19 October 2012.  Freiburg, Germany. 

Gleeson, B. and Low, N.  2000.  Revaluing planning: 
Rolling back neo-liberalism in Australia.  Progress 
in Planning 53 (2000): 83-164. 

Global  Construction  Perspectives  and  Oxford  Eco-
nomics.  2011.  Global construction 2020: A global 
forecast for the construction industry over the next 
decade to 2020.   London, UK.

GNDR  (Global  Network  of  Civil  Society  Organisa-
tions for Disaster Reduction).   2011.  If you do not 
join hands. Views from the Frontline. Local reports 
of progress on implementing the Hyogo Framework 
for  Action,  with  strategic  recommendations  for 

more effective implementation.  Global Network of 
Civil  Society  Organisations  for  Disaster  Reduc-
tion. May 2011.  

Goldhammer, J.G.  2009.  Regional / National Impact 
of Climate Change on Fire Regimes.  International 
Symposium.  Busan,  Korea. 

Gordon, M. 2013.  Exploring Existing Methodologies 
for  Allocating  and  Tracking  Disaster  Risk  Reduc-
tion  in  National  Public  Investment.    Background 
Paper prepared for the 2013 Global Assessment 
Report on Disaster Risk Reduction.  Geneva,  Swit-
zerland:  UNISDR.    http://www.preventionweb.
net/gar

Government  of  Bangladesh.    2012.    National  Prog-
ress  Report  on  the  Implementation  of  the  Hyogo 
Framework for Action (2011-2013).  Interim Report, 
31 October 2012. 

Government  of  Bhutan.    2004.    Thimpu  Structure 
Plan, 2002–-2007. Revision 1st August 2004.  Minis-
try of Works and Human Settlement. Department 
of Urban Development and Engineering Services.   
Bhutan. 

Government of Brazil.  2010.  Light for All: A Historic 
Landmark, 10 million Brazilians out of the darkness.  
Ministério de Minas e Energia.  Brasília,  Brasil. 

Government of Colombia.  2011.  Evaluación de da-
ños del fenómeno de La Niña 2010-2011.  Ministerio 
del Interior y de Justicia - DGR.  Bogotá, Colombia.
Government of Colombia.  2012.  Contingent liability 
Management in Colombia and the Financial Strat-
egy associated with Natural Disasters.  Chapter 7.  
In:  Improving  the  assessment  of  disaster  risks  to 
strengthen  financial  resilience.    Government  of 
Mexico and World Bank. 2012: 132-141. 

Government of Costa Rica.  2010.  El Impacto Económi-
co de los Eventos Naturales y Antrópicos Extremos en 
Costa Rica, 1988-2009.  MIDEPLAN (Ministerio de Pl-
anificación  Nacional  y  Política  Económica).    San 
José,  Costa Rica. 

Government of Italy.  2012.  Italian Application to Mo-
bilize  the  European  Union  Solidarity  Fund  -  EUSF. 
Earthquakes  May  2012  in  the  area  of  the  regions: 
Emilia-Romagna, Lombardia and Veneto.  Civil Pro-
tection Department, Government of Italy.

Government of Japan.  2011.  Disaster Management 

cclxv

in Japan.  February 2011.  Tokyo,  Japan. 

Government of Japan.  2012a.  White Paper on Small 
and  Medium  Enterprises  in  Japan.    Ministry  of 
Economy,  Trade  and  Industry  and  Japan  Small 
Business Research Institute.  Tokyo,  Japan. 

Government of Japan.  2012b.  White Paper on Land, 
Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism in Japan, FY 
2011.    Ministry  of  Land,  Infrastructure,  Transport 
and Tourism.  Tokyo, Japan. 

Government of Japan.  2012c.  White Paper on Disas-
ter  Management  in  Japan,  2012.    Cabinet  Office.  
Tokyo,  Japan.

Government of Mexico and World Bank.  2012.  Im-
proving  the  Assessment  of  Disaster  Risks  to 
Strengthen  Financial  Resilience.    A  Special  Joint 
G20 Publication by the Government of Mexico and 
World  Bank.  2012  International  Bank  for  Recon-
struction and Development / International Devel-
opment.  Washington, DC: USA.

Government of Namibia.  2012.  Disaster Risk Man-
agement Act.  Government Gazette of the Republic 
of Namibia. No. 5029, September 2012.  Windhoek 
Namibia 

Government of Samoa.  2009.  Samoa Post-Disaster 
Needs  Assessment:  Following  the  Erthquake  and 
Tsunami on 29th September 2009.  GFDRR.  Wash-
ington DC, USA. 

Government of the United Kingdom.  2006. Planning 
Policy Statement 25: Development and Flood Risk.  
Department  of  Communities  and  Local  Govern-
ment.  London, UK.

Government of the United Kingdom.  2008.  Plannning 
for the  Rising  Tides:  The  Humber  Flood  Risk  Man-
agement Strategy.    Environment  Agency.    Leeds, 
UK.

Government of the United Kingdom.  2011.  Adapting 
to an Uncertain Climate: A World of Commercial Op-
portunities.  UK Trade and Investment. 

Government of the United Kingdom.  2012.  National 
Planning Policy Framework.  Department of Com-
munities and Local Government.  London, UK .

Government of the United States of America.  2012.  
National progress report on the implementation of  
the Hyogo Framework for Action (2011-2013). 

Grain.  2012.  Who’s behind the land grabs? A look at 

cclxvi

some  of  the  people  pursuing  or  supporting  large 
farmland grabs around the world.  Grain factsheet, 
October 2012.  Barcelona,  Spain. 

Gubbels, P.  2012.  Changing the Development Para-
digm:  Key  to  Managing  Drought  Risk  in  areas  of 
Chronic Food Insecurity in Africa.  Background Paper 
prepared for the 2013 Global Assessment Report 
on Disaster Risk Reduction.  Geneva,  Switzerland: 
UNISDR  http://www.preventionweb.net/gar

Hall, C.M. 2010.  Crisis events in tourism: subjects of 
crisis in tourism.   Current Issues in Tourism, Vol 13, 
No 5: 401-417. 

Hallegatte, S.  2011.  How economic growth and ratio-
nal decisions can make disaster losses grow faster 
than wealth.  World Bank. Policy Research Work-
ing Paper No. 5617.  

Hallegatte,  S.,  Henriet,  F.,  Patwardhan,  A.,  et.  al.  
2010.  Flood Risks, Climate Change Impacts and Ad-
aptation Benefits in Mumbai. An initial assessment 
of  socio-economic  consequences  of  present  and 
climate induced flood risks and of possible adapta-
tion options.  OECD Environment Working Papers 
No. 27.  

Hamdan,  F.    2012.    Intensive and Extensive Disaster 
Risk  Drivers  and  Incentives  for  Disaster  Risk  Man-
agement in the MENA region.  Background Paper 
prepared for the 2013 Global Assessment Report 
on Disaster Risk Reduction.  Geneva, Switzerland: 
UNISDR.  http://www.preventionweb.net/gar

Haraguchi, M. and Lall, U.  2012.  Flood Risks and Im-
pacts.  Future Research Questions and Implications 
to  Private  Investment  Decision-Making  for  Supply 
Chain Networks.  Background Paper prepared for 
the  2013  Global  Assessment  Report  on  Disaster 
Risk  Reduction.  Geneva,  Switzerland:  UNISDR. 
http://www.preventionweb.net/gar

Harrington,  K.  and  O’Connor,  J.    2009.    How  Cisco 
Succeeds.    Supply  Chain  Management  Review. 
July/August 2009.  

Harvey, D. 1985.  Studies in the History and Theory of 
Capitalist Urbanization. Vol. 2. Urbanization of Cap-
ital.  Oxford, UK : Basil Blackwell Ltd. 

Hatton, T., Seville, E. and Vargo, J.  2012.  Improving 
the Resilience of SMEs: Policy and Practice in New 
Zealand.  Resilient Organisations Research Report 

References2012/012 ISSN 1178-7279.  

Hawnevik,  K.,  Matondi,  P.  B.  and  Beyene,  A.    2012 
Biofuels, Land Grabbing and Food Security in Africa.  
Zed Bos/Nordiska Afrikainstitutet.  London, UK.

Hayashi, T.  2012.  Japan’s Post-Disaster Economic 
Reconstruction: From Kobe to Tohuku.  Asian Eco-
nomic Journal 2012 Vol.26 No. 3: 189-210.

Hazell, P. and Hess, U.  2010.  Drought insurance for 
agricultural  development  and  food  security  in 
dryland areas.  Food Security, December 2010, Vol-
ume 2, Issue 4, pp 395-405. 

Heise, A. and Lierse, H.  2011.  The Effects of Europe-
an Austerity Programmes on Social Security Sys-
tems.  Modern Economy Vol 2: 498-513. 

Heitzmann, K., Canagarajah, S. and Siegel, P.  2002.  
Guidelines for Assessing the Sources of Risk and Vul-
nerability.  Social Protection Discussion Paper Se-
ries No 0218, World Bank.  

Henshaw, G.  2010.  The role of private sector in the 
provision of affordable housing to the public.  Lec-
ture  presented  to  the  Nigerian  Society  of  Engi-
neers, Cross River State branch, on its 2010 work-
shop. 

Hill, H. and Pittman, J.  2012.  Agriculture and Disas-
ter  Risk  Reduction.    Background  Paper  prepared 
for the 2013 Global Assessment Report on Disas-
ter  Risk  Reduction.    Geneva,    Switzerland:  UNIS-
DR.  http://www.preventionweb.net/gar

Hobsbawm, E.  2011.  How to change the world. Tales 
of Marx and Marxism.  London, UK: Little Brown/ 
Abacus. 

Hochrainer, S.  2009.  Assessing the Macroeconomic 
Impact of Natural Disasters: Are there any?  Policy 
Research  Working  Paper  4968. 
  Washington: 
World Bank. 

Hochrainer, S.  2012.  Financial and Economic Disas-
ter  Risk  Estimation  in  Madagascar  for  the  Imple-
mentation  of  CatSim.    Summary  report  for  the 
project  “Mainstreaming  Disaster  Risk  Manage-
ment and Climate Change in Economic Develop-
ment.  Technical  Assistance  to  the  Republic  of 
Madagascar”.  Vienna, Austria: IIASA. 

Hochrainer,  S.,  Timonina,  A.,  Williges,  K.,  Pflug,G. 
and Mechler, R.  2013.  Modelling the indirect and 
fiscal risks from natural disasters using the CatSim 

model.  Background Paper prepared for the 2013 
Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduc-
tion.  Geneva, Switzerland: UNISDR.  http://www.
preventionweb.net/gar

Hoekstra, A.Y. and Chapagain, A.K.  2008.  Globaliza-
tion  of  water:  Sharing  the  planet’s  freshwater  re-
sources.  Oxford,  UK: Blackwell Publishing, 

Holt,  J.,  Le  Jeune,  S.,  Bernard,  J.,  Chastre,  C.  and 
Berton,  H.    2009.    Understanding  the  Household 
Economy  in  Rural  Niger.    London:  Save  the  Chil-
dren UK. 

Honey,  M.  and  Krantz,  D.    2007.    Global  Trends  in 
Coastal  Tourism.    Prepared  for  Marine  Program 
World Wildlife Fund.  Washington DC, USA 

Hsiang, S.M. and Jina, A.S.  2012.  Development after 
Disaster.  Background Paper prepared for the 2013 
Global  Assessment  Report  on  Disaster  Risk  Re-
duction.    Geneva,    Switzerland:  UNISDR.  http://
www.preventionweb.net/gar

Hussels, S., Ward, D. and Zurbruegg, R.  2005.  Stimu-
lating  the  Demand  for  Insurance.    Risk  Manage-
ment and Insurance Review, 8 (2): pp. 257-278.  

IADB (Inter-American Development Bank).  2010.  In-
dicators  of  Disaster  Risk  and  Risk  Management. 
Program for Latin America and the Caribean.  Tech-
nical notes, IDB-TN-169, September 2010. 

IASC  (Inter-Agency  Standing  Committee).    2012.  
Strategic  Document  Version  2  Response  plan  ad-
dressing the food and nutrition crisis in the Sahel.  
15  February  2012.  Dakar  Inter  Agency  Standing 
Committee. 

IATP (Institute for Agriculture and Trade Policy).  

2009.  Betting Against Food Security: Futures Mar-
ket  Speculation.    Trade  and  Global  Governance 
Programme.  Minneapolis,  USA: Institute for Agri-
culture and Trade Policy. 

IFC (International Financial Corporation).  2012.  IFC 
and Small and Medium Enterprises.  IFC Issue Brief.  
International Finance Corporation.

IFPRI (International Food Policy Research Institute).  
2011.  Food Prices: Riding the Rollercoaster.  2011 
International  Food  Policy  Report.  Washington, 
DC: IFPRI. 

IHS Global Insight.  2012.    As  the  clear-up  begins,  a 
look  at  hurricane  Sandy’s  likely  economic  toll.  

cclxvii

Country & Industry Forecasting, 31 October 2012.
IIED  (International  Institute  for  Ennvironment  and 
Development).  2012a.  Draft Resilient Cities report.  
Unpublished contribution to the UNISDR Making 
Cities Resilient Report 2012. Draft of 6 July 2012).  
Geneva, Switzerland: UNISDR. http://www.preven-
tionweb.net/gar

IIED (International Institute for Environment and De-
velopment).  2012.  The global land rush: what the 
evidence reveals about scale and geography. IIED 
Briefing,  April  2012b,  written  by  Lorenzo  Cotula 
and Emily Polack.  London: IIED. 

IIED  (International  Institute  for  Environment  and 
Development), FAO (Food and Agriculture Organi-
zation),  and  IFAD  (International  Fund  for  Agricul-
tural Development).  2009.  Land grab or develop-
ment  opportunity?  Agricultural  investment  and 
international  land  deals  in  Africa.    IIED/FAO/IFAD.  
London/Rome. 

IIGCC  (Institutional  Investors  Group  on  Climate 
Change).  2010.  Climate Impact Reporting for Prop-
erty  Investment  Portfolios:  A  guide  for  Pension 
Funds and their Trustees and Fund Managers.  Re-
port  of  the  Institutional  Investors  Group  on  Cli-
mate Change.  London, UK 

IIHS (Indian Institute for Human Settlements).  2012.  
The Role of Private Sector in Reducing Disaster Risk 
in Large Scale Infrastructure and Real Estate Devel-
opment,  Case  of  Delhi.    Background  Paper  pre-
pared for the 2013 Global Assessment Report on 
Disaster  Risk  Reduction.    Geneva,  Switzerland: 
UNISDR.  http://www.preventionweb.net/gar

IISD (International Institute for Sustainable Develop-
ment),  the  Blended  Capital  Group,  and  UNEP-FI 
(United  Nations  Environment  Programme  Fi-
nance Initiative).  2012.  Financial stability and sys-
temic  risk.  Lenses  and  Clocks.    IISD  Report,  June 
2012.  Geneva,  Switzerland. 

ILO  (International  Labor  Office  or  Organization).  
2012.  Global Employment Trends 2012.   Geneva, 
Switzerland: ILO. 

IMECHE (Institution of Mechanical Engeneers).  2012.  

Global Food. Waste not, want not.  London, UK. 

IMF (International Monetary Fund).  2012.  Regional 
Economic  Outlook.  Sub-Saharan  Africa:  Maintain-

cclxviii

ing Growth in an Uncertain World.  World Econom-
ic and Financial Surveys.  October 2012.  Washing-
ton, DC: IMF.   

Ingirige,  B.  and  Amaratunga,  D.  2012.    Minimising 
flood  risk  accumulation  through  effective  private 
and  public  sector  engagement.    Background 
Paper  prepared for the 2013 Global Assessment 
Report on Disaster Risk Reduction.  Geneva, Swit-
zerland: UNISDR. http://www.preventionweb.net/
gar

IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change).  
2007.    Climate  Change  2007:  Impacts,  Adaptation 
and Vulnerability.  IPCC Synthesis Report.  Geneva,  
Switzerland. 

IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change).  
2012.  Managing the Risks of Extreme Events and 
Disasters to Advance Climate Change Adaptation.  
Special Report of Working Groups I and II of the 
Intergovernmental  Panel  on  Climate  Change 
(Field,  C.B.,  V.  Barros,  T.F.  Stocker,  D.  Qin,  D.J. 
Dken, K.L. Ebi, M.D. Mastrandrea, K.J. Mach, G.-K.  
Plattner,  S.K.  Allen,  M.  Tignor,  and  P.M.  Midgley 
(eds.).  Cambridge  University  Press.    Cambridge, 
UK, and New York, NY, USA. 

Ipsos  MORI.    2013.    Making  Futures  Real.  Exploring 
how  policy-makers  perceive  and  deal  with  long-
term risk.    Research  report  prepared  for  UNISDR 
and HFP, Kings College.  

IRGC  (Integrated  Risk  Governance  Council).    2005.  
Risk Governance. Towards an integrated approach.   
Geneva, Switzerland: Integrated Risk Governance 
Council. 

IRGP-IHDP.  2010.  Integrated Risk Governance Project 
Science Plan.  Integrated Risk Governance Project 
and International Human Dimension Program for 
Global Environmental Changes.  Bonn,  Germany.  
IRIN  (Integrated  Regional  Information  Networks).  
2010.  Niger: Southern villages emptying as drought 
bites.    Humanitarian  News  and  Analysis.    6  De-
cember 2012.  

IRP (International Recovery Platform).  2012.  Policy, 
partnerships & land use planning interventions to 
reduce future risks.  Background Paper prepared 
for the 2013 Global Assessment Report on Disaster 
Risk Reduction.  Geneva,  Switzerland: UNISDR. 

Referenceshttp://www.preventionweb.net/gar

Jabeen, H.  2012.  Private Sector Investment Decisions 
in Building and Construction: Increasing, Managing 
and  Transferring  Risks:  The  Case  of  Dhaka.    Case 
study prepared for the 2013 Global Assessment Re-
port on Disaster Risk Reduction.  Geneva, Switzer-
land: UNISDR. http://www.preventionweb.net/gar

Jackson, I.  2002.  Adaptation to Climate Change in 
the Caribbean Tourism Sector Workshop Grenada, 
May 27-28, 2002.  Prepared for the Organization of 
American States (OAS). 

Jayanthi, H. and Husak, G.J.  2012. 

  A  probabilistic 
approach to assess agricultural drought risk.  Back-
ground  Paper  prepared  for  the  2013  Global  As-
sessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction.  Ge-
neva,  Switzerland:  UNISDR. 
  http://www.
preventionweb.net/gar

Johannessen, A. Rosemarin, A. Gerger Swartling, A. 
Han,  G.  Vulturius,  G  and  Stenström,  T.A.    2013.  
Linking Investment Decisions with Disaster Risk Re-
duction  in  Water  Sanitation  and  Hygiene  (WASH): 
The Role of the Public and Private Sectors, Poten-
tials  for  Partnership  and  Social  Learning.    Back-
ground  Paper  prepared  for  the  2013  Global  As-
sessment  Report  on  Disaster  Risk  Reduction.  
Geneva,  Switzerland: UNISDR. http://www.preven-
tionweb.net/gar

Johnson, C.  2011.  Creating an enabling environment 
for reducing disaster risk: Recent experience of reg-
ulatory frameworks for land, planning and building 
in low and middle-income countries. Background 
Paper  prepared  for  the  2011  Global  Assessment 
Report on Disaster Risk Reduction.  Geneva,  Swit-
zerland:  UNISDR. 
  http://www.preventionweb.
net/gar

Johnson, C., Adelekan, I., Bosher, L., Jabeen, H., Ka-
taria, S., Wijitbusaba, A. and Zerjav, B.  2012.  Pri-
vate  Sector  Investment  Decisions  in  Building  and 
Construction:  Increasing,  Managing  and  Transfer-
ring  Risks.    Background  Paper  prepared  for  the 
2013 Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk 
Reduction.  Geneva,  Switzerland: UNISDR.  http://
www.preventionweb.net/gar

Johnston, D.  2012.  The Value of Seismic Risk Mitiga-
tion in Canterbury, New Zealand.  Case study pre-

pared for the 2013 Global Assessment Report on 
Disaster  Risk  Reduction.  Geneva,  Switzerland: 
UNISDR. http://www.preventionweb.net/gar

Jones  Lang  LaSalle.    2013.   Global Market Perspec-

tive, first quarter 2013.  

Jose, S.R.  2012.  Preliminary examination of Existing 
Methodologies for Allocating and Tracking National 
Government  Budget  for  Disaster  Risk  Reduction 
(DRR) in the Philippines.  Study commissioned by 
UNISDR under the ADB supported RETA 6511 (Re-
gional Stocktaking and Mapping of Disaster Risk 
Reduction Internventions in Asia and the Pacific).   
http://www.preventionweb.net/gar

Joskow, P.L. and Parsons, J.E.  2012.  The Future of 
Nuclear Power After Fukushima.  MIT Center for En-
ergy and Environmental Policy Research., CEEPR 
WP 2012-001, February 2012.  

Kamal-Chaoui,  L.,  Leman,  E.  and  Rufei,  Z.    2009.  
Urban Trends and Policy in China.  OECD Regional 
Development  Working  Papers,  2009/1.  Paris, 
France: OECD.  

Karlsson, A.  2012.  Innovative Approaches to Address 
DRR Implementation in Cities. Sustainability Certifi-
cation  of  Urban  Areas  and  Opportunities  to  Inte-
grate  Resilience  and  DRR.    Presentation  at  the 
Seminar  25  May  2012  on  “Resilient  cities  -  From 
knowledge  to  local  action”  convened  by  the 
Swedish Water House cluster group for Water and 
Disaster Risk Reduction.   

Kataria, S. and Zerjav, B.  2012.  Private Sector Invest-
ment  Decisions  in  Building  and  Construction:  In-
creasing, Managing and Transferring Risks: A Liter-
ature  Review.    Prepared  for  the  2013  Global 
Assessment  Report  on  Disaster  Risk  Reduction.  
Geneva,  Switzerland:  UNISDR.    http://www.pre-
ventionweb.net/gar

Kayode, F., Ojo, B. and Sheba E.A. 2008.  Review Pa-
per: Design, Aesthetics and the Isue of Integrity in 
the Built Environment: The Nigerian Example.  In-
door  and  Built  Environment,  August  2008  Vol.  17 
No.4, 283-298.  

Kellet  and  Sparks.    2012.    Disaster Risk Reduction - 
Spending where it should count.  Global Humani-
tarian Assistance / Development Initiatives. 

Kent, R.  2013.  Making Futures Real: The policy-mak-

cclxix

ers challenge.  Background Paper prepared for the 
2013 Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk 
Reduction.  Geneva,  Switzerland: UNISDR. 
http://www.preventionweb.net/gar

Khan, M.E.  2005.  The Death Toll from Natural Disas-
ters: the Role of Income, Geography and Institu-
tions.  The Review of Economics and Statistics, 87 
(2): 271-284. 

King, A.  2012.  Livelihood profiles, North Eastern Prov-
inces, Kenya.  Food Economy Group and Save the 
Children, Oct. 2012. 

KPMG International.  2012.  Expect the Unexpected: 
Building Business Value in a Changing World. Part I.  
http://www.kpmg.com/Global/en/IssuesAndIn-
sights/ArticlesPublications/Documents/building-
business-value-part-1.pdf 

Kyrili, K. and Martin, M.  2010.  The Impact of the Glob-
al  Economic  Crisis  on  the  Budgets  of  Low-Income 
Countries.  A report for Oxfam by Development Fi-
nancing International.  Oxford, UK: Oxfam Interna-
tional. 

Lao People’s Democratic Republic.  2012.  National 
Progress  Report  on  the  Implementation  of  Hyogo 
Framework for Action (2011-2013) - interim report.  
HFA Monitor update.  http://www.preventionweb.
net/english/countries/asia/lao/

Lapvitsas, C., Kaltenbrunner, A., Lambrinidis, G., Lin-
do,  D.,  Meadway,  J.,  Michell,  J.,  Painceira,  J.P., 
Pires, E., Powell, J., Stenfors, A. and Teles, N.  2010.  
The Eurozone between austerity and default.  RMF 
Occasional Report, September 2010.  

Lavell, A. 2003.    Regional  Programme  for  Risk  Man-
agement in Central America. Ideas and notions re-
lating to concept and practice.  Panama: CEPREDE-
NAC and UNDP. 

Le Courtois, E., Gálvez-Nogales, E., Santacoloma, P. 
and Tartanac, F.  2010.  Enhancing farmers’ access 
to  markets  for  certified  products:  A  comparative 
analysis  using  a  business  model  approach.    AGS 
Main Series, Agricultural Management, Marketing 
and Finance Working Documents, Issue 28. Rome: 
FAO.   

Lewsey, C., Cid, G. and Kruse, E.  2004.  Assessing cli-
mate change impacts on coastal infrastructure in 
the  Eastern  Caribbean.    Marine  Policy  28  (2004): 

cclxx

393-409.  

Likosky, M.B.  2009.  Contracting and regulatory is-
sues in the oil and gas and metallic minerals in-
dustries.  Transnational Corporations, Vol 18, No. 1 
(April 2009). 

 

Llasat, M. and Siccardi, F.  2010.  A reflection about 
the social and technological aspects in flood risk 
management – the case of the Italian Civil Protec-
tion.  Natural  Hazards  Earth  System  Science,  10: 
109–119. 

Lloyds.  2011.  Lloyds Risk Index 2011.   Featuring 

content by Economist Intelligence Unit.  London: 
Lloyds.  

Lloyds.  2012.  Lloyd’s Global Underinsurance Report.  

October 2012.  London: Lloyds. 

Lo, B., Mlachila, M., Nallari, R. and Kalonji, K.  2003.  
The impact of external indebtedness on poverty in 
low-income  countries.    IMF  Working  Paper  No. 
03/61. International Monetary Fund.  Washington 
DC, USA. 

Lorphensri, O., Ladawadee, A. and Dhammasarn, S.  
2011.    Review  of  Groundwater  management  and 
Land Subsistance in Bangkok, Thailand.  Chapter 7. 
In: Makoto Taniguchi (Ed.). Groundwater and Sub-
surface  Environments.  Human  Impacts  in  Asian 
Coastal Cities.  Kyoto, Japan: Springer. 

Louw, A., Vermeulen, H., Kirsten, J., and Madevu, H.  
2007.  Securing small farmer participation in su-
permarket supply chains in South Africa.  Develop-
ment Southern Africa 24(4): 539–551.  

Luino, F., Turconi, L., Petrea, C. and Nigrelli G.  2012.  
Uncorrected  land-use  planning  highlighted  by 
flooding:  the  Alba  case  study  (Piedmont,  Italy).  
Natural Hazards Earth System Sciences, 12: 2329–
2346. 

Mahon,  R.    2007.    The  Role  of  Physical  Planning  in 
Linking Disaster Risk Reduction to the Development 
Process: Coastal Tourism Reconstruction in Grand 
Anse, Grenada.  Paper presented at the 5th Inter-
national  Coastal  and  Marine  Tourism  Congress: 
Balancing Marine Tourism, Development and Sus-
tainability.  Auckland,  New Zealand. 

Mahon, R., Becken, S. and Rennie, H.  2012.  Evaluat-
ing the Business Case for Investment in the Risk Re-
silience of the Tourism sector of Small Island Devel-

Referencesoping States.  Background Paper prepared for the 
2013 Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk 
Reduction.  Geneva, Switzerland: UNISDR.  http://
www.preventionweb.net/gar

Marome, W.A.  2012.  Private Sector Investment Deci-
sions  in  Building  and  Construction:  Increasing, 
Managing, and Transferring Risks: A Case Study of 
Thailand.    Background  Paper  prepared  for  the 
2013 Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk 
Reduction.  Geneva, Switzerland: UNISDR.  http://
www.preventionweb.net/gar

Marsh, Inc.  2012.  Navigating the risk and insurance 
landscape: Latin America and Caribbean Insurance 
Market  Report  2012.  http://usa.marsh.com/Por-
tals/9/Documents/1807NCN2012IMR-LAC.pdf    

Marsh.  2011.    Preparing  the  Local  Public  Sector  for 
Risk Governance: First Steps Towards an ISO 31000 
Framework.    Framework  for  Public  Risk  Gover-
nance and Lessons Learnt.  

Masters, M.W. and White, A.K.  2011.  How institution-
al investors are driving up food and energy prices.  
Chapter 1. In: IATP, 2011. Excessive speculation in 
Agricultural  Commodities.  Selected  Writings  from 
2008-2011.  Minneaplolis, USA: IATP. 

Matondi,  P.  B.,  Havnevik,  K.  and  Beyene,  A.    2011.  
Biofuels, land grabbing and food security in Africa.  
Uppsala, Sweden: Zed Books Ltd. 

Maxwell, S. and Slater, R.  2003.  Food policy old and 
new.  Development Policy Review 21(5–6): 531–553. 
McKinsey Global Institute.  2009.  Global capital mar-

kets: Entering a new era.  September 2009.  

Mechler, R. 2004.  Natural Disaster Risk Management 
and Financing Disaster Losses in Developing Coun-
tries.  Band 1, Karlsruher Reihe II: Risikoforschung 
und Versicherungsmanagement.  Karlsruhe, 
Germany: Verlag Versicherungswirtschaft. 

Mechler, R.  2009.  Disasters and Economic Welfare. 
Can National Savings Measures Help Explain Post 
Disaster Changes in Consumption?   Background 
Paper for Chapter 2 of World Bank/UNISDR 2010: 
Natural  Hazards,  Unnatural  Disasters.    https://
www.gfdrr.org/node/284 

Mechler, R., Hochrainer, S., Linnerooth-Bayer, J. and 
Pflug, G.  2012.  Public Sector Financial Vulnerability 
to  Disasters.  The  IIASA  CatSim  Model.    In:  Birk-

mann,  J.  (ed.):  Measuring  Vulnerability  to  Natural 
Hazards. Towards Disaster Resilient Societies.  Re-
vised  and  extended  Second  Edition,  Tokyo,  Ja-
pan: United Nations University Press.

Mechler, R., Hochrainer, S., Pflug, G., Lotsch, A. with 
Williges, K. 2009. Assessing the Financial Vulnera-
bility  to  Climate-Related  Natural  Hazards.  Policy 
Research  Working  Paper,  5232  (Background  Pa-
per  for  the  Development  and  Climate  Change 
World  Development  Report  2010).  Washington, 
DC: World Bank. 

Mechler,  R.,  Hochrainer-Stigler,  S.  and  Nakano,  K.  
2013.  Modelling the Economic Effects of Disaster 
Risk in Nepal.  In: Amendola et al. (eds.): Integrated 
Catastrophe  Risk  Modeling.  Advances  in  Natural 
and Technological Hazards Research.  Springer. 

Mechler, R., Linnerooth-Bayer, J., Hochrainer, S. and 
Pflug,  G.    2006.    Assessing  Financial  Vulnerability 
and  Coping  Capacity:  The  IIASA  CatSim  Model. 
Concepts and Methods.  In: Measuring Vulnerabil-
ity and Coping Capacity to Hazards of Natural Ori-
gin.  J. Birkmann (ed.).  Tokyo, Japan: United Na-
tions University Press.

Méheux, K. and Parker, E.  2006.  Tourist sector per-
ceptions  of  natural  hazards  in  Vanuatu  and  the 
implications  for  a  small  island  developing  state.  
Tourism Management 27 (2006): 69-85.  

Mekkonen, M.M. and Hoekstra. A.Y.  2011.  National 
Water  Footprint  Accounts:  The  green,  blue,  and 
gray water footprint of production and consump-
tion.  Value of Water Research Report Series No. 50. 
Volume  1:  Main  Report.    Delft,  The  Netherlands: 
UNESCO-IHE Institute for Water Education. 

Menoni, S., Pesaro, G., Mejri, O. and Atun, F.  2005.  In-
terface  between  public  and  private  treatment  of 
«public goods».    Background  Paper  prepared  for 
the  2013  Global  Assessment  Report  on  Disaster 
Risk  Reduction.    Geneva,  Switzerland:UNISDR.  
http://www.preventionweb.net/gar

Mitlin, D. and Satterthwaite D.  2012.  Urban Poverty 
in  the  Global  South:  Scale  and  Nature.    London,  
Routledge 

Mkumbwa,  S.    2011.    Cereal  food  commodities  in 
Eastern Africa: consumption - production gap trends 
and projections for 2020.  MPRA Paper 42113.  http://

cclxxi

mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de/42113/ 

Mori Building.  2012.  Comprehensive disaster man-
agement measures: From the city that people run 
away from, into the city that people seek refuge in 
time of disaster (original document in Japanese).  
Mori Building report.  http://www.mori.co.jp/en 

Moteff, J. 2007.  Critical  Infrastructure:  The  National 
Asset Database. CRS Report for Congress. Updat-
ed July 16, 2007. Congressional Research Service.  
http://www.fas.org/sgp/crs/homesec/RL33648.pdf
Muir-Wood, R.  2012.  The Christchurch earthquakes 
of 2010 and 2011.  The Geneva Reports. Risk Insur-
ance Research.  Geneva, Switzerland: The Geneva 
Association. 

Mukhija, V.  2003.  Squatters as Developers? Slum Re-
development in Mumbai.  Aldershot, UK: Ashgate.

Munich Re.  2010.  TOPICS GEO Natural catastrophes 
2010 Analyses, assessments, positions.  Munich Re.  
Munich,  Germany.  

Munich Re.  2012.  TOPICS GEO Natural catastrophes 
2011. Analyses, assessments, positions.  2012 Issue, 
Munich Re.  Munich, Germany.

Mycoo, M.  2006.  Sustainable Tourism Using Regula-
tions,  Market  Mechanisms  and  Green  Certifica-
tion:  A  Case  Study  of  Barbados.    Journal  of  Sus-
tainable Tourism, Vol.14, No.5: 489-511. 

Nagamatsu,  S.    2007.    Economic  Problems  During 
Recovery  from  the  1995  Great  Hanshin-Awaji 
Earthquake.    Journal  of  Disaster  Research  Vol.2, 
N°5. 372-380. 

NAPC  (National  Agricultural  Policy  Center).    2009.  
Syrian  Agricultural  Trade  2008-2009.    Ministry  of 
Agriculture and Agrarian Reform, Syrian Arab Re-
public.  

National Academies.  2012.  Disaster Resilience. A na-
tional imperative, Summary Report.  The National 
Academies Press.  Washington USA. 

National Academy of Sciences.  2007.  Water implica-
tions of biofuel production in the United States. Re-
port in Brief, October 2007.  The National Academy 
of Sciences.  Washington,  USA.  

National Diet of Japan.  2012.  The Official Report of 
the  Fukushima.  Nuclear  Accident  Independent 
Investigation Commission.  http://www.nirs.org/
fukushima/naiic_report.pdf 

cclxxii

National Intelligence Council.  2012.  Global Trends 
2030: Alternative Worlds.  Office of the Director of 
National Intelligence.  United States of America.

National Transportation Safety Board.  2007.  Collapse 
of  I-35W  Highway  Bridge  Minneapolis,  Minnesota.  
August 1, 2007. Accident Report.  NTSB/HAR-08/03  
PB2008-916203.  United States of America.

Nellemann,  C.,  MacDevette,  M.,  Manders,  T.,  Eick-
hout, B., Svihus, B., Prins, A. G., Kaltenborn, B. P. 
(Eds).    2009.   The environmental food crisis – The 
environment’s role in averting future food crises. A 
UNEP rapid response assessment.  United Nations 
Environment Programme, GRID-Arendal.  

 

NERC (National Environment Research Council (CEH 
(Center of Ecology and Hydrology))). 2012.    Hydro-
logical Summary for the United Kingdom.  Oxford-
shire,  UK. 

Neumayer, E. and Barthel, F.  2011.  Normalizing Eco-
nomic Loss from Natural Disasters: A Global Anal-
ysis.  Global environmental change, 21 (1): 13-24.  

NGI (Norwegian Geotechnical Institute).  2013a.  Tsu-
nami  Metodology  and  Results  Overview.    Back-
ground  Paper  prepared  for  the  2013  Global  As-
sessment  Report  on  Disaster  Risk  Reduction.  
Geneva,    Switzerland:  UNISDR.    http://www.pre-
ventionweb.net/gar

NGI  (Norwegian  Geotechnical  Institute).    2013b.  
Landslide Hazard and Risk Assessment in El Salva-
dor.    Background  Paper  prepared  for  the  2013 
Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduc-
tion.    Geneva,  Switzerland:  UNISDR.  http://www.
preventionweb.net/gar

Nguyen,  T.    2012.    Insurability  of  Catastrophe  Risks 
and  Government  Participation  in  Insurance  Solu-
tions.   Background  Paper  prepared  for  the  2013 
Global  Assessment  Report  on  Disaster  Risk  Re-
duction.    Geneva,    Switzerland:  UNISDR.    http://
www.preventionweb.net/gar

Nicholls,  R.,  Hanson,  J.,  Herweijer,  C.,  Patmore,  N., 
Hallegatte,  S.,  Corfee-Morlot,  J.,  Château,  J.  and 
Muir-Wood, R.  2008.  Ranking Port Cities with High 
Exposure  and  Vulnerability  to  Climate  Extremes: 
Exposure Estimates.  OECD Environment Working 
Papers,  No.1,  OECD  Publishing.    Paris,  France: 
OECD. 

ReferencesNomura Research Institute.   2011.  On the promotion 
of  policies toward disaster reconstruction (in Jap-
anese).    http://www.nri.co.jp/opinion/r_report/
pdf/201104_fukkou9.pdf 

Noy, I.  2009.  The macroeconomic consequences of 
disasters.  Journal of Development Economics,  88 
(2009): 221-231.  

OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development).  2007.  Infrastructure to 2030 vol.2: 
Mapping Policy for Electricity, Water and Transport.  
Paris, France: OECD. 

OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development).  2008.  Privatisation in the 21st Cen-
tury:  Recent  Experiences  of  OECD  Countries.    Re-
port on Good Practices.  Paris, France: OECD. 

OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development).    2009.    OECD  Territorial  Reviews: 
Trans-border Urban Co-operation in the Pan Yellow 
Sea Region.  Paris, France: OECD. 

OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development).    2011.    Future  Global  Shocks.  Im-
proving  Risk  Governance.    OECD  Review  of  Risk 
Management,  OECD  Territorial  Reviews.    Paris, 
France: OECD. 

OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development) and FAO (Food and Agriculture Or-
ganization).  2012.  OECD-FAO Agricultural Outlook 
2012-2021.  OECD Publishing and FAO.  Paris, 
France: OECD. 

OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development).  2012.  OECD Roundtable of Mayors 
and Ministers: Mobilising investments for urban sus-
tainability, job creation and resilient growth. Issue 
Paper.  Chicago, Illinois, USA. 

OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development).    2013.    Investment.    National  Ac-
counts at a Glance 2013.  Paris, France: OECD. 

Okazumi, T., Nakasu, T., Sugimoto, M.and Adakari, Y.  
2012.  Lessons Learnt from Two Unprecedented Di-
sasters in 2011: Great East Japan Earthquake and 
Tsunami in Japan and Chao Phraya River flood in 
Thailand.    Background  Paper  prepared  for  the 
2013 Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk 
Reduction.  Geneva,  Switzerland: UNISDR.  http://
www.preventionweb.net/gar

Ole MoiYoi, O.  2012.  Short- and Long-term Effects of 
Drought  on  Human  Health.    Background  Paper 
prepared for the 2013 Global Assessment Report 
on Disaster Risk Reduction. Geneva, Switzerland: 
UNISDR.    

Oliver  Wyman.    2008.    Corporate  Risk  Case  Study. 
City of Chicago Climate Change Task Force.  Oliver 
Wyman report.  

Onakuse, S. and Lenihan, E.  2007.  Policies,  pro-
grammes and sustainable development in  Nige-
ria: a critique.  Africana 2007 Vol.1: No.1, 41-58. 

Orie, M. and Stahel, W.R. 2012.   UNISDR Case Study 
Report.  Background Paper prepared for the 2013 
Global  Assessment  Report  on  Disaster  Risk  Re-
duction.    Geneva,  Switzerland:  UNISDR.    http://
www.preventionweb.net/gar

Orihuela, J.C.  2012.  Understanding Existing Method-
ologies for Allocating and Tracking DRR Resources 
in  6  Countries  in  the  Americas:  Colombia,  Costa 
Rica, Guatemala, Mexico, Panama and Peru.  Study 
commissioned by UNISDR.  Geneva, Switzerland: 
UNISDR.  http://www.preventionweb.net/gar

OSSO (Corporación OSSO).  2012a.  La Ruralidad, la 
Fragilidad  Urbana  y  el  Fenómeno  La  Niña  en  Co-
lombia,  1971-2011.    Background  Paper  prepared 
for the 2013 Global Assessment Report on Disas-
ter  Risk  Reduction.    Geneva,    Switzerland:  UNIS-
DR.  http://www.preventionweb.net/gar

OSSO (Corporación OSSO).  2012b.  Contribución al 
análisis de riesgos en el sector rural. El caso de Co-
lombia y la “Ola Invernal”.  Background Paper pre-
pared for the 2013 Global Assessment Report on 
Disaster  Risk  Reduction.    Geneva,    Switzerland: 
UNISDR.  http://www.preventionweb.net/gar

OSSO  (Corporación  OSSO).    2012c.    Patrones  en  la 
Configuración de Riesgos y Condiciones de Vulnera-
bilidad Asociados con la Ruptura de Diques en Co-
lombia.  Background Paper prepared for the 2013 
Global  Assessment  Report  on  Disaster  Risk  Re-
duction.    Geneva,    Switzerland:  UNISDR.    http://
www.preventionweb.net/gar

Parker, M. and Steenkamp, D.   2012.  The Economic 
Impact of the Canterbury Earthquakes.  Reserve 
Bank  of  New  Zeland,  Bulletin,  Vol.75.  No.3  Sep-
tember 2012. 

cclxxiii

Patra, J.   2012.  Coasts, Ports and Communities: The 
Emerging Dynamics of Investment-Risk Interactions 
in Odisha, India.  Background Paper prepared for 
the  2013  Global  Assessment  Report  on  Disaster 
Risk  Reduction.  Geneva,  Switzerland:  UNISDR. 
Coasts, Ports and Communities.  Odisha,  India. 

Pennington-Gray, L., Thapa, B., Kaplanidou, K., Ca-
hyanto, I. and McLaughlin, E.  2011.  Crisis Planning 
and  Preparedness  in  the  United  States  Tourism 
Industry.  Cornell Hospitality Quarterly, 52(3): 312-
320. 

Perch-Nielsen, S. L. 2009.  The vulnerability of beach 
tourism  to  climate  change.  An  index  approach.  
Climatic Change 100: 579–606.  

Petherick,  A.    2012.    Dirty  Money.    Nature  Climate 

Change Vol 2, February 2012: 72-73.   

Porter, M. and Kramer, M. 2006.  Strategy and soci-
ety. The link between competitive advantage and 
corporate social responsibility.  Harvard Business 
Review, 84(12): 78–85.  

Porter, M. and Kramer, M. 2011.  Creating shared val-

ue.  Harvard Business Review, 89(1/2): 62–77.  

Pretty, J. 2006.  Agro-ecological approaches to agri-
cultural development.  Background Paper for the 
World  Development  Report  2008.  Rimisp-Latin 
American Center for Rural Development contribu-
tion to 2008 WDR. 

PwC  (PricewaterhouseCoopers).    2008.    Infrastruc-
ture in India. A Vast Land of Construction Opportu-
nity.   London: PricewaterhouseCoopers 

PwC  (PricewaterhouseCoopers).    2012.    Risk  in  Re-
view: Rethinking Risk Management for New Market 
Realities.  March 2012.  London,  UK.   

PwC (PricewaterhouseCoopers).  2013.  UNISDR and 
PwC  –  Working  together  to  reduce  disaster  risks.  
Report prepared in the context of the 2013 Global 
Assessment  Report  on  Disaster  Risk  Reduction.  
Geneva,  Switzerland:  UNISDR.      http://www.pre-
ventionweb.net/gar   

Rabobank.    2011.    Country  Report  Thailand,  May 
2011.  Rabobank Economic Research Department.  
Utrecht, The Netherlands

Raisch, W., Statler, M. and Burgi, P.  2007.  Mobilizing 
Corporate  Resources  to  Disasters:  Toward  a  Pro-
gram for Action.   The  International  Center  for  En-

cclxxiv

terprise Preparedness, New York University.  
New York,  USA. 

Raisch, W.G.  2007.  A Missing Link Between Business 
Resilience & Incentives? A New U.S. Law and Corpo-
rate Preparedness.  http://www.nyu.edu/intercep/ 
A%20Missing%20Link%20Between%20Business 
%20Resilience%20%26%20Incentives.htm. 

Ranger, N. and Surminski, S.  2011. 

  A  preliminary 
evaluation of the impact of climate change on non-
life  insurance  demand  in  the  BRICS  economies.  
Working  Paper  n°72.    Centre  for  Climate  Change 
Economics and Policy.  Leeds and London, UK.

Ranger,  N.  and  Williamson,  S.      2011.    Forecasting 
non-life insurance demand in the BRICS economies: 
a preliminary evaluation of the impacts of income 
and climate change.   Working Paper n°70. Centre 
for Climate Change Economics and Policy.  Leeds 
and London,   UK. 

Renn, O.  2008.  Risk Governance.  Coping with Uncer-
tainty in a Complex World.  University of Stuttgart: 
Earthscan.

Ritter,  J.R.    2004.    Economic  growth  and  equity  re-

turns.  EFA 2005 Moscow Meetings.    

Rittichainuwat,  B.N.    2013.    Tourists’  and  Tourism 
Suppliers’  Perceptions  Toward  Crisis  Manage-
ment on Tsunami.  Tourism Management, Vol. 34 
(31 January 2013): 112-121. 

RMS  (Risk  Management  Solutions,Inc.).    2012.    Too 
Early to Calculate Reliable Loss Estimates for Hur-
ricane Sandy.  Risk Management Solutions, 21 No-
vember 2012.  London, UK.

Robinson,  L.  and  Jarvie,  J.K.    2008.    Post-disaster 
community  tourism  recover:  the  tsunami  and 
Arugam Bay, Sri Lanka.   Disasters, Vol 32 (4): 631-
645.

Rondinelli, D.A. and Cheema, G.S.  2003.  Reinventing 
government for the 21st Century. State Capacity in 
a  Globalising  Society.      Bloomfield,  CT  USA:  Ku-
marian Press. 

Rosa, D.  2012.  The Boxing Day tsunami and its ef-
  http://www.neu-

fects  on  Thailand’s  tourism. 
mann.edu/academics/divisions/business/jour-
nal/Review2012/Rosa.pdf

Roy, A. and Ong, A.   2011.  Worlding Cities. Asian Ex-
periments and the Art of Being Global.  Oxford,  UK: 

ReferencesBlackwells. 

Ruel,  MT.,  Garrett,  JL.,  Morris,  SS.,  Maxwell,  D.,  Os-
haug, A., Engle, P., Menon, P., Slack, A. and Had-
dad, L.  1998.  Urban challenges to food and nutri-
tion security: a review of food security, health, and 
caregiving  in  the  cities.    Food  Consumption  and 
Nutrition Division discussion paper no. 51.  Wash-
ington DC: International Food Policy Research In-
stitute.  

Saeijs and Van Berkel.  1995.  Global Water Crisis, the 
Major Issue of the 21st Century, a growing and ex-
plosive  problem.    European  Water  Pollution  Con-
trol, Vol. 5: Issue 4 (July 1995): 26-40. 

Sarmiento, J.P., Hoberman, G., Ilcheva, M., Asgari, A., 
Majano, A.M., Poggione, S. and Duran, L.R.  2012.  
Private  Sector  and  Disaster  Risk  Reduction:  The 
Cases of Bogota, Miami, Kingston, San Jose, Santia-
go  and  Vancouver.    Background  Paper  prepared 
for the 2013 Global Assessment Report on Disas-
ter Risk Reduction.  Geneva, Switzerland: UNISDR.  
http://www.preventionweb.net/gar

Scheyvens,  R.  and  Russell,  M.    2012.    Tourism  and 
poverty alleviation in Fiji: Comparing the impacts 
of  small  and  large-scale  tourism  enterprises.  
Journal of Sustainable Tourism, Vol 20, Nr. 3: 417-
436. 

Schoneveld, G.C.  2011.  The anatomy of large-scale 
farmland acquisitions in sub-Saharan Africa.  Work-
ing paper 85.  Bogor, Indonesia: CIFOR. 

Sekar,  N.U.  2000.    Decentralized  Natural  Resource 
Management:  From  State  to  Co-management  in 
India.   Journal  of  Environmental  Planning  and 
Management, 43(1): 123-138. 

Sen, A.  1981.  Poverty and Famine: An Essay on Enti-
tlement and Deprivation.  Oxford,  UK: Clarendon 
Press/Oxford University Press. 

Sengezer, B. and Koç, E.  2005.  A critical analysis of 
earthquakes and urban planning in Turkey.  Disas-
ters, 2005, 29 (2): 171-194. 

 

Simpson, M.C., Gössling, S., Scott, D., Hall, C.M. and 
Gladin, E.   2008. Climate Change Adaptation and 
Mitigation in the Tourism Sector: Frameworks, Tools 
and Practices.  UNEP, University of Oxford, UNW-
TO, WMO.  Paris,  France. 

Sirakaya,  E.,  Sheppard,  A.G.  and  McLellan,  R.W.  

1997.    Assessment  of  the  relationship  between 
perceived  safety  at  a  vacation  site  and  destina-
tion  choice  decisions:  extending  the  behavioral 
decision-making model.  Journal of Hospitality & 
Tourism Research, 1997, 21(1): 1-10. 

Skidmore  and  Toya.      2002.    Do  Natural  Disasters 
Promote Long-Run Growth?  Economic Inquiry 40: 
664-687. 

Smolka, M.O. and Sabatini, F.  2000.  The Land Mar-
ket Deregulation Debate in Chile.  Land Lines, Jan-
uary 2000, Vol.12, No.1.  

SOPAC (South Pacific Applied Geoscience Commis-
sion).  2010.  SOPAC Overview: Introduction to the 
Applied  Geoscience  and  Technology  Division. 
http://www.sopac.org/index.php/south-pacific-
applied-geoscience-commission

Spielman, D.J., Kelemwork, D. and Alemu, D.  2011.  
Seed, Fertilizer, and Agricultural Extension in Ethio-
pia.    Ethiopia  Strategy  Support  Programme  II 
Working  Paper  020  (March  2011).    Addis  Ababa 
and  Washington:  International  Food  Policy  Re-
search Institute.   

Sudmeier-Rieux,  K.,  Fra  Paleo,  U.,  Garschagen,  M., 
Estrella, M., Renaud, F.G. and Jaboyedoff, M.  2012.  
Opportunities,  Incentives  and  Challenges  to  Risk 
Sensitive Land Use Planning: Lessons from Nepal, 
Spain and Vietnam.  Background Paper prepared 
for the 2013 Global Assessment Report on Disas-
ter Risk Reduction.  Geneva, Switzerland: UNISDR.  
http://www.preventionweb.net/gar

Swiss Re. 2008.    Setting  up  sustainable  agricultural 
insurance: the case of China.   Focus Report.   Zu-
rich, Switzerland. 

Swiss Re. 2011a.    Economics  of  Climate  Adaptation 
(ECA)-Shaping  climate-resiliet  development. 
  A 
framework for decision-making.  A factsheet on urban 
resilience.  Zurich,  Switzerland.  http://proclimweb.
scnat.ch/portal/ressources/2611.pdf

Swiss Re. 2011b. Closing the financial gap. New part-
nerships between the public and private sectors 
to finance disaster risks. Zurich, Switzerland.

Takagi, H., Danh Thao, N., Esteban, M., Thu Tam, T., 
Knaepen, H.L., Mikami, T. and Yamamoto, L.  2012.  
Coastal  Disaster  Risk  in  Southern  Vietnam:  The 
Problems of Coastal Development and the Need for 

cclxxv

Better Coastal Planning.  Background Paper pre-
pared for the 2013 Global Assessment Report on 
Disaster  Risk  Reduction.    Geneva,  Switzerland: 
UNISDR. http://www.preventionweb.net/gar

TEEB (The Economics of Ecosystems and Biodiver-
sity).  2010.    Integrating  the  ecological  and  eco-
nomic dimensions in biodiversity and ecosystem 
service  valuation.    In:  Kumar,  P.  (ed.).  Ecological 
and Economic Foundations, TEEB Document.  Lon-
don: Earthscan. 

Thampanishvong,  K.    2012.    The  Case  of  Thailand.  
Background  Paper  prepared  for  the  2013  Global 
Assessment  Report  on  Disaster  Risk  Reduction.  
Geneva,    Switzerland:  UNISDR.    http://www.pre-
ventionweb.net/gar

Thomalla, F., Downing, T., Spanger-Siegfried, E., Han, 
G. and Rockström, J.   2006.  Reducing hazard vul-
nerability: towards a common approach between 
disaster  risk  reduction  and  climate  adaptation. 
Disasters, 2006, 30 (1): 39-48. 

Thompson, G.  2004.  Sanitation Partnerships in Ma-
puto,  Mozambique.  A  case  study.    Draft  report 
available via info@bpdws.org. Short version: BPD 
Water  and  Sanitation,  “Sanitation  Partnerships: 
Maputo Case Study”.  

Time.  2012.  Hurricane Sandy Estimated to Cost $60 
Billion.  Time Magazine, Business & Money, 31 Oc-
tober 2012. 

Toba, N.   2009.    Potential  Economic  Impacts  of  Cli-
mate Change in the Caribbean Community.  Latin 
America  and  Caribbean  Region  Sustainable  De-
velopment Working paper 32, “Assessing the Po-
tential  Consequences  of  Climate  Destabilization 
in  Latin  America”.  World  Bank.    Washington  DC. 
USA. 

UNCTAD (United Nations Conference on Trade and 
Development).  2005.  Improving the Competitive-
ness  of  SMEs  Through  Enhancing  Productive  Ca-
pacity.  United Nations.  New York and Geneva.

UNCTAD (United Nations Conference on Trade and 
Development).  2011.  Trade and Development Re-
port: 2011 Post-crisis Policy Challenges in the World 
Economy.  New York and Geneva. 

UNCTAD (United Nations Conference on Trade and 
Development).    2012.    World  Investment  Report 

cclxxvi

2012: Towards a New Generation of Investment Pol-
icies.   New York and Geneva. 

UNDESA (United Nations Department of Economic 
and  Social  Affairs).    2010.    Trends  in  Sustainable 
Development.  Small  Islands  Developing  States 
(SIDS).  United  Nations  publication.    New  York,  
USA. 

UNDESA (United Nations Department of Economic 
and Social Affairs).  2012.  World Urbanization Pros-
pects:  The  2011  Revision  Highlights.    United  Na-
tions publication.  New York,  USA.

UNDP  (United  Nations  Development  Programme)   
Informe nacional de desarrollo humano 2011.  Bo-
gotá,  Colombia.

UNDP  (United  Nations  Development  Programme).   
2004.   Reducing Disaster Risk, a Challenge for De-
velopment.   Bureau for Crisis Prevention and Re-
covery.   New York.  USA. 

UNDP (United Nations Development Programme).  
2012a.  A  Global  Review:  UNDP  Support  to  Institu-
tional  and  Legislative  Systems  for  Disaster  Risk 
Management.   UNDP.   New York,   USA. 

UNDP (United Nations Development Programme).  

2012b.  Issue Brief: Disaster Risk Governance. Crisis 
Prevention and Recovery.   UNDP.   New York,  USA.
UNDP  (United  Nations  Development  Programme).  
2013.    Small  Businesses:  Impact  of  Disasters  and 
Building Resilience.  Background Paper prepared 
for the 2013 Global Assessment Report on Disas-
ter Risk Reduction.   Geneva,  Switzerland: UNIS-
DR.  http://www.preventionweb.net/gar

UNEP  (United  Nations  Environment  Programme).  
2008.  Coastal Degradation Leaves the Caribbean 
in Troubled Waters.  Environment Alert Bulletin 11. 
February  2008.  UNEP-DEWA  /  GRID-Europe.    Ge-
neva, Switzerland. 

UNEP  FI  (United  Nations  Environment  Programme 
Financial Initiative).  2002.  Climate Change & the 
Financial Services Industry. Module 1 – Threats and 
Opportunities.  Report prepared for the UNEP Fi-
nance  Initiatives  Climate  Change  Working  Group 
by Innovest SVA. 

UNEP  FI  (United  Nations  Environment  Programme 
Financial Initiative).  2007.  Carbon Crunch. Meeting 
the  Cost.    Recommendations  for  Policy  Makers.  

ReferencesCEObreefing  series,  December  2007.    Geneva, 
Switzerland.

UNEP  FI  (United  Nations  Environment  Programme 
Finance Initiative) and PRI (Principles for Respon-
sible Investment).  2011.  Universal Ownership. Why 
environmental externalities matter to institutional 
investors.  Geneva , Switzerland: UNEP Finance Ini-
tiative and Principles for Responsible Investment.  
UNEP-SOPAC  (United  Nations  Environment  Pro-
gramme-South Pacific Applied Geoscience Com-
mission).   2005.  Building Resilience in SIDS: The 
Environment  Vulnerability  Index.    Nairobi,  Kenya 
and Suva, Fiji: UNEP and SOPAC.

UN-HABITAT  (United  Nations  Human  Settlements 
Programme).    2012.    State  of  the  World’s  Cities 
2012/2013: Prosperity of Cities. Nairobi,  Kenya.

UNISDR.  2007.    Hyogo  Framework  for  Action  2005-
2015. Building the Resilience of Nations and Com-
munities to Disasters.  Extract from the final report 
of  the  World  Conference  on  Disaster  Reduction 
(A/CONF.206/6).  United  Nations 
International 
Strategy for Disaster Reduction. Geneva, Switzer-
land: UNISDR.

UNISDR.  2009.  Global Assessment Report on Disas-
ter Risk Reduction: Risk and poverty in a changing 
climate.  United Nations International Strategy for 
Disaster  Reduction.    Geneva,  Switzerland:  UNIS-
DR. http://www.preventionweb.net/gar

UNISDR.  2011.  Global Assessment Report on Disas-
ter Risk Reduction: Revealing Risk, Redefining De-
velopment.  United Nations International Strategy 
for  Disaster  Reduction.    Geneva,    Switzerland: 
UNISDR.  http://www.preventionweb.net/gar

UNISDR.  2012.  City Resilience in Africa: A Ten Essen-
tials Pilot.  United Nations International Strategy 
for  Disaster  Reduction.    Geneva,    Switzerland: 
UNISDR. http://www.preventionweb.net/gar

United  Nations  Secretary  General.    2012.    Resilient 

People, Resilient Planet: A future worth choosing.  
United Nations. High Level Panel on Global Sus-
tainability.  New York 

 

United Nations.  2010.  Shanghai Manual. A guide for 
sustainable urban development in the 21st Century. 
Case Study – Disaster Risk Management, Mumbai, 
India.   United  Nations  Bureau  International  des 

Expositions, Shanghai 2010 World Exposition Ex-
ecutive Committee.

UNU-IHDP  (United  Nations  University-International 
Human  Dimensions  Programme  on  Global  Envi-
ronmental Change) and UNEP (United Nations En-
vironmental Programme).  2012.    Inclusive  Wealth 
Report 2012: Measuring Progress Toward Sustain-
ability.   Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

UNWTO (World Tourism Organization).  2011.  Com-
pendium  of  Tourism  Statistics  Data  2006-2010.  
2011 Edition. 

UNWTO (World Tourism Organization).  2012.  Chal-
lenges and Opportunities for Tourism Development 
in Small Island Developing States.  Madrid, Spain.

UNWTO  (World  Tourism  Organization)  and  UNEP 
(United Nations Environement Programme).  2008.  
Climate Change and Tourism – Responding to Global 
Challenges.  Madrid, Spain.  

Van  Baars,  S.  and  Van  Kempen,  I.M.    2009.    The 
causes and mechanisms of Historical Dike Failures 
in the Netherlands.  Official Publication of the Eu-
ropean Water Association (EWA).  Delft University 
of Technology.  Delft, The Netherlands.

Van der Veen, A. and Logtmeijer, C.  2005.  Economic 
hotspots:  visualising  vulnerability  to  flooding.   
Natural Hazards (2005), 36: pp. 65-80. 

Vella, J.  2012.  The Future of Food and Water Security 

in New Egypt.  Future Directions International.  
Dalkeith,   Australia. 

Vitez, O.   2013.  The Effects of Disasters on Large vs. 
Small Businesses.  The Houston Chronicle. Hearst 
Communications Inc.  http://smallbusiness.chron.
com/effects-disaster-large-vs-small-business-
es-881.html. 

Wang,  Z.,  Lin,  T.  and  Walker,  G.    2009.    Earthquake 
Risk and Earthquake Catastrophe Insurance for the 
People’s Republic of China.  Sustainable Develop-
ment Working Paper Series, No. 7.  Manila: Asian 
Development Bank. 

 

WAVES.    2012.    Moving  beyond  GDP.  How  to  factor 
natural  capital  into  economic  decision  making.  
WAVES  Partnership,  June  1012. 
  Washington: 
World Bank 

WBCSD (World Business Council for Sustainable De-
velopment).   2005.  Facts and trends: water.  Ge-

cclxxvii

neva,   Switzerland. 

WCMA.  2012.  ILS Market Update. Strong Momentum 
Continues Into 2012 Hurrican Season.  Willis Capital 
Markets & Advisory, July 2012. 

Webb, P., Coates, J., Frongillo, E.A., Rogers, B., Swin-
dale, A. and Bilinsky, P.  2006.  Measuring house-
hold food insecurity: why it’s so important and yet 
so difficult to do.  The Journal of Nutrition 136(5): 
1404S–1408S. 

Wedawatta, G., Ingirige, B. and Amaratunga, D.  2010.  
Building up resilience of construction sector SMEs 
and  their  supply  chains  to  extreme  weather 
events.  International Journal of Strategic Property 
Management  Vol.14: 362-375.

WEF (World Economic Forum).  2008.  Convergence 
of Insurance and Capital Markets.  World Economic 
Forum in collaboration with Allianz, Barclays Cap-
ital, Deloitte, State Farm, Swiss Re, Thomson Re-
uters,  Zurich  Financial  Services.    New  York  and 
Geneva: World Economic Forum. 

WEF (World Economic Forum).  2011.  The Travel and 
Tourism Competitiveness Report 2011: Beyond the 
Downturn.  World Economic Forum.  Geneva,  
Switzerland. 

WEF  (World  Economic  Forum).    2012.    The  Global 
Competitiveness Report 2012-2013.  World Economic 
Forum.  Geneva,  Switzerland. 

White, C. and Fan, M.  2006.  Risk and Foreign Direct 
Investment.  Palgrave MacMillan.  Basingstoke, UK.
Williams, R.  2012.  The Rolling Apocalypse of Con-
temporary  History.    Chapter  1.  In:  Castells  et  al. 
(eds.). Aftermath. The Cultures of the Economic Cri-
sis.  Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.  

WMO  (World  Meteorological  Organization).    2005.  
Climate and Land Degradation.  WMO n°. 989.  Ge-
neva, Switzerland. 

WMO  (World  Meteorological  Organization).    2011.  
The State of Greenhouse Gases in the Atmosphere 
Based  on  the  Global  Observations  through  2010.  
Greenhouse Gas Bulletin.  Geneva,   Switzerland. 
WMO  (World  Meteorological  Organization).    2012.  
WMO Provisional Statement on the State of Global 
Climate in 2012.   Geneva,  Switzerland.  

World  Bank  and  UNISDR.    2010.    Southeastern  Eu-
rope Disaster Risk Mitigation and Adaptation Pro-

cclxxviii

gramme. At a glance.   Washington and Brussels: 
World Bank and UNISDR. 

World Bank.  1998.  Export processing zones.  PremNotes 
Economic  Policy  No.11.    Washington  DC:  World 
Bank.    http://www1.worldbank.org/prem/PREM-
Notes/premnote11.pdf 

World Bank.  2004.  Grenada,  Hurricane  Ivan  Prelimi-
nary  Assessment  of  Damage,September  17,  2004.  
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTDISMG-
MT/Resources/grenada_assessment.pdf 

World Bank.  2005.  Natural Disaster Hotspots: A Glob-

al Risk Analysis. Washington DC: World Bank.

World Bank.  2008a.  Rethinking Infrastructure for De-
velopment.    Annual  World  Bank  Conference  on 
Development  Economics  Global  2007.    Washing-
ton DC: World Bank. 

World Bank.  2008b.  World Development Report 2008: 
  Washington  DC: 

Agriculture  for  Development. 
World Bank .

World Bank.  2010.  Economics of Adaptation to Cli-
mate  Change.    Synthesis  Report.    Washington: 
IBRD and World Bank. 

World Bank.  2011.  The changing Wealth of Nations : 
Measuring  Sustainable  Development  in  the  New 
Millennium.  Washington DC 

World Bank.  2012a.  World Development Report 2013: 

Jobs.  Washington DC: World Bank 

World Bank.  2012b.  The Sendai Report. Managing 
Disaster Risks for a Resilient Future.   Government 
of Japan, GFDRR and World Bank.  Washington DC 
World  Bank,  ADB  (Asian  Development  Bank),  UN 
System. 2005.  Republic of Maldives, Tsunami: Im-
pact and Recovery.  Joint Needs Assessment.

Worldwatch Institute.  2012.  Losses from Natural Di-
sasters  Reach  Peak  in  2011.    http://www.world-
watch.org/losses-natural-disasters-reach-new-
peak-2011.

Worrell,  E.,  Bernstein,  L.,  Roy,  J.,  Price,  L.  and  Har-
nish, J.  2009.  Industrial energy efficiency and cli-
mate change mitigation.  Energy Efficiency (2009) 
2: 109-123.  

Wright, N.  2013.  Small Island Developing States, di-
saster risk management, disaster risk reduction, cli-
mate change adaptation and tourism.  Background 
Paper  prepared  for  the  2013  Global  Assessment 

ReferencesReport on Disaster Risk Reduction.  Geneva, Swit-
zerland: UNISDR.  http://www.preventionweb.net/
gar

WTO (World Trade Organization).  2011.  World Trade 
Report 2011: The WTO and preferential trade agree-
ments:  From  co-existence  to  coherence.    Geneva, 
Switzerland. 

WTTC  (World  Travel  and  Tourism  Council).    2012.  
Travel  and  Tourism  Economic  Impact  2012.    Lon-
don,  UK. 

Ye, L. and Abe, M.  2012.  The Impacts of Natural Di-
sasters on Global Supply Chains.  Asia-Pacific Re-
search  and  Training  Network  on  Trade.  ARTNeT 
Working Paper Series N°.115 / June 2012. ESCAP.  
Bangkok,  Thailand. 

Yönder, A. and Türkoğlu, H.  2010.  Post 1999 Develop-
ments in Disaster Management in Turkey: The Reg-
ulatory  Frameworks  and  Implementation  of  Land 
Use  Planning  for  Disaster  Risk  Reduction  in  Istan-
bul.  Case study prepared for 2011 Global Assess-
ment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction.  Geneva,  
Switzerland: UNISDR. http://www.preventionweb.
net/gar

Yumkella,  K.,  Kormawa,  P.,  Roepstorff,  T.  and 
Hawkins,  A.    2011.    Agribusiness  for  Africa’s  Pros-
perity.  Vienna, Austria: UNIDO.

Zhang, X., Song, H. and Huang, G.Q. 2009.  Tourism 
Supply  Chain  Management:  A  New  Research 
Agenda.  Tourism Management 30: 345-358.

Zheng,  W.,  Yongdong,  L.  and  Dickinson,  G.      2008.  
The  Chinese  Insurance  Market:  Estimating  its 
Long-Term Growth and Size.  The Geneva Papers 
on Risk and Insurance, 33: 489-506. 

cclxxix

Colombia   

 

 

28, 29, 35, 69, 70, 76, 80, 81, 82, 94, 133, 189, 

222, 225, 227, 230, ccl, ccliii, ccliv

88, ccliii

65, 76, 150, ccliii

 

29, 33, 35, 76, 189, 218, 224, 225, ccl, ccli, cclii, 

ccliii, cclv

ccliii, ccliv

88

88, ccliii
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

50, 64, 65, 88, 94, 95, 160, 200, 220, 231, 233, 

ccli, cclii, ccliii, ccliv, cclv, cclvi, cclxv, cclxxvii

D
Democratic Republic of  

88 

 

ccli, cclv
 
 
222, ccliii

 
 

 

 
 

 

 

the Congo

Djibouti  

Dominica  

Dominican Republic  

xviii, 72, 76, 88, ccliii

88, 106

80, ccliii

Index

UN list of country names and territories
A
Albania  

88

Algeria  

Americas   

88, cclv 

iv, v, xviii, 29,184, 228, cclxxiii

American Samoa  

65, 76, 107

Angola  

Anguilla  

88

88, 150, 222, ccliii

Antigua and Barbuda  

88, 

88, 156, ccliii

ccliii

88

Argentina  

Armenia  

Aruba  

Australia    

 

 

 

 

 

Austria  

B
Bahrain  

Bangladesh  

Barbados  

Belarus  

Belgium  

Belize  

Bhutan  

Bolivia  

48, 126, 127, 129, 212, 230, ccliii

109, 143, ccl, ccliii

ccliii

40, 88, 104

61, 88

80, 138, 139

76, 88, ccliii

Bolivia (Plurinational State of)  

76, 88

Bosnia and Herzegovina 

96

Brazil  

British Virgin Islands  

88, ccliii

Brunei Darussalam  

Bulgaria  

Burkina Faso  

Burundi  

C
Cambodia  

Canada   

 

 

Cape Verde  

Cayman Islands  

88

ccliii

212, ccliii

88

ccliii, cclx

viii, 35, 159, 189, 194, 220, 230, cclii, ccliii 

69, 88, 143

88, 106, cclx 

Central African Republic  

88

 

 

 

Comoros  

Cook Islands  

Costa Rica   

 

 

Croatia  

Cuba 

Czech Republic  

E
East Timor  

Ecuador  

Egypt  

El Salvador  

Ethiopia     

 

 

 

 

F
Fiji     

Finland  

France  

 

 

 

French Polynesia  

G
Georgia  

Germany  

Ghana  

Gibraltar  

Greece  

Grenada  

76

76, 88, 138, cclii, ccliii

164, 165, cclxxvii

71, 76, 81, 88, ccli, cclii, ccliii

 

vii, xviii, 72, 76, 88, 98, 102, 161, 162, 165, 167, 

212, 225, 226, ccl, ccliii

 

 

 

 

 

 

76, 113, 144, 145, 147, 148, 149, 150, ccliii

ccliii

ii, 182, 206, ccli, ccliii, cclv

64, 76, 88
 

 

 

 

65, 88, ccli, ccliii

31, 88, 186, 213, ccli, ccliii, ccliv 

69, 88, 161, 162, ccli, ccliii

88

88, 98, ccliii

88, 144, 147

61, 88, 106

65, 76

35, 128, 189, ccliii, cclxxv 

Guadeloupe  

iv, vi, 30, 31, 35, 44, 48, 56, 57, 58, 61, 62, 63, 80, 

Guam  

81,  88,  104,  123,  142,  158,  174,  202,  204,  213, 

Guatemala     

 

75, 76, 88, 218, 220, ccliii, Guyana  xviii, 72, 76, 

216, 217, 221, ccli, ccliii

 

88, ccliii

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Chile  

China   

 

 

 

 

cclxxx

IndexH
Haiti  

Honduras   

 

Hong Kong  

Hungary  

I
Iceland  

India   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Indonesia   

 

 

 

 

Iran  

Iraq  

Ireland  

Israel  

Italy   

 

 

J
Jamaica  

Japan 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Jordan  

 

 

 

 

K
Kazakhstan  

 

 

Kenya   

 

 

Kiribati  

 

 

 

 

 

Korea, Republic of  

L
Lao People’s  

Democratic Republic  

Lebanon  

Lesotho  

Liberia  

Libya  

Liechtenstein  

xviii, 72, 73, 74, 76, 88, ccliii, cclxx, cclxxxi   

xviii, 72, 73, 74, 76, cclii, ccliii, cclv

213, ccliii

161, 162

88

88

M
Macao (Special Administrative 

Region of China)  

62 

 

 

 

Macedonia (The former 

 

98, ccliv, cclxxxi 

Yugoslav Republic of) 

Madagascar    

46, 83, 84, 87, 161, 162, cclxvii

46, 57, 58, 88, 195

v, xviii, 72, 73, 75, 76, 81, 82, 83, 85, 87, 88, ccliii

57, 58, 61, 63, 88, 104, 216

 

 

 

ccliii

 

 

30

iv, vii, 30, 48, 65, 87, 94, 123, 131, 134, 142, 158, 

164, 170, 174, 213, 217, 218, 219, 222, ccl, ccli, 

cclii, ccliii, cclv

30, 62, 64, 88, 166, 195, 218, 221, 222, 231, 233, ccliii

56, 57, 58, 88, ccliii, ccliv

88

63, 88, ccliii

ccliv

88, 98, 118, 129, ccl, ccli, cclii, ccliii, ccliv, cclv

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

xviii, 

35, 72, 76, 111, 112, 189, ccliii

ii, iii, iv, vii, xv, xx, 23, 24, 25, 26, 30, 31, 32, 33, 35, 

48, 50, 52, 55, 56, 57, 61, 62, 63, 64, 81, 87, 133, 

135, 183, 189, 196, 201, 204, 217, 220, 228, 229, 

235, ccl, ccliii, ccliv, cclv, cclvi

 

 

 

 

ccliii
 

 

156, ccliii

 

 

 

 

 

Malawi  

Malaysia  

Maldives  

Mali  

Mariana Islands  

Marshall Islands  

Martinique  

Mauritius  

Mayotte     

Mexico   

 

 

 

 

 

 

Micronesia  

Monaco  

Mongolia  

Montenegro  

Morocco     

 

Mozambique   

 

Myanmar  
 
N
Namibia  

Nauru  

Nepal  

Netherlands  

New Caledonia   

New Zealand   

Nicaragua  

88, 98, 167, ccliii

30, 35, 88, ccliii

63, 106, 107, 143, 144, 147, 149, ccliii

xviii, 72, 76, 88, 100, 161, ccliv

65, 76, 

76, 227, ccliii, 

61, 88, 

230, ccliii

88

 

viii, 61, 75, 80 - 82, 85, 88, 91, 159, 184, 204, 206, 

218, 220 -  222, 226, 227, ccl-cclv 

76, 88, 104, ccliii, 

88, ccliii, 

88, 

88, 

ccliii, 

v, 69, 73, 78, 81, 88, 98, 102, 103, 161, ccliv

88, 213, ccliii, 

 

 

 

 

 

 

88, 225

65, 76, ccliii

85, 88, cclii, ccliv

65, 133, 140, 203, ccliii

76, 88

iii, viii, 30, 32, 33, 50, 139, 203, 204, ccli- ccliii

xviii, 72, 76, 81, 88, ccliv

 

xviii,  69,  72,  76,  97,  98,  99,  100,  102,  166,  167, 

Niger  

88, 98, 102 - 104, 166, 167, ccliii

168, 195, ccli, cclii, ccliii, ccliv, cclv

76, ccliii, cclxxxi

24, 88, 139, ccliii

Nigeria  

Niue  

93, 127, 166

65, 76, 213, ccliii

Northern Mariana Islands  

65, 76

Norway  

2, 204, ccli - ccliii, cclvi

O
Oman  

P
Pakistan  

Palau  

 

 

 

 

 

 

63, 88

iii, 26, 87, 94, 213, ccliii

76, 88, ccliii

Panama     

 

 

88, 134, 135, 140, 218, 220, 224, 233, cclii, ccliii, 

ccliv

Papua New Guinea  

56, 76, 88, 212, ccliii, 

 

 

 

 

Peru   

 

 

Philippines     

Pitcairn Islands  

Poland  

76, 218, 222, 224, 225, ccliii, cclxxiii, 

30, 52, 56, 57, 61, 80, 85, 87, 218, 221, 231

76

ccliii

cclxxxi

Portugal  

Puerto Rico  

R
Réunion  

Romania  

98, ccliii

52, 61, 88, 104, 109 

88

65, ccliii

Tuvalu  

U
Uganda   

Ukraine  

 

 

 

 

76, ccliii
 
 
xviii, 72, 73, 76, 98, 100, 104, ccliii, ccliv

 
 

 
 

 

88, 156

United Arab Emirates  

88

Russian Federation  

88, 156, 159, 160, ccliv

United Kingdom of Great 

 

30, 63, 88, 129, 130, 134, 197, ccl, ccli, ccliii 

Rwanda  

88, 212, ccliii

S
Saint Kitts and Nevis  

Saint Lucia  

Samoa  

San Marino  

Sao Tome and Principe  

Saudi Arabia  

Senegal  

Serbia  

Sierra Leone  

Slovenia  

ccliii

88

61, 76, 88, 106, 107, 144, ccliii

88

88

88

69, 88, 222, cclii

88, 98, 128, ccliii

46

ccliii

Solomon Islands  

57, 63, 76, 88, 106, 107, 110, ccliii

South Africa  

South Sudan  

Spain  

Sri Lanka  

State of Palestine  

Sudan  

Suriname  

Swaziland  

Sweden  

198

161

57, 58, 88, 98, 101, ccl

76, 145, 220, ccliii, ccliv

212, ccliii

88, 98, 161

88

88

88, 139, 194, 220, ccliii

Switzerland  

ii, 31, 88, 222, ccl - ccliii, cclv 

Syrian Arab Republic  

88, 102, ccl, ccliv

Britain and Northern Ireland 

 

United Republic of Tanzania  

69, 88, ccliii 

United States of America    

xv, 27, 30, 35, 44, 48, 52, 56, 57, 61, 63, 64, 81, 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

87, 88, 94, 95, 127, 137, 144, 148, 158 - 160, 166, 

189, 192, 194, 201, 206, 219, 222, 225, 229, 230, 

236, ccliii, cclvi

United States Virgin Islands  

88

Uruguay  

Uzbekistan  

V
Vanuatu  

Venezuela  

Viet Nam  

xviii, 72, 76, 88, 213, ccliii, ccliv

88

56, 76, 88, 106, 225, ccliii

76, 88, ccliv

72, 76, 88, 128, 146, 147, ccliv

W
Wallis and Futuna Islands  

76

Y
Yemen  

Z
Zambia  

Zimbabwe  

88, ccliv

161

88

T
Taiwan (Province of China), 

Tajikistan  

Thailand    

 

 

 

 

 

Timor-Leste  

Togo

Tokelau  

Tonga  

ccliii

65, 76

76, 88, 107, 110, 150, ccliii

Trinidad and Tobago  

111, ccliii

Tunisia  

Turkey  

88

88, 98, 129, ccliii

Turkmenistan  

88

Turks and Caicos Islands  

88, 106, ccliii

cclxxxii

88, cclv

88

agribusiness   

 

 

 

 

 

vii, xix, 34, 50, 90, 94, 104, 118, 119, 151-154, 

160, 162-165, 168, 170-173, 197, 240

 

iii, vi, xv, 25, 30, 31, 33, 35, 49, 50, 54, 149, 165, 

annual average loss (AAL) 

 

53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 75, 76, 79, 80, 81, 

195 - 198, 204, 214 - 216, 222, 235, cclii

 

 

 

 

98, 106, 107, 108, 109, 110, 113, 122, 217, ccxlix

xviii, 65, 72, 76, ccliv

business continuity 

v, ix, 183-187, 189, 200, 204, 239, ccxlix

capital stock  

climate change 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

25, 35, 39, 42, 45, 52, 63, 80, 81, 114, 236, ccxl-

viii, ccxlix

iii, xiii, xv, xvii, 48, 49, 50, 90-92, 100, 101, 106, 109, 

112, 113, 130, 135, 136, 138, 143, 162, 163, 165, 186, 

193, 195, 197, 203, 221, 225, 236, 243-245, ccxlviii

corrective risk management

222, 224, 225, ccxlix

cyclone wind (see also 

v, vii, 45, 52, 58-61, 65, 79, 80, 81, 91, 92,  106, 

cyclonic wind) 

107, 109-111, 122

IndexDisaster Deficit Index (DDI) 

84, 85 

 

 

 

probability 

  

iv, 23-30, 34, 35, 38, 39, 78, 86, 87, 90, 102, 109, 

118,  136,  139,  143,  144,  162,  185,  221,  232, 

produced capital 

ccxlviii

v, vii, 34, 35, 39, 68, 90-92, 94, 97-104, 109, 152, 

prospective (disaster) risk 

159-167, 170, 172, 194, 195, 197, 218, 221, 227, 

management  

direct losses     

 

 

drought 

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

earthquake 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

extensive risk 

financing gap 

flood 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

49, 52, 53, 57, 62, 64, 78, 98, 102-104, 130, 195, 

207, 226, ccxlviii, ccxlix

42-47, 52, 53, 55-58, 60-63, 65, 69, 80, 90, 93, 

94, 106-109, 111, 122, 148, ccxlix

188, 210, 218, 220,  224, 225, 228, 229, 230, ccxlix 

 

vi-ix, xv-xix, 29, 34, 39, 49, 69, 77-81, 106, 109, 

112, 114, 124, 135, 138, 142, 148, 149, 152, 160, 

166, 168-173, 178, 179, 183, 195, 200, 220, 225, 

226, 228, 230, 232, 235-237, 239, 240, 245, 246, 

ccxlviii

45, 53, 55, 58-60, 62-65, 68, 71, 75, 80, 83, 84, 

98, 108, 109, 114, 125, 130, 131, 133, 147, 150, 

ccxlix

78, 82, 84, 202, 219, 224, 226, 227

viii, ix, xiv, 135, 177, 179, 182, 186, 202, 209, 210, 

236, ccxlviii

iii-vii, xv, xvi, 23-26, 30-34, 39, 42, 44, 46, 47, 52, 

53, 55-58, 61, 62, 64, 79-81, 85, 106-113, 118, 

122, 131, 132, 135, 137, 139, 183, 187, 189, 198, 

201-204, 206, 207, 222, 227-229, 231, 232, 235, 

  

236, ccxlviii, ccxlix

economic resilience 

78, 81, 106, 109, 112, 138 

resilience    

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

return period    

 

 

 

 

risk financing   

26, 34, 39, 68-76, 122, 133 179, 235, ccxlviii

v, 81-86, 112, 226

iii, v, vi, xv, xviii, 24-28, 30, 31, 33, 34, 39, 44-46, 

risk governance 

48-50,  54,  55,  58,  65,  68,  69,  83,  85,  91,  106-

 

 

 

 

216, 217, 228-230, 238, 242, 243, ccxlix

109,  114,  127-140,  144-147,  160,  162,  164,165, 

Risk Reduction Index (RRI)  

46, 93, 104

169, 170, 178, 186, 187, 195-198, 200-204, 206, 

risk transfer 

 

xvi, 49, 82, 90, 91, 113, 131, 165, 219, 224

215-218, 220, 221, 225, 232, 233, 235, 236, 245, 

Special Economic Zone (SEZ)  

vi, 216, 242

ccxlviii

food security   

90, 119, 151-153, 156, 163, 165-169

shared risk 

 

 

 

 

 

foreign direct Investment (FDI)

xix, 33, 43, 44, 196, 204, 214-217, 238, 245, 246

shared value   

global risk model 

   
iii,  xvii,  34,  39,  45,  52-60,  63,  79,  80,  106-108, 

110, 111, 241

small and medium 

gross capital fixed formation 

xiv, xx, 25, 35, 65, 75, 76, 78, 79, 81, 86, 88, 110, 

enterprise (SME)   

111, 217, ccxlix

Hyogo Framework for Action 

xiii,  xiv,  xviii,  46,  129,  150,  153,  210-214,  217-

(HFA)  

 

hidden risks   

indirect losses 

 

 

 

 

intangible capital 

intensive risk   

 

 

222, 224-226, 228, 230, 231, 243, 246

vi, 41, 192-194, 197, 235

23-27, 29, 30, 33, 35, 39, 52, 56, 69, 76, 78, 86, 

102, 109, 143, 144, 185, 221

42, 245, ccxlix

tourism 

  

 

toxic assets 

tsunami 

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

underlying risk drivers 

51, 52, 68, 73, 75, 122, 125, 133, 204, 206, ccxl-

urban development 

viii

 

 

 

 

land degradation 

v, 33, 39, 90, 94, 96, 98, 101, 102, 158, 162, 163

urban produced capital 

landslide 

 

 

v,  xv, 25, 39, 68, 69, 71, 129, 198, 227, ccxlviii

macroeconomic effects 

23, 24, 35, 56, 78, 86, 88, ccxlviii 

Millennium Development 

xiii, xx, 114, 133 

 

 

Goals (MDGs) 

national revenue 

80, 88

natural capital 

  

v, 34, 39, 42, 88, 89-98, 101, 102, 104, 162, 163, 

171, 198, 216, 244, 245, ccxlix

value chain 

 

virtual water 

vulnerability  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

xv, xvi, xix, 49, 50, 90, 91, 118, 126, 127, 133-135, 

179, 185, 194, 235, 236, 239, 243-245

xiii, xv-xvii, xix, 34, 50, 119, 170, 171, 178, 179, 

235, 239, 245, 246

25, 26, 28, 31-34,49, 76, 118, 130, 145, 184, 186, 

189, 230, 240, 243   

vii, xix, 34, 35, 44, 109, 118, 142 - 150, 162, 215, 

240, 245

v, 235, 236

iii, iv, xvi, 24, 25, 30 - 34, 39, 42, 44, 52, 55, 61 - 

65, 106 - 108, 113, 114, 122, 133, 139, 143 - 145, 

147, 149, 150, 198, 204, 206, 236, ccxlviii, ccxlix

xiii, xiv, xvii, 46, 68, 163, 213, 239, ccxlviii

xv, xix, 34, 43, 46, 49, 50, 68, 92, 118, 122 - 131, 

133 - 135, 139, 162, 221, 225, 229, 236, 240, 245

52,  53,  55  -  58,  60,  61,  63,  65,  106  -  109,  122, 

ccxlix

119, 153, 154, 170, 192, 193

164, 174

xvii, 30, 42, 45, 46 - 48, 50, 52, 53, 54, 56, 57, 58, 

61, 63, 68, 69, 80, 83, 85, 90, 92, 112, 113, 119, 

136, 142, 143, 150, 166, 167, 170, 183, 186, 202, 

221, 227 - 232, 236, 238, 240, ccxlviii

cclxxxiii

probable maximum loss 

52, 53, 54, 57, 58, 60, 61, 80, 85, 107, 233, ccxlix 

water risks 

(PML)   

wider impacts 

23, 24, 31, 33, 35, 78, 87, 144, 200, ccxlviii

public-private partnership  

133, 134, 139, 140, 162, 170, 182, 201, 203-205, 

wild (land) fires 

v, 34, 39, 68, 90 - 92, 94 - 97, 102

(PPP) 

  

227-230 232, 243

cclxxxiii

GAR2013 products

• The Pocket GAR provides the main evidence and messages of the report in a concise, easy-to-
use format.
•  The  main  report  contains  enhanced  content  links  which  provide  access  to  dynamic  maps, 
videos, photos, and case studies for users with smartphones and tablets. 
• Tablet computer and smartphone users can also enjoy the GAR for Tangible Earth (GfT) free 
application.  GfT,  or  “gift”,  is  a  fully  interactive  stand-alone  application,  which  features  a  3D 
globe interface that contains decades of dynamic earth science data sets, including disaster 
events from all GARs. These data sets are illustrated with interactive risk scenarios, maps, and 
photos  and  are  searchable  by  time  (including  real-time),  place,  risk  driver,  hazard,  disaster 
event, and more. 
• GAR2013 is also available as a fully interactive web version, with much of the functionality 
available in products such as: 

The main report (PDF) in French, Spanish and Arabic
Interactive main report in English
Appendices
Background papers
Interim national progress reports on the implementation of the Hyogo Framework 
for Action
Access to disaster loss and risk databases
All GAR2013 products can be accessed via:

www.preventionweb.net/gar/

