STATE OF THE
WORLD’S CITIES

2012/2013

Prosperity of Cities

The City is the Home of Prosperity. It is the place where human beings find satisfaction of basic needs 
The City is the Home of Prosperity. It is the place where human beings find satisfaction of basic needs 
and access to essential public goods. The city is also where ambitions, aspirations and other material 
and access to essential public goods. The city is also where ambitions, aspirations and other material 

and immaterial aspects of life are realized, providing contentment and happiness. It is a locus at 
and immaterial aspects of life are realized, providing contentment and happiness. It is a locus at 

which e prospects of prosperity and individual and collective well-being can be increased.
which e prospects of prosperity and individual and collective well-being can be increased.

However, when prosperity is restricted to some groups, when it is used to pursue specific interests, or 
However, when prosperity is restricted to some groups, when it is used to pursue specific interests, or 
when it is a justification for financial gains for the few to the detriment of the majority, the city becomes 
when it is a justification for financial gains for the few to the detriment of the majority, the city becomes 

the arena where the right to shared prosperity is claimed and fought for. As people in the latter part 
the arena where the right to shared prosperity is claimed and fought for. As people in the latter part 
of 2011 gathered in Cairo’s Tahrir Square, in Madrid’s Puerta del Sol, in front of London’s St Paul’s 
of 2011 gathered in Cairo’s Tahrir Square, in Madrid’s Puerta del Sol, in front of London’s St Paul’s 

cathedral, or in New York’s Zuccotti Park, they were not only demanding more equality and inclusion; 
cathedral, or in New York’s Zuccotti Park, they were not only demanding more equality and inclusion; 

they were also expressing the need for prosperity to be shared across all segments of society.
they were also expressing the need for prosperity to be shared across all segments of society.

What this new edition of State of the World’s Cities shows is that prosperity for all has been 
What this new edition of State of the World’s Cities shows is that prosperity for all has been 

compromised by a narrow focus on economic growth. UN-Habitat suggests a fresh approach to 
compromised by a narrow focus on economic growth. UN-Habitat suggests a fresh approach to 

prosperity beyond the solely economic emphasis, including other vital dimensions such as quality of 
prosperity beyond the solely economic emphasis, including other vital dimensions such as quality of 
life, adequate infrastructures, equity and environmental sustainability. The Report proposes a new 
life, adequate infrastructures, equity and environmental sustainability. The Report proposes a new 
tool – the City Prosperity Index – together with a conceptual matrix, the Wheel of Prosperity, both of 
tool – the City Prosperity Index – together with a conceptual matrix, the Wheel of Prosperity, both of 

which are meant to assist decision makers to design clear policy interventions.
which are meant to assist decision makers to design clear policy interventions.

The Report advocates for the need of cities to enhance the public realm, expand public goods and 
The Report advocates for the need of cities to enhance the public realm, expand public goods and 
consolidate rights to the ‘commons’ for all as a way to expand prosperity. This comes in response to 
consolidate rights to the ‘commons’ for all as a way to expand prosperity. This comes in response to 
the observed trend of enclosing or restricting these goods and commons in enclaves of prosperity, or 
the observed trend of enclosing or restricting these goods and commons in enclaves of prosperity, or 

depleting them through unsustainable use.
depleting them through unsustainable use.

The Report maps out major policy steps to promote a new type of city – the city of the 21st century – that 
The Report maps out major policy steps to promote a new type of city – the city of the 21st century – that 
is a ‘good’, people-centred city. One that is capable of integrating the tangible and more intangible aspects 
is a ‘good’, people-centred city. One that is capable of integrating the tangible and more intangible aspects 
of prosperity, and in the process shedding off the inefficient, unsustainable forms and functionalities of the 
of prosperity, and in the process shedding off the inefficient, unsustainable forms and functionalities of the 
city of the previous century. By doing this, UN-Habitat plays a pivotal role in ensuring that urban planning, 
city of the previous century. By doing this, UN-Habitat plays a pivotal role in ensuring that urban planning, 

legal, regulatory and institutional frameworks become instruments of prosperity and well-being.
legal, regulatory and institutional frameworks become instruments of prosperity and well-being.

United Nations Human Settlements 
Programme (UN-HABITAT) 
P.O. Box 30030, Nairobi, Kenya 
Tel: +254 20 7621 234 
Fax: +254 20 7624 266/7

S
T
A
T
E
O
F
 

 

T
H
E

 
 

W
O
R
L
D
’
S
C
I
T
I
E
S

 

 
 

2
0
1
2
/
2
0
1
3

 
 
 
 

P
r
o
s
p
e
r
i
t
y
 
o
f
 

C

i
t
i
e
s

I T Y

L

I

B

A

A I N

ENVIRONMENTAL S U S T

P

R

O

D

U

C

T

I

V

I

T

Y

PROSPERITY

INFRASTRUCT U R E

EQUITY AND SOCIA

C

L

L IN

U

S
I

O

N

E
F
I
L
F 
Y O
QUALIT

STATE OF THE 
WORLD’S CITIES 

2012/2013

Prosperity of Cities

World Urban 
Forum Edition

STATE OF THE 
WORLD’S CITIES 

2012/2013

Prosperity of Cities

Copyright © United Nations Human Settlements Programme, 2012.

All rights reserved

United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-HABITAT) 
P.O. Box 30030, Nairobi, Kenya 
Tel: +254 20 7621 234 
Fax: +254 20 7624 266/7 
Website: www.unhabitat.org

DISCLAIMER
This is a World Urban Forum edition of the State of the World’s 
Cities Report 2012/2013: Prosperity of Cities. The final edition 
will include the foreword by the Secretary General of the United 
Nations, maps, bibliography, index and all illustrative text boxes. 

The designations employed and the presentation of the material in 
this report do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever 
on the part of the Secretariat of the United Nations concerning 
the legal status of any country, territory, city or area, or of its 
authorities, or concerning delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries, 
or regarding its economic system or degree of development. The 
analysis, conclusions and recommendations of this reports do 
not necessarily reflect the views of the United Nations Human 
Settlements Programme or its Governing Council.

The Report is produced with official data provided by governments 
and additional information gathered by the Global Urban 
Observatory. Cities and countries are invited to update data relevant 
to them. It is important to acknowledge that data varies according 
to definition and sources. While UN-HABITAT checks data provided 
to the fullest extent possible, the responsibility for the accuracy 
of the information lies with the original providers of the data. 
Information contained in this Report is provided without warranty 
of any kind, either express or implied, including, without limitation, 
warranties of merchantability, fitness for a particular purpose and 
noninfringement. UN-HABITAT specifically does not make any 
warranties or representations as to the accuracy or completeness 
of any such data. Under no circumstances shall UN-HABITAT be 
liable for any loss, damage, liability or expense incurred or suffered 
that is claimed to have resulted from the use of this Report, 
including, without limitation, any fault, error, omission with respect 
thereto. The use of this Report is at the User’s sole risk. Under no 
circumstances, including, but not limited to negligence, shall UN-
HABITAT or its affiliates be liable for any direct, indirect, incidental, 
special or consequential damages, even if UN-HABITAT has been 
advised of the possibility of such damages.

Design and layout by Bounford.com, Cambridge, UK. 
Printed and bound in Malta by Progress Press Ltd.

The paper used for this book is FSC-certified. FSC (the Forest 
Stewardship Council) is an international network to promote 
responsible management of the world’s forests.

Front cover pictures
Equity and Social Inclusion: © Meunierd/Shutterstock.com
Quality of Life: © 2012 Peter Herbert/fotoLIBRA.com
Infrastructure: © Paul Smith/Panos Pictures
Productivity: © Atul Loke/Panos Pictures
Environmental Sustainability: © Anne-Britt Svinnset/Shutterstock.com

Back cover picture 
© Claudio Zaccherini/Shutterstock.com

Part One pictures
Page 8: © Ragma Images/Shutterstock.com 
Page 10: © Denis Mironov/Shutterstock.com
Page 25: © Christian Als/Panos Pictures

Part Two pictures
Page 34: © Joyfull/Shutterstock.com 
Page 36: © Claudio Zaccherini/Shutterstock.com
Page 48: © Philip Lange/Shutterstock.com
Page 59: © Philip Lange/Shutterstock.com
Page 68: © Clive Shirley/Panos Pictures
Page 78: © Edwina Sassoon/fotoLIBRA.com

Part Three pictures
Page 88: © Steve Forrest/Panos Pictures 
Page 90: © Denis Mironov/Shutterstock.com
Page 103: © Chris Stowers/Panos Pictures

Contents

Foreword 

Introduction 

Acknowledgements 

Part One: Prosperity and Urban Trends 
Conceptualizing Urban Prosperity 

Urban and Regional Trends 

Urban Change in Developed Countries 

Urban Change in Developing Countries 

Part Two: Prosperity of Cities 
Productivity and the Prosperity of Cities 

Urban Infrastructure: Bedrock of Prosperity 

Quality of Life and Urban Prosperity  

Equity and the Prosperity Of Cities 

Environmental Sustainability and the Prosperity of Cities 

Part Three: Policies for Prosperous Cities 
From Comparative Advantage to Urban Prosperity 

Policy-Related Factors Underlying the Prosperity of Cities 

Innovating to Support the Transition to the City of the 21st Century 

Urban Prosperity Through Planning and Design 

Empowering Laws and Institutions for Urban Prosperity 

Statistical Annex 

iii 

iv

v

vi

8
10

25

25

28

34
36

48

59

68

78

88
90

92

103

108

114

122

Foreword

This is a time of crises. This 
is also a time for solutions. 
Indeed, the world is 
currently engulfed in waves 
of financial, economic, 
environmental, social and 
political crises. Amidst 
the turmoil, however, we 
are also witnessing valiant 
and creative attempts at 

different levels and by different actors to seek for solutions. 

The State of the World’s Cities Report 2012 presents, 
with compelling evidence, some of the underlying factors 
behind these crises that have strongly impacted on cities. 
It shows that a lopsided focus on purely financial prosperity 
has led to growing inequalities between rich and poor, 
generated serious distortions in the form and functionality 
of cities, also causing serious damage to the environment – 
not to mention the unleashing of precarious financial 
systems that could not be sustained in the long run. 

In this Report, UN-Habitat advocates for a new type of 
city – the city of the 21st century – that is a ‘good’, people-
centred city, one that is capable of integrating the tangible 
and more intangible aspects of prosperity, and in the process 
shedding off the inefficient, unsustainable forms and 
functionalities of the city of the previous century. By doing 
this, UN-Habitat plays a pivotal role in ensuring that urban 
planning, legal, regulatory and institutional frameworks 
become an instrument of prosperity and well-being. 

This is a time of solutions to the numerous challenges 
that confront today’s cities. If we are to take measures that 
will make a difference to the lives of the billions of people in 
the world’s cities, and to future generations, we need sound 
and solid knowledge and information. This Report provides 
some of these crucial ingredients. I am confident that it will 
serve as a useful tool in the necessary redefinition of the 
urban policy agenda at local, national and regional levels. 
I do believe also that it will provide valuable insights in the 
search for urban prosperity and related policy changes in 
the years ahead. 

The Report proposes a fresh approach to prosperity, 

The Report is a bridge between research and policy, 

one that is holistic and integrated and which is essential for 
the promotion of a collective well-being and fulfilment of 
all. This new approach does not only respond to the crises 
by providing safeguards against new risks, but it also helps 
cities to steer the world towards economically, socially, 
politically and environmentally prosperous urban futures. 
In order to measure present and future progress of cities 
towards the prosperity path, the Report introduces a new 
tool – the City Prosperity Index – together with a conceptual 
matrix, the Wheel of Prosperity, both of which are meant to 
assist decision makers to design clear policy interventions. 
To varying degrees of intensity, cities have been hit by 

different crises. However, this Report tells us that cities can 
also be a remedy to the regional and global crises. When 
supported by different tiers of government, and in the quest 
to generate holistic prosperity, cities can become flexible 
and creative platforms to address these crises in a pragmatic 
and efficient manner. Prosperity, in this sense, can be 
seen as a Pharmakon – both a cause of the problem and a 
remedy. As per this ancient Greek construct, when used 
properly, it can help decision-makers to steer cities towards 
well-balanced and harmonious development. 

with inputs from more than 50 cities, individual scientists 
and institutions, particularly the Directorate-General for 
Regional Policy from the European Commission, and other 
partner institutions around the world that participated 
actively in the preparation of this study. I would like to thank 
them for their immense contribution. I would also like to 
thank the Government of Norway for its financial support. 

The partnerships that have evolved during the 

preparation of this report are part and parcel of, as well as 
critically essential in, creating the building blocks of a more 
sustainable prosperity, one that is shared by all. UN-Habitat 
is determined to sustain and consolidate such partnerships 
as we collectively chart a better future. 

Joan Clos 
Under-Secretary-General,  
United Nations Executive Director, UN-Habitat 

iv 

Introduction

As the world moves into the urban age, the dynamism and 
intense vitality of cities become even more prominent. 
A fresh future is taking shape, with urban areas around 
the world becoming not just the dominant form of habitat 
for humankind, but also the engine-rooms of human 
development as a whole. 

This ongoing evolution can be seen as yet another 

assertion, albeit on a larger scale, of the time-honoured role 
of cities as centres of prosperity. In the 21st as in much earlier 
centuries, people congregate in cities to realize aspirations and 
dreams, fulfil needs and turn ideas into realities. 

Prosperity in this broader, organic sense transcends 
narrow economic success to encompass a socially broad-
based, balanced and resilient type of development that 
combines tangible and more intangible aspects.  Taken in 
this multi-dimensional sense, urban prosperity tightens the 
links between individuals and society with their everyday 
environment, i.e., the city itself.  Amidst multiple challenges 
facing cities today, a focus on poverty reduction and/or 
responses to the economic crisis is gradually shifting to a 
broader and more general understanding of the need to 
harness the transformative dynamics and potentials which, to 
varying degrees, characterize any city anywhere in the world. 

How to rekindle momentum, optimize regenerating 
potential, enhance strategic position in the international 
business sphere, polishing both image and appeal – in other 
words, how to foster prosperity – has become the main 
thrust behind urban development.  In this endeavour, every 
city will inevitably find itself on its own specific and unique 
historic course. Still, a common set of conditions can be 
found prevailing in all cities, which enable human beings to 
flourish, feel fulfilled and healthy, and where business can 
thrive, develop and generate more wealth.  These conditions 
mark out the city as the privileged locus of prosperity, where 
advancement and progress come to materialize.

This Report focuses on the notion of prosperity and 

its realisation in urban areas. More specifically, this Report 
advocates a shift in attention around the world in favour of a 
more robust notion of development – one that looks beyond 
the narrow domain of economic growth that has dominated 
ill-balanced policy agendas over the last decades. 

The gist of this Report is the need for transformative 

change towards people-centred, sustainable urban 
development, and this is what a revised notion of prosperity 
can provide.  This focus on prosperity comes as institutional 
and policy backgrounds are in a state of flux around the 

v 

world.  Prosperity may appear to be a misplaced concern 
in the midst of multiple crises –financial, economic, 
environmental, social or political – that afflict the world 
today. It may appear as a luxury in the current economic 
predicament. However, what this Report shows with 
compelling evidence is that the current understanding 
of prosperity needs to be revised, and with it the policies 
and actions deployed by public authorities. UN-Habitat 
suggests a fresh approach to prosperity, one that reaches 
beyond the sole economic dimension to take in other vital 
dimensions such as quality of life, infrastructures, equity and 
environmental sustainability. The Report introduces a new 
statistical instrument, the City Prosperity Index, measuring 
the prosperity factors at work in an individual city, together 
with a general matrix, the Wheel of Urban Prosperity, which 
suggests areas for policy intervention.

As the privileged locus of prosperity, the city remains best 

placed to deal pragmatically with some of the new, post-
crisis challenges. With adequate backing from higher tiers of 
government, the city appears as a flexible, operational, creative 
platform for the development of collaborative agendas and 
strategies for local responses to the global crisis.

Cities can offer remedies to the worldwide crises – if 

only we put them in better positions to respond to the 
challenges of our age, optimizing resources and harnessing the 
potentialities of the future. This is the ‘good’, people-centred 
city, one that is capable of integrating the tangible and more 
intangible aspects of prosperity- in the process shedding the 
inefficient, unsustainable forms and functionalities of the 
previous century or so – the city of the 21st century.  

This Report comes at a transitional juncture in the 

international agenda: in the wake of the ‘Rio + 20’ conference 
on the environment and development, and ahead of a fresh, 
updated Habitat Agenda due in 2016 (Habitat III). Against 
this background, this UN-Habitat Report calls on countries 
and cities to engage with a fresher notion of prosperity in their 
respective agendas.  Prosperity involves a degree of confidence 
in the foreseeable future. As the world recovers from one of 
its worst-ever economic crises and a variety of interrelated 
predicaments, we must find a new sense of balance and 
safeguard against risks of further turmoil. With dominant 
roles in economic, political and social life cities remain critical 
to setting our nations on a more inclusive, productive, creative 
and sustainable course.

Acknowledgements

CORE TEAM
Director: Oyebanji O. Oyeyinka 

Coordinator: Eduardo López Moreno

Task Manager: Ben C. Arimah

Statistical Adviser: Gora Mboup

Principal Authors: Eduardo López Moreno,  
Ben C. Arimah, Gora Mboup, Mohamed Halfani, Oyebanji O. Oyeyinka

Research: Raymond Otieno Otieno, Gianluca Crispi, Anne Amin

City Prosperity Index: Gora Mboup, Wandia Riunga, John Obure

Editor: Thierry Naudin

SUPPORT TEAM
Contributors: Wandia Seaforth, Obas John Ebohon,  
Cecilia M. Zanetta, Kaushalesh Lal, Dina K. Shehayeb,  
Olumuyiwa Alaba, Sai Balakrishnan, Maria Buhigas,  
Christopher Horwood

Statistics: Omondi Odhiambo, Joel Jere, Julius Majale,  
Wandia Riunga, John Obure, Anne Kibe, Wladimir Ray, Kaushalesh Lal

Maps: Maharufa Hossain, Jane Arimah

Administrative Support Team: Beatrice Bazanye, Anne Idukitta, 
Elizabeth Kahwae, Jacqueline Macha, Mary Dibo

Africa: Femi Olokesusi (Accra, Ibadan and Lagos);Yeraswork Admassie 
(Addis Ababa); Hany M. Ayad (Alexandria); Madani Safar Zitoun (Algiers); 
Albino Mazembe (Beira); Aldo Lupala (Dar es Salaam); Faustin Tirwirukwa 
Kalabamu (Gaborone); Rosemary Awuor Hayanga (Johannesburg); 
Allan Cain (Luanda); Godfrey Hampwaye and Wilma Nchito (Lusaka); 
Alfred Omenya (Nairobi); C. Fernandez (Praia)

Asia and Arab States: Saswati G. Belliapa (Bangalore); Francisco 
L. Fernandez (Cebu); Yanping Liu and Yuehan Wang (Chongqing); 
Amelita Atillo (Davao); Pelin F. Kurtul (Gaziantep); Dung D. Dzung (Ho Chi 
Minh City); Satyanarayana Vejella (Hyderabad); Syed Shabih ul Hassan 
Zaidi. (Lahore); Lan Jin and Yanping Liu. (Shenzen); Centre for Livable 
Cities (Singapore); Omar Khattab (Kuwait City); Ali Shabou, Nashwa Soboh, 
Kamal Jalouka, Deema Abu Thaib, (Aqaba and Amman); Sinan Shakir A. 
Karim (Basra); Mona Fawaz and Nisrene Baghdadi (Beirut); Ahmedou Mena 
(Doha); Darim. Al-Bassam and Jalal Mouris (Dubai); Dara al Yaqubi (Erbil); 
Falah Al- Kubaisy (Muharrak); Rana Hassan and Ismae’l Sheikh Hassan 
(Saida).

Input to boxes: 
Cilla Ng, Inga Klevby, José Chong, Zeltia Gonzales, Estefania Villalobos, 
Laura Petrella; Alexy Romero Garcia C.; Francisco Perez Arellano, 

Design and page layout: 
Bounford.com (UK)

UN-HABITAT ADvISORy AND TECHNICAL SUPPORT
Elkin Velasquez, Laura Petrella, José Chong, Claudio Acioly, John Hogan, 
Raf Tuts, Ana Moreno, Alioune Badiane, Mariam Yunusa, Roi Chiti, Axumite 
Gebre-Egziabher, Kibe Muigai.

INTERNATIONAL ADvISORy BOARD
Patricia Annez; Mark Redwood; Billy Cobbett; Lamia Kamal-Chaoui; Edgar 
Pieterse; Amin Y. Kamete; Smita Srinivas; Alfonso Iracheta; Yu Zhu; Dina K. 
Shehayeb, Inga Klevby, Maha Yahya, Javier Sanchez-Reaza 

FINANCIAL SUPPORT
Government of Norway

SPECIAL TECHNICAL CONTRIBUTION 
Directorate-General for Regional Policy from the European Commission 
various background documents from: Corinne.Hermant, Zoé BUYLE-BODIN, 
Christian.SVANFELDT, Antonio G. Calafati, Celine Rozenblat, Moritz Lennert, 
Gilles Van Hamme, Uwe Neumann Birgit Georgi

ADDITIONAL CONTRIBUTIONS:
Thematic Background Papers:
Brian H. Roberts; Pengfei Ni; Robert M. Buckley and Achilles Kallergis; 
David Simon, Michail Fragkias, Robin Leichenko, Roberto Sánchez-
Rodríguez, Karen Seto and Bill Solecki, Susan Parnell and Matthew Sharp; 
Ivan Turok.

City Reports for policy analysis:
Latin America and the Caribbean: Francisco Perez Arellano 
(Guadalajara);Ana Raquel Flores (Ciudad Del Este); Vladimir Morales 
Gonzalez (Valparaíso);Flávio José Nery Conde Malta (Santos); Ibarra Rolando 
Mendoza (Panama City); Oscar Bragos (Rosario); Tito Alejandro Alegría 
Olazábal (Tijuana); Grethel Castellanos (Santo Domingo); Haydée Beltrán 
Urán (Medellín); Isabel Viana (Montevideo); Miguel Coyula (Havana); 
Carlos Foronda (La Paz); Alberto José Tobío (Guarenas); Luis Delgado 
Galimberti (Lima); Alain Philippe Yerro (Fort-De-France) 

vi 

Part One

Prosperity and 
Urban Trends

Chapter 1.1

Conceptualizing Urban 
Prosperity

THE CITy IS THE HOME OF PROSPERITy
Cities are where human beings find satisfaction of basic 
needs and essential public goods. Where various products 
can be found in sufficiency and their utility enjoyed. Cities 
are also where ambitions, 
aspirations and other 
immaterial aspects of life 
are realized, providing 
contentment and happiness 
and increasing the 
prospects of individual and 
collective well-being.
However, when 

city’s interest to 
adopt organically integrated 
types of development and 
prosperity that transcend 
the narrow confines of an 
accumulation-driven model 
that benefits only a few to 
the detriment of the majority.

POLICy It is in every 

prosperity is absent or 
restricted to some groups, 
when it is only enjoyed in 

some parts of the city, when it is used to pursue specific 
interests, or when it is a justification for financial gains for 
the few to the detriment of the majority, the city becomes 
the locus where the right to shared prosperity is claimed 
and fought for. 

PROSPERITy: A MISPLACED CONCERN IN 
THE MIDST OF CRISES?
Never before had humankind as a whole faced cascading 
crises of all types as have affected it since 2008, from 
financial to economic to environmental to social to 
political. Soaring unemployment, food shortages and 
attendant price rises, strains on financial institutions, 
insecurity and political instability, among other crises, 

10 

might well on their own call into question the relevance 
and even the viability of a Report on prosperity. 
This proliferation of risks might even challenge the 
conventional notion of “Cities as the Home of Prosperity”, 
i.e. where, by definition, “successful, flourishing, or 
thriving conditions” prevail. 

As people in the latter part of 2011 gathered in Cairo’s 

Tahrir Square or Madrid’s Puerta del Sol, in front of 
London’s St Paul’s cathedral or in New York’s Zuccotti 
Park, they were not only demanding more equality and 
inclusion; they were also expressing solidarity with fellow 
citizens that belong with the“99 per cent” (the vast 
majority) as opposed to the “one per cent” (those with 
vastly disproportionate shares of wealth and decision-
making capacity). These movements highlighted the 
inherent risks of ill-balanced growth or development 
policies, and their failure to safeguard prosperity for all. 
Throughout history, cities as seats of power have served 
as stages for protests and the recent social movements 
are no exception. Demographic concentrations in dense 
urban spaces allow critical masses of protestors to 
congregate and air new ideas, highlighting cities’ role 
as sounding boards for 
positive social change. This 
points to another of the 
promises of a prosperous 
city – not just a more 
productive socio-economic 
use of space and the built 
environment, but also one 
that safeguards the city’s 
role as a public forum 
where plans and policies 
can be discussed and 
challenged for the sake of a 
more prosperous society.

prosperity 
as conventionally 
understood seems to be 
an unnecessary luxury 
in a time of crisis. At 
worst, prosperity can 
be seen as a harbinger 
of yet another single-
minded pursuit of purely 
economic prosperity 
that might bring the 
global economy to the 
brink again. 

FACT At best, 

Conceptualizing Urban Prosperity

Box 1.1.1

Crises, Cities and Prosperity 

The financial crisis: Borrowing, borrowing, borrowing
Prominent scholars such as Joseph Stiglitz ascribe the 2008 
financial crisis to rising income inequalities in countries 
around the world. In the face of stagnating real earnings, those 
households in the lower- and middle-income brackets were 
forced into more and more borrowing in order to maintain or 
improve living standards. With financiers experimenting with risky 
schemes at the other end of the credit chain, this situation led to 
a spate of defaults and, ultimately, the financial crash of 2008. 
The double irony of this crisis is that it originated in the efforts of 
a supposedly sophisticated financial system to give low-income 
categories a much-desired access to housing finance – and a 
foothold in prosperity. 

The democratic crisis: “We are the 99 per cent!”
The recent crisis is more than just an economic one. More 
fundamentally, it has exposed a number of risks to social justice, 
fairness, participation and, ultimately, democracy. Systematic 
decision-making in favour of those better-off is, in itself, a form of 
democratic deficit, and one that has led to popular movements like 
New York’s Occupy Wall Street. The movement “calls for a society 
organized around the needs, desires, dreams, of the 99 per cent, 
not the one per cent.” The other major uprisings of 2011 – the 
Arab Spring in North Africa and the Middle East, and Spain’s 
own Indignados – were also motivated by similar demands for 
better and deeper democracy as essential for overall prosperity. 

These protests highlighted the fact that economic growth was a 
necessary condition for prosperity, though insufficient on its own: 
social and political inclusion is vital for prosperity.

The environmental crisis: The convergence of climate change 
and urbanisation
The current pattern of urbanization both in developed and 
developing countries converges on one and the same model: low 
density-based suburbanisation. Land speculation is associated 
with indiscriminate conversion of rural land to urban uses in the 
peripheries; this phenomenon combines with a growing reliance on 
individual motor vehicles and new-fangled middle-class lifestyles 
to expand urban areas way beyond formal city boundaries. A 
variety of economic agents can typically be found behind this 
trend, including real estate developers, home- and road-builders, 
national and international chain stores, among others, more often 
than not with support from banks and finance houses. Wasteful 
expansion of cities in endless peripheries is a major factor behind 
climate change. Beyond the physical threats from climate change, 
some cities stand to face an array of additional risks related to 
the provision of basic services and public goods (water supply, 
physical infrastructure, transport, energy, etc.), affecting industrial 
production, local economies, assets and livelihoods. Climate 
change may have ripple effects across many sectors of urban 
life, affecting the potential for prosperity of the more vulnerable 
populations: women, youth, children and ethnic minorities.1

CITIES: REMEDy TO THE GLOBAL CRISES
If anything, the recent crises have demonstrated that cities 
around the world are, to varying degrees of intensity, 
exposed at least as much to the destructive as to the more 
beneficial effects of international markets, including social 
and political repercussions. In this sense, these crises 
did more than expose systemic market failures: they also 
highlighted major imbalances at the core of economic 
policy-making.2

When responding to such crises, national 

macroeconomic policies definitely have a major role to play 
through countercyclical public expenditure, strengthening 
bank supervision and financial regulations, introducing 
progressive income taxation, and reinforcing worldwide 
financial governance mechanisms, among other solutions. 
However, responses to global crises must also allow for 
a vigorous role for cities. So far, cities have been perceived 
as the ‘engines’ of national economies and there is no 
reason to depart from that view. Indeed, urban authorities 
find themselves, at least notionally, in a position to boost 
production in the real sector of the economy at local level, 

11 

with attendant employment and income generation. If 
urban responses to economic crises are to be effective on a 
local scale with positive regional or national repercussions 
(‘multiplier effects’), then efficient, multi-way institutional, 
policy and budget linkages are required between all relevant 

FACT Cities are a remedy to the global crises. They provide 

ready, flexible and creative platforms that can mitigate 

the effects of regional and global crises in a pragmatic, balanced 
and efficient way. Cities can act as the fora where the linkages, 
trust, respect and inclusiveness that are part of any remedy 
to the crisis can be built. Acting locally in different areas and 
spaces, urban responses to the crisis can be structured and 
included in national agendas for more efficiency, with better 
chances of flexible responses and more beneficial effects. 
Although not immune to divisive partisanship and ideologies that 
can paralyze decision-making, cities find themselves in more 
privileged positions than national governments to negotiate and 
agree on responses with local stakeholders. They can forge new 
partnerships and local social pacts which, in turn, can strengthen 
national governments in the face of global challenges.

POLICy Cities can devise a number of safeguards against a 

variety of socioeconomic risks. Municipal authorities 
can prioritize expenditures on social security nets, local/regional 
infrastructure and other types of development, with a view to 
securing longer-term growth while stimulating consumption and/
or employment in the short term. 

POLICy Cities can also deploy safeguards against the risks 

international markets may bring to bear on local 
socioeconomic conditions, deploying redistributive policies in 
close collaboration with central government in order to reduce 
income gaps and other local structural problems. 

FACT This edition of the 

State of the World’s 

Cities Report presents 
a fresh perspective on 
prosperity based on five 
dimensions – productivity, 
infrastructures, quality 
of life, equity and 
environmental sustainability. 

China: busy traffic on one of Beijing’s boulevards. Wide avenues such as this bring a sense of space to city centres but increasing wealth has 
led to a massive growth in private car use.

© Yu Yang/Shutterstock.com

12 

State of the World’s Cities 2012/2013tiers of government. In this respect, proper alignment of 
central and local government expenditures at city level can 
facilitate transfers and their effective use by urban authorities. 

RE-THINkING URBAN PROSPERITy
A poverty-stricken plumber in Hyderabad (India), a 
factory worker in Bogotá (Colombia), a middle manager in 
Madrid (Spain), a businessman in Fortaleza (Brazil), a car 
mechanic in Nairobi (Kenya) − all five will have aspirations 
to prosperous lives. However, prosperity means different 
things to different people around the world. Whatever the 
individual perception, regardless of culture and civilization, 
prosperity refers to a sense of general and individual 
socioeconomic security for the immediate and foreseeable 
future, which comes with the fulfilment of other, non-
material needs and aspirations.

Yet, the prevailing view continues to confine prosperity 

to the realm of economics; a limiting view that shuts out 
other dimensions that are integral to human well-being 
and necessary for individual and collective fulfilment. 
If anything, the 2008 financial crisis has amplified the 
need to include other, non-economic dimensions in the 
understanding and measurement of prosperity. 

This Report introduces a new gauge for the degree 

of prosperity in the cities of the world. Known as the 
City Prosperity Index and developed by UN-Habitat, 
this new instrument combines the five dimensions of 
prosperity as understood in this Report and as subsumed 
in measurable indicators. The index pinpoints strengths and 
weaknesses, in the process suggesting where policy action 
can address imbalances. 

Re-thinking prosperity in those terms requires a shift 

away from the current dominant perspective, which is 
outdated and unsustainable on many grounds with its 
combination of cheap fossil fuel, heavy dependence on 
the motor car, highly segmented urban forms, socially and 
economically segregated spaces, endless urban peripheries 
that consume land, resources and in many cases natural 
protected areas – and all largely steered by private, not 
public interest.

CONCEPTUALIzING PROSPERITy:  
THE UN-HABITAT APPROACH
Prosperity implies success, wealth, thriving conditions, and 
wellbeing as well as opportunity. In any urban setting, a 
key question will arise: What are the essential conditions 
and elements that are required for a city to thrive, or for 
an urban area to be described as prosperous, or for the 

Conceptualizing Urban Prosperity

POLICy Shared urban prosperity puts people first, values 

the tangible and intangible aspects of development, 

promotes inclusive economic growth, protects human rights, 
ensures enabling equitable development, cares for the natural 
environment, reduces disaster risks and vulnerabilities for the 
poor and builds resilience to adverse forces of nature. This new 
city – the city of the 21st century –creates harmony between the 
five dimensions of prosperity and enhances the prospects for a 
better future. 

POLICy The ‘good’, people-centred city of the 21st century 

stimulates local job creation, promotes social 

diversity, maintains a sustainable environment and recognises 
the importance of public spaces. In short, this is a city that comes 
with a change of pace, profile and urban functions and provides 
the social, political and economic conditions of prosperity – a city 
that is all-encompassing and accessible to everyone. 

wellbeing of the population? Put differently, what are the 
manifestations or outcomes of a prosperous city? In general 
terms, a prosperous city offers a profusion of public goods 
and develops policies and actions for a sustainable use and 
equitable access to ‘commons’.3 More specifically, several 
elements which come to mind guide what constitutes the 
UN-Habitat conceptualization of Prosperity. 

First, a prosperous city contributes to economic 

growth through productivity, generating the income and 
employment that afford adequate living standards for the 
whole population. 

Second, a prosperous city deploys the infrastructure, 

physical assets and amenities – adequate water, 
sanitation, power supply, road network, information and 
communications technology etc. – required to sustain both 
the population and the economy.

Third, prosperous cities provide the social services – 

education, health, recreation, safety and security etc. – 
required for improved 
living standards, enabling 
the population to maximize 
individual potential and 
lead fulfilling lives. 

POLICy A fresh 

approach 

Fourth, a city is only 
prosperous to the extent 
that poverty and inequalities 
are minimal. No city can 
claim to be prosperous 
when large segments of the 
population live in abject 
poverty and deprivation. 

13 

to prosperity is needed, 
not just to respond 
to the effects of the 
crisis and safeguard 
against new risks, but 
also to steer the world 
towards economically, 
socially, politically 
and environmentally 
prosperous urban 
futures. 

Table 1.1.1

Defining a prosperous city

Productivity

Infrastructure 
development

Quality of life

Equity and social 
inclusion

Environmental 
sustainability

A prosperous city is one that provides

Contributes to economic growth and development, generates income, provides decent jobs and equal 
opportunities for all by implementing effective economic policies and reforms

Provides adequate infrastructure – water, sanitation, roads, information and communication technology in 
order to improve urban living and enhance productivity, mobility and connectivity 

Enhances the use of public spaces in order to increase community cohesion, civic identity, and guarantees the 
safety and security of lives and property

Ensures the equitable distribution and redistribution of the benefits of a prosperous city, reduces poverty and 
the incidence of slums, protects the rights of minority and vulnerable groups, enhances gender equality, and 
ensures civic participation in the social, political and cultural spheres

Values the protection of the urban environment and natural assets while ensuring growth, and seeking ways 
to use energy more efficiently, minimize pressure on surrounding land and natural resources, minimize 
environmental losses by generating creative solutions to enhance the quality of the environment

This involves reducing the incidence of slums and new 
forms of poverty. Prosperous cities are equitable and socially 
inclusive. The benefits and opportunities that come with a 
prosperous city are equitably (re)distributed. A prosperous 
city ensures gender equality, protects the rights of minority 
and vulnerable groups, and ensures civic participation by all 
in the social, political and cultural spheres.

Fifth, the creation and (re)distribution of the benefits 
of prosperity do not destroy or degrade the environment, 
instead the city’s natural assets are preserved for the sake of 
sustainable urbanization. 

THE ‘WHEEL OF URBAN PROSPERITy’
Prosperity, as defined by UN-Habitat, is a social construct 
that materializes in the realm of human actions. It builds 
deliberately and conscientiously on the objective conditions 
prevailing in a city at any time, wherever located and 
however large or small. It is a broader, wide-ranging notion 
that has to do with well-balanced, harmonious development 
in an environment of fairness and justice. 

As described above, prosperity takes in all urban 

functions as subsumed in five main categories. Since shared, 
balanced development is a crucial feature of prosperity, 
none of the dimensions must prevail over the others and 
all must be kept roughly ‘equal’ – for the sake of a smooth 
‘ride’ on the path of prosperity. In practice, of course, it is 
a rare city where the five dimensions will be found equal 
at any point in time, and this is where policy interventions 
will be called for, as suggested graphically by the profile 
of the city’s specific ‘city prosperity index’. For instance, 

14 

infrastructure may be well-advanced, but inaccessible to 
large portion of the population, therefore compromising the 
notion of equity. In other, frequent situations, a city may be 
economically efficient, enhancing job opportunities, but the 
natural environment is neglected. 

Since socioeconomic conditions keep changing on a 

FACT The ‘hub’ 

local and a broader scale, they will have an effect on one or 
more of the five dimensions of prosperity, and it will be for 
policy interventions to restore the balance. In this endeavour, 
urban authorities will find that the various interlinkages and 
interdependencies between 
the five dimensions can 
also be of a positive nature. 
For instance, provision 
of water and sanitation 
in informal settlements 
will improve both equity 
and quality of life, and 
even the environment. 
This points to the 
‘natural’ or ‘spontaneous’ 
interdependencies between 
the five dimensions along 
the outer rim of the 
wheel. These can also 
be strengthened with a 
multiplier effect through 
deliberate, well-targeted 
interventions through the 
‘hub’ of the wheel, i.e., the 

is made 
of the local urban 
power functions, both 
public (municipal and 
other institutions and 
agencies, laws and 
regulations, including 
urban planning) and 
non-public (civil society, 
business, etc.).they 
combine in a variety of 
ways according to local 
needs and conditions, 
with the synergies 
between them 
resulting in innovative 
institutional or policy 
practice, all for the sake 
of the public interest 
and shared prosperity. 

State of the World’s Cities 2012/2013Figure 1.1.1

The Wheel of Urban Prosperity

Conceptualizing Urban Prosperity

spoke interactions

policy
interactions

Environmental sustainability

ERITY

P
S
O
R
N P

A
B
R
U

s

p

o

k

e

 

i

n

t

e

r

a

c

t
i

o

n

s

policy
interactions

Equity and social inclusion

URBAN PR

Y

RIT
E

P

S

O

U

R

B

A

N

 

P

R

O

S

P

E

R

I

T

Y

s
n

ctio
e intera
spok

U R B AN PROSPERITY

policy
interactions

P
r
o
d
u
c
t
i
v
i
t
y

oke interactions

p

s

Government
institutions
Laws and

urban planning

e

r

u

t

c

u

r

t

s

a

r

f

n

I

policy
interactions

Q

u

a

lit
y
 
o

f lif

e

policy
interactions

spoke interactio n s

URBAN PROSPERIT

Y

combined power functions at work in the city. For instance, 
building a school and a covered market next to a poor area is 
likely to have multiplier effects across the five dimensions of 
shared prosperity.

This goes to show that far from some new ‘model’ or 
‘utopia’ or branding/marketing technique, UN-Habitat’s 
‘wheel of prosperity’ symbolises the well-balanced 
development of the five dimensions, the current condition 
of which is graphically represented in the City Prosperity 
Index (CPI – see below). The ‘outer rim’ absorbs the 
cumulative forces transmitted through the ‘spokes’ – the 
five dimensions of prosperity. At the centre is the ‘hub’ – 
the local urban power functions, with four interrelated 
roles: (i) ensuring the prevalence of public over any 
other kind of interest); (ii) controlling the direction, 

15 

pace and momentum of the ‘wheel’; (iii) ensuring the 
balanced development of the five ‘spokes’ and associated 
synergies; and (iv) in a two-way relationship, absorbing 
and amortising any ‘shocks’ transmitted by the ‘spokes’. 
The ‘hub’ brings together 
the power functions 
(e.g., laws, regulations 
and institutions, urban 
planning, civil society, 
trade associations, special 
agencies, etc.) associated 
with the five ‘spokes’. 
In this role the ‘hub’ 
represents human agency 
in all its embodiments. 

that the project for the 
city of the 21st century 
is one of achieving 
balanced prosperity, 
implying making the 
‘wheel’ well rounded 
with synergetic spokes 
and a dynamic hub. 

POLICy UN-Habitat 

suggest 

It holds the five ‘spokes’ together and endeavours to 
maintain their balance and symmetry.

MEASURING PROSPERITy: ATTEMPTS, 
FAILURES AND PROGRESS 
Prosperity remains one of humankind’s most enduring 
pursuits across time and space. But it is only in the past 
few decades that decision-makers, academics, practitioners 
and populations have started to measure this important 
dimension of human development. This has been a journey 
of learning, trial and error. The adage “what gets measured, 
gets done” has injected a sense of urgency in the pursuit not 
just of prosperity per se, but also of an operational definition 
complete with specific indicators.

More than 70 years ago in 1937, the Nobel-winning 
metric of gross domestic product (GDP) was purported 
to be the ‘mother of all statistics’, capturing the notion of 
prosperity through total production of goods and services. 
Although GDP spread rapidly and was widely accepted for 
decades, it is becoming more and more apparent that this 
aggregate is too narrow to provide the accurate measure 
of a society’s overall well-being today. In 1972, the king 
of Bhutan declared he was interested in measuring ‘Gross 
National Happiness’ (GNH). In 1990, US economist 
Mahbub ul-Haq convinced future Nobel laureate Amartya 
Sen to create “an index as vulgar as GDP but more 
relevant to our own lives.”4 In 2006, China developed its 
own “Green GDP Index”, which seriously challenged the 
validity of the standard aggregate, once environmental 
aspects were factored in.5 In 2009, Joseph Stiglitz called for 

an end to “GDP fetishism” and, one year later, the British 
government announced that it would, for the first time, 
survey happiness in addition to purely economic measures.6

Prosperity is a more complex notion, one that cannot 
be captured through straightforward indices that measure 
how much money people earn or how many cars they 
own. A ‘prosperous’ life includes other non-material, 
non-tangible dimensions, like having a voice in shaping 
the future of one’s city, having meaningful relationships, 
belonging to supportive communities, and having the 
resources and capabilities to transform your dreams into 
concrete realities. 

Recent efforts have attempted to include these other 

dimensions of prosperity for a more accurate representation 
of societal progress. Table 1.1.2 presents a summary of these 
methods and approaches.

THE UN-HABITAT “CITy PROSPERITy INDEx”
Cities can take different paths to prosperity. UN-Habitat 
views development as a non-linear, non-sequential and 
complex process and recognizes that development paths 
are differentiated and unique.7 Still, actions and policies 
implemented by governments to increase prosperity and 
the outcomes of these policies can be measured to provide 
an indication of how solid or weak are the factors of 
prosperity available to any individual urban area. 

Fetching water in Debre Zeit city, Ethiopia. Quality of life 
and prosperity require an urban growth with commensurate 
infrastructure and basic services.

© Eduardo Lopez Moreno

FACT Conceptually, the 

notion of prosperity 
still belongs within the realm 
of economic growth, but it 
has to do with more than 
just economic well-being 
and material progress. Trying 
to integrate other tangible 
and less tangible human 
dimensions of development, 
such as well-being and 
prosperity, has been an 
ongoing story for more 
than 40 years, with efforts 
to create new metrics and 
approaches that add nuance 
to standard GDP.

16 

State of the World’s Cities 2012/2013Conceptualizing Urban Prosperity

Table 1.1.2

Measuring Progress and Prosperity

Human Development Index (HDI) 
United Nations Development Programme 
1990

Genuine Progress Indicator (GPI) 
Think-tank Redefining Progress 
1994

Measuring Sustainable Development  
UNECE, OECD, EUROSTAT 
2005

Prosperity Index  
Regional Research Institute, USA 
2006

HDI combines indicators of life expectancy, educational attainment and income into 
a composite human development index. It is a single statistic that serves as a frame 
of reference for both social and economic development, ranking countries by level of 
“human development”.

GPI was developed as an alternative system to GDP measurement. It is used as a more 
inclusive type of economics based on “True Cost” economics, looking how the increased 
production of goods, and expanding services have actually resulted in the improvement of 
welfare or well-being of the people. 

This is structured around the concept of capital, as measured under four main 
dimensions – economic, natural, human and social – that all pertain to sustainability. 
The idea is to make this concept operational for public policies.

This index measures regional economic prosperity and tracks performance at city level, 
assessing competitiveness and identifying opportunities to improve business. Although 
based on economic prosperity, the index includes three main components: business, 
people and place.

Commission on the measurement of 
economic performance and social 
progress, France 
2008

This Commission proposed to shift emphasis from measuring economic production to 
measuring people’s well-being, against a background of sustainability. The Commission 
concluded that well-being is better assessed on the basis of income and consumption 
rather than production. 

Legatum Prosperity Index  
Legatum Institute, Uk 
2008

The index purports to measure national prosperity based on wealth and well-being, using a 
composite indicator. It ranks 110 countries based on eight “pillars of prosperity”: economic 
conditions, entrepreneurship and opportunity, governance, education, health, safety and 
security, personal freedom, and social capital.

Redefining Prosperity 
UN Sustainable Development Commission 
2009

Prosperity is redefined based on three aspects: a) fulfilment of material needs; b) the social 
and psychological dimensions that contribute to an enhanced sense of identity, meaning, 
belonging and hope; c) individual capability to flourish in more prosperous environments.

National Well-Being Accounts Index  
New Economics Foundation, Uk 
2009

Global City Index (GCI) 
Foreign Policy Magazine, kearney & 
Chicago Council on Global Affairs
2010

Sustainable Development Index 
Department for Environment,  
Food and Rural Affairs, Uk 
2010

Various sources, compiled by UN-Habitat, 2012.

The index measures social progress based on subjective well-being. It combines two types 
of data: personal (emotional well-being, satisfying life, vitality, resilience, self-esteem) and 
social well-being (supportive relationships, trust and belonging). 

The GCI measures the international standing of cities along five dimensions: business 
activity, human capital, information exchange, cultural experience and political 
engagement. The index results in competitiveness rankings of cities in terms of business 
opportunities and economic innovation.

This index combines four sets of data: sustainable consumption and production, climate 
change and energy, protecting natural resources and enhancing the environment, and 
creating sustainable communities. The index is a composite of a total 68 indicators.

UN-Habitat’s “City Prosperity Index” (CPI) does 

not only provide indices and measurements; it also 
enables decision-makers to identify opportunities and 
potential areas along the path of prosperity. The CPI 
includes various indices and indicators that are relevant 
to urban areas, and important for prosperity-oriented 
public policy-making. 

Being based on the UN-Habitat concept of prosperity, 

the CPI includes the five dimensions (the ‘spokes’ in the 
‘wheel’) of urban prosperity. Each is further disaggregated in 
various variables and sub-indices. UN-Habitat has adopted 
an incremental approach to the development of this index. 
Two of the dimensions – productivity and quality of life – 
correspond to components of the Human Development 

17 

FACT UN-Habitat analysis shows that some cities 

in the developing world are becoming more 
prosperous (with higher HDI values), reflecting very 
significant progress on health and education, and at 
times even in the absence of sustained economic growth. 

Box 1.1.2

Cities and Human Development

Cities with high HDI values appear both as engines for positive 
change and as beneficiaries of prosperity. In the developing 
world, some urban areas are becoming so prosperous that 
they have closed the gap with, or even surpassed the HDI of 
cities in developed nations. For example, Seoul, South Korea, 
features a HDI as high as 0,911, higher than that of many 
European cities, particularly the Southern and Eastern regions 
where HDI readings, though high, come under 0.900 in cities 
such as Lisbon, Athens or Warsaw. 

City and National HDI values

Country HDI 2010

City HDI

HDI Index
1.0

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

Kinshasa

Niamey
Monrovia

Dakar

Accra

New Delhi
Mumbai

Cairo

Mexico City
Warsaw

Seoul

Toronto

Index (HDI), and have been used to compute the “City 
Human Development Index” (CHDI). The three other 
dimensions – infrastructure, environmental sustainability 
and equity – are made of various key indicators as indicated 
in Table 1.1.3. Although more refinement is still needed in 
terms of what indicators 
are included in the index 
and with which respective 
weightings, those that have 
been selected offer the 
possibility of disaggregating 
the different dimensions 
of prosperity, in the 
process identifying policy 
intervention areas.8

FACT The Human 

Development Index 

(HDI) is typically higher 
in cities compared with 
relevant national averages. 
Indeed, cities are in general 
richer than the rest of any 
country. However, differences 
between City and country 
HDI measures are much 
steeper in nations with lower 
than those with higher HDI 
measures. 

Although in many cases 
the prosperity of a city will 
go hand in hand with that 
of the country, significant 
variations in CPI measures 

18 

can be found in cities in the same country, and this goes 
to show that national aggregates do not necessarily reflect 
what happens in different regions or cities. Most existing 
prosperity indices provide estimations for countries only 
(see Table 1.1.2). By comparison, the UN-Habitat City 
Prosperity Index is unique in the world for two reasons: (i) 
it focuses on individual cities, as opposed to countries, and 
(ii) it is concerned with 
prosperity as measured 
across five dimensions, of 
which the local economy is 
only one, as opposed to the 
sole business environment. 
The resulting CPI values 
can be regrouped in six 
distinct brackets that range 
from cities with ‘very solid’ 
prosperity factors to those 
where those factors are 
found to be ‘very weak’.9

their high 
production of goods 
and services, European 
cities are experiencing 
many crises –financial, 
employment, housing, 
among others – and it 
is expected that their 
respective CPI values 
will reflect this in the 
near future. 

POLICy Despite 

State of the World’s Cities 2012/2013Conceptualizing Urban Prosperity

Table 1.1.3

The UN-Habitat City Prosperity Index

Dimensions

Productivity

Definitions/variables

The productivity index is measured through the city product, which is composed of variables such 
capital investment, formal/informal employment, inflation, trade, savings, export/import and household income/
consumption. The city product represents the total output of goods and services (value added) produced by a 
city’s population during a specific year (details of the methodology can be found in the complete Report).

Quality of life

This index is a combination of three sub-indices: education, health sub-index and public space.

Infrastructure development

This index combines two sub-indices: one for infrastructure proper, and another for housing.

Environmental sustainability

This index is made of three sub-indexes: air quality (PM10), CO2 emissions and indoor pollution.

Equity and social inclusion

This index combines statistical measures of inequality of income/consumption, (Gini coefficient) and 
inequality of access to services and infrastructure. 

Cities with very solid prosperity factors (0.900 

and above): In the world’s most prosperous cities the 
five ‘spokes’ are well-developed overall, with very little 
variations among them. Urban power functions such as 
good governance, urban planning, laws, regulations and 
institutional frameworks ensure that no particular dimension 
of prosperity gains prevalence to the detriment of the others. 
More specifically, they feature high volumes of goods and 

services as well as strong economic fundamentals and high 
productivity. Their populations live longer and are well 
educated. Infrastructures are available and the environment 
is well managed. These cities are well governed and ensure 
safe, secure environments. It is clear that the five ‘spokes’ of 
urban prosperity are kept together in balance and at a right 
pace by a ‘hub’ that has the collective interest as its core. 

When the equity index is included in the CPI, the 

Figure 1.1.2

Cities with very solid prosperity factors 

CPI Index (with (cid:31)ve dimensions)

Productivity Index

Infrastructure Development Index

Equity Index

CPI Index (with four dimensions)

Quality of Life Index

Environmental Sustainability Index

findings show that urban 
equity and prosperity 
are closely linked: not 
unsurprisingly, cities 
that do well on the first 

1.0

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

Warsaw

Barcelona
Milan

Copenhagen
Brussels

Amsterdam
Zurich

Auckland

Melbourne

Tokyo

Paris

Oslo

Dublin

Helsinki
Stockholm

London

Toronto

New York

Vienna

19 

FACT In broad terms, 

the classification 

of cities by CPI values 
results in regional brackets 
with various cities in the 
developed world featuring 
solid prosperity factors 
(CPI: 0.900 or higher), a 
majority of African cities 
with a very weak readings, 
constituting the last two 
groups (CPI: 0.600 or 
below). In between a large 
number of Asian and Latin 
American cities make up the 
third and fourth groups (with 
CPI values of 0.700–0.799 
and 0.600–0.699, 
respectively). 

FACT All the cities in this group feature very high Gross 

National Incomes (GNI) per capita (from US$ 25,478 

for New Zealand to US$ 58,810 for Norway) and they produce a 
substantial share of the country’s GDP (e.g., Brussels – admittedly 
an exception – contributes as much as 46 per cent of Belgium’s 
GDP). The economic power of some of these cities is comparable 
to that of many national economies. Estimated GDP equivalents in 
Tokyo and New York are similar to those of Canada or Spain, while 
London’s GDP is higher than those of Sweden or Switzerland. 

four dimensions of prosperity (with very solid prosperity 
factors) seem to be more equitable. In most cities of this 
group, inequality is relatively low, as reflected in low Gini 
coefficients (typically below 0.4, the exception being 
New York where inequality is significantly steeper (0.5)). 
When the equity dimension is taken into consideration, 
the CPI remains high for all cities (i.e., above 0.800), 
but only half remain with ‘very solid’ prosperity factors 
(i.e., CPI above 0.900). 

Figure 1.1.3

Cities with solid prosperity factors – first category 
(CPI: 0.800–0.899): Cities in this bracket feature high 
CPI values. The five ‘spokes’ of prosperity are connected, 
generating a self-
reinforcing, cumulative 
momentum along the 
path of prosperity. The 
minute variations between 
the ‘spokes’ is evidence 
of the efficiency of the 
’hub’, i.e., relatively 
strong institutions, 
responsive legal and 
regulatory frameworks 
and large availability of 

0.7

0.8

1.0

0.9

Recycling is a vital service in modern city dwelling.

© EGD/Shutterstock.com

Cities with solid prosperity factors – first category

CPI Index (with (cid:31)ve dimensions)

CPI Index (with four dimensions)

Productivity Index

Infrastructure Development Index

Equity Index

Quality of Life Index

Environmental Sustainability Index

FACT Cities with solid 

prosperity factors 

belong to countries with 
different stages of economic 
development and different 
HDIs, with Kazakhstan 
featuring the highest (0.884) 
and China, Turkey and Brazil 
the lowest (0.663, 0.679 
and 0.699, respectively). 

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

Ankara

Mexico City

Bucharest

Shanghai

Almaty

São Paulo

Moscow

Seoul

Prague

Athens

Budapest

Lisbon

20 

State of the World’s Cities 2012/2013Conceptualizing Urban Prosperity

Box 1.1.3

Promising African cities

Among the 20 African cities included in UN-Habitat’s CPI 
sample, Cape Town, Johannesburg, Cairo and Casablanca are 
the only ones featuring solid prosperity factors. Cairo’s current 
political turmoil highlights the need for a more integrated 
pathway and more balanced growth with some dimensions 
(quality of life and infrastructure) progressing much faster than 
others (equity and social inclusion). Morocco, on the contrary, 
has embraced political change with a new constitution that 
enhances civil liberties and expands the notion of prosperity, 
which stand to benefit Casablanca and other cities. South 
African cities have experienced significant economic growth, 
but in the past two decades life expectancy has declined 
substantially, affecting quality of life. 

public goods. Cities in Southern and Eastern Europe such 
as Lisbon, Athens, Warsaw, Budapest, Prague, Bucharest 
and Moscow feature in this bracket, along with others in 
Latin America and Asia: São Paulo, Mexico City, Almaty 
(Kazakhstan), Shanghai, Seoul and Ankara. 

However, it is important to note that high inequalities 

in Moscow, Mexico City and São Paulo interfere with their 

POLICy Cities in emerging economies such as Brazil or 

China combine high economic growth and strong 

infrastructure, and are expected to move faster along the path of 
prosperity – but then, for the sake of balanced development, they 
must tackle inequalities and environmental degradation. They also 
must look to improve quality of life through more ample provision 
of public goods. 

performance in terms of prosperity. When the equity index 
is included in the CPI, both cities score below 0.800. This 
suggests that, although prosperity factors remain on the 
whole solid, they are somewhat weaker. While inequality is 
historically entrenched in most Latin American cities, it is a 
recent phenomenon in Russia, in the extended aftermath of 
economic liberalization. 

Cities with solid prosperity factors – second category 

(CPI: 0.700–0.799): This group is heterogeneous, with 
some cities showing a ‘less coordinated’, ill-balanced 
development in the ‘spokes’. This comes as the result 
of institutions, legal and regulatory frameworks and 
urban management practices that are being consolidated 
and because of this; they cannot hold together all the 

Figure 1.1.4

Cities with solid prosperity factors – second category

CPI Index (with (cid:31)ve dimensions)

Productivity Index

Infrastructure Development Index

Equity Index

CPI Index (with four dimensions)

Quality of Life Index

Environmental Sustainability Index

1.0

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

Casablanca

Cairo

Manila
Johannesburg

Jakarta

Cape Town

Beijing

Yerevan

Hà Noi

Kyïv

Bangkok

Am man

21 

elements of the ‘wheel’ 
to operate with stability. 
Heterogeneity is also 
related to the stage of 
development of the 
relevant countries. 
Measured by HDI 
readings, significant 
variations occur between 
countries like Jordan 
(0.884) and Indonesia 
(0.600), for instance. 

FACT Most of the 

cities in this 
group are located in 
Asia: Amman, Bangkok, 
Hanoi, Yerevan, Beijing, 
Jakarta and Manila. 
Four African cities are 
feature: Cape Town, 
Johannesburg, Cairo 
and Casablanca. Kiev in 
Ukraine is the only city 
in Eastern Europe.

Interestingly, the capital 
cities of these two 
countries do not feature 
such extreme variations 
in their respective HDIs 
(0.810 for Amman and 
0.755 for Jakarta). 

However, it is important 

to note that inequality 
is inconsistent with 
prosperity as understood 
in this Report. When the 
equity index is included 
in the CPI, Cape Town 
and Johannesburg (which 
both feature very high Gini 
coefficients), drop from the 
bracket of cities with ‘solid’ 
prosperity factors and join 
the group with ‘weak’ or 
even ‘very weak’ prosperity 
factors, with CPI values of 
0.590 and 0.479 respectively.

Cities with moderate 

1.0

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

Figure 1.1.5

Cities with moderate prosperity factors

CPI Index (with (cid:31)ve dimensions)

Productivity Index

Infrastructure Development Index

Equity Index

CPI Index (with four dimensions)

Quality of Life Index

Environmental Sustainability Index

New Delhi

Yaoundé

Guatemala City

Ulaanbaatar

Phnom Penh

Nairobi

Mumbai

Chisinau

Tegucigalapa

prosperity factors (CPI: 0.600–0.699): The difference 
between ‘solid’ and ‘moderate’ prosperity factors 
lies in wider discrepancies among the values of the 
various components. This points to institutional and 
structural failures, as the ‘hub’ fails to keep the ‘spokes’ 
at a relatively same ‘length’. Cities with less balanced 
development feature contrasted patterns, with a neat 
divide between rich and poor. 

In Nairobi, prosperity is compromised by steep 

inequality (Gini coefficient: 0.59), causing its CPI value to 
drop from ‘moderate’ to’ weak’ (0.673 to 0.593).

Cities with weak prosperity factors (CPI: 0.500–0.599): 

infrastructure and environment in most of the cities in 
this bracket. Production of goods and services is still too 
low, a reflection of underdevelopment. Historic structural 
problems, chronic inequality of opportunities, widespread 
poverty, inadequate capital investment in public goods, 
and lack of pro-poor social programmes are critical factors 
behind such low degrees of prosperity. 

The city product of African cities in this bracket is low, 
as are the ratings for quality of life and infrastructure. Most 

Box 1.1.4

Much remains to be done there in terms of quality of life, 

Low production, highly available public goods

FACT Most of the cities in this bracket – Tegucigalpa, Nairobi, 

Phnom Penh, Ulaanbaatar, Guatemala city, Yaoundé, 

Mumbai and New Delhi – feature low HDIs (below 0.62). While 
in most cities a moderate CPI value is associated with a low city 
product, in the case of the two Indian cities the low CPIs mostly 
reflect poor environmental conditions.

FACT In Nairobi, prosperity is compromised by steep inequality 

(Gini coefficient: 0.59), causing its CPI value to drop from 

‘moderate’ to’ weak’ (0.673 to 0.593).

Chisinau, the capital of Moldova, features a very low city 
product (0.34) that is almost half of those of Mumbai (0.645) 
or New Delhi (0.596). Still, this combines with very high 
readings for quality of life (0.85), infrastructure (0.895) and 
clean environment (0.894), similar to those for much richer 
cities like Auckland, Brussels, London or New York. With 
a very modest economic base, the city has been able to 
deliver sufficient public goods to reach a moderate degree 
of prosperity. This goes to show that various dimensions of 
urban prosperity can be deployed while economic growth 
remains relatively weak. 

22 

State of the World’s Cities 2012/2013Figure 1.1.6

Cities with weak prosperity factors

CPI Index (with (cid:31)ve dimensions)

Productivity Index

Infrastructure Development Index

Equity Index

CPI Index (with four dimensions)

Quality of Life Index

Environmental Sustainability Index

Conceptualizing Urban Prosperity

POLICy Poor 

performance of 
the ‘hub’ points to the need 
for more effective urban 
power functions such as 
governance, urban planning, 
laws, regulations, and 
institutions that can pave 
the way for more prosperous 
futures for these cities. 

1.0

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

like Monrovia (0.048), 
Antananarivo (0.171) or 
Conakry (0.133). In 2002, 
Zimbabwe recorded the 
lowest slum prevalence of 
the region, and one of the 
lowest of all the developing 
world (four per cent); 
poor governance, political 
instability and massive 
housing evictions in 2005 
have raised that percentage 
to 17 per cent, mainly due to overcrowding; and yet, Harare 
features high infrastructure development (0.899), similar to 
that of emerging economy cities like Ankara, Manila, Mexico 
City or Mumbai. Quality of life in Harare is also very low, 

Kathmundu

Abidjan

El Alto, Bolivia: a large and poorly serviced part of greater La Paz, 
where the population is 80% indigenous

© Eduardo Lopez Moreno

Dar es Salaam
Lusaka

Harare

Dakar

Addis Ababa

La Paz

Accra

Lagos

Kampala

Dhaka

of these cities perform better on the environment indicator 
(low emissions of fine particles (PM10). Recent progress in 
Ghana in the economic and political spheres looks certain 
to improve the CPI value for Accra, which at the moment 
is low (0.533) due to poor economic performance (0.347). 
Addis Ababa features relatively low in all CPI components, 
and this relative uniformity reflects a fair balance among 
the ‘spokes’ (0.52 on average). The city continues to make 
progress, thanks to higher investment in infrastructure and 
construction, manufacturing and tertiary activities. This 
in turn paves the way for job creation, and it is for central 
government to ensure that this economic model, which 
involves several dimensions of prosperity, retains both 
momentum and good synchronization. 

FACT The bulk of this 

bracket can be 
found in Africa: Abidjan, 
Accra, Addis Ababa, 
Dakar, Dar Es Salam, 
Harare, Kampala, 
Lagos and Lusaka. Also 
included are Dhaka, 
Kathmandu and La Paz. 

Various cities/countries 

from this group have a 
recent past marred by 
conflicts, political instability 
or economic crisis. The 
city product of Harare 
(0.246), not long ago a 
very vibrant economic 
centre, is almost as low as 
that of post-conflict cities 

23 

FACT There are only 

five cities with  

very weak prosperity 
factors  (CPI below 0.500) 
in UN-Habitat’s worldwide 
sample – Bamako, 
Antananarivo, Monrovia, 
Niamey and Conakry. Their 
common feature is that they 
have recently experienced 
various types of conflict 
with various degrees of 
intensity. In each of them, 
production, quality of life 
and infrastructure indicators 
are very low.

reflecting a dramatic 
reduction in life expectancy 
(to 1970s levels). Similar 
declines are also observed in 
the Democratic Republic of 
Congo, Lesotho, Swaziland 
or Zambia. 

It is important to 
note that inequality 
further weakens the CPI 
values for Lagos, Harare 
and Lusaka. When the 
equity index is included 
in the CPI, all three cities 
move from ‘weak’ to ‘very 
weak’ prosperity factors 
(below 0.500).

Cities with very weak prosperity factors (CPI 

below 0.500): Cities in this bracket feature contrasted 
patterns among the sub-indices in the CPI. For some, 
the dispersion of index values across the ‘spokes’ reflects 
institutional and structural problems. For others, the five 
dimensions of prosperity do converge, only at very low 
values, a hallmark of dysfunctional systems, institutional 
failures, sluggish economic growth as well as widespread 
poverty and destitution.

Figure 1.1.7

Cities with very weak prosperity factors 

CPI Index (with (cid:31)ve dimensions)

Productivity Index

CPI Index (with four dimensions)

Quality of Life Index

Infrastructure Development Index

Equity Index

Environmental Sustainability Index

1.0

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

Monrovia

Conakry

Antananarivo

Bamako

Niamey

Box 1.1.5

visualizing the 5 dimensions of the CPI

Productivity index

Productivity index

Equity index

Quality of life index

Equity index

Quality of life index

0

0.5

1.0

Vienna
Mexico City
Johannesburg

0

0.5

1.0

Vienna
Cairo
Nairobi

Environmental index

Infrastructure index

Environmental index

Infrastructure index

The two pentagons represent the five ‘spokes’ of prosperity 
as measured in five cities and the extent to which they are 
imbalanced /balanced in relation to each other. The radar-shaped 
graphs suggest where policy interventions are required. For 
instance, Nairobi (to the right) performs well in terms of the 
environment and infrastructure, but less so on equity, productivity 
and quality of life. In Cairo, the situation is the reverse, as the 

environment appears to be the weaker point in an otherwise 
well-balanced pattern of prosperity – although at an overall 
lower level compared with Vienna. Similar interpretations can be 
derived from the pentagon to the left, which compares the relative 
performances of revealing the prosperity patterns for the Mexico 
and Johannesburg, again against Vienna’s. 

24 

State of the World’s Cities 2012/2013Chapter 1.2

Urban and 
Regional Trends

Urban Change in 
Developed Countries

MORE THAN HALF OF THE WORLD IS NOW URBAN
It is really remarkable that only one century ago, two 
out of 10 people in the world were living in urban areas. 
In the least developed countries, this proportion was 
as low as five per cent, as the overwhelming majority 
was living in rural areas. The world has been rapidly 
urbanizing since then and, in some countries and regions, 
at an unprecedented pace. It was only two years ago that 
humankind took a historic step when, for the first time 
in history, the urban outnumbered the rural population. 
This milestone marked the advent of a new “urban 
millennium” and, by the middle of this century, it is 
expected that out of every 10 people on the planet, seven 
will be living in urban areas. 

Interestingly, only 60 years ago or so (1950), the 

number of people living in urban centres was slightly 
higher in the developed nations (54 per cent, or 442 
million) compared with developing countries. Today, 
of every 10 urban residents in the world more than 
seven are found in developing countries, which are also 
hosts to an overwhelming proportion of humankind 
(82 per cent of the world’s population). Moreover, it is 
estimated that, between 2010 and 2015, some 200,000 
people on average will be added to the world’s urban 
population each day. Worth noting is that 91 per cent of 
this daily increase (or 183,000) is expected to take place in 
developing countries. 

25 

URBAN POPULATION GROWTH IS NExT TO 
STAGNANT 
In the more advanced nations, urban population growth 
is next to stagnant (0.67 per cent on an annual average basis 
since 2010), which represents an additional six million or 
so every year. In Europe, the annual increase is only two 
million. By comparison, the aggregate annual population 
increase in six major developing-country cities – New Delhi 
and Mumbai (India), Dhaka (Bangladesh), Lagos (Nigeria), 
Kinshasa (Democratic Republic of Congo) and Karachi 
(Pakistan) – is higher than Europe’s entire population. 
Population in North American cities was the least slow of 
all those in the developed world between 2005 and 2010, 
particularly in the United States (one per cent on average). 

The Growth, Decline and Prosperity of Cities: There 
is no clear association between the demographic growth or 
decline of cities and their degrees of prosperity. Although 
population numbers have declined in a number of cities in 
Western Europe, Canada and New Zealand, this did not 
affect living standards, which in some cases even improved. 
On the other hand, and 
as might be expected, 
population declines in 
a number of cities in 
Eastern Europe and the 
United States of America 
are strongly associated 
with economic decay. The 
deterioration of inner 
city conditions (deserted 

20 years, 
the proportions of 
European cities with 
demographic growth 
rates over one per cent 
and of those with 
population declines 
were comparable. 

FACT In the last 

POLICy Cities must 

create 
the conditions (and 
record accurate data) 
that will enable them 
to understand and 
anticipate trends, 
including the growth or 
decline of some areas 
or regions, if they are 
to be in a position to 
develop expansionary 
or recovery strategies. 

China, Ruili, Yunnan Province. Dai minority threshing rice harvest in fields which are gradually being swallowed by this booming border city.

© Mark Henley/Panos Pictures

26 

State of the World’s Cities 2012/2013Figure 1.2.1

Population density in Europe, 2001

Urban and Regional Trends

Source: ORNL LandScan – cartography DG REGIO, European Commission. 

residential areas and crumbling infrastructure) have all gone 
hand in hand with population declines. 

Growing Cities are Located in Growing Regions. 

Cities and the surrounding regions are typically 
interdependent economically and tend to share similar 
socio-economic and demographic trends. In most North 
American cities, surrounding regions tend to predominate 
over urban areas. In contrast, in Western Europe the 
prosperity of entire regions is largely dependent on a 
primate conurbation and the concentration of services 
and manufacturing that comes with it. 

POLICy Regional 

and national 
urban planning through 
central government 
plays a critical role in 
creating a system of 
cities and in determining 
the prosperity and 
growth of cities.

Cities in the North will 
continue to attract migrants. 
European urban areas, 
in particular, will continue to 
feature low fertility rates and 
rapidly aging populations. 
These demographic trends 
are unmistakable and point 
to overall demographic 
decline. 

27 

FACT In the European 

Union, deaths 

should outnumber births 
from 2015 onwards, putting 
an end to population growth 
through natural increase. 
Positive net migration will 
be the only demographic 
growth factor until 2035.10

Between 2005 and 2010, 
net international migration 
counterbalanced the excess 
of deaths over births in 11 
developed countries, while 
contributing twice as much 
to population growth in 
another nine countries.11 
With the ongoing economic 
crisis, the aggregate flow of 
immigrants to developed 
countries has slowed down 
from an annual 2.3 per cent average rate in 2000–05 to 
1.7 per cent in 2005–10. Rising unemployment in some of 
the host cities/countries may cause governments to impose 
restrictions on immigration.12

It would be in the best interests of European countries/

cities to review immigration policies with a view to 
maximizing the benefits and reducing the more negative 
aspects of the phenomenon, with inclusionary social and 
political mechanisms to bring prosperity to all. 

Urban Change in 
Developing Countries

DIvERGENT URBAN GROWTH PATTERNS 
In the last decade, the urban population in the developing 
world grew an average 1.2 million people per week, or 
slightly less than one full year’s demographic growth in 
Europe’s urban areas. Asia dominated the picture, adding 
0.88 million new urban dwellers every week. Africa was the 
second largest contributor with an additional 0.23 million 
per week, dwarfing Latin America and the Caribbean’s 
0.15 million weekly increment. 

Africa: The urban population is set to outstrip 
Europe’s: In what promises to be one of the more 
remarkable forthcoming developments in the overall 
pattern of urbanization in Africa, the region’s population 
is poised to outgrow both Europe’s and Latin America’s, 
which was the first region to become predominantly urban 
in the developing world. In 2025, the aggregate urban 
population of Africa, Europe, Latin America and the 

FACT Urbanization in Africa has not yet brought the economic 

development and degree of prosperity that might have 

been expected. Inadequate education and physical infrastructure, 
combined with poor governance, have constrained the efficient use 
of productive resources, and the industrial development that might 
have come with it. At the same time, the ongoing urban economic 
momentum in Africa is a result of a number of the typical factors of 
prosperity at work in other regions of the world, such as economies 
of agglomeration, location advantages, and diversification of the 
economic base, albeit all in nascent form. 

FACT Asia is also confronted by the same urban paradox as 

Africa. Despite high concentrations of population in large 
cities, the continent ranks among the least-urbanized regions in 
the world (45 per cent urban). The tipping point for ‘urban Asia’ is 
expected to happen earlier though (around 2020s). 

POLICy The economic success of many countries/cities goes 

hand in hand with urbanization. Cities must give 

more attention to rising inequalities and the worrying trend of 
environmental degradation. 

Caribbean is expected to reach 642 million, 566 million 
and 560 million, respectively. In an apparent paradox, by 
that same year 2025 Africa will still be the least urbanized 
region in the world (45 per cent of the population).

Asia: Moving into the “Urban Century”: Half of the 
world’s urban population now lives in Asia. This region 
has accounted for about 65 per cent of the demographic 
expansion of all urban areas across the world since the 
beginning of the 21st Century. Undoubtedly, this is the 
“Asian Urban Century”.13 Large population concentrations 
in mega-cities are to remain a prominent feature in 
urban Asia (today, seven out of the 10 most populous cities 
of the world are in this region). In the recent past, Delhi 
and Shanghai have joined the league of ‘meta-cities’, those 
massive conurbations of more than 20 million people. It is 
expected that by 2020, another three Asian cities – Beijing, 
Dhaka and Mumbai – will have reached the 20 million mark.
Latin America and the Caribbean: Inter-city migration 

predominates: This is the most urbanized region in the 
world (80 per cent of the total population, compared with 
Europe’s 73 per cent).The urban transition in this region 
was achieved in the early 1960s, or about 16 years before 
Western Asia (the second sub-region in the developing 
world to become predominantly urban), and 30 and 45 
years respectively before Southern and North Africa (or, on 
current trends, some 70 years before the whole of Africa). 

cities must 

POLICy African 

CONvERGENT URBAN GROWTH PATTERNS 
Cities are expanding in a discontinuous, scattered and 
low-density form that is not sustainable: A defining feature 
of cities in the developing 
world is an outward 
expansion far beyond 
formal administrative 
boundaries, largely 
propelled by the use 
of the automobile and 
land speculation. A large 
number of cities – whether 
in Angola, Egypt, Brazil, 
China, or almost any other 
country – feature very 
land-consuming suburban 
sprawling patterns that 
often extend even to 
farther peripheries. A study 
on 120 cities shows that 
urban land cover grew, 

connect to regional 
and global business 
networks, enhance 
quality of life, improve 
basic infrastructure 
and communication 
networks, address 
public transport 
deficiencies and 
environmental 
conditions, and respond 
to inequality and 
poverty issues, if they 
are to turn into real 
engines of national 
growth and prosperity. 

28 

State of the World’s Cities 2012/2013Urban and Regional Trends

FACT Urban populations maintain high growth rates in the 

developing world, but the pace has slowed down, from 

just under three per cent in the year 2000 to 2.4 per cent in 
2010, which is still three and a half times higher than the annual 
average population growth rate in developed countries.

La Paz, Bolivia sprawls ever higher up the mountain side. The metropolitan area, formed by the neighbouring cities of La Paz, El Alto and 
Viacha, is the most populous area of Bolivia.

© 2012 Robert Gilhooly/fotoLIBRA.com

29 

on average, more than double the growth of the urban 
population. Similar urban trends can be observed in other 
parts of the world. For instance, in Mexico, the urban 

FACT Latin America and the Caribbean will be nearly 87 per cent 

urban in 2050, by which time the annual average pace 
of growth in the urban population is expected to slow down to 
0.3 per cent. Some cities already see their populations shrinking. 
Latin America and the Caribbean stands out as the only region 
where migration between urban areas is a significant determinant 
of urban population growth, accounting for nearly 50 per cent and 
due to several factors, chief among them the pursuit of prosperity. 

POLICy Latin American cities must become more productive 

and generate local jobs, improve transport 

infrastructure and living conditions, short of which they will face 
prospects of population decline due to higher mobility from city 
to city. They must reduce entrenched inequalities while improving 
quality of life and environmental protection. More prosperous 
cities must articulate better their strategic advantages with 
national economic policies and enhance their creative capital to 
increase prosperity prospects.

POLICy Even though the region is more urbanized than Europe, 

GDP per capita (PPP) was nearly three times lower 
than the European Union’s in 2010. The main reasons include 
chronic inequalities and mass poverty, insufficient infrastructure, 
poor public services, inadequate connectivity, poor governance 
and fragile institutions.

POLICy Against this background, cities must accommodate 

demographic and spatial expansions, with a 

concomitant development of well-devised urban structures that 
would reduce transport and service delivery costs, optimize land 
use and support the deployment and/or protection of open spaces. 

POLICy Better connectivity, mobility and accessibility and well-

planned integration of land-use, density and transport 

have the potential to reduce energy consumption drastically, 
making cities more sustainable. 

FACT Most urban plans and regulatory regimes in the developing 

world have been incapable of preventing the conversion 

of rural land to urban use in city peripheries. as a result, the 
reclassification of settlements from ‘rural’ to ‘urban’ has become 
the second most significant determinant of urban population growth 
and expansion in the developing world today.

physical expansion of all urban areas over the last 30 years 
was estimated to be at around 7.4 per cent on an annual 
average basis, outstripping population growth by a multiple 
of nearly four.14

Cities are becoming endless expanses, with high 

degrees of fragmentation of the urban fabric that 
result in vast interstitial open spaces. At the periphery, 
residential neighbourhoods are characterized by low-
density developments which, along with under-used 
spaces and fragmented built-up areas in the intermediate 
city-rings, are contributing to dramatic reductions in 
residential densities. 

NOvEL URBAN/REGIONAL CONFIGURATIONS AND 
PROSPERITy
Cities large or small have increasingly come to merge 
together to form new spatial configurations that typically 
take three principal forms: mega-regions, urban corridors 
and city-regions. Each on its own spatial scale, these 
three forms seem to act as nodes where global and 
regional flows of people, capital, goods and information 
combine and commingle, resulting in faster growth, both 
demographic and economic, than that of the countries 

Box 1.2.1

Novel configurations: A typology

Mega-regions surpass mega- and meta-cities by population 
and economic output, combining large markets, skilled labour 
and innovation and amalgamating several cities within the 
orbit of the overall region.  
Example: Japan’s Tokyo-Nagoya-Osaka-Kyoto-Kobe region, 
with a population close to 60 million. 

Urban corridors, a number of urban centres of various 
sizes are connected along transportation routes in linear 
development axes that are often linked to a number of mega-
cities, encompassing hinterlands. New developments in some 
fringe areas experience the fastest growth rates and the most 
rapid urban transformation. Example: in Malaysia, the Kuala 
Lumpur-Klang corridor along the Klang Valley.

City-regions take on a larger scale than large cities, 
expanding beyond formal administrative boundaries to engulf 
smaller ones as well as semi-urban and rural hinterlands, 
and even merge with other intermediate cities, creating large 
conurbations that eventually form city-regions. 

Examples: São Paulo, Brazil; Cape Town, South Africa; 
Bangkok, Thailand.

30 

State of the World’s Cities 2012/2013where they are located. These new configurations are 
more and more spatially connected and functionally 
bound by their economic and environmental ties, at times 
even socially and politically. They play an increasing role 
in the creation and distribution of prosperity far beyond 
their own specific geographic areas. 

Large urban configurations, as grouped in 

networks of cities, amplify the benefits of economies of 
agglomeration, increasing efficiencies and enhancing 
connectivity. They also generate economies of scale that are 
beneficial in terms of labour markets, as well as transport 
and communication infrastructure, which in turn increase 
local consumer demand. 

ENHANCING PROSPERITy IN LARGE URBAN 
CONFIGURATIONS: THE 5 DIMENSIONS
Large urban configurations concentrate so many 
resources and opportunities that give substance to the 
five dimensions of prosperity: productivity, infrastructural 
development, quality of life, equity and social inclusion, and 
environmental sustainability. 

Enhanced productivity: Planning large urban 

configurations as a ‘portfolio’ of functional and 
complementary areas of specialization can lead to more 
diversified economies, capitalizing on the comparative 
advantages of each city within the large agglomeration 

Urban and Regional Trends

FACT A critical mass of people, ideas, infrastructure and 

resources acts as a magnet of development, attracting 

migrants, private firms, investors and developers. All of this 
enhances the prospects for more employment opportunities, 
wealth creation, innovation and knowledge, which are all major 
factors of prosperity.

and developing a strong 
regional vision for the 
whole large configuration. 
For instance, in the Pearl 
River Delta mega-region 
in China, each of the 
cities capitalizes on its 
comparative strengths, and 
contributes to the overall 
prosperity of the large 
configuration. 

Infrastructural 

development: Transport 
infrastructure improves 

POLICy It is in a city’s 

interest to 
establish linkages with 
other neighbouring urban 
areas for the sake of 
complementary functions 
in order to acquire a 
strong collective regional 
identity, in the process 
achieving greater economic 
momentum than if they 
remain in isolation.

India, Tirupur, Tamil Nadu.Workers at a textile factory in Tirupur. 
There are some 7,000 garment factories in the city, providing 
employment to close to one million people.

© Atul Loke/Panos Pictures

31 

POLICy Investments 

connectivity and spatially integrates the networks of cities 
that make up the urban/regional configuration. The large 
economically prosperous cities of Shanghai, Guangzhou 
and Beijing have invested 
in infrastructure to connect 
peripheral towns and 
enhance the large urban 
configuration. Beijing has 
extended 304 km of roads 
to link all ‘administrative 
villages’ to the city (2005). 
Shanghai has built 750 km 
of highways to integrate 
the rural hinterland (2007). 

infrastructure and related 
reforms, including finance 
and regulations, deliver 
major economic benefits, 
contributing to poverty 
alleviation and improving 
quality of life. 

in transport 

POLICy Cities and regional governments should encourage 

social and institutional innovations that can level out 
socio-spatial inequalities; this can include tax revenue transfers 
among urban authorities within the large urban configuration, or 
revenue-sharing, or equalization grants. 

POLICy New or strengthened, more effective local and regional 

institutions, new linkages and alliances across the 

three tiers of government, together with a comprehensive vision 
with clear plans favouring inclusiveness, are all crucial for 
equitable development and prosperity. 

China: high-speed train in Lujiazui City, the financial district of 
Shanghai. Bullet trains in China substantially reduce transit times 
between cities, a 140 km journey taking only 30 minutes. 

© ArtisticPhoto/Shutterstock.com

Guangzhou has completed extensive networks of roads, 
electricity and water distribution to all neighbouring rural 
settlements with more than 100 residents (2007).15
Equity and social inclusion: The market-driven 
logic of scale economies can interfere with equitable 
distribution, such as unregulated land markets, spatial 
segregation, extreme income inequalities and uneven 
development. Speculative real estate development in 
many of these large urban 
configurations effectively 
excludes not only the poor, 
but even the middle class, 
from formal land markets, 
creating an uneven 
patchwork of privilege and 
underprivilege across large 
urban areas. 

POLICy Increasing 

evidence 

shows that 
interventions to 
promote quality 
of life have clear 
positive effects on 
the other dimensions 
of prosperity. 
Unsurprisingly, progress 
on the other dimensions 
of prosperity is found to 
enhance quality of life.

Quality of life: When 

city leaders cooperate, 
rather than compete, in a 
number of areas (crime, 
poverty, social inequalities, 

32 

State of the World’s Cities 2012/2013transport systems, infrastructure) a more effective type of 
regional governance emerges that has direct implications on 
the quality of life both inside and outside the large urban 
configuration.

Environmental sustainability: Environmental 

challenges transcend political/administrative boundaries. 
Yet, local authorities may find themselves with little 
power or resources to counter negative impacts of growth 
on the environment, particularly in the face of negative 
externalities generated by neighbouring cities. 

LARGE URBAN CONFIGURATIONS FACE 
SPECIFIC RISkS
Large urban configurations come with a number of well-
identified, specific risks: poor urban/regional planning, 
lack of coordination and deficient coping strategies in 
the face of social and fiscal disparities. Although these 
affect the whole population, the bulk of the risks fall 
disproportionately on the poor. 

Economic forces and spontaneous growth in the large 

urban configurations tend to sharpen spatial and social 
disparities, which are further compounded by inefficient use 
of land and other resources. Close links with world financial 

Urban and Regional Trends

POLICy Looking beyond their own local interests and 

cooperating with the other jurisdictions involved, 

local authorities can improve competitive advantage while also 
preserving the environment.

POLICy Working together, cities in a large urban configuration 

are in better positions effectively to protect, 

manage, and plan for physical environments that span multiple 
jurisdictions. 

POLICy The economic surpluses that large urban 

agglomerations derive from productivity gains can 

be channeled towards the protection of natural resources in the 
region, with the costs of maintaining these indivisible public goods 
equitably shared among the population. 

POLICy Should they fail to address those detrimental side 

effects, large urban configurations may find it 

increasingly difficult to attract investment, labour and skills, in the 
process compromising future prosperity. 

markets and the impacts of global and regional economic 
crises shape ‘uneven geographies of development’.

Endnotes

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 
7 

UN-Habitat (2011) Cities and Climate Change: Global Report on Human Settlements 
2011, Earthscan, London
 United Nations (2010) World Economic and Social Survey 2010: Retooling Global 
Development, United Nation (DESA),New York, http://www.un.org/esa/policy/wess/
wess2010files/wess2010.pdf
Historically, water, biodiversity, knowledge and some other shared resources, 
including roads, sidewalks, highways and other public infrastructure have been 
considered as ‘commons’. ‘Commons’ are also intangible aspects such as clean 
environmental conditions, identity, cultural and symbolic spaces. More recently, from 
an institutional governance perspective, ‘commons’ are institutional arrangements 
such as ‘spaces’ for negotiation and participation, cultural norms and legal and 
statutory provisions. 
 Dickinson, E. (2011) ‘GDP: A Brief History’, Foreign Policy, January/February 2011, 
http://www.foreignpolicy.com/articles/2011/01/02/gdp_a_brief_history.
The outcome of China’s “green GDP” index was that if air pollution, water shortages, 
desertification, and depletion of fish stocks and wildlife were factored into its GDP 
calculation, the 2004 GDP would have been 511 billion yuan (US$ 66 billion), or three 
per cent lower (SEPA and NBS, 2006).
Dickinson, 2011.
Oyelaran-Oyeyinka, B. and P.G. Sampath (2010) Latecomer Development: Innovation 
and Knowledge for Economic Growth, Routledge, London and New York.

8 

9 

Further compounding the problem of data dearth is the fact that most of the existing 
information was not collected in a uniform way to allow for comparisons of cities 
across countries and regions.
This classification has used data from multiple sources for the various components 
of the UN-Habitat City Prosperity Index, and this calls for a word of caution when 
interpreting some of these variations.

10  Eurostat (2008) ‘Ageing characterizes the demographic perspectives of the European 
societies’, Eurostat - Statistics in focus, 72/2008, Author: Konstantinos Giannakouris. 
European Commission, Brussels.

11  United Nations (2010) World population policies 2009, United Nations, Department 

of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division, New York, http://www.un.org/esa/
population/publications/wpp2009/Publication_complete.pdf
Ibid.

12 
13  Mohan, R. (2006) Asia’s Urban Century: Emerging Trends, Key note address delivered 

at the Conference of Land and Policies and Urban Development, Lincoln Institute 
of Land Policy, Cambridge, Massachusetts, June 5, http://www.bis.org/review/
r060705e.pdf.

14  ONU-HABITAT and SEDESOL (2011), El Estado de las Ciudades de México, ONU-

HABITAT (Oficina Regional para América Latina y el Caribe), Rio de Janeiro,
15  World Bank (2009) World Development Report 2009: Reshaping Economic 

Geography, World Bank, Washington.

33 

Part Two

Prosperity of Cities

Chapter 2.1

Productivity and the 
Prosperity of Cities

Enhancing urban productivity is clearly desirable, as it 
improves competitiveness and, ultimately, the prosperity of 
any city. More productive cities are able to increase output 
with the same amounts of resources, generating additional 
real income that can raise living standards through more 
affordable goods and services. More specifically, the 
extra income and municipal revenue generated through 
productivity will enable any city to provide more, better 
services, such as housing, education and health services, 
social programmes and expanded infrastructure networks 
to support both productive and leisure activities. 

Urban productivity refers to the efficiency with which 

a city transforms inputs into outputs. However, because 
of limited data, gross domestic product (GDP) per capita 
is commonly used as a proxy for urban productivity, with 

POLICy Raising urban 

productivity 
is not a goal in itself, but 
a critical starting point 
to provide residents with 
decent income for their 
basic needs and adequate 
living standards.1

a city’s GDP measuring 
local production of 
goods and services and 
the population serving 
as a proxy for inputs 
related to human capital. 
However, it is important 
to emphasize that, despite 
its expediency, GDP 

POLICy Cities are naturally more productive than rural areas, 

as they benefit from larger pools of labour and talent, 

together with concentration efficiencies for both producers and 
consumers, and a more fluid exchange of ideas and innovations.2

per capita fails fully to reflect the complex dynamics 
determining urban productivity.

RISING URBANIzATION AND INCREASING 
PRODUCTIvITy
As countries become more urbanized, both urban 
and national productivity will increase. As shown in 
Figure 2.1.1, rising urbanization and per capita income 
went hand in hand for the world as a whole over the 
past five decades. While the share of urban populations 
worldwide increased from 33 to 51 per cent between 1960 
and 2010, per capita income increased by 152 per cent – 
from USD 2,382 to USD 6,006 – over the same period.4
However, as shown in Figure 2.1.2, the positive link 

FACT In OECD 

between urbanization and national productivity holds 
mainly for high- and middle-income countries, signaling 
healthy urbanization dynamics fueled by prosperous 
cities acting as magnets for rural migration. Low-income 
countries display a more mixed trend. While these countries 
as a whole experienced a fast pace of urbanization from 
1960 onward, GDP per 
capita remained largely 
unchanged, and even 
decreased, particularly 
between 1970 and the 
year 2000. This would 
suggest that, rather than 
being attracted by better 
economic opportunities 
in urban areas (demand 
pull’), rural migrants 
were only seeking refuge 
from famine, war or other 
calamities in what is often 
referred to as ‘supply push‘ 
urbanization.5

countries, the 
GDP per capita is, on 
average, 64 per cent 
higher in towns and 
cities than in rural 
areas. Similarly, in 
European cities with 
populations over 
one million, average 
GDP per capita is 
25 per cent higher than 
in the EU as a whole, 
and 40 per cent higher 
than that of their home 
nations.3 

36 

Figure 2.1.1

Urbanization and per capita GDP across countries 
as % of base year, 1960–2010

GDP per capita

Urban population (%)

5.0

4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0
1960

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

Note: Both time series are indexed to 1 in the initial year. The y value of 
each series shows the unit change with respect to the base year.

Source: UNDESA (2012) urbanization; World Bank (2012) GDP per capita. 

The experience of the USA, Brazil, China and 

Kenya illustrates some of the specific factors at work 
in individual countries. Figure 2.1.3 shows that in the 
USA, urbanization rates and per capita income moved 
together until roughly 1940, when urbanization reached 
close to 60 per cent. Thereafter, per capita income grew 

Productivity and the Prosperity of Cities

FACT The correlation 

between 

urbanization rates and 
productivity over the past 
five decades has also varied 
across and within regions, 
reflecting the multiplicity 
of factors affecting both 
phenomena. 

more rapidly, reflecting 
the productivity gains 
from improvements in 
manufacturing and services 
as well as infrastructure 
investments made during 
the inter-war years.6 

Brazil, a higher middle-
income country, underwent 
a seemingly similar growth-
urbanization path until the 
late 1960s, when about half the population became urban. 
Thereafter, productivity neither grew significantly faster 
than urbanization, nor were productivity gains sustained, 
suggesting that urbanization alone may not guarantee 
continued productivity increases. 

China, a lower middle-income country, experienced 
a gradual increase in urbanization rates and productivity 
until the late 1970s, when urbanization reached 20 per cent. 
After the opening up of the economy in 1978, productivity 
increased at a much faster pace – GDP per capita grew 
by a factor of roughly 15 between 1978 and 2010, while 
the percentage of the urban population increased by a 
factor of ‘only’ 2.4 during the same period. 

Shenzen, China: inside the factory of the biggest CCTV 
surveillance camera producer in China.

© Bartlomiej Magierowski/Shutterstock.com

37 

Figure 2.1.2

Trends in urbanization and national GDP per capita – for various levels of income, 1960–2010

GDP per capita

Urban population (%)

Higher middle-income countries, 1960–2010

Low-income countries, 1960–2010

High-income countries, 1960–2010

Lower middle-income countries, 1960–2010

5.0

4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

5.0

4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

5.0

4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

5.0

4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

1975

1980

1970

1965

0.0
1990
1960
Note: Both time series are indexed to 1 in the initial year. The y value of each series shows the unit change with respect to the base year.
Source: UNDESA (2012) urbanization; World Bank (2012) GDP per capita.

0.0
1960

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

1965

1970

2010

1975

1980

1985

1995

2000

2005

2010

FACT In the USA, New York City contributes about 10 per cent 

of the country’s GDP and only 6.3 per cent of the total 

population. The 10 US cities with the largest GDP produce 
36 per cent of the country’s goods and services and 24 per cent 
of the total population.8 São Paulo – Brazil’s economic and 
financial capital accounts for 10 per cent of the population, but 
25 per cent of national GDP.9 In China, the 53 metropolitan regions 
with populations over one million contribute about 62 per cent 
of national non-farm GDP and 29 per cent of the country’s 
population. In Kenya, Nairobi, with 8.4 per cent of the country’s 
population, accounts for almost 20 per cent of the country’s 
GDP.10 Worldwide, the largest 100 cities accounted for around 
30 per cent of the total production of goods and services in 2008, 
with the top 30 cities alone accounting for around 18 per cent.11

Lastly, Kenya illustrates the experience of the limited 
number of low-income countries, mostly in Sub-Saharan 
Africa, where productivity 
growth was negligible even 
though urbanization rates 
continued to rise.7 

POLICy Despite 

differences 

in the pace of 
productivity growth 
with respect to 
urbanization, the urban 
dominance in economic 
productivity is evident 
across countries. In 
other words, urban 
areas contribute 
disproportionately to 
national productivity. 

FACTORS AFFECTING 
URBAN PRODUCTIvITy
The factors determining 
urban productivity can 
be split into two broad 
categories: external factors 
that give cities additional 
comparative advantage, 
including national and 

38 

State of the World’s Cities 2012/2013Figure 2.1.3

 Urbanization and GDP per capita in selected countries

Productivity and the Prosperity of Cities

GDP per capita

Urbanization

USA

1,200

1,000

800

600

400

200

Kenya

350

300

250

200

150

100

50

0
1880

1890

1900

1910

1920

1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

0
1960

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

350

300

250

200

150

100

50

0
1960

Brazil

China

2,250

2,000

1,750

1,500

1,250

1,000

750

500

250

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

0
1960

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

Note: Both time series are indexed to 100 in the initial year. The y value of each series shows the percentage change with respect to the base year.  
GDP per capita is in constant 2000 USD.

Source: Source: UNDESA (2012) urbanization; World Bank (2012) GDP per capita.

regional factors; and city-level factors that affect the city’s 
production function, such as physical infrastructure, 
growth management, human capital, and innovative and 
entrepreneurship spirits.

cities a comparative advantage, and have served to spur the 
growth of resort cities around the world, from the French 
Riviera to Punta del Este (Uruguay), Eilat (Israel), Jurmala 
(Latvia) or Las Palmas 
(Canary Islands). 

ExTERNAL FACTORS 
External factors are largely beyond cities’ orbits of 
influence. Some of the differences in productivity among 
cities are explained by external factors, such as geographic 
location, as well as regional and national comparative 
advantages (Table 2.1.1). 

In terms of geographic location, coastal areas and river 

deltas have been preferred locations for cities. Currently, 
14 of the world’s 19 largest cities are port cities, which 
benefit from lower shipping costs and access through wider 
markets.12 Natural beauty and warmer weather also give 

The importance of 
national comparative 
advantage is illustrated by 
the fact that, while 22 of 
the top 30 largest urban 
areas (by population) were 
located in emerging or 
developing economies in 
2008, only seven emerging 
economy cities ranked 
among the top 30 in terms 

39 

POLICy Cities located 

in countries 

with a well-educated labour 
force, sound infrastructure, 
mature financial markets, 
stable political systems and 
firmly grounded market 
mechanisms have higher 
productivity than those 
located in countries that do 
not offer these conditions. 

FACT In China, national 

policies have 

played a key role in 
improved productivity 
in coastal cities. Three 
decades ago, China 
initiated policies designed 
to promote economic 
growth in those cities 
through a combination 
of industrialization and 
financial incentives, 
putting them in a better 
position to compete for 
foreign investment and 
infrastructure spending. 

of urban GDP. The group 
included Mexico City, 
São Paulo, Buenos Aires, 
Moscow, Shanghai, Mumbai 
and Rio de Janeiro, but 
no Middle Eastern or 
African cities. The average 
GDP per capita of these 
emerging/developing 
country cities tends to be 
substantially smaller than 
that of developed cities 
(Figure 2.1.4).

Subsequent expansion 

in individual cities triggered 
the emergence of ‘city 
clusters,’ spurring the 

growth of second-tier cities such as Tianjin, Shijiazhuang 
and Tangshan, which respectively developed around Beijing; 
Zhuhai, Dongguan and Foshan around the provincial 
capital of Guangzhou; and Suzhou, Wuxi and Hangzhou in 
close proximity to Shanghai. These city clusters generated 
agglomeration economies at the regional level, expanding 
opportunities for trade and enhancing their (and their entire 
region’s) attractions for investors.13 This cumulative effect 
has resulted in dramatic differences in productivity between 
coastal cities and their counterparts in the hinterland, with 
the growth differential 
surpassing 6 per cent, 
and the per capita fiscal 
revenues between the 
richest and the poorest 
provinces increasing from a 
ratio of 2:1 to 19:1.14

Figure 2.1.4

2008 GDP per capita (Thousands US$ PPPs)  
100

Table 2.1.1

External factors determining a city’s productivity

Geographical 
comparative  
advantage

Physical attributes
Climate
Location (e.g., ports, rivers)
Natural endowments
Soils
Minerals
Energy
Natural beauty
Archeological heritage

Regional 
comparative 
advantage

National 
comparative 
advantage

Economic opportunities
Access to markets, investors and skills
Regional hubs and/or clusters

Level of development 
Pool of labour, skills, scientific and 
technological capital
Social conditions (e.g., poverty, inequality) 
Economic infrastructure

Institutional conditions
Sound institutions
Sound governance
Political stability
Maturity of financial markets 

Economic policies
Ease of doing business
Investment attractiveness
Macroeconomic stability

vision
National leadership

Population, GDP per capita and total GDP for selected metropolitan areas (2008)

CITy-LEvEL FACTORS 
AFFECTING URBAN 
PRODUCTIvITy 
Cities play a key role in 
determining their own 
productivity, since many 
factors that affect urban 
productivity play out at 
the city level. Some of 
these factors are intrinsic 
to all urban areas – 
occurring naturally such 
as agglomeration and scale 

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

Boston

New York

Atlanta

Houston

Paris

Los Angeles

Sao Paulo**

Buenos Aires

Shanghai

Mexico City

Istanbul

Cairo

Lagos

0

5

Karachi
10

Dhaka

15

Sphere surface represents
total urban GDP 
(2008 US$bn PPPs)

Tokyo

Mumbai (Bombay)****

20

25

30

35

40

45

2008 Population (Millions)

** New data found from national data sources on GDP per capita in all major Brazilian Cities including Sao Paulo and Rio de Janeiro.  
**** New data found from national data sources on GDP per capita in Mumbai (as well as Delhi, Bangalore and Kolkata in full rankings).

Source: Data from PricewaterhouseCoopers (2009)

40 

State of the World’s Cities 2012/2013Productivity and the Prosperity of Cities

FACT The concentration of infrastructure, people as well 

as economic, social and cultural activities, leads to 

substantial benefits and efficiency due to agglomeration and scale 
economies.

POLICy Agglomeration 

economies 
give cities a competitive 
advantage over rural 
areas, as well as large 
cities over smaller cities. 
Agglomeration economies 
also benefit densely 
populated areas within 
cities. 

POLICy The structural 

productivity 

benefit from a wider range 
of potential employers, 
which lowers their risk of 
failure. Better matching 
between labour supply 
and demand results in 
greater flexibility, higher 
productivity and stronger 
growth for both workers 
and businesses. Cities also 
offer firms and residents 
access to a wider and better 
range of shared services 
and infrastructure.16 

of cities in part rests upon 
an efficient supply of 
serviced land and reliable 
infrastructure, including 
transport, power, water 
and sanitation as will as 
ICT. These are critical 
enabling factors of urban 
development, as they 
constitute basic inputs of 
productive activity and, 
if deficient, constitute 
a limiting constraint 
on growth and private 
investment. 

Extrinsic city-level 
factors 
As cities continue to 
grow, higher productivity 
comes to depend on other 
factors, such as the ability 
of a city to maximize 
the technical efficiency 
of urban systems, both 
structural and operational. 
Effective management 
of agglomeration 
diseconomies – including 
congestion and rising input 
prices – enables the population and businesses to maximize 
their own productive potential. 

This has been the case in Mumbai, where serious 
attempts to create an international financial hub have 
been defeated by chaotic local transport conditions 
together with a prohibitive property (rental) market, with 

FACT Lack of adequate infrastructure severely hinders the 

structural productivity of cities, limiting their capacity to 

achieve full potential. 

Table 2.1.2

City-specific factors determining a city’s productivity 

Intrinsic 
(natural) 
productivity 
growth 
factors

Extrinsic 
productivity 
growth 
factors

Economies of scale
Provision of urban services

Agglomeration economies
Matching
Sharing
Learning

Technical efficiency
Structural efficiency
Land management policies
Space efficiency
Infrastructure investment
Taxation
Disaster prevention
Operational efficiency
Day-to-day urban management
Service delivery
Emergency management

Institutional scaffolding
Sound local institutions (e.g., decentralization)
Sound governance
Ease of doing business

Quality of life (quality of education, safety, 
cultural life, liveliness)
Attractiveness to knowledge-base industries 
Attraction and retention of the ‘creative class’

Learning-based efficiency
Creativity and innovation
Research and development and technological 
development
Entrepreneurship 

vision
Local leadership
Local governance

economies (Table 2.1.2). Other city-specific factors depend 
on the city’s ability to capitalize on the natural productivity 
potential of agglomeration economies (‘extrinsic city-
specific factors’). 

Intrinsic city-level factors15
One of the most obvious factors determining urban 
productivity is population growth. As a city’s population 
increases, so does the pool of workers and consumers. 

Agglomeration economies are the benefits firms derive 

from locating near customers and suppliers in order to 
reduce transport and communication costs and having 
access to a large labour pool. In larger cities, workers 

41 

POLICy The sound 

operation of 

cities, which encompasses 
traffic to emergency 
management, transport 
services, garbage collection, 
and the provision of urban 
services that offer critical 
support to social and 
economic activities are 
important determinants of 
the operational productivity 
of cities. 

rents twice as high as 
Manhattan’s pushing major 
financial companies away 
from the city.17

Several cities are 

actively expanding 
infrastructure as part 
of their development 
strategies. Kenya’s 
capital Nairobi is 
developing transport 
and communications 
infrastructure, with 
tangible results in terms of 
efficiency and productivity 

in various economic sectors. Similar efforts are underway 
in Guadalajara in central Mexico in a bid to attract more 
high-technology firms (electronics and communications). As 
a result, production structures are undergoing rapid change, 
and suburban landscapes with them. 

Figure 2.1.5

Factors hampering economic productivity

For example, Rio de Janeiro’s newly established 

Operations Centre offers a glimpse of the way cities might 
be managed in the future.18 Conceived as a city-wide 
decision-making mechanism for emergency situations 
based on real-time information, the centre integrates 
information from multiple departments and government 
agencies, Visual displays of data from various urban 
systems, including surveillance cameras, together with 
maps, news updates, information about incidents and 
even simulations, facilitate real-time monitoring and 
analysis. Although initially designed for forecasting floods 
and other emergencies, the Centre is also used for day-
to-day management of urban functions. Similar projects 
have already been implemented in New York City and in 
Gauteng (South Africa).19

With the decline of physical constraints on cities and 

communities as a result of technological progress in recent 
decades, creativity and innovation have arguably become 
major driving forces of productivity and economic growth 
in urban areas. 

per cent
40

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

Corruption/lack of good governance

Cost of conducting business

Weak public institutions

Lack of appropriate knowledge & skills development

De(cid:31)cient infrastructure

Poor access to information

Africa 

Asia 

LAC 

Arab States

All regions

42 

State of the World’s Cities 2012/2013FACT New technologies 

offer opportunities for 
enhanced urban management, 
making cities more efficient 
and productive. 

Productivity and the Prosperity of Cities

FACT While physical factors are undoubtedly 

key determinants of productivity, 
local experts around the world emphasize 
the importance of ‘soft’ factors. Specifically, 
corruption and lack of good governance were 
identified as the most significant barriers 
to economic productivity by 25 per cent of 
the local experts surveyed by UN-Habitat 
(Figure 2.1.5). Additional factors included the 
high cost or difficulty of doing business, weak 
institutions, insufficient knowledge and skills, 
deficient infrastructure and poor access to 
information.

China: the Hexi Corridor, part of the historical Silk Route, remains economically important.

© 2012 Edwina Sassoon/fotoLIBRA.com

43 

FACT Cities that succeed 

in fostering the 
exchange of ideas and 
innovations are able to tap 
into growth dynamics that 
fuel the creation of social 
and intellectual capital, 
thereby further contributing 
to their productivity. 

POLICy Cities that 

succeed in 

educating, attracting 
and retaining creative 
individuals are more likely 
to prosper, as they not only 
generate new ideas and 
products but, in turn, also 
attract high-value added 
firms, such as knowledge-
based industries. 

FACT A city’s existing 

talent pool is 
a major determinant of 
productivity. The more 
highly skilled a city’s 
population, the more likely it 
is to attract more talent. 

POLICy By offering an 

environment 

conducive for Research and 
Development, cities can be 
key players in a knowledge-
based economy, as there 
is a direct link between 
Research and Development, 
technology and productivity. 

information technologies.23 Chongqing has developed an 
ambitious training programme to support the transition of 
rural migrants from manual-based to skill-based types of 
work; by 2009, nearly one-third of migrants had benefited 
from the scheme.24

44 

Some cities are 

Some cities in developing countries have embraced 

strengthening comparative 
advantage by showcasing 
their tangible and 
intangible heritage and 
exploiting their cultural 
identity, in an effort to 
bring about social and 
economic transformation.20 
Doha, for example, is 
developing education and 
arts as part of the city’s new 
cultural vision.21 Gaziantep 
in eastern Turkey has 
started to use cultural 
heritage as a touristic 
asset for the purposes 
of increased prosperity. 
Heritage restoration and 
rehabilitation enhance 
quality of life while 
contributing to economic 
development.22 

Talent, in turn, is a 

function of the quality of 
school systems and higher 
education. Many cities in 
the developing world are 
faced with brain drain 
due to lack of local and 
national policies to retain 
highly qualified individuals. 
With the exception of 
Asia, where about half of 
the local experts perceive 
that cities are making 
efforts to retain talent, the 
proportions are alarmingly 
low in other regions. 
There are exceptions, 
though: Dubai emphasizes 
higher education and 
training in engineering and 

the model of world-class innovation clusters, such as 
California’s Silicon Valley or Boston’s Route 128, to become 
‘high-tech hubs’. Those that have met with success in 
this endeavour, such as India’s Bangalore, owe it to the 
same basic factors: the presence of top-quality academic 
and research institutions as well as substantial public and 
corporate investment. However, some observers claim 
that the city needs to pay more attention to infrastructure 
development and to ensure that the benefits of growth are 
more evenly distributed across all the population.

Quality of life is rapidly emerging as a major asset 
in any efforts to attract and retain creative minds and 
businesses. It comes as no surprise that Toronto, San 
Francisco or Stockholm should consistently rank among 
the top performing cities in the world, since they are found 
as performing particularly well in a wide range of both 
economic and quality of life indicators, crime, green areas, 
air quality and life satisfaction. Outside the more developed 
nations, Singapore, with a similar balance of quality of life 
attributes, also ranks among the top world cities and the 
highest among developing countries. 

URBAN PRODUCTIvITy: SOME CHALLENGES
While China’s urban population increased from 17 to 
39 per cent within a span of 40 years (from 1963 to 2003), 
the same change in urban population took 120 years in 
Great Britain and 80 years in the USA.26 Cities in more 
advanced countries are better positioned to capitalize on 
the agglomeration economies associated with population 
growth. This is not just because that growth is more 
manageable (typically around one per cent per year); but 
also because, as suggested by their high GDP per capita, 
these cities already have the physical and institutional 
support needed to capitalize on that demographic 
potential. Such capacities are generally not available in 
developing countries, 
leaving fast-expanding 
cities more exposed 
to the agglomeration 
diseconomies which 
prevent them from 
fully capitalizing on the 
productivity potential 
associated with sustained 
population growth 
(typically an annual rate 
of two to four per cent or 

their strengths not 
just from their status 
as global economic 
powerhouses or 
from sophisticated 
infrastructure, but 
also from their ability 
to enhance quality of 
life.25

FACT Top performing 

cities derive 

State of the World’s Cities 2012/2013Productivity and the Prosperity of Cities

growing sectors of the 
economy. Fueled by the 
continuous growth in the 
financial, manufacturing 
and telecommunications 
sectors, annual GDP 
is an estimated USD75 
billion.28 At the same 
time, Dhaka’s GDP per 
capita is the lowest of all 
mega-cities, suggesting 
that agglomeration 
diseconomies are likely 
to have offset a large 
proportion of the potential 
benefits associated 
with strong population 
growth. In other words, 
the productivity gains 
associated with such 
growth would have been 
remarkable if only Dhaka 
had been able to manage 
its growth more effectively 
and distribute benefits it in 
a more equitable manner. 

As shown in 

more). Despite the difficulty, some cities such as Shenzhen, 
China has made remarkable progress as indicated in the 
box below. 

This is the case of Dhaka the capital city of Bangladesh, 

with an average annual population growth of 4.4 per cent 
between 1990 and 2008. The ninth largest city in the world, 
Dhaka is one of the fastest growing in Asia. While some of 
the population growth has only reflected recent expansion 
boundaries, the Dhaka region has long attracted migrants 
from rural areas looking for opportunities in the booming 
metropolis. They provide much-needed labour in rapidly 

Box 2.1.1

Shenzhen: Capitalizing on the gains of urban growth

Shenzhen is one of the world’s fastest growing cities. During 
the past 30 years, Shenzhen’s GDP per capita ranked first 
among China’s major cities – averaging a phenomenal 
27 per cent annual growth in urban GDP. Notably, the gains 
from Shenzhen’s fast pace of industrialization, urbanization 
and modernization have served to enhance the quality of 
life of all its residents. Income and living conditions have 
improved steadily. A new social security and public health 
insurance system has been successfully implemented. The 
city’s Gini coefficient has remained around 0.3, far less than 
that of the other cities on the mainland, denoting the city’s 
efforts to achieve an equitable growth pattern.27

Figure 2.1.6

Perceptions of experts regarding the distribution of 
economic prosperity

per cent
20

POLICy The fast pace 

of urbanization 

in developing countries 
presents both challenges 
and opportunities for the 
productivity of cities. 

FACT Not all cities are 

fully capitalizing 
on the gains of population 
growth. 

FACT Unfortunately, 

Dhaka’s experience 
is not exceptional. In the UN-
Habitat survey, urban experts 
expressed scepticism 
regarding the progress being 
made towards distributing 
the benefits of a prosperous 
city. In cities like Bangalore, 
Ho Chi Minh and Chongqing, 
the benefits of economic 
prosperity are perceived to 
be captured mainly by the 
educated class; in Alexandria 
and Nairobi, mostly by the 
wealthy; while in Santo 
Domino, Dubai and Dar-es-
Salam, largely by politicians. 

Figure 2.1.6, urban experts 
from all regions share the 
same grim assessment, with 
Asia showing just a slightly 
more positive outlook – as 
20 per cent of local experts 
perceive that economic prosperity is evenly distributed, 
compared to 14 per cent in the Middle East and roughly 
7 per cent in Africa and Latin America. 

15

10

5

0

Africa

Asia

LAC

Arab States

All regions

Source: UN-Habitat, City Monitoring Policy Survey, 2011

45 

HOW TO RAISE A CITy’S PRODUCTIvITy? SOME 
GENERAL POLICy GUIDELINES
While urban productivity is generally linked to stable 
macroeconomic conditions, sound institutions and 
adequate infrastructure, the focus of policy actions will 
depend on a city’s level of development. 

 The management of urban growth is particularly 

important if rapidly expanding cities in early stages 
of development must be able fully to capitalize on the 
natural benefits of agglomeration economies and to 
reduce future inefficiencies. 

Ineffective land management, inadequate spending 

on infrastructure, distorting taxation schemes and unduly 
cumbersome business regulations are detrimental to any 
city’s structural productivity. 

It is important to identify any barriers that prevent 
any city from maximizing its productivity potential. In 
this regard, reducing traffic congestion, enhancing mass 
transit options and providing efficient, reliable services are 

POLICy As cities progress 

along the development 

path, they must facilitate 
production processes, addressing 
the technical and organizational 
inefficiencies that hinder structural 
and operational productivity. 

POLICy Cities at the early stages of development need 

to strive towards enhancing good transport 

connectivity to its markets and providing access to 
adequate health and basic education to its population.

POLICy The importance 

of sound 

governance structures 
to prevent corruption, 
together with strong local 
institutions, and business-
conducive regulations, 
cannot be overemphasized. 

China: docks on the Huangpu river, which flows through the centre of Shanghai. The Huangpu is a tributary of the Yellow River, joining it just 
before that river flows into the East China Sea, and thus the port has developed as a major import/export hub.

© Claudio Zaccherini/Shutterstock.com

46 

State of the World’s Cities 2012/2013major determinants in any city’s operational productivity. 
In addition, cities at intermediate levels of development 
should also enhance their technological capacities with a 
sharper focus on higher education and training as well as 
ICT infrastructure. 

While the factors at work are less easy to grasp than 

in the case of technical efficiency, experience from around 
the world points to the importance of supporting research 
and development in quality higher education and research 
institutions with both public and corporate investment. 

Promoting an entrepreneurial spirit, particularly among 

youth, is a desirable strategy for any city, regardless of 
development level or economic strength. Similarly, far 
from a desirable though ultimately dispensable aspiration, 
enhancing overall quality of life should be considered as 
essential to any economic development strategy if a city is to 
attract creative people and businesses.

Leadership will always be always a critical factor, 

be it collective, as exercised through sound governance 
systems, or individual, i.e. relying on a particularly inspiring 

Productivity and the Prosperity of Cities

politician or local figure. 
It takes leadership to 
change the prevailing urban 
paradigm and develop 
the transformative vision 
that will not just boost 
productivity of a city, or 
region, or even country, but 
also broadly distribute the 
associated benefits for the 
sake of shared prosperity.

POLICy To be able to 

sustain higher 
wages and the associated 
standards of living, more 
advanced cities need to 
tap into innovation-driven 
productivity gains by 
supporting businesses’ 
ability to compete based 
on more sophisticated 
and innovative production 
processes and products. 

POLICy To enhance productivity, cities at all stages of 

development must seek support from a wide range 
of stakeholders, including various public authorities, other urban 
areas in the same region, and major economic actors, and set in 
motion the process of desirable change. 

Endnotes

1 

2 

3 

Bodin-Buyle Z., and C. Hermant-De Callataÿ (2011), Urban Prosperity and Quality of 
Life in European cities – Beyond GDP, Background paper prepared for “State of the 
World’s Cities Report 2012/2013” as part of EU /UN-Habitat collaboration.
UN-Habitat (2010), State of the World’s Cities 2010/2011 : Cities for All: Bridging the 
Urban Divide.,Earthscan,London
European Commission (2009) Promoting Sustainable Urban Development in Europe: 
Achievements and Opportunities. European Commission , Brussels

16  As noted by Turok, see Jacobs,J. (1969) The Economy of Cities, London, Jonathan 

Cape; Jacobs, J. (1984) Cities and the Wealth of Nations, New York, Random House; 
Porter, M. (1998) ‘Clusters and the new economics of competitiveness’, Harvard 
Business Review, December, pp.77-90.

17  Bloomberg Business Week, April 23, 2011 as quoted by Buckley, R. and A. Kallergis 

(2011) op. cit.

18  Rio’s Operation Centre builds upon advanced technologies created by IBM Research 

4  World Bank (2012) World Bank Data: World Development Indicators & Global Development 

labs around the world. 

5 

9 

6 
7 
8 

Finance, Online database last updated July 9 2012, http://data.worldbank.org
Buckley, R. and A. Kallergis (2011) The Wealth of Cities and Equitable Growth, 
background paper for ‘State of the World Cities Report 2012/13’
Buckley, R. and A. Kallergis (2011) op. cit.
Buckley, R. and A. Kallergis (2011) op. cit.
PricewaterhouseCoopers (2009) ‘Global city GDP rankings 2008-2025’ 
PricewaterhouseCoopers UK Economic Outlook, November 2009, London. http://www.
ukmediacentre.pwc.com/Media-Library/Global-city-GDP-rankings-2008-2025-61a.aspx
Cities Alliance (2006) Guide to City Development Strategies: Improving Urban 
Performance, Cities Alliance, Washington, D.C. http://www.citiesalliance.org/ca/sites/
citiesalliance.org/files/CA_Docs/resources/cds/cds-guidelines/role_of_cities.pdf
10  Kenya’s 2008 GDP (PPP current International), total population, population in the 

largest city: World Development Indicators (2012); Nairobi’s 2008 GDP (PPP): 
PricewaterhouseCoopers (2009). 

11  PricewaterhouseCoopers (2009) op. cit.
12  UN-Habitat (2008) State of the World’s Cities Report 2008/09: Harmonious Cities. 

UN-Habitat, Nairobi.

13  ActiveUKChina (2012) Business and economic distributions and clusters, http://www.

activeukchina.com/business-environment/business-and-economic-distributions-
and-clusters/

14  UN-Habitat (2008) op. cit.
15  This section draws heavily from Turok, I. (2011) Urban Employment and the Prosperity of 

Cities. Background paper prepared for “State of the World’s Cities Report 2012/2013”

47 

19  Astroman (2011) City Government and IBM Close Partnership to Make Rio 
de Janeiro a Smarter City, January 3, http://www.astroman.com.pl/index.
php?mod=magazine&a=read&id=871

20  Spirou, C. (2011) Urban Tourism and Urban Change: Cities in a Global Economy, New 

York, Routledge, 

21  Mena, A. (2011) City Report on Doha. Unpublished UN-Habitat background study for 

“State of the World’s Cities Report 2012/2013”

22  Kurtul,P. F. (2011) City Report on Gaziantep. Unpublished UN-Habitat background 

study for “State of the World’s Cities Report 2012/2013”

23  Al-Bassam, D. and J. Mouris (2011) City Report on Dubai. Unpublished UN-Habitat 

background study for “State of the World’s Cities Report 2012/2013”

24  Liu, Y. and Y. Wang (2011) City Report on Chongqing. Unpublished UN-Habitat 

background study for “State of the World’s Cities Report 2012/2013”

25  PricewaterhouseCoopers (2010) Cities of opportunities. PricewaterhouseCoopers/ 

The Partnership for New York City, Inc. http://www.pwc.com/us/en/cities-of-
opportunity/2011/pdfdownload.jhtml

26  China’s urban growth rates: UNDESA (WUP): US’ and Great Britain’s urban growth 

rates: Buckley, R. and A. Kallergis (2011) op. cit.

27  J Jin, L. and Y. Liu (2011) City Report on Shenzhen. Unpublished UN-Habitat 

background study for “State of the World’s Cities Report 2012/2013”.

28  PricewaterhouseCoopers (2009) op. cit.

Chapter 2.2

Urban Infrastructure: 
Bedrock of Prosperity

Infrastructure is crucial for the development, functionality 
and prosperity of urban areas. It provides the foundation 
on which any city will thrive. Adequate infrastructure – 
improved water and sanitation, reliable and sufficient 
power supply, efficient transport networks and modern 
information and communication technologies (ICTs) – 

contributes to the sustainability and economic growth 
of urban areas, promotes the competitiveness of local 
businesses, improves labour productivity, enhances the 
investment climate in the city and contributes to its 
attractiveness. Physical infrastructure like roads, power 
and communication facilities, improves urban connectivity, 
which is essential to induce growth and reduce poverty. 

There is a positive link between the provision of 

infrastructure and the level of urbanization. More 
urbanized countries tend to provide more infrastructures 
(Figure 2.2.1). 

FACT The cities that 

have managed 
to attract investment and 
enhance competitiveness 
in a highly globalized 
economy are those that 
have vastly improved the 
range and quality of their 
infrastructure. Conversely, 
poor infrastructure is 
a major impediment to 
development, poverty 
reduction and improved 
standards of living.

POLICy Cities that 

fail to provide 

adequate infrastructure are 
less likely to be prosperous 
and sustainable in terms 
of balancing economic and 
social development, and 
environmental protection.1

Mexico: aerial view of Guadalajara.

© Jesus Cervantes/Shutterstock.com

48 

Urban Infrastructure: Bedrock of Prosperity

Figure 2.2.1

Infrastructure provision is closely related to levels of urbanization

Access to water(%)

Access to sanitation(%)

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

r=0.4907

Improved water

r=0.4778

Improved sanitation

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

% urban

% urban

from 4.1 per cent to 5.6 per cent of GDP. The average for 
Latin America and the Caribbean is under two per cent of 
GDP3, compared with Africa’s estimated 5–6 per cent.4 

Makoko district of Lagos, Nigeria: a man bathes in fresh water 
sold to him by a nearby wealthy family.

© Jacob Silberberg/Panos Pictures

TRENDS IN THE PROvISION OF URBAN 
INFRASTRUCTURE: IMPORTANT 
REGIONAL vARIATIONS
Differences in infrastructure across regions have 
implications for the prosperity of cities and reflect a variety 
of factors, including levels of income or development, 
economic growth, pace of urbanization, technical 
capacities and political commitment. The lowest levels 
of infrastructure provision are to be found in urban 
Africa (average water and sanitation coverage is 89 and 
69 per cent respectively; electricity: 69 per cent; paved 
roads: 28 per cent; fixed telephone lines: 4 per cent; 
mobile telephones and Internet connectivity: 57 and 
10 per cent, respectively). Asian cities have strongly 
invested in infrastructure development in the last few 

POLICy 

Infrastructure is the 
most common entry 
point to achieving 
prosperity in cities; 
consequently, 
prioritizing 
infrastructure is 
part of long-term 
economic development 
for most cities.
social development, 
and environmental 
protection.1

decades, achieving nearly 
universal provision of 
water, electricity and 
mobile telephone services. 
In particular, China has 
pursued a conscious 
strategy of infrastructure-
led growth since the 
1990s. Investment in 
this area increased from 
5.7 per cent of GDP in 
1998 to 14.4 per cent in 
2006.2 During the same 
period, India increased 
infrastructure spending 

49 

Figure 2.2.2

Infrastructure coverage by region

percentage of urban population 

with improved water 

percentage of urban population 

with improved sanitation  

percentage of urban population 

paved roads as a percentage 

with electricity  

of total 

per cent
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

Africa

World

Africa

Asia

LAC

Developing countries

Asia

LAC

Developing countries

World

Africa

Asia

LAC

Developing countries

World

Africa

World

Asia

LAC

Developing countries

(cid:31)xed telephone lines

mobile cellular subscriptions 

internet users

broadband ((cid:31)xed) subscriptionsper

per 100 inhabitants
25

per 100 inhabitants
120

per 100 inhabitants
40

per 100 inhabitants
12

100

80

60

40

20

World

0

Africa

20

15

10

5

0

Africa

Asia

LAC

Developing countries

Asia

LAC

Developing countries

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

World

0

Africa

10

8

6

4

2

World

0

Africa

Asia

LAC

Developing countries

World

Asia

LAC

Developing countries

Source: WHO/UNICEF (2010); International Energy Agency (2010); International Road Federation (2009); ITU World Telecommunication/ICT Indicators  
Database (2010)

Water Supply: When Good Governance 
Changes the Equation 
Adequate water supply is essential for environmental 
sustainability and quality of life. Access to clean water 
reduces morbidity and mortality, and improves the 
productive abilities of the poor.

Water scarcity characterizes African cities. Although 

official statistics reveal that 89 per cent of the urban 
population in Africa is now enjoying improved water 
supply, a large majority of Sub-Saharan African cities 
experience regular water shortages. The UN-Habitat 
survey shows that 11 of the 14 African cities (79 per cent) 
under review are associated with serious such problems. 
Experts concur that worst affected are Ibadan and Dar es 
Salaam, closely followed by Accra, Addis Ababa, Luanda, 

Lusaka, Lagos and Nairobi, which suffer continuous water 
shortages. Despite 78 to 98 per cent of households in 
four of these cities – Accra, Lagos, Nairobi and Lusaka –
benefiting from improved access to water, most experts 
also mention them as experiencing severe water shortages. 
Interestingly, despite its semi-arid climate and its location 
in a water-scarce country, Gaborone is where shortages 
are least severe, suggesting good water governance. 

The water shortage pattern is more mixed in Asian 

cities: half of the cities in the UN-Habitat survey experience 
water shortages. Those with the more severe shortages 
are Cebu, Davao, Bangalore, Lahore, and Hyderabad. In 
Bangalore, water is supplied once in 46 hours for a period 
of 2–3 hours.5 This trend had been observed by one analyst 
who noted that: “no South Asian city can supply water 

50 

State of the World’s Cities 2012/2013Urban Infrastructure: Bedrock of Prosperity

FACT The success of Singapore in meeting local water demand 

is down to effective water governance. The specialized 
agency has developed a long-term strategy known as the Four 
National Taps to ensure a robust and sustainable supply of 
water. The strategy entails using water from different water 
sources: water catchment, recycled water, desalinated water and 
imported water.

FACT Many Arab cities are able to meet their water 

requirements because of the high political priority 

given to the provision of this public good.12 City authorities have 
improved water security through increased supplies, demand 
management, conservation and desalination.13 

Saudi Arabia: an old water tower, a well-known feature in the 
city of Riyadh.

© Fedor Selivanov/Shutterstock.com

24/7 to its residents”.6 On the other hand, water scarcity is 
unknown in Singapore, according to all local respondents to 
the survey. Other cities where water shortages are perceived 
to be relatively insignificant include Chongqing, Gaziantep, 
Kuwait City and Shenzhen.

Water shortages vary a lot in Latin American cities: 

The UN-Habitat survey revealed that eight of the 
15 cities under review in this region were found to have 
serious water shortages, including Havana, Panama City, 
Guarenas (Venezuela), Lima, Ciudad del Este (Paraguay) 
and Guadalajara. Cities with moderate water scarcity 
are Tijuana, La Paz and Valparaíso. Those cities without 
perceived water shortages are Medellín, Fort de France 
(French Antilles) and Montevideo. 

Differences in shortages across cities reflect local 

conditions and the state of water management. In 2011, 
Havana experienced its worst water shortage since 1961 
due to the effects of drought and depletion of fresh 
supplies as well as a deteriorated network (70 per cent in 
poor condition).7 In contrast, regular supplies in Medellín 
reflect sound management by Empresas Públicas de 
Medellín (EPM), one of the most successful public utility 
companies in Latin America. In 2009, EPM launched 
the Water Programme Litros de Amor to provide free-of-
charge water (a daily 25 litres per head) to economically 
poor households.8 

Limited water shortages in Arab State cities: Despite 

their typical location in hyper-arid regions, Arab state 
cities generally do not suffer from severe water shortages. 
However, according to local experts, three of the surveyed 
cities are finding water supply a major challenge: Amman, 
Basra and Saida (Lebanon). In Amman, the situation is 
quite critical with supplies only once or twice a week.9 

POLICy Cities 

authorities 
need to systematically 
maintain their stock 
of infrastructure to 
ensure that the benefits 
of infrastructure are 
fully capitalized. It 
is in their interest to 
improve coordination 
with the different 
levels of government 
in the design, provision 
and maintenance of 
infrastructure. 

In Basra, the supply 
falls short of around 
33 per cent of the needs 
of the population.10 
Residents often complain 
about quality (taste, 
smell and colour).11 
Arab cities deemed to be 
meeting their water needs 
include Aqaba, Doha, 
Al-Muharrak (Bahrain), 
Dubai and Erbil. 

There are remarkable 

inter-city differences 
in experts’ perceptions 

51 

Box 2.2.1

Ranking of Urban Infrastructure

UN-Habitat survey experts report that across all developing 
regions the least developed components of urban infrastructure 
relate to recreation, sanitation and urban transport, while the 
most developed is telecommunications; all of this has important 
implications for urban prosperity. For instance, the low priority 

given to recreational infrastructure implies that access to public 
spaces in many cities is limited, as indicated in Chapter 2.3 
(Quality of Life). Similarly, the low priority given to urban transport 
has wider-ranging implications, in this case for intra- and inter-
urban mobility. 

Ranking <1 least developed to 5 most developed>

ranking
5.0

l

 
d
e
p
o
e
v
e
d
 
t
s
o
m

l

d
e
p
o
e
v
e
d
 
t
s
a
e

0l

4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

Africa 

Asia 

LAC 

Arab States

All regions

Telecom munications  
Transport infrastructure 
Recreation 
Electricity 
Sanitation 
Water 

Telecom munications  
Transport infrastructure 
Recreation 
Sanitation 
Electricity 
Water 

Telecom munications  
Transport infrastructure 
Recreation 
Electricity 
Sanitation 
Water 

Telecom munications  
Transport infrastructure 
Recreation 
Electricity 
Sanitation 
Water 

Telecom munications  
Transport infrastructure 
Recreation 
Electricity 
Sanitation 
Water 

Source: UN-Habitat, City Monitoring Branch, Policy Survey,

regarding the coverage and quality of urban infrastructure. 
These differences are discussed below with respect to water, 
roads and ICTs.

free movement and making travel frustrating and time-
consuming.14 

Road infrastructure remains poor in African cities: 

Trends in Road Infrastructure
The road network will rank amongst any city’s most prized 
assets, as it facilitates the movement of people and goods. 
Apart from access, road networks also form the basic grid 
for trunk infrastructure for water, sanitation and power 
supplies. Roads also contribute to effective mobility, which 
is crucial for the prosperity of cities. Congested roads 
and poor facilities for pedestrians are the most pervasive 
transport problems affecting cities in developing countries. 
The UN-Habitat survey shows that to a large majority 
of experts – 96 per cent in Africa; 91 per cent in Asia; 
88 per cent in Latin America; and 80 per cent in Arab 
states – traffic congestion is the main form of infrastructure 
deficiency plaguing cities in those regions, hindering 

52 

In most African cities, roads account for less than 
seven per cent of land area, compared with 25–30 per cent 
in developed cities.15 In cities such as Kinshasa, Kampala 
and Ouagadougou, paved roads account for less than 
12 per cent of the whole urban network. In many cities, the 
road network has barely 
kept pace with urban 
growth: in Douala, for 
instance, it has remained 
unchanged for the past 20 
years despite a doubling of 
the population, increased 
numbers of vehicles, 
and urban sprawl.16 The 
dysfunctional nature of 

poor facilities for 
pedestrians, power 
outages and flooding 
are major infrastructural 
deficiencies, and thus 
adversely affect the 
prosperity of cities. 

FACT Road 

congestion, 

State of the World’s Cities 2012/2013road infrastructure in Africa poses a major challenge to 
mobility and prosperity and is an important source of 
congestion. In addition to this, poor maintenance is a major 
problem: only 18.5 per cent of experts across African cities 
believe that infrastructure is systematically maintained. 
Some African cities have taken innovative steps to 
enhance mobility and tackle traffic congestion. Lagos 
introduced Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) in 2008. South Africa’s 
Gauteng Province launched in 2010 the ‘Gautrain’, a state-
of-the-art 80-km mass rapid transit railway system. Cities 
like Nairobi and Dakar have achieved significant progress 
in the development of road infrastructure increasing 
prosperity prospects. 

Significant improvements in road infrastructure in 

Asian cities: In recent years, various Asian countries have 
embarked on ambitious programmes of road development 
and expansion. In 1997, India started the Golden 
Quadrilateral motorway to connect the country’s largest 
cities – Kolkata, Delhi, Mumbai and Chennai. An East-
West corridor has also been recently completed, not just 
improving connections between cities but also opening up 
the hinterlands. In China, cities have been at the forefront 
of massive infrastructure development with emphasis on 
new roads and subway systems. The urban road network 
more than doubled between 1990 and 2003,19 largely 
contributing to urbanization and economic growth. Cities 
like Beijing and Shanghai have extended infrastructure to 
suburban areas in a bid to match spatial expansion. Beijing 
currently allocates 30 per cent of its construction budget to 
mass transit20 and Shanghai spends 10 per cent of its GDP 
on infrastructure, of which 40 per cent is for transportation. 
Singapore’s public transportation system is considered to be 
one of the most integrated and well-planned in the world. 
In addition, adequate facilities are provided for pedestrians 
with a safe and comfortable 
walking environment that 
enhances quality of life. 

FACT In major Asian 

cities, some 

11 per cent of land 
space is devoted to 
roads, well below the 
20–30 per cent rate 
common in US cities.21 
In Indian cities, the 
proportion varies from 
21 per cent in Delhi to 
11 per cent in Mumbai 
to five per cent in 
Kolkata.22 

Massive economic 

growth in Asia, particularly 
China and India, has 
spurred spectacular 
increases in the numbers 
of motor vehicles. This 
has contributed to traffic 
congestion, air and 
noise pollution, road 
accidents and energy use 
in the region. In India, 

53 

Urban Infrastructure: Bedrock of Prosperity

FACT A notable feature of the transport system in African cities 

is the virtual absence of State-operated public transport. 

The private sector is the major provider of transport services, 
often in the form of secondhand mini- and microbuses, shared 
taxis, and more recently commercial motorcycles.17 The needs of 
pedestrians are hardly taken into consideration despite the fact 
that walking accounts for over 60–70 per cent of trips in cities 
such as Conakry, Douala or Kinshasa.18 

transport accounts 

FACT In India, public 

for only 22 per cent 
of urban trips among 
ever-increasing numbers 
of private vehicles.24 A 
greater proportion of these 
vehicles are concentrated 
in only a few cities: New 
Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata 
and Bangalore, which host 
five per cent of India’s 
population but 14 per cent 
of registered vehicles.25 

the number of passenger 
vehicles increased by nine 
million, or 12.9 per cent, 
between 2007 and 2008.23 
In China, the number of 
vehicles increased 10-fold 
between 1990 and 2002; of 
particular significance is the 
increase in motorcycles and 
scooters, which increased 
from just 200,000 in 1981 
to 50 million in 2002. 
Latin America and 
the Caribbean region 
features the highest level 
of motorization in the 
developing world: the 
region has five times more 
cars than sub-Saharan 
Africa and Asia, and 
about twice as many as the 
Middle East and North 
Africa.26 Motorization 
in the region increased from 100 vehicles per 1,000 in 
1990 to 155 in 2005, before reaching 169:1,000 in 2008. 
Rising incomes, expanding middle classes, high levels of 
urbanization, an expanding local automobile industry, and 
availability of low-cost vehicles are the major forces driving 
motorization in the region. As a result, cities in the region 
experience severe traffic congestion. A great majority 
of experts in the UN-Habitat survey (over 80 per cent) 
indicate that the roads in their respective cities are 
congested, costing the region USD2.2 billion a year in lost 
productivity.27 Time spent in traffic deteriorates quality 
of life, causing pollution, traffic accidents, increased fuel 
consumption and emission of greenhouse gases. 

road congestion problems 
that adversely affect their 
prosperity 

POLICy Cities must 

address the 

In São Paulo, public transport as a share of all trips 

declined from 46 per cent in 1977 to 33 per cent in 1997 and 

FACT A trend closely associated with motorization in Latin 

American and Caribbean cities is the decreasing share of 

public transport. 

POLICy It would be in the best interests of cities to develop 

sustainable public transport solutions that have 

positive repercussions on all ‘spokes’ of prosperity. 

down to 29 per cent in 2001.28 In Havana, the total number 
of public transport users declined from 3.5 million in 1991 
to 540,000 in 2011.29 In 
Guadalajara the use of 
private cars increased 
from 30 to 50 per cent of 
all trips between the years 
2000 and 2010, while the 
number of public transport 
users declined from 60 to 

shares of dedicated bus 
lanes in the region, which 
have served as models for 
BRT across the world. 

FACT Bogotá and Curitiba 

feature the highest 

30 per cent.30 Factors behind these sharp declines include a 
poor perception of public bus services; lack of information on 
availability, routes and schedules; crime and safety concerns; 
and the long distances that commuters have to walk to bus 
stops/terminals.

Cities in the Arab States have the highest level of 

vehicle ownership: The quality and maintenance of roads in 
Arab cities are high when compared with other developing 
countries. However, despite massive investment, the 
expansion in road networks has not matched rapid increases 
in vehicle numbers, or urban sprawl. Over the past two 
decades, the Arab region has witnessed phenomenal rises in 
motorization. In 2008, the total number of vehicles reached 
26.7 million – growing at a 4.2 per cent annual average 
between 1997 and 2008.31 In Bahrain, Kuwait, Qatar, the 
United Arab Emirates and Oman, the ratios of motor vehicles 
per 1,000 stand at 509, 507, 724, 313 and 225, respectively.32 
Factors behind this trend include the affluence occasioned by 
the oil-driven economic boom, a strong preference for private 
cars, subsidized fuel, greater availability of car loans, and lack 
of effective mass transit systems. High levels of motorization 

in Arab cities have led to 
chronic traffic congestion. 
The traffic situation in 
Dubai typifies those of cities 
in the Gulf Cooperation 
Council countries: with 
over one million cars, 
the ownership ratio – 
541:1,000 – exceeds those 
of London (345) and New 
York (444).33 

Dubai‘s Metro began 

operating as a fully 
automated rail transit 

FACT Public 

transport 

systems are inadequate 
in many cities of this 
region. For instance, 
in Beirut, fewer 
than 10 per cent of 
commuters are served 
by public transport34; 
in Amman, the 
corresponding figure is 
14 per cent.35 

Curitiba, Brazil: a tubular bus station and sleek, modern bus, part of the city’s integrated transport system.

© Paul Smith/Panos Pictures

54 

State of the World’s Cities 2012/2013Urban Infrastructure: Bedrock of Prosperity

system in 2009, and when fully operational in 2012 is 
expected to reduce car use by 30 per cent.36 In 2010, the 
Greater Amman Municipality launched a USD175 million 

BRT project along three busy corridors totaling 32km; when 
completed in 2012, the system will have a transport capacity 
of 6,000 passengers per hour.37 

Box 2.2.2

Information and communication technologies (ICTs) and the Prosperity of Cities

Over the past decade, worldwide expansion in ICTs has been 
nothing short of phenomenal. In the sole mobile telephony 
area, for instance, the total number of subscriptions increased 
from 962 million in 2001 to six billion in 2011 – resulting in a 
worldwide ratio of 867:1,000.38 It is worth noting that developing 
countries account for over 75 per cent of global mobile cellular 
subscriptions. No other component of infrastructure has 
witnessed such spectacular growth. Advances in ICTs and 
liberalization of telecommunications markets have led to wealth 
creation and economic growth, with cities the major beneficiaries. 
ICTs play a major role in any city’s competitiveness, productivity 
and prosperity as they facilitate innovation, efficiency and 
effective service delivery. An overwhelming majority of surveyed 
experts – 85 per cent in Africa; 96 per cent in Asia; 86 per cent in 
Latin America and the Caribbean; and 90 per cent in Arab States –
rank telecommunications infrastructure as ‘highly developed’ or 
‘developed’ in their cities. 

FACT In Africa, the total number of mobile telephone 

connections has grown an average 30 per cent 

per annum since 2001, and by 2011 over 60 per cent 
of the population was connected. In Asia-Pacific, 
the number of mobile connections increased from 
824 million in 2005 to three billion in 2011– making 
the region the largest mobile telephone market in 
the world. Remarkable growth rates have also been 
recorded in the Middle East, where the number of mobile 
connections increased from 177 million in 2007 to 
334 million in 2011.39 

ICTs in African cities: Mobile telephones have leapfrogged 
landlines in Africa when compared with developed regions that 
invested in landlines before moving to mobile networks.40 At least 
90 per cent of households in Abuja, Accra, Dakar, Lagos, Luanda 
and Nairobi own mobile telephones; even where ownership 
of mobile telephones appears to be low, it hardly falls below 
50 percent. The use of mobile telephones surpasses fixed lines 
in virtually all cities. In Kinshasa, there are 119 times as many 
households owning mobile telephones as fixed lines. In Lagos, 
Harare, Kampala and Mombasa, households are 12 times more 
likely to own mobile telephones than landlines. Apart from 
facilitating connectivity and communication, the cell-phone 
industry also serves as a catalyst for growth, contributing an 

55 

estimated average USD56 billion or 3.5 per cent of GDP, to the 
regional economy every year,41 as well as employment for over 
five million Africans. 

ICTs in Asian cities: Mobile telephony has also expanded 
dramatically in this region. India’s four major cities – Delhi, 
Mumbai, Kolkata and Chennai – feature mobile telephone 
connection rates of 138 per cent, 112 per cent, 102 per cent and 
143 per cent respectively.42 In Singapore, telecommunications 
infrastructure is highly developed. In 2010, the household fixed-
line penetration rate was 103 per cent, and the mobile population 
penetration rate was 144 per cent, with 82 per cent of households 
having access to Internet.43 ICTs are major contributors to 
economic growth in Asia accounting for USD485 billion, or 
2.7 per cent of GDP; they also provide 11.4 million jobs – for 
each job created by a mobile operator, eight additional ones 
are generated.44 The major role played by the mobile telephone 
sector has seen it act as a buffer against economic recession in 
the region. 

ICTs in Latin American cities: The ownership of mobile 
telephones is fairly widespread. Urban areas in Brazil, Chile, 
Panama, and Paraguay feature the highest connection rates, with 
at least 80 per cent of households owning mobile telephones.45 
In major Mexican cities, ownership varies between 66 and 
84 per cent of the population. Compared with Africa and Asia, 
fixed lines are more developed in Latin American cities. For 
instance, between 41 per cent and 68 per cent of households 
in Mexico’s major cities have fixed lines. The mobile telephone 
industry contributes significantly to the region’s economy: 
1.7 per cent of regional GDP46 (or USD82 billion) in 2010. 
Increases in mobile telephone connectivity have also been found 
to boost GDP per capita.

ICTs in Arab States cities: Urban ownership of mobile 
telephones in Arab States, especially Gulf Cooperation Council 
countries, is widespread. Penetration rates in Doha, Dubai, 
Amman, Kuwait, Muscat and Riyadh are in excess 100 per cent 
(Dubai’s penetration rate is the highest in the world with over 
200 mobile telephones per 100 residents). The UAE and other Gulf 
Cooperation Council countries have invested in ITC-dedicated 
parks as a boost to socioeconomic growth and diversification 
away from an oil-dependent to a knowledge-based economy. The 
ICT sector plays a significant role in the region’s economy. In the 
case of the UAE, the sector contributed 5.3 per cent to GDP in 
2010, up from 4.1 per cent in 2007, and currently employs over 
11,500.47 

Box 2.2.3

Infrastructure Development and the Dimensions of Prosperity

Contribution of Infrastructure to the Prosperity of Cities

per cent
100

Africa

Asia

POLICy 

Consistent and 
targeted investments 
in transport and 
communications 
infrastructure are a 
major factor behind 
urban prosperity. 

LAC

Arab States

All cities

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

per cent
100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

Reducing spatial disparities
Environmental quality
Improving slum conditions
Quality of life
Economic growth
Mobility
Urban Growth
Access to health & education

Reducing spatial disparities
Economic growth
Quality of life
Mobility
Environmental quality
Access to health & education
Urban Growth
Improving slum conditions

Mobility

Reducing spatial disparities
Quality of life
Economic growth
Urban Growth
Environmental quality
Access to health & education
Improving slum conditions

Source: UN-Habitat, City Monitoring Branch, Policy Survey, 2011

56 

State of the World’s Cities 2012/2013Urban Infrastructure: Bedrock of Prosperity

POLICy The provision of infrastructure must take into 

consideration the needs of women.

Steering spatial expansion: Infrastructure can steer the spatial 
expansion of a city, facilitating more compact urban development 
and integrating different land uses. This urban form is deemed 
to be efficient, inclusive and sustainable in four different ways: 
(1) the costs of infrastructure are cheaper; (2) access to services 
and facilities is improved; (3) the livelihoods of the urban poor are 
enhanced; and (4) social segregation is reduced.  
 
Environmental quality: Many developing country cities are 
characterized by inadequate water supply and squalid conditions in 
terms of sanitation. These two components of infrastructure are vital 
to improved environmental conditions in cities, as they facilitate a 
clean and pollution-free environment. On top of this, flood-control 
infrastructure safeguards urban areas against erosion, flooding, 
landslides and disasters. 
 
Improving slum conditions and reducing poverty: Infrastructure 
can contribute to the prosperity of cities through improved slum 
conditions and reducing poverty. Providing adequate infrastructure 
for roads, water, sanitation and electricity can reduce the health 
burden faced by slum dwellers, delivering major benefits in terms of 
environmental quality.

Reducing spatial disparities: Infrastructure can reduce spatial 
disparities, particularly in uncontrolled and un-serviced peri-urban 
areas, connecting them to consolidated parts of the city. 

POLICy Beneficiary communities must be fully 

involved in the design, provision and 

maintenance of infrastructure.

It is possible to identify the specific contributions adequate 
infrastructure can make to the prosperity of cities, but it must be 
remembered that they are interrelated and interact with one another 
in a variety of ways. As perceived by experts participating in the 
UN-Habitat survey, these contributions are the following (by order 
of decreasing importance): economic growth; facilitating mobility; 
improving access to health and education; improving quality of life; 
steering spatial expansion; environmental quality; improving slum 
conditions and reducing poverty; and reducing spatial disparities. 
These eight types of contribution are presented in the charts for the 
four regions under review. 

Economic Growth: Infrastructure plays a crucial role in supporting 
economic growth, and it is worth noting that the reverse causal 
relationship also holds – that is, infrastructure benefits from 
economic growth. Infrastructure contributes to growth through 
enhanced productivity of the factors of production. Indeed between 
1990 and 2005, improved infrastructure contributed one per cent 
to per capita economic growth in Africa, and 1.2 per cent in 
Asia.48 In Africa, the greatest impact has been attributed to 
telecommunications and, to a lesser extent, roads. 

Facilitating Mobility: Seamless movement within and between 
cities thanks to efficient mass transit systems is essential to the 
proper functionality and prosperity of cities. Cities that have deployed 
sustainable transport policies to enhance mobility have reaped huge 
advantages that positively impact on the other ‘spokes’ of prosperity. 
In Bogotá and Curitiba, for instance, BRT makes both cities more 
livable in very tangible ways, including reducing traffic congestion, 
decreasing travel times and costs, reducing energy consumption and 
improving environmental quality. 

Access to health and education: Infrastructure facilitates access 
to health and education, which are essential components of 
human development and feature prominently among Millennium 
Development Goals. Healthy children learn better and healthy 
adults work better – both being major assets to the city. Education 
is crucial to empowerment, reducing poverty and enhancing 
productivity. Cities with a healthier, better-educated workforce are 
more likely to be productive and competitive.

Improving quality of life: Infrastructure can improve quality of 
life in a variety of ways, including: enhancing safety and security, 
especially for youth and women; and expanding the provision of 
public goods to enhance the city’s appeal. 

57 

Endnotes

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

Choguill, C. (1996) “Ten steps to sustainable infrastructure”, Habitat International, Vol. 
20(3), pp. 389-4044; Teriman, S., T. Yigitcanlar, and S. Mayere (2010) ‘Sustainable 
urban infrastructure development in south east Asia : evidence from Hong Kong, 
Kuala Lumpur and Singapore’ in Yigitcanlar, T. (ed.) Sustainable Urban and Regional 
Infrastructure Development : Technologies, Applications and Management, IGI Global, 
Hershey, Pennsylvania
Lall, R., R. Anand and A. Rastogi (2010) ‘Developing physical Infrastructure: A 
comparative perspective on the experience of China and India’, in Gerhaeusser K., 
Iwasaki, Y. and V. B. Tulasidhar, (eds) Resurging Asian Giants’ Asian Development 
Bank, Manila, pp.57-114.
Fay, M. and M. Morrison (2005) Infrastructure in Latin America and the Caribbean: 
Recent Developments and Key Challenges, World Bank, Washington,DC.
Foster, V., and C. Briceno-Garmendia (2010) Africa’s Infrastructure: A Time for 
Transformation, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Belliapa, S.G. (2011) City Report on Bangalore. Unpublished UN-Habitat background 
study for “State of the World’s Cities Report 2012/13” 
Harris, C (2008) “India Leads Developing Nations in Private Sector Investment”, 
Gridlines, No.3, March 2008, http://www.pppinindia.com/pdf/gridlines.pdf
 Latin American Herald Tribune (2011) ‘Cuban Capital Faces Worst Water Shortage in 
50 Years’, Latin American Herald Tribune, http://laht.com/article.asp?ArticleId=3915
53&CategoryId=14510
López , M (2011) Water Distribution as an Indicator of Social Inequality: The Case of 
Medellín, Colombia, http://www.centrodametropole.org.br/static/uploads/marcela_l.pdf
Shabou, A., N. Soboh, K. Jalouka, and D. A. Thaib (2011) City Report on Amman. 
Unpublished UN-Habitat background study for “State of the World’s Cities Report 
2012/2013”

10  Karim, S. S.A. (2011) City Report on Basra. Unpublished UN-Habitat background study 

for “State of the World’s Cities Report 2012/2013”

11  Takechi, A (2010) Basrah Water Supply from viewpoint of Its Water Sources, http://

www.waterforum.jp/jpn/iraq/doc/expert_meeting/session/4_2.pdf

12  Although the region is the least provided in the world, with just 1.4 per cent of the 
planet renewable freshwater. {Roudi-Fahimi, F., L. Creel and R. M. De Souza (2002) 
Finding the Balance: Population and Water Scarcity in the Middle East and North 
Africa, MENA Policy Brief, Population Reference Bureau, Washington, DC}

13  The Arab State’s Region is host to 65 of the world’s 100 largest desalination plants. 

{Pacific Institute (2011) The World’s Water Volume 7: The Biennial Report on 
Freshwater Resources, Table 21, http://www.worldwater.org/data.html}

14  The economic costs of traffic congestion are staggering: in the US in 2010 it 

was put at $101 billion in terms of lost productivity and wasted fuel, or $713 per 
commuter per year; in Mauritius, traffic congestion in cities costs the economy 1.3 
per cent of GDP. {African Economic Outlook (2011) Mauritius: Overview, http://www.
africaneconomicoutlook.org/en/countries/southern-africa/mauritius/}

15  Kumar , A., and F. Barrett (2008) Stuck in Traffic: Urban Transport in Africa, World 

Bank, Washington, DC

16  Kumar,A. (2011) Understanding the Emerging Role Of Motorcycles in African 
Cities: A Political Economy Perspective, Sub-Saharan Africa Transport Policy 
Program Discussion Paper No. 13, World Bank, http://siteresources.worldbank.org/
EXTAFRSUBSAHTRA/Resources/1513929-1262811948762/DP13-Role-Motorcycles.
pdf
In 2007, Lagos had over 100,000 minibuses and 200,000 commercial motorcycles 
directly employing 500,000 people. Kumar (2011)

17 

18  Kumar and Barrett (2008), op. cit.
19  The network increased from 95,000 to 208,000 km from 1990 to 2003. Pucher et 

al (2007)

20  McKinsey Global Institute (2009) Preparing for China’s Urban Billion, McKinsey and 

Company.

21  World Bank (2002) Cities on the Move: A World Bank Urban Transport Strategy 

Review, World Bank, Washington, DC.

22  Pucher, J., Z. Peng, N. Mittal, Y. Zhu,and N. Korattyswaroopam (2007) ‘Urban transport 
trends and policies in China and India: Impacts of rapid Economic growth’, Transport 
Reviews, Vol. 27 (4), pp. 379–410

58 

23  Uddin, A. (2009) ‘Traffic Congestion in Indian Cities: Challenges of a Rising Power’, 

paper presented at the conference Kyoto of the Cities, Naples, March 26-28, 
2009, http://www.visionwebsite.eu/UserFiles/File/filedascaricare/Scientifci%20
Partners,Papers(Kyoto)/Draft_koc_Azeem%20Uddin.pdf

24  HPEC (2011) Report on Indian Urban Infrastructure and Services,National Institute of 

Urban Affairs, New Delhi

25  Uddin, A (2009) op.cit.
26  Estimated from World Bank (2011)
27  Canassa, H. (2008) ‘São Paulo Traffic Jams Mean Lost Business, Stress, Helicopters’, 
Bloomberg, July 14, http://www.bloomberg.com/apps/news?pid=newsarchive&sid=
aAwzOeXmIxgk

28  Vicentini, V. L.(2010) ‘Lessons from urban transport in Latin America and the 

Caribbean’, presentation at the 2010 ADB Transport Forum, May 25-27, Manila; 
Luoma, J., M. Sivak and S. Zielinski (2010) The Future of Personal Transportation in 
Megacities of the World, Transportation Research Institute, University of Michigan, 
Ann Arbor

29  Coyula, M. (2011) City Report on Havana. Unpublished UN-Habitat background study 

for “State of the World’s Cities Report 2012/2013”

30  Perez, F. (2011) City Report on Guadajara. Unpublished UN-Habitat background study 

for “State of the World’s Cities Report 2012/2013”.

31  ESCWA (2009) Transport for Sustainable Development in the Arab Region: Measures, 

Progress Achieved, Challenges and Policy Framework, United Nations, New York, 
http://www.uncclearn.org/sites/www.uncclearn.org/files/unescwa14.pdf

32  World Bank (2011) World Development Indicators, World Bank, Washington, DC.
33  Shariff, O. (2007) ‘Dubai Traffic Woes Inflict Losses of Dh4.6b a Year’, Gulf News, 
December 13, http://gulfnews.com/business/shipping/dubai-traffic-woes-inflict-
losses-of-dh4-6b-a-year-1.75892; Raouf, M. A. (2009)’Towards sustainable 
transportation’, Gulf News, September 18, http://gulfnews.com/opinions/columnists/
towards-sustainable-transportation-1.539872

34  Kollock, P. (2010) ‘Still Sitting in Beirut Traffic’, NOW Lebanon, May 5 http://www.

nowlebanon.com/NewsArchiveDetails.aspx?ID=166121

35  Shabou, A., N. Soboh, K. Jalouka, and D. A. Thaib (2011) op. cit.
36  Raouf, M. A. (2009) op. cit.
37  Al-Rawashdeh, A. (2011) “New bus system aims to reduce Amman’s traffic 

congestion”, Al-Shorfa.com, January 26, http://al-shorfa.com/en_GB/articles/meii/
features/main/2011/01/26/feature-02
International Telecommunication Union (2010) World Telecommunication/ICT 
Indicators Database, http://www.itu.int/ITU-D/ict/statistics/

38 

39  GSM Association (2011a) Asia Pacific Mobile Observatory 2011, GSMA, London
40  Aker, J. C. and I. M. Mbiti, (2010) ‘Mobile telephones and economic development in 

Africa’, Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 24(3), pp. 207-232

41  GSM Association (2011b) Africa Mobile Observatory 2011, GSMA, London
42  Philip, J. T. (2009) ‘Average Urban Teledensity Crosses 100% Mark’, The Economic 

Times, December 12, http://articles.economictimes.indiatimes.com/2009-12-12/
news/28416388_1_cent-mark-mobile-connections-teledensity

43  Centre for Livable Cities (2011) City Report on Singapore. Unpublished UN-Habitat 

background study for “State of the World’s Cities Report 2012/2013”

44  GSM Association (2011a) op. cit.
45  Fernández-Ardèvol, M. (2010) ‘Household access to mobile telephony in Latin 

America’, in Sevensson, J. and G. Wicander, (eds.): Proceedings of the 2nd 
International Conference on M4D,Mobile Communication Technology for 
Development, 10-11 November, Kampala, Uganda, pp. 60-69.

46  GSM Association (2011c) Latin American Mobile Observatory 2011, GSMA London
47  Telecommunications and Regulatory Authority (2011) UAE Telecommunications 

Sector Developments and Indicators, 2007 –2010.

48  Calderón, C (2008) “Infrastructure and growth in Africa”, Policy Research Working 

Paper 4914, World Bank, Washington, DC

State of the World’s Cities 2012/2013Chapter 2.3

Quality of Life and 
Urban Prosperity 

Today no one disputes that quality of life is essential 
for a city to prosper. The notion is increasingly used by 
decision-makers, practitioners and urban populations 
alike. Everyone agrees on its importance, but everyone 
will also agree that this notion comes with different 
meanings and facets. Many efforts have been made to 
develop a policy-oriented definition, yet the essence 
of quality of life remains vague when applied to urban 
areas. Despite these different views and understandings, 
the very basic notion remains largely similar both in the 
developed and the developing world: peoples in Jakarta, 
Naples, Los Angeles or Bogotá will, to large extent, 
share similar concerns, including decent employment, 
material wellbeing, fulfilling family lives and good 
health. Individuals and specific circumstances may 
value one of these factors over others; yet, as noted in 
the Report by the French Government Commission on 
the Measurement of Economic Performance and Social 
Progress (2009), these constitute “the most important 
features that give life its value.”1

MEASURING QUALITy OF LIFE
Recently, efforts have turned from definition to scientific 
measurement of quality of life. To Nobel laureate 
Amartya Sen, quality of life is determined by the various 
opportunities open to individuals, and their freedom to 
choose from these many opportunities.3 Other conceptual 
approaches measure quality of life based on the notion of 
subjective well-being and on economic notions drawn from 
welfare economics.4 The most comprehensive subjective 
measurement of quality of life is the World Values Survey, 

59 

of indicators 

FACT The choice 

reflects the audience for 
which the indices are 
being created. The UN-
Habitat city prosperity 
index is primarily aimed 
at city leaders and 
national governments. 
Therefore, the quality 
of life indicators in the 
index include health 
and education and 
various infrastructure 
indicators. 

which reflects representative 
individuals’ beliefs and 
values in 54 countries around 
the world.5 More recent 
measurements of quality of 
life combine subjective and 
objective measures. In 2003, 
the European Environmental 
Agency investigated eight 
domains of individual 
life situations in 25 EU 
member states, ranging 
from economic situation, 
housing and employment 
to work-life balance, health, 
subjective well-being and 
perceived quality of life.6 
The international human resource consulting firm, Mercer, 
focuses on the quality of life of expatriates, taking in criteria 
such as availability of consumer goods, the economic 
environment, the natural, political and social environments 
as well as recreation amenities.7 

QUALITy OF LIFE: A SyNTHESIS OF ALL 
DIMENSIONS OF PROSPERITy
Quality of life underpins the 
functionality of cities: the 
notion is at the crossroads 
of all policies and actions8, 
and a synthesis of all the 
dimensions of prosperity. 
When a city generates 
employment and economic 
growth, quality of life 
improves. When a city 
designs better buildings 

is often tied 
to the opportunities 
available to people, 
to the meaning and 
purpose they attach to 
their lives and to the 
extent to which they 
enjoy the possibilities 
available to them”.2

FACT “Quality of life 

POLICy Cities that 

improve quality 

of life experience higher 
levels of prosperity; they 
are also likely to find 
themselves more advanced 
in terms of sustainability.

and public spaces that 
provide attractive, 
secure, clean and 
durable surroundings, 
it is improving quality 
of life. When a city 
provides adequate 
public transport, it 
improves quality of 
life for both users 

and non-users. When a city raises levels of education and 
provides good healthcare it is ensuring quality of life for 
the foreseeable future. And when a city reduces the use 
of environmental resources and becomes more energy-
efficient, it also improves quality of life. 

promoting quality of life and prosperity in their cities. 
In Europe, a survey on perceived quality of life in 

75 cities (2010) shows that ‘the three most important issues 
for the city’ were: educational facilities, job creation/reduce 
unemployment and the availability and quality of health 
services, among seven other alternatives such as social 
services, housing conditions, air pollution, noise, public 
transport, infrastructure and safety.9

It remains that, as perceived by experts and residents 

in developing and developed countries alike, the quality of 
urban life is a broader concept that includes a full range of 
factors such as economic development, living standards, 
material progress and individual and collective wellbeing, 
which all are important dimensions of prosperity.

According to the 
UN-Habitat survey 
(2011), on balance experts 
value security to live 
and work freely, good 
quality of education, 
adequate housing with 
basic services, and 
meaningful employment 
and decent income as the 
most important factors 

FACT Experts from 

52 cities consider 
quality of life as the second 
most important dimension 
promoting prosperity in 
cities, after infrastructure 
development. 

POLICy It is in any city’s 

best interest to 
promote public goods such 
as public transport, green 
areas and public spaces 
and ‘urban commons’ such 
as safety and security and 
political participation in 
order to enhance quality of 
life and shared prosperity. 

Accessibility, environmental sustainability and health: cyclists on dedicated cycle lanes in 
Copenhagen, Denmark.

© Anne-Britt Svinnset/Shutterstock.com

60 

State of the World’s Cities 2012/2013Treating Quality of Life as a By-product
UN-Habitat survey results show that the more committed 
the city is to promote quality of life, the more the chances 
that the effects will be broad-ranging. There is a clear 
positive association between a high degree of commitment 
to address quality of life and the possibility of designing 
specific policies. Unfortunately, the opposite also applies, 
and many cities treat quality of life as a by-product or an 
‘after-effect’ of policy interventions. Even where some cities 
perform well under other dimensions of prosperity, they 
fail to deliver better quality of life. Abidjan, Dakar, Dar 
es Salam and Kampala illustrate well this situation: they 
feature moderate or weak values in the “City Prosperity 
Index”, but rank even much lower for quality of life, which 
goes to show that this dimension cannot be considered as an 
indirect component of any urban policy agenda.

A number of studies have shown that the various 

determinants of quality of life generate complex interactions 
and diverse causal relations. Sometimes, efforts to promote 
one element can have unexpected detrimental effects 
on other elements; for example, prioritizing economic 
growth per se can result in negative environmental 
impacts. In other cases, positive linkages between 
these determinants are quite obvious; for instance, the 
provision of green open spaces brings health benefits to 
the population. In some other cases, the relationship can 
be less evident; for example, individual housing choices 
may have environmental impacts that affect quality of 
life in different ways.10 All too often, cities do not clearly 
perceive the complexity of these interactions and assume 
that interrelations will always be positive. Several cities 
in Asia and the Arab States that are experiencing high 
economic growth are mostly focusing on infrastructure 

Quality of Life and Urban Prosperity 

employment opportunities 
but also contribute to 
higher quality of life. But 
there may also be negative 
consequences.

FACT Social equity 

and quality of 
life go hand in hand. In 
practice, though, any 
policies and actions 
aiming to expand 
societal well-being 
largely depend on 
the political will of 
governments and the 
degree of participation 
of civil society 
organizations and, in 
particular, their degree 
of autonomy when it 
comes to advocating, 
upholding and fighting 
for the rights of all. 

However, UN-Habitat 
policy analysis shows that 
most surveyed cities in the 
developing world have 
no clear policies, actions 
and reliable procedures 
to deliver and expand 
quality of life to the whole 
population. With the 
exceptions of Singapore, 
Davao, Ho Chi Minh 
City and Chon Qing in 
Asia, Fort-de-France and 
Medellín in Latin America 
and the Caribbean, and 
Doha in the Arab States 
(whose commitment to 
quality of life was highly 
commended), experts 
took a critical view of the 
42 other cities on that 
count. They found public 
administrations to be 
generally inefficient and 
with poor incentives to 
devise specific quality of 
life policies for lack of adequate financial resources, trained 
staff or political interest. 

on economic prosperity, it is 
very likely that the benefits 
and improvements in terms 
of quality of life may not be 
geared to the urban poor, 
particularly in those cities 
where corruption and poor 
governance are endemic.

POLICy When a city 

focuses solely 

POLICy Cities 

that focus 

only on economic 
development and 
provide services that 
are not public goods, 
may leave the urban 
poor, migrants, ethnic 
minorities and other 
vulnerable groups with 
serious difficulties to 
pay for the improved 
services, reducing the 
possibilities for them to 
enjoy quality of life. 

development in the pursuit 
of higher productivity and 
therefore higher incomes, 
assuming that this will lead 
to better quality of life in 
the long term. Generally, 
that is what happens, 
since economic growth 
increases purchasing power 
and demand for goods 
and services including 
education, entertainment, 
financial services and 
housing, which, in turn, 
not only create new 

61 

Positive exceptions can be found, such as Cebu, 

Singapore, Dubai, and Ho Chi Minh City, where, in the 
words of a local expert, “investing in human resources is 
considered to be the best way of seizing more opportunities 
and turning them into wealth and quality of life to make the 
city more prosperous”.11 In Cebu, a local expert argues that 
“it is not only a matter of expanding the pie (i.e., economic 

FACT Experts in 60 per cent of surveyed cities in Africa 

and Arab States and slightly more than 40 per cent 
of cities in Asia and Latin America believe that corruption and 
poor governance conspire against local prosperity and quality 
of life.

POLICy Cities that are committed to quality of life are almost 

always committed to enhanced productivity and equity, 

emphasizing the strong relation between these dimensions.

development), but dividing the pie and ensuring that the 
poor benefit, too (i.e., equity and quality of life)”.12 Dubai, 
as other cities in the Arab Gulf, recognizes quality of life as 

a key competitive advantage that contributes to promoting 
city productivity, attracting and retaining highly qualified 
individuals and prestigious firms and investors. Priority is 
given to those most easily perceived elements of quality of 
life such as parks, clean sidewalks, leisure, art and culture 
amenities as well as hospitals. Although not generalized 
to all the population, the pursuit of prosperity through 
quality of life is an interesting connection and entry point 
to development. 

Box 2.3.1

Quality of Life – the ‘Spokes’ and the ‘Hub’ of the Wheel of Urban Prosperity

Quality of life and productivity 
Productivity and quality of life are increasingly associated. Skilled 
workers and talented people will flock to, and concentrate in, 
liveable cities with high quality of life, and firms will follow suit. 
Consulting firms rank cities based on their ‘good living’ factors to 
make informed locational decisions. High human capital, which 
is a main ingredient of quality of life, attracts firms that cluster in 
cities to take advantage of common labour pools. Well-planned 
and designed urban environments, with pedestrian-friendly areas, 
bicycle paths, mix-land uses and sufficient public goods, attract 
people and businesses which, in turn, contribute to finance further 
social amenities and public goods. More and more city leaders 
are investing in education and the provision of ‘commons’ and 
public goods as part of a quality of life. Inversely, cities that do 
not invest in quality of life tend to feature poor public health, low 
education, limited mobility, and marginalization of the urban poor, 
all resulting in low productivity. 

Quality of life and infrastructure development 
The prosperity of a city largely depends on infrastructure. 
Physical facilities like transportation, power and communications 
contribute to economic development, industrialization, trade and 
mobility of labour. Water supply, sanitation and sewerage, together 
with education and health facilities, have a direct impact on 
quality of life. All of these types of infrastructure connect people 
to people, goods to markets, workers to jobs, families to services, 
and the poor in rural areas to urban centres − a connectivity 
process that is essential to induce economic growth, reduce 
poverty and increase general well-being. More and more cities 
today are launching into ambitious initiatives to expand/improve 
infrastructure to sustain economic growth, prepare for population 
decline, address climate change issues and/or reduce slum 
incidence. Conversely, under-developed infrastructure makes life 
more difficult and more costly: poor facilities discourage industrial 
development, trade and investment and reduce competitiveness, 
besides generating air pollution, wasted time, fuel and safety 
costs, noise and more greenhouse gas emissions. 

Quality of life and equity
Quality of life and equity are constitutive of progress and 
development. No city can claim to be prosperous when large 
segments of its population are excluded or live in abject poverty, 
or when large sections of the population are deprived of basic 
goods or services while other sections live in affluence. Cities 
that look to more equity in the distribution of resources and 
opportunities, in law enforcement, in the rules and relationships 
that govern institutions and in access to public goods will be those 
where shared prosperity and quality of life are improved. More 
equitable cities enhance the prospects for people to take part in 
democratic processes and participate in a more decisive manner 
in cultural and political life. The benefits of social participation 
and political voice extend to other domains such as health, 
employment and the urban environment. 

Quality of Life and Environmental Sustainability
Environmental conditions have an immediate impact on the 
quality of people’s lives. They affect human health both directly 
(air, water pollution, noise) and indirectly (climate change, 
biodiversity). Well-managed urban commons and public goods 
can improve environmental conditions and quality of life. 
Conversely, the pursuit of short-term quality of life objectives can 
be detrimental to the more long-term sustainability objectives 
that collectively affect the lives of the whole population. 
Indeed, individual short-term aspirations to quality of life, such 
as affordable, low-density housing, can act as major factors 
behind urban sprawl, which in turn is detrimental to the natural 
environment through higher use of land, energy and water, along 
with greenhouse gas emissions.

Quality of life and the ‘hub’ of the wheel of prosperity
Effective institutions, more appropriate laws and regulations, 
proper urban planning and new value systems are essential 
power functions and can make sure that policies, actions and 
solutions involving any of the ‘spokes’ of prosperity can have 
positive effects on the others. 

Sources: Glaeser, E. and Berry, C. (2005); Gidwani, V. and Baviskar, A. (2011); European Environment Agency (2009); Stiglitz Joseph, Sen Amartya,  
Fitoussi Jean-Paul (2009); UN-Habitat (2008/9); Jones, Harry (2009); Lalnunmawia H, (2010); AusAid (2009). 

62 

State of the World’s Cities 2012/2013Quality of Life and Urban Prosperity 

FACT Experts in Beira, Algiers, Praia, Luanda and Addis 

Ababa, among others, explicitly link improved quality 

of life to slum upgrading and poverty reduction.

European 

FACT Northern 

In rich countries, government responses to the need 
for quality of life implicitly refer to access to a number 
of goods and services and improvements in the domestic 
living environment. Many 
European cities emphasize 
good transport, green open 
spaces, culture and sports 
facilities as major factors 
behind better quality of life. 
Although better paid jobs, 
good levels of education 
and health facilities always 
feature in government 
responses, quality of life is 
increasingly associated to 
an inclusive, well-planned, 
healthy and supportive 
environment.14 

cities like Copenhagen, 
Amsterdam, Groningen, 
Berlin and Muenster 
promote cycling and 
walking as part of new 
urban cultures and in 
the pursuit of better 
quality of life. Others 
like Dresden, Vancouver 
and Los Angeles have 
launched into urban 
conversion programmes 
in cultural and historical 
neighbourhoods, 
adapting urban 
infrastructure and 
reusing open land 
areas for better quality 
of life. 

Convergent city 

responses: Beyond local 
circumstances, some 
aspects of quality of life 
improvements can be found 
in all types of country. 

Quality of Life: A Variety of Local Responses 
UN-Habitat has identified some convergent and divergent 
forms in which cities address quality of life. 

Divergent city responses: Actions to improve quality of 
life will largely depend on the stage of development of the 
relevant country or city.

In most poor cities in the developing world, quality of 

life is strongly associated with the provision of public goods 
in the form of basic services such as water, sanitation and 
electricity, and improvements in slum neighbourhoods. 

Tanzania’s National Development Vision 2025 aims at 

high quality of life for all the population, linking this notion 
to economic growth and poverty reduction.13 In Ho Chi 
Minh City, quality of life is directly linked to improved 
drainage, sewage collection and treatment systems, and 
other public infrastructures such as road enlargements. 

In middle-income countries, governments link quality of 

life to various factors, from improved living environments 
and enhanced material well-being to higher incomes. Experts 
in cities as diverse as Fort-de-Fran ce (Martinique), Habana, 
Cebu, Davao, and Beirut explicitly refer to the provision of a 
decent house and a healthy environment as essential elements 
for improved well-being and quality of life. In other cities 
−Rosario, Bangalore, Hyderabad, Alexandria and Guarenas 
(Venezuela) − improved solid waste disposal is perceived as 
a major condition for better quality of life. Improvements 
in healthcare services appear as another major factor. In 
Singapore, Doha, Chongqing and Shenzhen, local experts 
implicitly refer to good and affordable medical services for 
all as a good way of improving quality of life. Shenzhen’s 
universal healthcare system 
and Tehran’s Urban Heart 
Programme are good 
examples. 

Box 2.3.2

Quality of Life, World-Class Cities and Social Inclusion

POLICy Equitable 

cities 
generalize access 
to urban commons 
and public goods, 
preventing private 
appropriation and 
expanding the scope for 
improved quality of life 
for all.

Cities with aspirations to ‘world class’ status will typically equate this notion with competitiveness. 
The 2007–2015 Dubai Long-term Strategic Development Plan declares these two notions as twin 
objectives that will “establish the city as a preferred home for current and future residents by 
improving the well-being of citizens and residents, and helping them live healthier lives enriched 
with opportunity and choice.15 In Doha, the capital of Qatar, transformation of the city into a 
diversified knowledge-based economy is seen by public authorities as being contingent on the 
development and upgrading of the education and skills of the population and improved quality of 
life.16 Singapore considers quality of life as a key competitive advantage to attract skilled foreign 
labour and investment.17 At a different level, a local expert in Beirut noted that ‘quality of life’ mostly 
appeared in the advertising brochures of high-end property developments, in response to which 
non-governmental organizations have used the same notion to draw attention to the lack of public 
goods in the city, such as public or ‘green’ spaces.18 In Santos, Brazil, quality of life is perceived as 
involving social justice and inclusion, not just economic growth, as a precondition for sustainable 
development.

63 

Cultural vitality enhances quality of life: Sinulog Street dancing, an annual event held on the third Sunday in January celebrates Santo Niño, 
the patron saint of Cebu, Philippines, as well as Cebuano peoples’ origins.

© 2012 John Lander/fotoLIBRA.com

64 

State of the World’s Cities 2012/2013UN-Habitat has identified various areas of intervention 
which governments with different political orientations and 
levels of development still consider as priority interventions: 
safety and security, efficient public transport, public spaces, 
healthcare and adequate housing, appear to be among the 
most important. 

Public Safety and Quality of Life: A safe and secure life 
for all is an integral component of a prosperous city. As an 
expert in Nairobi states, “quality of life only makes sense 
when there is adequate security”.19 Experts in 52 cities in 
the developing world agreed that this is the most important 
factor contributing to a sense of empowerment and a feeling 
that one is part of a prosperous city. In Lima, for instance, a 
survey on quality of life conducted by a citizens’ observatory 
found that 73 per cent of the population considers urban 
insecurity as the main problem that conspires against quality 
of life and prosperity.20

A survey on “urban lifestyles” conducted in 2010 by 

Veolia Observatory in seven cities in both developing 
and developed nations found that in three of these cities 
(Chicago, London and São Paulo) insecurity appears as the 
most important problem, and in another (Paris) it features 
as the third most important.21 

By itself, security may not bring prosperity to any city, 

but its absence is fatal. Economic inequity and/or instability 
nurtures high perceptions of crime and violence in various 
cities around the world, and inadequate urban planning law 
enforcement drives many high- and middle-class residents 
into gated communities and other guarded urban and 
suburban enclaves22, creating pockets of prosperity. This 
type of privilege remains unaffordable to those on low 
incomes, whose safety is often more at risk. Personal safety 
is seriously detrimental to freedom, mobility, productivity 
and public interactions, all of which are crucial to ensuring 
a high quality of life. 

Crime and violence can hinder, and sometimes, paralyze 

regional and national economies. High rates of violence 
and insecurity in Kingston (Jamaica) and Nairobi (Kenya) 
have stultified the otherwise thriving tourist sectors in 

POLICy Effective 

public 

safety is a fundamental 
‘common good’ that 
enhances quality of life 
for all, and is a major 
foundation of urban 
prosperity.

these countries.23 

Even though urban 

insecurity is to large extent 
the result of extreme 
inequalities, it can also 
generate further social 
and spatial disparities 
that restrain access to 
employment, resources 

65 

Quality of Life and Urban Prosperity 

FACT In 19 cities out of the 52 surveyed by UN-Habitat, an 

overwhelming majority of experts (more than 80 per cent) 

rated security to work and live freely as a major contributor 
to prosperity. In cities like Praia, Cebu, Algiers, Chongqing, 
Singapore, La Paz and Amman, nearly all experts rated security as 
‘contributing’ or ‘highly contributing’ to prosperity. 

and opportunities. Moreover, unsafe cities and perceptions 
of insecurity also lead to more fragmented, sprawled and 
car-dependent urban environments. The fear of crime and 
violence not only increases reliance on private automobiles 
through the proliferation of low-density, peri-urban gated 
communities, it also deters 
the public from using 
public transport. 

FACT Nearly one-third 

of local experts in 
Latin America, 25 per cent 
in African cities and more 
than 10 per cent in Asia and 
the Arab States said lack 
of public security was not 
properly addressed in their 
respective cities.

Extensive provision 

of public goods such 
as parks, schools, basic 
services, sports facilities 
and community centres, 
particularly in more violent 
neighbourhoods, together 
with strong participation 
from local communities, 
has enabled Medellín to 
enhance safety through social cohesion.

Reviving the public space: In a large number of cities, 
provision, preservation and improvement of public spaces 
remains a neglected agenda. According to a local expert 
in Panama City, “in practice, the concept of public space 
does not exist”.24 In Cebu, an expert mentions that “public 
parks, playground areas and recreational facilities are 
grossly inadequate”.25 Another in Al-Muharrak (Bahrain) 
states that “the city has been losing green areas and today 
the proportion of gardens is small”.26 As many other 
public goods, ‘green’ and open areas tend to be enclosed, 
restricted, or depleted by unsustainable use. In Amman, 
city authorities have been converting public areas and 
parks into developments. 
In India, confessional 
groups erect temples in 
public parks; in Bangladesh 
developers construct 
housing in open public 
areas; in Nairobi, private 
interests occupy riparian 
lands.27 

areas that are exposed 
to speculation for private 
profit. In other cities, public 
spaces remain concentrated 
in the affluent areas. 

FACT Many public spaces 

are residual urban 

POLICy Cities that 

reevaluate 

their notion of the public 
and thereby provide green 
areas, parks, recreation 
facilities and public spaces 
demonstrate a commitment 
to improved quality of life. 

POLICy Cities that 

enhance and 
sustain the use of public 
space have enhanced 
community cohesion, civic 
identity and quality of life. 

Box 2.3.3

Greenery and Quality of Life in Asian Cities

Many cities across the developing world, especially in Asia and the Arab States, are creating new 
parks in an effort to meet international standards for green area per capita (i.e., eight square meters 
per head).32 In the past five years, Shenzhen has created 435 new parks as part of the “Eco-city 
Programme” and the “Garden City Plan”, achieving a ratio of 16.3 sqm in 2009. As a result, the 
urban ecological environment in Shenzhen has gradually improved and with it quality of life.33 Also 
in China, Chongqing has increased the combined green belt and public square surface area by a 
multiple of 16 in the last 30 years.34 The state-city of Singapore is a leading example in the world, 
with greenery over 50 per cent of the surface area and over 450 public parks and gardens. The city 
is also preserving its rich biodiversity with four nature reserves which cover more than 3.000 ha, and 
are legally protected to safeguard key indigenous ecosystems. These initiatives contribute to a cleaner 
environment, shaping the country’s landscape and enhancing quality of life. Recently, greenery has 
been given even more emphasis, with a new plan for a “City-In-a-Garden”’.35 

In Amman, parks 

represent 12 per cent of the total land area; however, in 
the eastern part of the city, with the highest population 
density, open spaces are very scarce.28 In some other cities, 

Internet café, Maroc telecom, and teleboutique signs in Morocco. 
Access to the Internet is now a vital asset for both poor and rich.

© 2012 Alistair Laming/fotoLIBRA.com

66 

particularly those aiming at ‘world-class’ status, parks and 
‘green’ spaces have a more ornamental or ‘image’ role than 
a real ‘public good’ one.

Parks and ‘green’ spaces have always been associated 
with better quality of urban life. In Praia, a city where 
such spaces are very scarce, a newly opened, small public 
square has become a major place for recreation, leisure 
and socialization despite its reduced dimensions.29 In 
Guadalajara, Mexico, temporary appropriation of streets 
and public spaces for pedestrian and cycling purposes has 
become extremely popular. As a result, this recreational 
project, known as ‘vía recreativa’, has been extended 

Box 2.3.4

Internet, Information and Quality of Life

Basic needs are rapidly changing. Access to Internet is 
increasingly becoming an essential component of quality 
of life. In many cities today, Internet is used not just to 
communicate, socialize and learn, but also to promote public 
participation and to assess citizens’ perceptions of urban 
affairs. Formal recognition of right to information (i.e., India, 
2005; the Philippines, 2008; South Africa, 2000) empowers 
citizens and encourages participation in governance and 
government programmes. The cities of Hyderabad, Cebu, 
and Johannesburg, amongst many others, are introducing 
e-governance to enable many services on-line − issuance 
of documents, payments, ticketing, applications and 
complaints − as a major step to enhance quality of life. In 
India more than 500 million cell phones are currently in use, 
and many with reduced call rates. This is improving the 
connectivity of poor and rich alike, and enhancing economic 
opportunities for the urban poor. As stated by a local expert in 
India, “Internet is an empowerment tool”. 

State of the World’s Cities 2012/2013Quality of Life and Urban Prosperity 

from 3.4 km to over 25 km and across four municipal 
jurisdictions. At national level, the Mexican government 
has launched an ambitious programme to recover public 
spaces in a bid to improve quality of life and enhance public 
security, particularly in marginalized neighbourhoods in 
various cities.30 In Cuba, as part of a ‘non-discriminatory 
enjoyment of public spaces’ policy, several cultural 
programmes have been made free or affordable for all, with 
plazas, avenues and even vacant lots featuring various events 
that enhance quality of life.31 

In Europe, public greens which take the form of corner 

lots, small community parks, street greens, linear parks, 

and river banks as well 
as large city parks, are 
designed for specific types 
of activity. The liveliness 
and continuous use of 
public space as a public 
good leads, in turn, to 
urban environments that 
are well-maintained and 
safe, making the city an 
attractive place to live and 
work in.36 

POLICy “Having 

access to 

public spaces does not 
only improve quality 
of life, it is a first step 
to civic empowerment 
on the way to further 
institutional and political 
spaces”.37 

Endnotes

1 

2 
3 

4 
5 
6 

7 

8 
9 

Stiglitz, J.E., A. Sen, and J-P. Fitoussi (2009) Report by the Commission on the 
Measurement of Economic Performance and Social Progress, The Commission, Paris, 
http://www.stiglitz-sen-fitoussi.fr/en/index.htm
Stiglitz, J.E., A. Sen, and J-P. Fitoussi (2009) op. cit.
Andrulis ,D.P., H.M. Reid, L. M. Duchon (2004), Quality of Life in the Nation’s 100 
Largest Cities and Their Suburbs: New and Continuing Challenges for Improving 
Health and Well-Being, The Social and Health Landscape of Urban and Suburban 
America Report Series, USA.
Stiglitz, J.E., A. Sen, and J-P. Fitoussi (2009) op. cit.
www.worldvaluessurvey.org
European Environment Agency (2009), Ensuring quality of life in Europe’s cities and 
towns: Tackling the environmental challenges driven by European and global change, 
EEA Report 5/2009,Office for Official Publications of the European Communities, 
Luxembourg
http://www.mercer.com/articles/quality-of-living-survey-report-2011; Also targeting 
business, the Economist Intelligence Unit designed a Quality of Life Index using 
nine factors: material well-being, health, political stability and security, family life, 
community life, gender equality, political freedom, climate and geography, and job 
security, Refer to http://www.economist.com/media/pdf/QUALITY_OF_LIFE.pdf
European Environment Agency (2009) op. cit.
Bodin-Buyle Z., and C. Hermant-De Callataÿ (2011), Urban Prosperity and Quality of 
Life in European cities – Beyond GDP, European Union, Brussels, prepared for UN-
Habitat as part of EU – UN-Habitat collaboration.

10  European Environment Agency (2009) op. cit.
11  Dzung, D. D. (2011) City Report on Ho Chi Minh City, Unpublished UN-Habitat 

background study for “State of the World’s Cities Report 2012/2013”

20  Lima Como Vamos (2010) Lima Según sus Ciudadanos, Observatorio Ciudadano, 

Informe de Percepción sobre la Calidad de Vida, Lima.

21  Veolia Environment (2010), Villes à Vivre 2010, Observatoire Veolia de Modes de Vie 

Urbains, Paris.

22  Davis, D. (2007) “Urban Violence, Quality of Life, and the Future of Latin American 
Cities,” in Allison M. Garland,A.M, M. Massoumi and B. A. Ruble (Eds) Global Urban 
Poverty: Setting the Agenda. Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars, 
Comparative Urban Studies Project, Washington D.C, pp. 57-87.

23  UN-Habitat (2007) Enhancing urban safety and security: Global report on human 

settlements 2007, Earthscan, London

24  Mendoza, I. R. (2011) City Report on Panama City, Unpublished UN-Habitat 

background study for “State of the World’s Cities Report 2012/2013”

25  Fernandez, F.L. (2011) op. cit.
26  Al- Kubaisy, F. (2011) City Report on Al-Muharrak, Unpublished UN-Habitat 

background study for “State of the World’s Cities Report 2012/2013”

27  UN-Habitat (2010), Bridging the Urban Divide, State of the World’s Cities Report 

2010/2011, Earthscan, London

28  Shabou, A., N. Soboh, K. Jalouka, and D. A. Thaib (2011) City Report on Amman, 
Unpublished UN-Habitat background study for “State of the World’s Cities Report 
2012/2013”

29  Fernandez, C. (2011) City Report on Cape Verde, Unpublished UN-Habitat background 

study for “State of the World’s Cities Report 2012/2013”

30  SEDESOL (2007). Guia de Diseno del Espacio Publico Seguro, Incluente y 

Sustentable. Secretaria de Desarrollo Social, México

31  Coyula, M. (2011) City Report on Havana, Unpublished UN-Habitat background study 

for “State of the World’s Cities Report 2012/2013” 

12  Fernandez, F.L. (2011) City Report on Cebu, Unpublished UN-Habitat background 

study for “State of the World’s Cities Report 2012/2013”

13  Lupala, A. (2011) City Report on Dar es Salaam, Unpublished UN-Habitat background 

32  The agreed international ratio is 8 square meters per capita. For instance, Lima, the 
capital of Peru, has around 3 square meters, the Mexican border city of Tijuana has 
around one or two, and Al-Muharrak in Bahrain has less than 1 square meters.

study for “State of the World’s Cities Report 2012/2013”

14  European Environment Agency (2009) op. cit.
15  Al-Bassam, D. and J. Mouris (2011) City Report on Dubai, Unpublished UN-Habitat 

33  Jin, L. and Y. Liu (2011) City Report on Shenzhen, Unpublished UN-Habitat 

background study for “State of the World’s Cities Report 2012/2013”

34  Liu, Y. and Y. Wang (2011) City Report on Chongqing, Unpublished UN-Habitat 

background study for “State of the World’s Cities Report 2012/2013”

background study for “State of the World’s Cities Report 2012/2013”

16  Mena, A. (2011) City Report on Doha, Unpublished UN-Habitat background study for 

“State of the World’s Cities Report 2012/2013”

17  Centre for Livable Cities (2011) City Report on Singapore, Unpublished UN-Habitat 

background study for “State of the World’s Cities Report 2012/2013”

35  Centre for Livable Cities (2011) op. cit.
36  Shehayeb, D. (2008) ‘Safety and Security in Public Space’ in International Report on 
Crime Prevention and Community Safety: Trends and Perspectives, ICPC, Montreal, 
pp. 107-112

18  Fawaz, M. and N. Baghdadi (2011) City Report on Beirut, Unpublished UN-Habitat 

37  Castellanos, G. (2011) City Report on Santo Domingo, Unpublished UN-Habitat 

background study for “State of the World’s Cities Report 2012/2013”

background study for “State of the World’s Cities Report 2012/2013”

19  Omenya, A. (2011) City Report on Nairobi, Unpublished UN-Habitat background study 

for “State of the World’s Cities Report 2012/2013”

67 

Chapter 2.4

Equity and the 
Prosperity of Cities

The past few decades have witnessed a notable surge in 
economic growth, but one which has been accompanied 
by an equally daunting degree of inequity under various 
forms, with wider income gaps and deepening poverty 
in many cities across the world. In the 1970s, widening 
income gaps began an unhealthy co-existence with 
economic growth, with reduced incomes for households in 
the middle and lower classes and steady increases for the 
well-off. Economic inequality is seriously detrimental to the 
equitable distribution among individuals of opportunities 

FACT Cities must realize 

that equity has 
a significant impact on 
economic performance, 
since the greater the degree 
of equity, the greater the 
chances of a fuller, more 
efficient use of available 
resources, including skills 
and creative talent.1

FACT As understood in 

this Report urban 
prosperity thrives on equity, 
which involves reduction 
in barriers on individual/
collective potential, 
expansion of opportunities, 
and strengthening of 
human agency2 and civic 
engagement. 

to pursue a life of their 
choosing and be spared 
from extreme deprivation 
in outcomes. 

Equity involves 

systematic (re)distribution 
of the economic benefits 
of growth or development, 
with legal frameworks 
ensuring a ‘level playing 
field’ and institutions 
protecting the rights 
of the poor, minorities 
and vulnerable groups. 
Promotion of equity 
also involves enhancing 
socioeconomic equality 
and providing for civic 
participation by all in the 
social, political and cultural 
spheres. 

68 

THE UNEQUAL WEALTH OF CITIES: INCREASED 
INCOME DISPARITIES 
The 2011 OECD report Divided We Stand stresses that 
income gaps between rich and poor are expanding in both 
developed and developing countries. In OECD countries, 
inequalities are as steep as they have been for over 30 
years. The Report shows that, in advanced economies, the 
average income of the richest 10 per cent of the population 
is about nine times higher than that of the poorest 
10 per cent. In Europe’s Nordic countries, the average is a 
multiple of six but growing, 
compared with multiples 
of 10 in Italy, Korea and 
the United Kingdom, and 
up to 14 in Israel, Turkey 
and the United States. 
These are overshadowed 
by countries such as Chile 
and Mexico with multiples 
of 27, and in Brazil, despite 
recent declines in inequity 
(the exception among 
the BRICs countries), the 
ratio of incomes between 
richest and poorest reached 
a staggering 50:1.4 In 
the 34 OECD member 
countries, Gini coefficients 
have risen by 10 per cent 
on average between the 
1980s and the late 2000s 
(from 0.29 to 0.316).5 
In emerging economies 
(such as Argentina, Brazil, 
China, India, Indonesia, 
the Russian Federation 

wealth, but it 
is not shared equitably. 
Despite considerable 
increases in capital and 
per capita GDP growth 
along with reductions 
in extreme poverty, 
inequality as a whole is 
growing in most parts 
of the world – a process 
that undermines urban 
prosperity. 

and local experts 
concur that inequalities 
are becoming steeper. 
A review of inequality 
in cities reveals a 
steady increase over 
the long term, as well 
as in recent decades.3 
Paradoxically, this has 
occurred as wealth rose 
enormously around the 
world. 

FACT Cities generate 

FACT In many cities, 

the population 

Equity and the Prosperity of Cities

POLICy Promoting 

equity must 
be a dual endeavour: (i) 
providing the conditions that 
enable every individual and 
social group to realize their 
full potential and harness 
the collective benefits and 
opportunities any city has 
to offer; and (ii) removing 
any systemic barriers that 
discriminate against any 
individual or social group.

and South Africa) 
income inequality is 
significantly steeper 
than the OECD average. 
Inequality has increased 
in all these countries over 
time, reaching extremes 
in Argentina, Brazil and 
South Africa. 

EQUITy COMES WITH 
MULTIPLIER EFFECTS
Equity and lack thereof 
work in exactly opposite 
ways. When actively 
pursued, equity can act as a powerful catalyst for prosperity, 
exerting multiplier effects on other prosperity factors, 
optimizing their respective performances and creating 

CPI

Gini

MPI

Box 2.4.1

Income Inequalities in the World’s Cities: An Overview

The UN-Habitat database shows that income inequalities are 
widening in urban Asia; this is also the case in half of the 
African countries where urban data is available, while the gap 
has narrowed slightly in Latin America and the Caribbean. 

According to the database, the most unequal cities in the 
developing world are Hong Kong, Yichan, Shenzhen, Kuala 
Lumpur, Manila, Davao, Colombo, Bangkok, and Ho Chi Minh 
City; Bujumbura, Douala, Brazzaville, Addis Ababa, Libreville, 
Maputo, Lagos, Kigali and several South African cities (the 
most unequal in the world); and cities in Brazil and Colombia, 
together with Mexico City, Port-au-Prince, Buenos Aires, 
Santiago and Quito. 

Rising inequity is not limited to the developing world, as the 
recent banking/financial crisis has had serious socioeconomic 
effects on the developed countries where it started in the 
first place. 

Figure 2.4.1

Urban Prosperity, Poverty and Inequity

1.0

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

Mexico city

Moscow

Ha Noi (Red Delta region)
Johannesburg
Cape Town

Jakarta

Manila
Casablanca

Nairobi
Guatemala city

Abidjan

Yaounde

Lagos

Accra

Punjab*
Phnom Penh*

Dhaka*

Dakar*
Addis Ababa*

Kampala*
Dar es Salaam*

* Gini coeffecient based on consumption

This graph shows the difference between poverty and inequity in the context of rising prosperity. In many developing countries, inequity is often concealed in 
poverty, thus misdirecting policy and strategic interventions which tend to concentrate only on poverty. The case of Chile (Santiago) is a case in point. Whereas 
poverty has been reduced by around 20 per cent, the Gini coefficient increased from 0.542 in 1990 to 0.558 in 2009. A typical example of income polarisation 
can be found in Nairobi, which features a Gini coefficient of 0.59, whereby the richest 10 per cent in the city account for 45.2 per cent of income while the 
poorest 10 per cent account for just 1.6 per cent. 

Source: WHO/UNICEF (2010); International Energy Agency (2010); International Road Federation (2009); ITU World Telecommunication /  
ICT Indicators Database (2010)

69 

POLICy When equity 

is embedded 

in urban development 
strategies, efficiency is 
enhanced, asset utilization 
becomes optimal, 
productivity improves, social 
cohesion is strengthened, 
and both sustainability and 
resilience are enhanced.

linkages among them. 
Its absence will will 
have the reverse effect, 
compounding any existing 
biases, or dysfunctions 
already hindering 
prosperity. 

Undoubtedly, some 

cities have demonstrated a 
capacity to stimulate growth 
and prosperity even in the 
absence of equity. However, 

as has become amply evident in the past three decades, 
such prosperity, coupled with uneven distribution, remains 
narrowly confined and is unsustainable. Conversely, cities 
that have built equity into their local development strategies 
are better placed for enhanced prosperity. 

Equity reduces alienation and exclusion, paving the 

way for empowerment and engagement of all social groups, 
and for the realization of the full potential of the entire 
population. Indeed, cities that have removed impediments 
to the full engagement of women, youths and even the 

Box 2.4.2

Spatial divisions exacerbate inequality

Spatial inequalities are not only a forerunner of social and 
economic divisions; these in turn cause further inequalities and 
different forms of exclusion and marginalization. In Jordan’s 
capital, for instance, 97 per cent of households in Western 
Amman have computers while in Eastern Amman the proportion 
is no more than eight per cent. Not surprisingly, in Western 
Amman more than 50 per cent of males and 20 per cent of 
females earn more than USD1,400 monthly, compared with only 
two per cent for males and less than one per cent for females in 
Eastern Amman.7 

The urban divide appears to widen with higher degrees of 
economic prosperity; at least this is the perception of populations 
and local experts. In Bangalore, where specialisation in computer 
technologies has brought a fair amount of economic prosperity, 
a local expert remarked that “while quality of life is comfortable 
for ‘elite Bangalore’, it is not so for the ‘other Bangalore’ which 
comprises the majority of the population”.8 In São Paulo, even 
as municipal authorities strive to integrate favelas, informal 
settlements and rehabilitated urban neighbourhoods into a more 
inclusive city, wealthy Paulistanos resist the process and gravitate 
to more exclusive enclaves. The result is what has been dubbed 
a ‘city of walls’ where any visible prosperity appears to be largely 
monopolised by the wealthy. In Lusaka, a local expert reports 

elderly have invariably enhanced overall prosperity. 

Equity is not simply a normative concern, related to 

issues of fairness and justice, important as these may be. It is 
a material factor which directly impinges on the process of 
social and material sustenance. In fact, through removal of 
‘unfreedoms’, and with the attendant broadening of choices 
and opportunities, equity enhances the city’s transformative 
capacity while also promoting identity and agency among 
the population. 

The social process that comes with the opportunities 

made available to all through public goods like quality 
education and skills, enables the population to remain 
engaged and to stake a claim on the city. In this respect, the 
way a city shapes, and is in turn shaped by, its population, 
will largely depend on whether urban systems provide all 
residents with equal opportunities for development and the 
ability to exert agency. 

Inequity is inefficient from an economic perspective. As 
stressed by Sen, “the primitiveness of social developments 
(such as widespread illiteracy, malnutrition, lack of health 
facilities and medical networks) is a barrier to the full 
realisation of the benefits of participatory growth and 

that ”increasing degrees of exclusion are reappearing in the 
city, especially with the new infrastructure under development. 
Segregation along racial lines is re-emerging.”9 In Dubai, as in 
some other Gulf cities, the gap between nationals and non-
nationals (access to schooling, public hospitals, health insurance, 
adequate and affordable housing, labour grievances and rights) is 
unequal in the extreme. 

Research shows that when combined, the physical and social 
divisions between rich and poor neighbourhoods can generate 
further exclusion and marginalization, especially when the 
poor are confined to farther neighbourhoods with inadequate 
accessibility. The underprivileged people living in these ‘lost’ 
areas suffer from a triple jeopardy: long distances, high transport 
costs and excessive commuting times. This turns into a genuine 
“spatial poverty trap” that conspires against shared prosperity 
through restrictions on jobs, compounding gender differences, 
limiting social interactions and reducing social capital, increasing 
the likelihood of crime and violence, with worsening living 
standards as a result.10 The spatial inequalities so visible in 
so many cities are also the outcome of broader and deeply 
entrenched processes of unplanned urban development, poor 
governance and institutionalized exclusion and marginalisation of 
specific groups. 

70 

State of the World’s Cities 2012/2013Equity and the Prosperity of Cities

prosperity.”6 Remedies 
here include such public 
goods as political freedom, 
economic facilities, social 
opportunities, transparency 
and security, with the 
safeguards against a variety 
of risks that they ensure for 
basic capabilities. 

THE RISkS OF 
UNCHALLENGED 
DIvISION
A growing body of 
research connects the 
competitiveness of cities 
with social cohesion. 
Analysis increasingly 
links the importance of 
tackling inequality at earlier 
stages of development 
to the achievement of 
prosperity. Reducing 
inequality and poverty has 
been highlighted as a key 
aspect of urban quality 
of life. A UNICEF study 
on poverty reduction 
mentioned that “evidence from India, China and Brazil 
indicates very clearly that efforts to ease inequalities 
generate larger dividends for poverty reduction than a 
more conventional focus on economic growth”.11 An 
OECD study has reached similar conclusions: the notion of 
social cohesion includes dimensions of social relationships, 
social inclusiveness and social equity, which are major 
components of broader-defined prosperity. “The key 
idea that has emerged to link these concerns is that social 
cohesion improves economic performance. This is a more 
positive way of saying that social division and fragmentation 
undermine long-term economic success”.12

However, the absence of social cohesion, particularly 

in the form of equity, does not just challenge economic 
success: it also jeopardises prosperity as a whole through 
the multidimensional, and far-reaching consequences 
which inequity spreads throughout urban society. UN-
Habitat analysis (2010) of urban inequality in 47 developing 
countries challenged the notion that inequity is an 
acceptable, inevitable aspect of economic growth.13 

Kibera, Nairobi: Looking out ... access to good education is one 
way out the slum.

© Eduardo Lopez Moreno

Recently, OECD experts agreed that economic growth 
and equality were by no means contradictory variables but 
instead can, and arguably should, act in a complementary 
way, stressing that “researchers are increasingly finding that 
regions marked by higher levels of inequality, in fact, find 
their economic performance damaged.”14

The statement that ‘more equal cities are more 

prosperous cities’ is 
increasingly supported by 
evidence, and has become 
a development proposition. 
Without elaborating on 
the moral principle that 
inequality is inherently 
unacceptable, it would 
appear that when certain 
groups of people are 

71 

FACT More and 

more empirical 
data suggests a strong 
connection between 
equity and economic 
prosperity, with equity 
being a cause not a 
result of economic 
prosperity.

POLICy If left unaddressed, socioeconomic fragmentation can 

jeopardise urban prosperity and pose major risks to 

nationwide political stability. 

repeatedly and disproportionately refrained from taking 
their fair, full share of the multidimensional benefits of the 
‘urban advantage’, the above statement comes with two 
interconnected corollaries. First, inequality can be linked 
to poor economic productivity, and experience shows that 
more sustainable urban economies are frequently associated 
with lower inequality. Second, persistent, ever-higher 
inequality carries direct risks. Stark disparities within cities 
have proven to be social detonators, as recent revolutions 
in the Arab world and social unrest in some cities in the 
developed world have recently demonstrated.

Take a city anywhere in the world that can boast 

sustained economic growth thanks to high productivity, 
adequate infrastructure, a high quality of life and 
environmental preservation: the more this prosperity is 
inequitably distributed, the more precarious it is bound 
to be. All five ‘spokes’ in the ‘prosperity wheel’ must be 
developed in a well-balanced way for a smoother ride on the 
path of sustainable, shared prosperity. 

The recent society-wide upheavals in Tunisia, Libya 

and Egypt did not occur against a background of extreme 
poverty or deprivation. In all three countries, national 
poverty reduction programmes had gained considerable 
traction. Slum improvement or eradication had been 
achieved or was on-going. Large infrastructure projects 
with adequate transport networks had been deployed or 
were underway and, in terms of education and health, 
achievements were approaching or surpassing national 
Millennium Development Goals. Still, Egypt, Libya and 
Tunisia were shown to have feet of clay. The sobering 

POLICy When prosperity 

remains an 
elusive proposition for a 
majority of the population, 
the prospects of social 
unrest or full-blown 
conflicts increase, since 
the majority’s claims are 
nothing but demands for 
effective human dignity. 

message from the Arab 
Spring, though still in a 
state of flux, is that leaders 
and societies ignore 
inequality at their own peril.

A recent report on the 
East African Community 
has highlighted a number of 
remarkable achievements in 
terms of economic growth 
over the past decade, 
propelled by massive 

increases in trade based on new, all-weather roads and uptake 
of mobile telephone technology. Still, the actual number of 
East Africans living below the poverty line has increased from 
44 million to 53 million, and income inequality indicators, as 
measured by Gini coefficients, have also worsened in most 
countries.15 As a regional expert put it, ”The reason for this 
is that inequality is both deepening and widening. Fewer 
people are enjoying the benefits of economic growth.”16

Inequality and criminality appear to be part and parcel 
of the same equation. This is all the more so when lack of 
opportunities and rising unemployment are added to the 
balance. Perceptions of rising criminality, and the fears 
thereof, may be strong in cities characterised by high 
inequity, and even stronger than actual numbers actually 
state. In one poll, comparing perceptions and expert 
opinion in São Paulo and London, criminality emerged 
as a major concern in both cities, even though actual 
numbers in São Paulo were a multiple of London’s.17 In 
the same survey, residents of cities as diverse as Mumbai, 
Chicago, Cairo, London, Paris, Beijing and São Paulo 
overwhelmingly agreed (89 per cent) that “a non-dangerous 
city” was their prime criterion for the ‘good urban life’, a 
notion that has much to do with prosperity. 

LINkING EQUITy TO PROSPERITy
“Inequalities are increasing day after day”, according to a 
local expert in Hyderabad. This comment echoes findings 
from the United Nations General Assembly 2011 Report on 
Progress towards Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), 
which stressed that “despite advances towards achieving 
the MDGs, insufficient emphasis in the MDG agenda had 
been given to the issue of inequity which is increasing within 
and between countries.”18 Even in those countries that have 
made progress towards the MDGs, inequalities have grown. 
Therefore, as suggested by the UN General Assembly, equity 
must be mainstreamed in the development agenda, based on 
more inclusive growth. 

Evidence showing that 

equity is a critical dimension 
of prosperity runs 
against the conventional 
development approaches 
that prevailed before the 
2008–09 global financial 
crisis. A particular case in 
point is the ‘Washington 
Consensus’, which 
reinforced the notion that 

72 

POLICy Cities must 

pay more 

attention to inequity as 
a critical factor affecting 
prosperity. Deliberate 
and conscious policies 
now need to emphasise 
the importance of equity 
in urban decision-
making.

State of the World’s Cities 2012/2013Equity and the Prosperity of Cities

FACT The impact of 

inequity has been 
overlooked in conventional 
economic and development 
theory.

(with its role in rights advocacy) (Figure 2.4.2). This is 
the case in Lahore, Bangalore, Amman and Beirut. In the 
survey, local experts also 
cited poor governance, 
lack of political will 
and structural barriers 
to pro-equity policies 
as other significant 
hindrances to equity. Far 
from being a historic or 
inevitable phenomenon, 
urban inequality in this 
perspective is understood 
to be the result of 
deliberate negligence, 
structural obstacles and 
weak capacities to counter 
prevailing conditions.

greater chances to be more 
prosperous; but prosperity 
does not happen all by itself, 
or as a logical consequence 
of economic growth. 

POLICy More equitable 

cities have 

FACT While equity has a direct effect on the emergence of 

prosperity, it must be brought about through the other 

dimensions of prosperity.

economic growth is to take place first before equity issues can 
be addressed. Although the Consensus promoted pro-poor 
growth and the provision of primary education along with 
primary health and infrastructure development, it was based 
on the premise that poorer sections of society benefit from 
whatever ‘trickles through’ the economic and social pyramid, 
in an environment of free enterprise and deregulation. The 
dramatic collapse of the banking system in major Western 
countries in 2008 and the subsequent world economic crisis 
has seriously discredited the Consensus approach.

Ample evidence suggests that structures and institutions 

are skewed in favour of dominant groups in society. These 
groups may legally or otherwise maximise their own 
benefits, not by chance but by design, and perpetuate and 
enhance conditions that further benefit themselves or their 
socio-political class. This is particularly true in cities with 
poor governance arrangements, weak institutions and non-
existing or ineffective planning structures − in other words, 
in cities where the ‘hub’ of the wheel of prosperity is not 
properly working and fails to steer growth and development 
in a more equitable manner. 

The UN-Habitat survey on urban prosperity in 

developing regions has highlighted corruption as the 
greatest barrier to equity, followed by weak civil society 

Figure 2.4.2

Factors restricting the scope of greater urban equity

ranking
4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0

Historic patterns of inequality 

Corruption

Discriminatory practices

Inef(cid:31)cient and ineffective government

Lack of interest from ruling elites

Public institutions controlled by ruling elite

Lack of democracy

Lack of funds

Weak civil society to claim or defend rights

Africa 

Asia 

LAC 

Arab States

All regions

73 

FOSTERING SOCIAL INCLUSION 
Unequal income and unequal opportunities are the two 
main underlying factors of urban inequity. They derive 
from biases in distribution at national level as well as 
dysfunctions at the local urban level. In this sense, inequity 
reveals a differentiation in the manner in which resources 
are allocated and facilities and services accessed. The main 
driver of inequity often tends to be differential access 
to employment as well as to public goods and services. 
Inequity in this respect reflects biases in the economic 
realm which effectively concentrate a disproportionate 
share of resources, services and opportunities in the hands 
of certain groups or individuals. A common response is 
the consolidation of redistributive programmes, mainly 
in the area of social welfare. In developing countries, this 
has been complemented with the design of local economic 
development initiatives as well as poverty alleviation 
measures. However, it has become increasingly evident that 
beyond dysfunctions in the distributive systems, in both 
developed and developing countries, some systemic barriers 
sustain outright discrimination and alienation. 

Transcending poverty and deprivation, social inclusion 

as both a process and an outcome entails the removal of 
barriers to access to goods, services and opportunities 
as well as improved wellbeing and self-fulfilment. This 
goes to show that social inclusion is not just reactive; 

POLICy Cities willing to 

embrace shared 

prosperity must also look 
beyond equity to ensure the 
promotion of social inclusion 
as a whole. 

FACT Equity is also 

about social and 
political relations among 
urban populations as well 
as among government 
institutions and individuals 
and social groups. It is the 
relational dimension which 
underlies the degree to 
which a city operates and 
sustains as a collective 
entity. 

rather, it recognizes the 
importance of differences 
and diversity, and harnesses 
the commonality of lived 
and shared experiences 
to achieve positive 
societal ends. 

To a substantial 

degree, the urban protest 
movements that were 
referred to earlier in this 
Report have been about 
social inclusion (Chapter 
1, Part 1). The rallying cry, 
“We are the 99 per cent”, 
is more of a reaction to 
exclusion and alienation 
than a protest against 
poverty or deprivation. 
Whereas equity in its 
primarily economic 
dimension is driven by 

74 

‘macro’ and national policies, most interventions in favour 
of social inclusion take place at the local level. Therefore, 
urban authorities have a major role to play when it comes to 
making shared prosperity a reality within their jurisdictions. 
In European cities an abundance of initiatives have been 

introduced to promote social inclusion, and their benefits 
seem to have registered in the UN-Habitat “City Prosperity 
Index”. For example, the ‘Cities Against Social Exclusion’ 
(CASE) programme illustrates the concerted efforts at local 
and regional levels to share experiences and improve local 
action among a network of European cities. 

Typical interventions, such as in Stockholm, include 

removal of barriers to full engagement of women, youths, 
the homeless, the elderly and the disabled. In Vienna, 
an elaborate action plan involves systems for non-
discrimination at all levels, improved political and social 
participation of all minority groups including migrants, and 
measurable monitoring of social diversity and integration. 
As Vienna’s mayor once put it, “Social cohesion and a 
climate of respect are particularly important at a time when 
we all face new challenges. Good neighbourly relations 
cannot be enacted by law. The people who live in Vienna 
need to come to an understanding and formulate mutually 
acceptable solutions.”19 

Similar noteworthy experiences are emerging in 
developing countries where Medellín, Dar es Salaam 
and Kigali, for instance, have found effective ways of 
enhancing prosperity based on relatively lower productivity, 
infrastructural development and quality of life. Medellín has 
resorted to civic architecture and public spaces to further 
inclusiveness and the empowerment of otherwise marginalized 
social groups. These groups benefit from expanded public 
facilities as infrastructure reaches out to them, improving not 
just their sense of wellbeing 
but also their capacity 
fully to engage with the 
urban fabric. In Dar es 
Salaam, a conscientious 
plan for socially mixed 
neighbourhoods has 
brought more inclusion 
both in space and in 
social relations. In Kigali, 
innovative measures aim to 
consolidate reconciliation 
and integration as part 
of the post-genocide 
reconstruction process. 

inclusion provides an 
environment where 
individuals feel they 
belong to the larger 
whole, have access 
to ‘commons’ and are 
free fully to engage in 
collective affairs. Social 
inclusion involves a 
broad set of variables 
as it hinges upon 
the socio-political 
relationship. 

POLICy At the city 

level, social 

State of the World’s Cities 2012/2013PLACING EQUITy ON THE DEvELOPMENT AGENDA 
UN-Habitat policy analysis shows that in most developed 
countries, concerns for socio-economic equity are typically 
built into concerted actions from local and national 
governments. This will usually result in urban policies 
promoting inclusion, diversity, multi-ethnicity, affirmative 
action, positive discrimination and pro-poor planning. This 
in turn can take the form of wide-ranging programmes 
and actions, from strategic positioning of educational and 
recreational centres to low-cost housing to quota systems 
to encourage minority engagement in local politics and 
representation, as well as targeted subsidies and financial 
support for new businesses. Similar policies and dedicated 
institutions are found at the municipal level in most 
developed countries and in some emerging economies. 
Local experts in the UN-Habitat survey believe that 

equity is primarily the responsibility of public authorities; 
where a failure of political will, or indifference, are to blame 
for deficient, or total lack of, effective policy. Such failure 
can be identified at national or local level. In the survey, 
local experts in Nairobi, Luanda, Kuwait City, Lahore, 

Equity and the Prosperity of Cities

FACT Institutions are not fully contributing to equity. Rulers lack 

interest and ineffective governments are hampering the 

potential for more equitable cities. 

inequities 

POLICy Addressing 

Lima, Fort-de-France, Erbil 
and Saida felt that national 
governments showed 
little concern for inequity 
whereas local experts 
in Alexandria, Algiers, 
Hyderabad, Guadalajara, 
Panama City, Beirut and Doha report that it is local policy-
makers who show little concern for equity.

requires political will, strong 
institutions and well-
targeted policies.

Elsewhere, local experts report that some cities 
prioritize equity in planning and policy strategies. 
Figure 2.4.3 summarises the types of action they use. In 
African and Asian cities in the UN-Habitat survey, pro-poor 
vocational training and skills programmes are emphasised, 
with some projects explicitly targeting the poor and 

Figure 2.4.3

Most notable policy or action the city is implementing to be more equitable

per cent
40

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

Vocational education and training to 
enable skills development

Easier access to employment 
and opportunities

New rules and regulations to promote 
equitable development

Cash transfers and other forms of (cid:31)nancial 
support for disadvantaged groups

Financial incentives for the 
urban poor

Speci(cid:31)c projects targeting the poor 
& marginalized

Other

None

Africa 

Asia 

LAC 

Arab States

All regions

75 

marginalised. Singapore offers a clear example of repeated 
commitment by the government to education and training 
for all in an environment that promotes productivity and 
social mobility. In Ho Chi Minh City, government-led 
promotion of the high-tech (IT) and service sectors offers 
widespread new opportunities for communities to switch 
away from conventional manual labour.20 In Africa, Addis 
Ababa’s Micro and Small Enterprises Development Strategy 
targets the unemployed.21 Johannesburg enhances the skills 
of poor communities, expanding access to education and 

Medellín, Colombia: children enjoy education at a junior school.

© Jez Coulson/Panos Pictures

training. In Latin American and Caribbean countries, some 
experts cited cash transfers and other financial assistance 
in support of marginalised groups, such as Brazil’s “Bolsa 
Familia” and Mexico’s “Oportunidades” programme. 
In Arab cities, local experts found that new rules and 
regulations did promote equitable development. 

76 

State of the World’s Cities 2012/2013Equity and the Prosperity of Cities

Cities are also allocating funds and introducing local 
programmes to promote equity. Some of these interventions are 
becoming best practices and good examples that are inspiring 
other cities, and sometimes national governments. Authorities 
in Chongqing have made social equity a primary goal. Priority 
public rental housing programmes have improved conditions 
and rural migrant workers’ rights are better protected. In Beirut, 
vulnerable groups are targeted for special social support as part 
of a scheme that has significantly reduced homelessness and 
the number of people (10 per cent in 2009) below the National 
Poverty line22). Faced with very steep income inequality (with 
Gini coefficients as high as 0.75 in 2005), Johannesburg is 
responding with pro-poor policies including ‘Cash Social Grants’. 
Singapore integrates equity in national development policies 
and urban planning. According to a local expert, ‘There is room 
for upward social mobility among the poor and lower-middle 
class people through adequate opportunities for all in education 
and the job market’. 

Box 2.4.3

Making Progress on the Equity Agenda

POLICy There is no 

substitute 

for government 
leadership to address 
issues of equity, 
with civil society in 
advocacy, support and 
complementary roles. 

Today, some cities and  
national governments in the  
developing world are  
beginning to prioritize equity  
through concerted actions.  
They understand that working  
together maximizes their  
possibilities to make positive  
changes in the living  
conditions of the urban poor.  
They also understand that  
equity is a fundamental aspect  
of prosperity. Their interventions are closely linked to pro-
poor programmes such as, in Alexandria, the Social Fund 
for Development, which focuses on small- and medium-size 
businesses; in Gaziantep, the Social Solidarity Fund whose cash 
transfers are conditional on children being sent to school; in 
Lahore, the Benazir Income Support Programme; in Shenzhen, 
social equity policies have brought large numbers of migrant 
workers and vulnerable groups into the city’s social housing and 
welfare system; in Ho Chi Minh City, the ‘Doimoi’ reform process 
has reduced inequalities in Vietnam’s capital.

Endnotes

1  World Bank (2006) World Development Report 2006 - Equity and Development, 

14  OECD (2006) OECD Territorial Reviews Competitive Cities in the Global Economy, 

2 
3 

4 

5 
6 
7 

8 

9 

Oxford University Press ,Oxford 
Gewirth, A. (1996), The Community of Rights, Chicago: University of Chicago Press
UN-Habitat (2010) State of the World’s Cities Report 2010/2011: Bridging the Urban 
Divide, Earthscan, London
OECD (2011) Divided We Stand: Why Inequality Keeps Rising, OECD Publishing, Paris, 
pp.22
Ibid.
Sen, A. (1999) Development as Freedom, Oxford University Press, Oxford
Shabou, A., N. Soboh, K. Jalouka, and D. A. Thaib (2011) City Report on Amman, 
Unpublished UN-Habitat background study for “State of the World’s Cities Report 
2012/2013”
Belliapa, S.G. (2011) City Report on Bangalore, Unpublished UN-Habitat background 
study for “State of the World’s Cities Report 2012/2013”
Hampwaye, G. and W. Nchito (2011) City Report on Lusaka, Unpublished UN-Habitat 
background study for “State of the World’s Cities Report 2012/2013”

10  UN-Habitat (2010) Op. Cit 
11  UNICEF(2010) Understanding Urban Inequalities in Bangladesh: A prerequisite for 

achieving Vision 2021, UNICEF Bangladesh, Dhaka

12  Turok, I (2006) ‘The Connection between Social Cohesion and City Competitiveness’, 

in OECD Territorial Reviews Competitive Cities in the Global Economy, OECD 
publishing, Paris. 

13  UN-Habitat (2010) Op. Cit; UN-Habitat (2008) State of the World’s Cities Report 

2008/2009: Harmonious cities, Earthscan, London

OECD publishing, Paris.

15  Society for International Development (SID) ( 2012) The State of East Africa Report 
2012: Deepening Integration, Intensifying Challenges, http://www.sidint.net/docs/
SoEAR2012_final.pdf

16  SID Programme director Aidan Eyakuze [Mungai, C. (2012) ‘East Africa region’s 

economy expands amid deepening levels of poverty and malnutrition’ in The East 
African, April 7, http://www.theeastafrican.co.ke/news/A+richer+East+African+Com
munity+with+more+poor+people/-/2558/1381658/-/v2nkg7/-/index.html]

17  Urban Age (2009) Cities and Social Equity: Inequality, Territory and Urban Form, 

Summary report, http://downloads0.cloud.lsecities.net/downloads/2009/09/
SouthAmericaReport/CSE_Summary_Report.pdf 

18  United Nations General Assembly (2011) Accelerating progress towards the 

Millennium Development Goals: options for sustained and inclusive growth and 
issues for advancing the United Nations development agenda beyond 2015, Annual 
report of the Secretary-General (A/66/126) ,July 2011

19  Vienna City Administration (n.d) Vienna Charter. Shaping the Future Together, http://

www.wien.gv.at/english/living-working/vienna-charter.html

20  Dzung, D. D. (2011) City Report on Ho Chi Minh City, Unpublished UN-Habitat 

background study for “State of the World’s Cities Report 2012/2013”

21  Admassie, Y. (2011) City Report on Addis Ababa, Unpublished UN-Habitat background 

study for “State of the World’s Cities Report 2012/2013”

22  UNDP (2009) Arab Human Development Report: Challenges to Human Security in the 

Arab Countries , UNDP , New York,,p. 113-114.

77 

Chapter 2.5

Environmental 
Sustainability and the 
Prosperity of Cities

The prosperity and environmental sustainability of cities are 
inextricably linked. Urban areas consume huge amounts of 
environmental goods and services like food, water, energy, 
forestry, building materials, and ‘green’ or open spaces often 
beyond their boundaries. This undermines the assimilative 
capacity of the environment around urban areas.1 For 
example, the cities of the world generate over 720 billion 
tons of wastes every year, but in developing regions, even 

A key message is that prosperous cities can operate 

efficiently and productively without damaging the 
environment.5 This is possible only when environmental 
and social objectives are fully integrated in a city’s overall 
economic goals to help bring about environmental 
sustainability.6

ENvIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITy IN CITIES 
It is generally assumed that any country can preserve 
the environment while maintaining economic growth.7 
However, a degree of commitment is required from all 

FACT Environmentally 

sustainable cities 

are likely to be more 
productive, competitive, 
innovative, and prosperous 
enough to provide better 
preservation for the 
environment and enhance 
quality of life and well-being 
for all the population. 

in large, presumably more 
affluent, cities only 25 to 
55 per cent of wastes are 
collected.2 Demographic 
and spatial expansion can 
be so rapid as to outstrip 
the capacity of cities to 
provide basic amenities − 
housing, water and 
sanitation, etc. − resulting 
in poor urban conditions.3 

POLICy Inasmuch cities are sources of environmental 

problems within and beyond their jurisdictions, 
they are also best-placed to provide most of the solutions. 
Environmentally sustainable cities are able to draw a healthy 
balance between economic growth and the environment, and 
facilitate prosperity and resilience in the process.4 

Solar panel assembly at a Suntech factory in Wuxi, China. A high 
percentage of China's homes use solar-heated water.

© Qilai Shen/Panos Pictures

78 

Environmental Sustainability and the Prosperity of Cities

FACT In Europe, cities stand at the forefront of initiatives 

in favour of environmental sustainability9, as they 

keep developing and implementing various policies and 
strategies.10 

POLICy If economic development and related urban activities 

are pursued in an environmentally sustainable 

manner, they can facilitate urban prosperity. 

frameworks to undermine quality of life and, more 
generally, prosperity in their respective cities. 

Of the fourteen African cities covered in this Report, 

no more than four – Johannesburg, Beira, Alexandria, and 
Gaborone – can be found where only a few local experts 
perceive that economic development and related activities 
have negative effects on 
the environment. This 
comes as no surprise 

stakeholders, particularly at local level, if sustainable 
development is to be achieved.8

Nowhere are the commitments of cities to 

environmental sustainability more vital than in developing 
countries, where urban demographics are growing rapidly 
and current total population accounts for 82 per cent 
of the world population. This underscores the need for 
growth and prosperity to sustain and fulfil basic needs. 
Vitally important as economic growth may be, it must be 
sustainable if any city is to achieve prosperity.

AFRICAN CITIES
In Nairobi, for example, local experts point to extensive 
pollution of the Nairobi River not just by industrial effluents 
but also solid waste.12 Traffic congestion is also mentioned 
as a major environmental problem, and apart from the 
attendant air pollution, the cost to the local economy 
is enormous.13 Similar opinions are held by experts in 
Lusaka, Accra, Algiers, Lagos, Ibadan and Luanda, where 
rapid urban sprawl and uncontrolled spatial development 
combine with poor infrastructures and weak regulatory 

Figure 2.5.1

Environmental Impact of Growth* – African Cities 

per cent
100

FACT Africa’s rate 

of economic 
growth has outpaced 
the global economic 
growth over the last 
decade. Real growth 
GDP has been steady 
particularly in the 
Sub-Saharan region, 
a sub-region expected 
to continue growing by 
more than 5 per cent.11 

POLICy However, an 

overwhelming 

majority of local experts 
believe that urban 
economic development has 
unintended effects on the 
environment in cities such 
as Nairobi, Lusaka, Praia, 
Algiers, Dar es Salaam, 
Ibadan, Accra, Luanda and 
Lagos. These cities are 
seen to be unable to match 
sustained economic and 
demographic growth with 
corresponding expansion in 
infrastructures and services.

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

Nairobi

Lusaka

Praia

Ibadan

Accra

Luanda

Dar Es Salaam
Algiers

Addis Ababa
Lagos

Gaborone

Alexandria
Johannesburg

All Sampled 
Beira
Africa Cities

* As perceived by local experts surveyed by UN-Habitat

Source: UN-Habitat, City Monitoring Branch, Policy Survey, 2011

79 

FACT In some African cities, a large majority of local 

experts report that although economic developed and 
related urban activities have detrimental effects on the natural 
environment, sustainability is largely overlooked by policy-makers. 

POLICy Johannesburg’s 

approach to 

environmental sustainability 
appears to be the most 
comprehensive of all African 
cities. 

given that these cities are 
among those pursuing 
environmental sustainability 
as a matter of policy. 

South Africa’s 

economic capital has been 
systematically promoting 
creation and preservation 

of open spaces, pursuing energy efficiency and the reduction 
of greenhouse gases, and promoting solar energy, energy-
saving bulbs and insulation as part of a retrofitting scheme. 
Above all, the city promotes sustainable building design 
and construction through a comprehensive set of planning 
regulations, whereby a sustainable approach must pervade all 
planning stages.14 

ASIAN CITIES
However, the expert opinion survey reveals differences 
across cities. For instance, economic growth is not 
perceived to have been matched by adequate infrastructure 
and services in Ho Chi Minh City, Bangalore, Lahore, and 
Hyderabad. In Lahore, experts point to ground water 
pollution, extensive air pollution, traffic congestion and 
urban sprawl as major effects of economic development and 
urban activities on the environment, these are compounded 
by inadequate capacity and weak institutions.15 Similarly 
in Bangalore, experts point to poor air quality, depletion 
of ground water tables and fast receding lakes.16 These 
perceptions contrast with those of local experts in 
Singapore, Turkey’s Gaziantep, and Shenzhen, where very 
few local experts view economic growth and urban activities 
as detrimental to the environment (Figure 2.5.2).

In Asia, close to two-thirds of local experts report 

that this type of policy is at work in their respective cities, 
especially in Singapore and Ho Chi Minh City. Singapore 
is fully committed to environmental sustainability. This 
includes environmental awareness campaigns, with 

FACT Apart from cities 

in the Arab States, 
economic development and 
urban activities in Asian 
cities are perceived to have 
the least detrimental effects 
on the natural environment. 

POLICy When cities 

promote 

environmental sustainability 
as a matter of policy, 
they are able to cushion 
the unintended effects of 
economic development 
and urban activities. 
Environmentally sustainable 
cities are, almost by 
definition, more compact, 
energy-efficient, clean 
and less polluted, more 
accessible, and offer better 
transport choices 

Figure 2.5.2

Environmental Impact of Growth* – Asian Cities 

per cent
90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

Ho Chi 
Minh City

Bangalore

Lahore

Hyderabad

Davao

Cebu

Gaziantep

Shenzen

Singapore

All Sampled 
Asian Cities

* As perceived by local experts surveyed by UN-Habitat

Source: UN-Habitat, City Monitoring Branch, Policy Survey, 2011

80 

State of the World’s Cities 2012/2013Environmental Sustainability and the Prosperity of Cities

POLICy The main message from Arab States is that 

urbanisation and economic growth are inevitable; 

and if matched with appropriate and effective policies and 
governance, the environmental consequences are manageable. 

are rarely considered”, with an absence of effective policies 
for urban planning, although they are needed in areas 
like traffic and waste management.19 However, in Doha, 
Aqaba and Dubai, most local experts report that their 
respective cities have proper policies in place. In Dubai, 
environmental sustainability policies include the Emirates’ 
Energy and Environment Rating System and the Air 
Quality Management System, among other robust policies 
and governance mechanisms promoting environmental 
sustainability in Qatar’s capital city.20 

LATIN AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN
Two distinct phenomena may be at play here: the region’s 
high rates of urban spatial expansion and relatively high 

institutions and grassroots leaders collaborating on 
community outreach schemes, and various programmes 
involving the citizenry in the ‘sustainable’ agenda. The city-
State’s ‘compact city initiative’ promotes density, facilitates 
mass transit and includes a ‘walkable’ campaign. Under 
Singapore’s waste management scheme, 58 per cent of solid 
wastes are recycled, another 40 per cent incinerated to 
produce energy, and the remaining two per cent goes to a 
purpose built off-shore sanitary landfill. 

CITIES IN ARAB STATES 
Across Arab States, only one-third of local experts consider 
that economic development has unintended detrimental 
effects on the environment (Figure 2.5.3). However, this 
favourable average conceals sharp differences across 
cities. Experts that view that economic development has 
negative effects on the environment are an overwhelming 
majority in Beirut, and 50 per cent in Kuwait City, Shiraz 
and Muharrak in Bahrain. These cities have relatively 
large populations (Beirut, Kuwait City and Shiraz) and 
intense economic activity. In Beirut, local experts see a 
direct link between rapid 
urban expansion and 
environmental problems, 
with one describing the city 
as “a metaphor for brutal 
real estate speculation”, 
with attendant noise 
pollution and traffic 
congestion.17

Figure 2.5.3

Environmental Impact of Growth* – Arab Cities

per cent
90

80

Similarly in Kuwait 
City, local experts point 
to the construction boom 
associated with economic 
growth and urban 
expansion. As noted by 
one, this double boom has 
placed “acute pressures on 
road networks, with traffic 
becoming a nightmare”.18 

Only very few local 

experts in Saida (Lebanon), 
Basra and Beirut believe 
their respective cities 
promote environmental 
sustainability as a matter 
of policy. In Beirut, 
“environmental concerns 

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

Beirut

Kuwait City

Muharrak

Shiraz

Am man

Basra

Erbil

Dubai

Doha

Aqaba

Saida

All Sampled 
Arab Cities

* As perceived by local experts surveyed by UN-Habitat

Source: UN-Habitat, City Monitoring Branch, Policy Survey, 2011

81 

FACT The overall 

picture in Latin 
American cities is one of 
inadequate commitment to 
environmental sustainability, 
with the concomitant 
absence of policies or 
strategies. This leaves 
relatively few opportunities 
for wider participation in 
environmental policies, 
which can only further 
exacerbate the negative 
effects of economic 
development and urban 
activities on the natural 
environment. 

Figure 2.5.4

Environmental Impact of Growth* – Latin America and Caribbean Cities

per cent
90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

POLICy Latin America 

and the 

Caribbean is the region 
where a greater proportion 
of local experts believe that 
economic development 
and urban activities have 
(unintended) detrimental 
effects on the environment. 

0

Guadalajara

Lima

Este

Santo Domingo

Medellin

Valparaiso
La Paz

Panama

Santos

Guarenas

Tijuana
Montevideo

La Habana

Rosario
Fort-De-France

All Sampled 
Arab Cities

* As perceived by local experts surveyed by UN-Habitat

Source: UN-Habitat, City Monitoring Branch, Policy Survey, 2011

degrees of economic 
development. The 
consequences of economic 

development on the environment are considered as 
‘serious’ or ‘very serious’ by majorities of local experts in 
Guadalajara, Lima, Ciudad de Este, Medellín, La Paz and 
Valparaíso (Figure 2.5.4). In Medellín, experts point to the 
224,000 tons of pollutants discharged annually into the 
atmosphere, of which 66 per cent are traceable to traffic 
in a city that keeps expanding rapidly in both surface 
area and population.21 In Santo Domingo, rapid urban 
sprawl and population expansion are fuelled by natural 
resource exploitation, and the two combine with weak 
institutions to compound environmental problems.22 In 
Lima, an overwhelming number of local experts concur 
that environmental sustainability has not been a priority in 
the management of the city. The few existing initiatives are 
largely uncoordinated, though all under the responsibility of 
the central rather than local government.23 

On the other hand, environmental sustainability 

policies have worked relatively well in Fort-de-France, 
Havana and Venezuela’s Guarenas. In the case of Fort-

de-France, from 2008 onwards, a determined mayor has 
taken action, challenging environmental misbehaviour – 
particularly with regard to solid waste – and vigorously 
enforcing rules and regulations across all sectors through 
a so-called ‘green brigade’.24 Similarly in Medellín, the 
municipality’s environmental department implements 
a variety of ‘sustainable’ policies with regard to noise 
pollution, global warming, water conservation and 
reforestation. A range of targets have been set involving 
various greenhouse gas emission controls and air 
quality. As one local expert put it, “the municipality is 
awakening and educating people towards a more responsible 
environmental behaviour.”25 

ENvIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITy: A CATALyST 
FOR CITy PROSPERITy
Environmental sustainability offers cities huge scope for 
the balanced economic growth that can pave the way 
to prosperity. This includes opportunities for new types 
of employment and investment, poverty alleviation and 
reduced inequity together with new types of infrastructures 
and services. 

82 

State of the World’s Cities 2012/2013Environmental Sustainability and the Prosperity of Cities

POLICy Environmental sustainability offers huge 

employment potential in terms of: substitution 

of renewable alternatives for non-renewable resources, 
recycling and reusing materials26, production and installation 
of renewable energy systems, sustainable urban transport, 
waste recycling, retrofitting old buildings, new sustainable 
buildings and infrastructures, and environmental services.27 

WASTE AND RECyCLING
In Bangladesh, 800,000 of the 3.5 million potential 
jobs associated with environmental sustainability are in 
recycling.36 Besides new jobs, waste management and 
recycling have also spawned technical innovations, leading 
to the creation of many specialised small- and medium-sized 
businesses in cities of developing countries.37 

RENEWABLE ENERGIES
The renewable energy sector – solar, wind, hydroelectric, 
geothermal and bio-fuel – continues to attract huge 
investments. In 2010, a total of USD 243 billion had been 
committed to this sector worldwide28; this is projected to 
rise to USD 630 billion by 2030, in the process creating 
as many as 20 million jobs.29 Although much of this has 
concentrated on developed countries, investments in 
renewable energies are beginning to materialise in the 
developing world.30 

Around the world, about 300,000 workers are employed 

in the wind power sector alone, and another 100,000 
in solar photovoltaic, while some 1.2 million jobs have 
already been created in the biomass sector in Brazil, China, 
Germany and the USA.31 In the UK for example, 250,000 
people are already employed in the various renewable 
energy sectors estimated to 
be worth USD 53 billion 
annually.32
While developed countries 
have the lion’s share of 
jobs in the sustainable 
sector around the world, 
huge opportunities exist 
for developing countries. 
India is looking to create 
no fewer than 100 million 
jobs in this sector within 
10 years, most of which 
are expected to be in the 
solar energy sector.33 South 
Africa reckons that 98,000 
new ‘low carbon’ jobs are 
possible in the short term, 
and close to 717,000 in the 
medium to long-term34, to 
be split into recycling, solar 
energy and retrofitting of 
old buildings for energy 
efficiency. 

POLICy Investment 

in renewable 
energies could generate 
more employment 
and income for urban 
households. 

India: the wind turbine area of southern Tamil Nadu runs for mile after mile across the plains south 
of the Southern Ghats mountains, producing electricity for part of the massive demand for power 
throughout India.

© 2012 Peter Herbert/fotoLIBRA.com

83 

POLICy Waste 

management 

and recycling can be a 
huge source of employment 
in developing countries 
where 15 million people are 
estimated to work in waste 
collecting and processing.35 

POLICy In Ouagadougou, 

Burkina Faso, 

a project for collecting 
and recycling plastic 
waste has helped improve 
environmental conditions 
and has created jobs and 
incomes for local people, 
who either collect the 
plastic waste or work in 
the recycling centre. The 
project has also resulted in 
a cleaner environment in the 
suburbs and has generated 
USD 35,000 in revenues.38 

© G.M.B. Akash/Panos Pictures

BUILDINGS
Buildings have a major role 
to play in climate change 
mitigation because of the 
disproportionate amounts 
of natural resources, waste and pollution they involve. For 
instance, 60 per cent of the operational energy of a typical 
building goes to cooling and heating, 18 per cent to water 
heating, six per cent to refrigeration and three per cent to 

POLICy The construction industry has the largest potential 

to create ‘green’ jobs in urban areas. The building 
and construction sector employs more than 111 million people 
worldwide, or approximately 5–10 per cent of total employment 
at the country level with 75 per cent in developing countries and 
90 per cent in micro-firms (those with fewer than 10 employees).39

Dhaka, Bangladesh: in a factory producing Polyethylene Terephthalate (PET) flakes, women sort plastic 
bottles collected from the streets. Bangladesh exports over 20,000 tons of PET flakes made in 3,000 
factories across the country. The industry is worth GBP 7 million, and growing by 20% per annum.

lighting. This is why buildings have been identified as having 
the greatest potential for reduced greenhouse emissions.40 
In addition to this, environmental jobs associated with 
buildings will largely occur in retrofitting in accordance with 
new sustainable standards, designs and codes.41 

URBAN TRANSPORT
New jobs can be created not only by replacing or 
retrofitting old, polluting buses, but also in retrofitting 
other vehicles used in urban transport, in a double effort 
to reduce air pollution. 

The bicycle industry also offers opportunities 
for employment, though only in a few countries. 

84 

State of the World’s Cities 2012/2013Environmental Sustainability and the Prosperity of Cities

POLICy Public transport jobs account for 1–2 per cent of 

total employment in many countries. In Europe 
and the USA, some 30 jobs are created for every USD 1.4 
million invested in public transport infrastructure, and another 
57 in transport operations proper.42 

POLICy Pilot projects in the Philippines suggest that 

retrofits of two-stroke engines on two- and 

three-wheeled vehicles − the most popular public transport 
in many developing countries − has cut fuel consumption 
by 35–50 per cent and emissions of air pollutants by as 
much as 90 per cent. Installing and servicing the kits creates 
employment.43 

sustainability issues and challenges over and above 
unemployment, poverty, housing shortages, infrastructures 
and services, especially where local political expediency 
demands this type of action.

This underscores the importance of growth and 
prosperity to the capacity of cities to address urban 
environmental sustainability issues, and this is also why 
they must be innovative and inventive when dealing with 
historic urban environmental problems while shaping an 
environmentally sustainable future. This situation highlights 
the fact that the twin dynamics of sustainability and economic 
prosperity are inevitably subject to a number of structural 
constraints that are specific to each and every urban area 
regardless of size. 

The manufacture of bicycles is dominated by China, 
India and the European Union, all of which account for 
87 per cent of global production. However, China alone 
produces more than half the world’s bicycles. 

DRIvERS AND CAPACITy-BUILDING FOR 
ENvIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITy
Sustainable urban policies are driven by seven main 
factors: availability of financial resources, human resources, 
appropriate technology, specialised institutions, access to 
information, adequate organisational arrangements, and 
supportive legal frameworks.

Approximately one-third of local experts across all 

regions are of the view that mechanisms for coordination 
between city and national authorities regarding 
environmental sustainability are already in place 
(Table 2.5.1). Less than one-third report that cities are 
mobilising investment to support sustainable resource use, 
or pulling their resources together in order to enhance 
environmental sustainability. 

These efforts can only go so far, it would seem, as 

experts simultaneously highlight the widespread problem of 
inadequate capacity. This refers to lack of not just finance, 
but also effective arrangements to facilitate partnerships 
with stakeholders, together with weak institutional 
frameworks and poor urban governance structures.44 These 
conditions have drastically restraining effects on cities’ 
ability for effective mitigation and adaptation. 

Similarly, cities and local authorities in developing 

countries may find it difficult to prioritize environmental 

Table 2.5.1

Drivers of Environmental Sustainability in Cities*

Available mechanism(s) for 

coordination between local and 
national authorities concerning 

Leveraging of investments to 
support sustainable resource 
use and lower greenhouse  

sustainability (%)

gas emissions (%)

Municipalities in same city/
region combining resources 

& partnering together for 
enhanced environmental 

sustainability (%)

31

37

48

26

34

20

35

49

18

29

20

35

48

20

29

Regions

Africa

Arab States

Asia

Latin America & Caribbean

All Regions

* As perceived by local experts surveyed by UN-Habitat
Source: UN-Habitat, City Monitoring Branch, Policy Survey, 2011

85 

FACT Environmental sustainability requires capacity-building 

and resource availability at the local level. 

FACT Asia and the Arab 

States appear to 

best placed, in terms of 
capacities, to deal with 
environmental concerns 
and bring about more 
sustainable cities. 

Cities are best able to 

combine sustainability and 
shared prosperity through 
effective urban governance 
and transformational 
leadership. This type of 
leadership recognises 
the complex interactions 
between urbanisation and 

position to tackle the effects of climate change on top of 
poverty and inequity. 

The need for adequate capacity is further underscored by 

the fact that whereas environmental sustainability is widely 
recognised as essential, local authorities when faced with 
competing demands and budget constraints, consider it to 
be the least of priorities.45 This has implications for cities, 
especially given the role they must play in local environmental 
issues, including when it comes to responding to the needs 
of the population at a time when the need for environmental 
preservation is gaining more recognition in public opinion.46 

the environment at the local, regional, and global levels. 
The next step is to put in place appropriate institutions 
and build the institutional building capacities required 
for environmentally sustainable urban systems including 
transport, energy, waste management, rehabilitation of 
the built and natural environments, and management of 
ecosystem services. 

For the time being, local experts across all developing 

regions clearly highlight financial and institutional 
capacities as a major problem (Table 2.5.2). More 
specifically, only a few believe that efficient systems 
are in place in their respective regions to monitor 
environmental sustainability or the transport sector. Local 
experts also identify further challenges, suggesting that 
growth has a critical role to play if cities are to be in a 

Table 2.5.2

Cities with the capacity for environmental sustainability* 

Kuwait City: skyscraper under construction.

© 2012 Wael Hamdan/fotoLIBRA.com

Region

Africa 

Arab States 

Asian 

Latin America & the Caribbean 

All Regions

22

60

64

24

39

* As perceived by local experts surveyed by UN-Habitat
Source: UN-Habitat, City Monitoring Branch, Policy Survey, 2011

Local authorities 

with financial 
& institutional 
capacity (%)

Integration of 
environmental 
protection plans 
in to policies and 

strategies (%)

Efficient 
monitoring 
systems for 
environmental 
sustainability (%)

17

37

45

21

28

48

46

65

47

51

86 

Cities making 

progress 

toward more 

Cities with 

environmental 

sustainable urban 

transport policies 

environment

(%)

9

8

31

8

36

(%)

36

46

70

46

43

State of the World’s Cities 2012/2013Environmental Sustainability and the Prosperity of Cities

Nevertheless, cities need not wait until full capacity 

is built before adopting and implementing adequate 
environmental policies and strategies: indeed, in many cases 
cities have managed to enhance overall quality of life despite 
modest financial and institutional capacities. 

POLICy Cities must build those financial and other institutions 

required to achieve environmental sustainability without 
which economic growth will fall short of ensuring shared prosperity. 

Endnotes

1  Mitlin, D., and S. Satterthwaite (1996) Sustainable Development and Cities. In Pugh, 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

C. (ed.) Sustainability, the Environment and Urbanisation, Earthscan, London
UNEP (1996) Taking Action: Environmental Guide for You and Your Community, UNEP, 
Nairobi, http://www.nyo.unep.org/action/08f.htm
UN-Habitat (2003) The Challenge of Slums: Global Report on Human Settlements 
2003, Earthscan, London
UN-Habitat (2011a). Cities and Climate Change: Policy Directions, Abridged edition, 
Earthscan, London.
 Cities Alliance, ICLEI and UNEP (2007) Liveable Cities: The Benefits of Urban 
Environmental Planning. A Cities Alliance Study on Good Practices and Useful Tools, 
Cities Alliance, Washington DC.
Pacione, M. (2003) ‘Urban Environmental Quality and Human Wellbeing; A Social 
Geographical Perspective’, Landscape and Urban Planning, vol.65, pp.19-30

7  WCED (World Commission on Environment and Development) (1987) Our Common 

8 

9 

Future, Oxford University Press, Oxford
United Nations (1992) Agenda 21: Programme of Action for Sustainable Development, 
United Nations, New York
Portney, K. E. and J.M. Berry (2011) Civil Society and Sustainable Cities. Paper 
prepared for the Princeton Conference on Environmental Politics: Research Frontiers 
in Comparative and International Environmental Politics, Niehaus Center for 
Globalization and Governance, Princeton University, December 2-3, 2011

10  Lafferty, W.M and Eckerberg, K. (1998) From the Earth Summit to Local Agenda 21: 

Working Towards Sustainable Development, Earthscan, London.

11  Africa Economic Outlook (2012) Macroeconomic Prospects, http://www.

africaneconomicoutlook.org/en/outlook/forecast/

12  Omenya, A. (2011) City Report on Nairobi, Unpublished UN-Habitat background study 

for “State of the World’s Cities Report 2012/2013”
Ibid.

13 
14  Awuor-Hayanga, R. (2011) City Report on Johannesburg, Unpublished UN-Habitat 

background study for “State of the World’s Cities Report 2012/2013”

15  Zaidi, S.S.H. (2011) City Report on Lahore, Unpublished UN-Habitat background study 

for “State of the World’s Cities Report 2012/2013”

16  Belliapa, S.G. (2011) City Report on Bangalore, Unpublished UN-Habitat background 

study for “State of the World’s Cities Report 2012/2013”

17  Fawaz, M. and N. Baghdadi (2011) City Report on Beirut. Unpublished UN-Habitat 

background study for “State of the World’s Cities Report 2012/2013”

18  Khattab, O. (2011) City Report on Kuwait City, Unpublished UN-Habitat background 

study for “State of the World’s Cities Report 2012/2013”
Ibid.

19 
20  Al-Bassam, D. and J. Mouris (2011) City Report on Dubai, Unpublished UN-Habitat 

background study for “State of the World’s Cities Report 2012/2013”

21  Urán, H. B. (2011) City Report on Medellín, Unpublished UN-Habitat background study 

for “State of the World’s Cities Report 2012/2013”

22  Castellanos, G. (2011) City Report on Santo Domingo, Unpublished UN-Habitat 

background study for “State of the World’s Cities Report 2012/2013”

23  Galimberti, L. D. (2011) City Report on Lima, Unpublished UN-Habitat background 

study for “State of the World’s Cities Report 2012/2013”

24  Yerro, A. P. (2011) City Report on Fort-De-France, Unpublished UN-Habitat 

background study for “State of the World’s Cities Report 2012/2013”

25  Urán, H. B. (2011) op. cit.
26  UNEP (2008) UNEP Background Paper on Green Jobs, UNEP, Nairobi

87 

27  Simon, D., M. Fragkias, R.Leichenko , R. Sánchez-Rodríguez, K. Seto and B.Solecki 
(2011) The Green Economy and the Prosperity of Cities, background paper for ‘State 
of the World Cities Report 2012/13’

28  UNEP (2011) Renewable energy: Investing in energy and resource efficiency http://

www.unep.org/greeneconomy/Portals/88/documents/ger/GER_6_RenewableEnergy.pdf

29  UNEP (2009) Global Green New Deal, UNEP Policy Brief, http://www.unep.org/

pdf/A_Global_Green_New_Deal_Policy_Brief.pdf 

30  Martinot, E. , A. Chaurey , D. Lew, J. R. Moreira, and N. Wamukonya (2002) 

‘Renewable Energy Markets in Developing Countries’, Annual Review of Energy and 
Environment, vol. 27, pp. 309-348.

31  UNEP, ILO ,IOE and ITUC (2008) Green Jobs: Towards Decent Work in a Sustainable, 

Low-Carbon World, UNEP, Nairobi

32  Peacock, L (2011) ‘Future of jobs: Green industry to create thousands of roles’, The 
Telegraph, September 15, http://www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/jobs/8765695/Future-
of-jobs-Green-industry-to-create-thousands-of-roles.html

33  Shukla, A. (2012) ‘India to create 100 million green jobs’, One World South Asia, 
February 13, http://southasia.oneworld.net/todaysheadlines/india-to-create-100-
million-green-jobs/?searchterm=100%20million%20green%20jobs

34  Maia, J., T. Giordano,N. Kelder, G. Bardien, M. Bodibe, P. Du Plooy, X. Jafta, D. 

Jarvis, E. Kruger-Cloete, G. Kuhn, R. Lepelle, L. Makaulule. K. Mosoma, S. Neoh, N. 
Netshitomboni, T. Ngozo, and J. Swanepoel, (2011) Green Jobs: An Estimate Of The 
Direct Employment Potential Of A Greening South African Economy. IDC/DBSA, Trade 
and Industrial Policy strategies

35  UNEP, ILO, IOE and ITUC (2008) op. cit.
36  HK (2010) Estimating green jobs in Bangladesh: A GHK report for the ILO, http://

www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_emp/---emp_ent/documents/publication/
wcms_159433.pdf

37  Simon, D., M. Fragkias, R.Leichenko, R. Sánchez-Rodríguez, K. Seto and B.Solecki 

38 

(2011) op.cit.
ILO (2007) Green jobs initiative in Burkina Faso: From waste to wages, http://www.
ilo.org/global/about-the-ilo/press-and-media-centre/insight/WCMS_084547/lang--
en/index.htm

39  Simon, D., M. Fragkias, R.Leichenko, R. Sánchez-Rodríguez, K. Seto and B.Solecki 

(2011) op.cit.
Ibid.

40 
41  Renner, M., S. Sweeney and J. Kubit (2008) ‘Green Jobs: Working for People and the 

Environment’, WorldWatch Report 177, Worldwatch Institute , Washington, DC

42  UNEP, ILO, IOE and ITUC (2008) op. cit.
43  UNEP, ILO, IOE and ITUC (2008) op. cit.
44  UN-Habitat (2011b) Cities and Climate Change: Global Report on Human Settlements 

2011, Earthscan, London

45  Hess, D. and L. Winner (2006) Enhancing Justice and Sustainability at Local Level: 

Affordable Policies for Urban Governments, http://www.davidjhess.org/PolicyPaper.pdf
46  UNCED (1992) Capacity Building: Agenda 21’s definition (Chapter 37), United Nations, 

New York.

Part Three

Policies for 
Prosperous Cities

Chapter 3.1

From Comparative 
Advantage to Urban 
Prosperity

Geography has always played an important role in the 
evolution of cities. Historically, coastal cities and cities in 
river deltas have been preferred locations – at present, 14 of 
the world’s 19 largest cities are port cities. However, with 
advances in transport and communication technologies and 
also with increasing specialization, other locational factors, 
beyond positions along waterways, have accelerated the 
growth and development of cities. Even when located in the 
hinterland, cities located close to other major urban centres 
or to important urban agglomerations have significantly 
gained from their position and demonstrated relatively 
higher levels of development. Indeed, new configurations 
such as mega-regions and urban corridors generate regional 
economies and trigger the evolution of new patterns of 
economic activity which contribute to prosperity. Similarly, 
cities which lie in the vicinity of markets and infrastructure, 

POLICy It is time for 

governments 
to recognize the existence 
of a wide scope for human 
intervention that can 
enable cities to enhance 
their potential as engines 
of today’s and tomorrow’s 
prosperity, both locally and 
nationally. 

or close to transnational 
borders, have also exhibited 
a tendency to grow and 
prosper much faster.1

The increasing number 
of large and dynamic cities 
which are not sea or river 
ports confirms that much 
as geographic location is 
an important correlate of 
a city’s prosperity, it does 
not explain everything. 

90 

Many cities derive their prosperity from their capacity to 
harness other advantages, particularly through repositioning 
themselves in the national, regional or global context. 
Common among all of them has been their capacity to 
change and adjust to new circumstances and to build upon 
their own history and identity. Such cities have been able 
to envision a new future and to use their different forms of 
capital and assets. Critical also has been the ability of these 
cities to build social and political consensus. In essence, 
many cities today are able to deploy the capacity of human 
agency and to steer growth in the new direction of choice. 

Indeed, the prosperity of any city is no accident. It is the 
result of innovation, sustained vision and good governance. 
It is also a result of proper laws, regulations and institutions, 
as well as reinvigorated planning and adequate policies. 
Effective use of these instruments and processes has 
enabled many cities around the world to optimize their 
comparative advantages and to set themselves along the 
path of prosperity. They have used a range of avenues and 
capitalized on different sets of ‘spokes’ in their drive to 
shared and sustainable growth and wellbeing. 

Some cities are enhancing prosperity though strategic 

thinking and conscious 
planning policies. This 
is the case with Dubai in 
the Persian Gulf, which 
took advantage of its 
privileged geographic 
location to become the 
largest re-exporting 
centre in the Middle East, 
and today is emerging 
as a cosmopolitan 
centre. Other cities 
are devising long-term 
visions with well-defined 

FACT Geography 

alone cannot 
determine which city 
will grow and which will 
decline. Other factors 
such as government 
policies, corporate 
strategies, human 
capital, major political 
forces and decisions, 
investments in strategic 
sectors, all have an 
influence on the fate of 
cities. 

From Comparative Advantage to Urban Prosperity

POLICy Beyond 

geography, 

well-managed urbanization 
stands out as the new 
comparative advantage in 
this early 21st century.

Gaziantep in Eastern 
Turkey is a case in 
point, with its efforts to 
develop cultural heritage 
tourism. Restoration 
and rehabilitation works 
enhance quality of life and 
at the same time creating 
alternative means of 
economic development. Valparaíso, Chile’s most important 
seaport and a well-known tourist resort, is repositioning its 
image as a cultural centre with facilities for entertainment, 
leisure and tourism. 

Many other cities are developing innovative ideas and 

strategies to shape new urban identity in the pursuit of 
prosperity. This typically includes revamped public spaces, 
rehabilitation of architecture and historic landmarks, re-
creation of the street as part of the soul of the city, shaping a 
‘sense of place’ with monuments, piazzas, marketplaces and 
streetscapes as open venues for arts and cultural expression. 

All of these achievements testify not just to the creative 

and innovative powers of municipal and other public 
authorities; they are also the outcomes of the interplay 
between the various power functions at work in any city. 

implementation plans, like Melbourne’s or Rio de Janeiro’s 
strategies for improved quality of life. 

Some other cities are enhancing prosperity based on 

national economic policies and investments with financial 
support from central government. The Jordanian city of 
Aqaba on the coastline of the Red Sea was designated as 
Special Economic Zone (ASEZ) in 2001 and benefited 
from a public-private venture that created a duty-free and 
multi-sectoral development. The Zone contributed to 
enhanced infrastructure development, restoration of the 
city’s historic core and enhanced prosperity through the 
development of the tourism industry.2 Shenzhen, too, has 
benefited from national economic and industrial policies 
and related strategic investments. These examples show that 
success depends on careful design of regional and economic 
strategies, effective coordination across government tiers, 
massive infrastructure building, outstanding industrial and 
entrepreneurial strategies, and pro-equity policies. 

Other cities still pursue prosperity through improved 
provision of goods and services at regional level. Nairobi, 
the capital of Kenya, is capitalizing on the newly-created 
East African Common Market and Customs Union to 
enhance its communications and information technology 
sector, while at the same time developing its transport 
infrastructure to improve 
efficiency and productivity. 
Prosperity can also be 

pursued through other 
important dimensions 
such as knowledge 
development. Doha is 
developing education 
and arts as part of the 
city’s new cultural vision. 
Concepción in Chile, 
like the Algerian cities of 
Blida, Tlemcen, Sidi-
bel-Abbès and Setif, are 
growing and becoming 
more prosperous through 
education institutions and 
higher learning.3

Some cities showcase 

their tangible and 
intangible cultural heritage 
and identity, in a bid to 
bring about social and 
economic transformations.4 

La Paz, Bolivia: providing public goods for all, irrespective of neighbourhood or income bracket. 

© Eduardo Lopez Moreno

91 

This driving power behind urban change and transformation 
acts as the ‘hub’ at the centre of the ‘wheel of prosperity’. 
Urban power functions are where the public, collective 
interest is determined, together with the practical rules, 
plans and actions that are to embed it in a specific area. The 
hub is where decisions are made to activate any of the five 
dimensions of prosperity, keeping them well-balanced and 
maintaining the momentum in the wheel. 

Part 2 of this Report detailed the respective roles of 
the five dimensions of urban prosperity, with the various 
interlinkages and multipliers involved. Part 3 presents the 
policy related factors underlying the prosperity of cities, 
including drivers and constraints. It also focuses on urban 
power functions – the ‘hub’ holding together, activating 
and controlling the five ‘spokes’ of the ‘wheel of prosperity’ 
across the length and breadth of any urban jurisdiction, 
regardless of geographic location, size or resources. Just 
like productivity, infrastructure or a well-preserved natural 
environment, these urban power functions are human 
constructs; it is for governments, local and municipal 
authorities, and society at large to make sure that these 
power functions work for the benefit of the majority of the 
population and keep enhancing shared urban prosperity.

Policy-Related Factors 
Underlying the Prosperity 
of Cities

The policy-related factors underlying the prosperity of 
cities are multifaceted. They can be described in terms 
of drivers and constraints. The drivers could be the 
traditional and non-conventional factors that create an 
environment conducive to prosperity; they often affect the 
prosperity of cities in a positive manner. The constraints 
act as impediments that prevent a city from becoming 

FACT Effective urban 

planning and 

management is perceived 
to be the most important 
driver creating a favourable 
environment for the 
prosperity of cities. 

more prosperous. These 
factors are further 
mediated by the local 
context, and as such, their 
effects may vary across 
cities and regions – a 
particular factor might be 
important in one city or 
region, but not in another. 

92 

Actualizing dreams of prosperity: penthouse in El Alto, Bolivia.

© Eduardo Lopez Moreno

FACTORS CREATING AN ENvIRONMENT 
CONDUCIvE FOR THE PROSPERITy OF CITIES
According to the local experts surveyed by UN-Habitat, 
the factors that create a favourable environment for cities 
to prosper are effective urban planning and management; 
decentralization polices and appropriate institutions; a 
system that creates equal opportunities for all; participation 
of civil society; elected local officials; a favourable business 
environment; access to basic amenities; and public transport 
and mobility. Most of these factors are interrelated or 
complementary and jointly affect the prosperity of cities. 
The importance of these factors with respect to the various 
regions is presented in Figure 3.1.1. 

Effective urban planning and management
The perceived importance of urban planning is most 
pronounced in the Arab States followed by Africa and Asia. 
However, in Latin America 
and the Caribbean, urban 
planning emerges as the 
third most important factor 
that creates an environment 
conducive for cities to 
prosper.s 

urban planners must 
view urbanization as a 
positive phenomenon. 

POLICy As a starting 

point, 

State of the World’s Cities 2012/2013From Comparative Advantage to Urban Prosperity

POLICy Managing urbanization is essential to nurturing the 

prosperity of cities. Cities that want to grow and 
be prosperous in all five dimensions must make urbanization 
work well. 

POLICy When urbanization is planned and well-managed, and 

distributive mechanisms of prosperity are put in place, 

it can contribute to poverty reduction.

employment; inadequate 
living conditions; poor 
infrastructure and 
services; risks associated 
with living in slums; 
spatial issues which inhibit 
mobility and transport; 
and inequality associated 
with exclusion. 

Effective urban 

planning, together with 

POLICy Another way 

urban planning 

can bring about more 
liveable cities consists in 
tackling slums and informal 
settlements, as no city can 
claim to be prosperous 
when large segments of 
the population live in slum 
conditions.

Urban planning can contribute to the prosperity of cities 

in various ways. 

While there is growing recognition of the benefits, 

positive contribution and potential opportunities associated 
with cities, urban planners and policymakers in some 
developing countries are still ambivalent about the 
importance of urbanization and some cases, show aversion 
to the urbanization process. This should not be the case, 
because cities generate the bulk of GDP; they are the 
engines of growth and centres of innovation. 

There at least two ways to achieve this. The first is 
to nurture the growth of high-productivity activities – 
particularly manufacturing and services, which benefit from 
agglomeration economies. The second entails managing 
the negative externalities associated with the economic 
growth and success of cities – congestion, inequality, crime 
and violence, and soaring cost of land and housing, among 
others.5 Neglecting cities even in countries with low levels 
of urbanization can impose significant costs.6 

The positive nature of urbanization can be beneficial 

to the poor if the common deprivations that affect 
their daily existence are adequately addressed. Such 
deprivations include limited access to income and 

Figure 3.1.1

Factors underlying urban prosperity 

Ef(cid:31)cient urban planning & 
management 

Decentralization policies & 
appropriate institutions

System that creates equal 
opportunities for all

Policies that promote participation 
of civil society

Elected local of(cid:31)cials

Sound business environment & 
entrepreneurial culture

Access to basic amenities including public transport

per cent of respondents
35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

Africa 

Asia 

LAC 

Arab States

All regions

Source: UN-Habitat City Monitoring Policy Survey, 2011

93 

unsustainable. Compact urban development has several 
advantages. It is more efficient, inclusive and sustainable. The 
cost of providing infrastructure is lower, access to services 
and facilities is improved since thresholds are higher, the 
urban poor find that livelihoods are less of a challenge, and 
social segregation is reduced. Urban planning has played a 
significant role in Singapore’s compact pattern and modern, 
convenient public transportation. Singapore is transit-
oriented, with high-density residential and commercial 
developments integrated into transport nodes. This improves 
accessibility to public transport. 

Decentralization and appropriate institutions
In Latin America and the Caribbean, decentralization 
is perceived to be the most important factor enhancing 
urban prosperity. This is an indication of the effectiveness, 
or more developed nature, of decentralization policies in 
Latin America and the Caribbean compared with other 
regions. The perceived effect of decentralization in Arab 
States appears to lag behind other regions. The highly 
centralized governance structure in the region undermines 
the efficiency of municipal authorities, obstructs political 

POLICy Urban planning and appropriately developed 

institutions and regulations can play major roles, 

improving urban equity through the capture and redistribution of 
rising land values. 

political commitment, has contributed to a reduction 
of slums in a number of countries including Argentina, 
China, Colombia, Egypt, India, Indonesia, Morocco, 
South Africa and Tunisia. 

One positive outcome of urban growth is that it 
increases urban land values. Components of urban 
planning systems – such as re-zoning, granting of planning 
permission, and the provision of infrastructure and 
services – also contribute to higher urban land values. 
Experience in North and Latin America shows that value 
capture can be an effective way to link urban planning and 
land use regulations, as well as to control land use, finance 
urban infrastructure, and generate local revenue to fund 
urban management. 

Uncontrolled sprawl presents a major challenge for 

urban planning and 
has implications for 
the prosperity of cities. 
Urban sprawl contributes 
to the high numbers of 
cars, distances travelled, 
length of paved roads, fuel 
consumption, alteration of 
ecological structures and 
the conversion of rural land 
into urban uses – all of 
which are environmentally 

POLICy Urban planning 

can encourage 

more compact, efficient 
and sustainable urban 
development. 

FACT Decentralization 

policies emerge 
as the second important 
factor enhancing urban 
prosperity. 

Kathmandu, Nepal: the relentless urban sprawl of the Kathmandu Valley. The Vishnumati River is 
surrounded by suburbs which have sprung up in recent years. With few building regulations, the 
city keeps on growing, as many look for a better life in the city than in the countryside. The result is 
environmental chaos with severe noise, air and water pollution problems.

© 2012 Jonathan Mitchell/fotoLIBRA.com

94 

State of the World’s Cities 2012/2013participation and erodes the relationships between the 
citizenry and the level of government closest to them.7 

Box 3.1 highlights how decentralization can play a key 

role in the prosperity of cities.

While the responsibilities of municipal governments 

have increased following reforms in recent years, many have 
no access to the financial resources needed to undertake 
these functions. This naturally creates a mismatch between 
responsibilities and financial resources, and is a major 
reason why decentralization has been less than successful in 
certain countries. 

National reforms relating to various aspects of 
decentralization – revenue allocation, community 
participation, local elections, local planning, pro-urban 
development strategies – all provide the enabling 
environment for cities to prosper.

Box 3.1.1

Decentralization and the prosperity of cities

A major benefit of decentralization as it relates to the prosperity 
of cities is that delivery of essential services such as water, 
sanitation and waste management, health and education can 
be carried out more effectively. Decentralization can make 
for better service delivery by providing greater opportunities 
for community-based groups to lobby for improved services. 
Proximity to physical demand for a service encourages 
effectiveness and promotes a more rational use of resources, 
while also allowing for closer monitoring by the beneficiary 
population of projects intended to serve them.

The devolution of authority can foster community 
participation, too. Decentralization can lead to an institutional 
framework through which various political, religious, social, 
ethnic groups and multi-levels including towns and cities, can 
participate in making decisions that will affect them.

Decentralized decision-making can provide a better 
framework for poverty reduction, so long as it is accompanied 
by fiscal devolution of powers to municipal authorities.

Decentralization can accelerate economic development through 
active engagement of regional and municipal government 
units and local enterprises in economic activities. The transfer 
of authority and resources to local units of government and 
administration to design and implement programmes provides 
more opportunities for local citizens to play a more direct role 
in the development process. As catalysts for development and 
local change agents, they can make decisions about location of 
services and determine priorities. 

Source: UN-Habitat (2012) Decentralization in Iraq: Challenges and 
Solutions for Federal and Local Governments, Nairobi: UN-Habitat

From Comparative Advantage to Urban Prosperity

POLICy For decentralization to strengthen urban authorities’ 

commitment to urban prosperity, it must be backed by 

fiscal devolution. 

POLICy Decentralization 

works well 
when backed by strong 
commitment and support 
from central government.8 

System that creates 
equal opportunities
The importance of this 
factor is most pronounced 
in Arabs States compared 
with other regions. This 
is because Arab States 
are one of the most 
egalitarian in terms of 
income distribution in the 
developing world. This is 
reflected in an overall (low) 
Gini coefficient of 0.36, 
which has been declining 
over time.9 The low degree 
of inequality in the region 
has been attributed to a 
strong, cohesive social system, and the fact that redistribution 
constitutes a policy priority in Islamic economies.10

opportunities for all is 
the third important factor 
underlying the prosperity of 
cities. The more egalitarian 
a city, the more prosperous 
it becomes. 

FACT A system that 

guarantees equal 

A system that creates equal opportunities for all can 

use redistributive policies that give priority to low-income 
groups and areas. In Venezuela, the government has used 
redistributive policies to bring significant improvements 
to the living standards of the urban poor through 
massive investment in health and education.11 With the 
provision of over 8,000 clinics in the barrios, people are 
able to access health services 24 hours a day at no cost. 
Similarly, illiteracy has been eliminated, pupils are no 
longer restricted to elementary school, and those with the 
required academic qualifications can attend university. 

Another form of redistribution policy involves 

conditional cash transfers. These enhance the human 
capital of beneficiaries through transfers which are made 

POLICy For a city to be truly prosperous, it must deploy 

systems that will ensure equal opportunities for all, 
especially the more vulnerable – the poor, women, children, the 
elderly, youth and the disabled. A prosperous city is one where the 
aspirations of all segments of the population are realized. Highly 
unequal cities are a ticking time bomb waiting to explode.

95 

conditional on certain requirements such as school 
attendance, visits to clinics and periodic immunization.12 
Brazil’s Bolsa Família scheme, which benefits 11.1 million 
families, is the largest of its kind in the world, and has 
contributed to reducing poverty and inequality.13 Indeed, 
80 per cent of Bolsa Família benefits go to families living 
below the poverty line; the programme also accounted for 

21 per cent of the decline in 
inequality in Brazil between 
1995 and 200414 – all of 
which contribute to making 
cities more prosperous. 

Civil society participation 
The perceived importance 
of participation of civil 
society varies across 
regions. It is seen by local 
experts as the second 
most important factor in 
Latin America and the 
Caribbean, while in Arab 

FACT Policies that 

promote the 

participation of civil society 
are perceived as the fourth 
most important factor 
behind enhanced urban 
prosperity. 

POLICy Participation of 

civil society has 

the potential to empower 
communities, build social 
capital, lead to better design 
of urban projects, and 
allow for citizens’ concerns 
to be incorporated into 
development strategies. 

States, it is the fifth important factor. This is not surprising, 
given that participation of civil society has very strong roots 
in Latin American cities, with the best-known participatory 
approaches being participatory budgeting and participatory 
planning. A classic example of participatory planning 
process in Asia is the People’s Campaign for Decentralized 
Planning in Kerala (India), which strengthens democratic 
decentralization by identifying local needs and establishing 
local development options and priorities through local 
consultation and participation.15 

Elected local officials
Research shows that durable democracy is correlated with 
economic development.17 Across the world, the more 
prosperous cities (at least economically) tend to be located 
in countries that are stable democracies. Democratically 
elected local officials owe their mandate to the people, and 
as such, are best placed to respond to the people’s needs, 
which include providing good conditions for employment, 

Kerala, India: food security is critical for productivity. Ready 
access to a variety of wholesome food enhances quality of life.

© 2012 Peter Herbert/fotoLIBRA.com

POLICy Lessons from 

experience 
suggest that successful 
civil society participation 
is dependent upon 
certain preconditions 
such as: (i) a political 
system that encourages 
active citizenship and is 
committed to equity and 
remedial action; (ii) the 
legal basis for participation; 
(iii) available resources 
in terms of skilled and 
committed professionals, 
as well as well-resourced 
and empowered local 
governments; and (iv) 
informed and organized 
communities and 
stakeholders.16

96 

State of the World’s Cities 2012/2013providing adequate infrastructure and urban services, 
improving the quality of life, making society more equitable, 
and ensuring environment sustainability.

Of course, there are instances where non-democratic 

leadership is associated with a degree of economic 
prosperity, but this is the exception rather than the rule. 
Indeed, non-democratic regimes are coterminous with 
pathologies such as predation and expropriation, and in 
the long-run undermine the institutions underlying that 
prosperity.18 It has been noted that autocratic governments 
often distribute benefits to an elite group, while democratic 
governments distribute benefits more widely to gain the 
support of the general public.19 

Favourable business environment
A business-conducive environment is needed for a vibrant 
private sector, attracting and retaining investment (including 
foreign direct), creating jobs and improving productivity – 
all of which are important for the promotion of growth and 
for expanded opportunities for the poor.20 

Cities such as Singapore, Hong Kong, Seoul, Busan, 
Kuala Lumpur, Tokyo, Yokohama and Osaka all feature 
favourable business environments, with beneficial effects on 
prosperity. In Africa, it is easier to do business in St Louis 
(Mauritius), Johannesburg, Kigali, Tunis and Gaborone 
than in Kinshasa, Conakry, Asmara, N’Djamena or Bangui, 
which are located in countries that rank low in business 
environment. Generally, cities in the former group of 
countries tend to be more prosperous than those in the latter.

Rwanda has consciously deployed a business-friendly 
environment, in the process bringing a higher degree of 
prosperity to its capital, Kigali. In recent years, Rwanda 
has undertaken reforms to streamline business procedures, 
create a favourable legal framework, reduce bureaucracy, 
and improve service delivery in order to promote both 
domestic and foreign investment. For instance, in Kigali, 
registering a business takes only three days and costs less 
than five per cent of the average income in an environment 
devoid of corruption, making the city “a very easy place for 
a global firm to operate”.21

Access to basic amenities
An efficient mass transit system is essential for the seamless 
movement of people and goods within and between cities, 
which in turn is vital for the prosperity of cities. In Lagos, 
the bus rapid transport (BRT) system has attracted new 
patronage, lowered average fares, creating 1,000 jobs as 
well as indirect employment for over 500,000 people.22 

From Comparative Advantage to Urban Prosperity

FACT A system that ensures that local officials are elected 

is ranked by local experts as the fifth most important 

policy-related factor that enhances urban prosperity. The election 
of local or city officials presupposes the existence of stable 
democracy through which citizens are empowered to elect and 
remove their leaders through an open, free and fair ballot. 

POLICy Political institutions like democracy are essential 

if the conditions for prosperity are to be laid out 

and nurtured. 

FACT Across the four developing regions surveyed by UN-

Habitat, a favourable business environment is perceived 
to be most important in Asia – possibly pinpointing the role played 
by cities in the region, creating an enabling environment for 
businesses and attracting foreign direct investment. 

In South Africa, the 
Gautrain is expected 
to reduce road traffic 
between Johannesburg 
and Pretoria by 25,000-
30,000 cars per day; this is 
one of the busiest roads in 
South Africa where traffic 
increases an average seven 
per cent every year.23 In 
Bogotá, the BRT provides 
fast and reliable transport 
for over 1.4 million 
passengers per day, in the 
process reducing traffic 
congestion and enhancing 
environmental quality.24

In addition to the 

FACT Access to basic 

amenities and 
infrastructure, including 
improved public transport 
and ICT, is a factor that 
will enhance the prosperity 
of any city. This factor 
is considered as most 
important in African and 
Asian cities. 

POLICy Cities with a 

favourable 

business environment and 
entrepreneurial culture 
are more likely to be 
prosperous. 

foregoing, access to basic 
amenities can deliver major 
prosperity-enhancing benefits such as: supporting economic 
growth; contributing to achievement of Millennium 
Development Goals through improved health and education; 
improving quality of life especially for youth and women; 
enhancing environmental quality through improved access 
to water and sanitation, which in turn reduces morbidity and 
mortality, and fosters greater productivity. 

97 

SOME IMPEDIMENTS TO THE URBAN PROSPERITy 
Based on the UN-Habitat local expert survey, there are 
seven main impediments to urban prosperity, as follows: 
poor governance and weak institutions; corruption; lack 
of appropriate infrastructure; high incidence of slums and 
poverty; high costs of doing business; low levels of human 
capital; and high crime rates (Figure 3.1.2). The hard-won 
prosperity gains made by cities in terms of productivity, 
infrastructures, quality of life, equity, social inclusion and 
environmental sustainability can be jeopardized or eroded, 
either individually or collectively, by these impediments.

FACT Poor governance 

and weak 

Poor governance and weak institutions
What this implies is that countries in Africa and Arab 
States must do more to improve urban governance and 
institutions. Indeed, in many developing countries, the 
institutions required for urban prosperity, if they exist, are 
weakly developed. Proper 
institutions are crucial 
formal (Constitution, 
laws and regulations) and 
informal (social norms, 
customs and traditions) 
rules that determine how 
people, organizations 
and firms make decisions 
of an economic, social 
political nature, maximize 
potentials and optimize 
resources.25 

institutions act as major 
impediments to higher 
urban prosperity. 

POLICy The impact of 

poor governance 

and weak institutions on 
urban prosperity appears 
to be more pronounced in 
cities in Africa and Arabs 
States, where over 40 per 
cent of experts cite this 
factor as the single most 
important impediment. 

FACT Corruption is 

considered by local 
experts as the second most 
important hindrance to 
enhanced urban prosperity. 

FACT Corruption can 

be detrimental 
to urban prosperity in a 
variety of ways. 

Sound institutions 

matter for the prosperity 
of cities, as they provide 
the superstructure that 
enables, or otherwise, 
underlying factors to 
operate and deliver a 
maximum of benefits 
to the largest possible 
majority of the population. 
Institutional inadequacies 
take the form of weak (if 
not altogether lacking) 
legal and institutional 
frameworks26, disregard 
for the rule of law, 
poor enforcement of 
property rights, excessive 

98 

bureaucracy, and proliferation of corrupt practices among 
others. All these are incompatible with urban prosperity. 

Corruption
Local experts surveyed by UN-Habitat unanimously concur 
that corruption is a major threat to the prosperity of cities. 
This is in line with the view that corruption is the single 
largest obstacle to development.27 Corruption can be found 
operating on a grand scale, often penetrating the highest 
policy-making organs of government, including urban 
authorities, or take a petty sort of nature, involving everyday 
public and social interactions. 

Corruption acts a deterrent to direct (and even 

indirect) foreign investment, as it will influence foreign 
firms’ decisions to locate in a particular country or city. 
Corruption acts like a tax, only imposed for private instead 
of public benefit.28 One of the reasons that foreign firms are 
attracted to cities such as Bridgetown (Barbados), Santiago 
(Chile), Gaborone (Botswana), Doha (Qatar), San Juan 
(Puerto Rico), St Louis (Mauritius), Kigali (Rwanda) or 
Victoria (Seychelles) is because they all located in countries 
with low levels of corruption. 

Corruption undermines the ability of city authorities to 
provide fair municipal services, as it distorts planning and 
allocation processes.

Corruption is particularly evident in large-scale 

urban infrastructure projects, and distorts infrastructure 
spending in various ways.29 It can increase public 
expenditure on new infrastructure, since such capital 
projects can be easily manipulated by politicians and high-
level officials to obtain bribes. 

Corruption can reduce the resources normally available 
to urban authorities for improved provision of basic services 
such as water, sanitation, education, health and recreation, 
which are all essential for urban prosperity and the 
achievement of the Millennium Development Goals, many 
of which are urban-related. 

Corruption can also result in shoddy delivery of urban 
services. When contractors offer bribes to secure contracts, 
they are likely to cut back and compromise on quality in 
order to recoup part or whole of the bribe offered. 

Inadequate infrastructure
Cities with deficient infrastructure will be adversely affected 
on many fronts; they are less likely to be prosperous, 
sustainable or productive. For instance, inadequate water 
and sanitation facilities will lead to deterioration of the 
urban environment, increasing the disease burden of the 

State of the World’s Cities 2012/2013From Comparative Advantage to Urban Prosperity

FACT Inadequate infrastructure is a major impediment to the 

prosperity of cities. The impacts of deficient infrastructure 
appear to be more pronounced in Asian and African cities and less 
so in Arab States. 

stigmatized on account of 
their location and are often 
discriminated against in 
terms of access to public 
and social services, as well 
as employment. 

Slum prevalence 

FACT Cities with large 

proportions of their 

populations living in slum 
conditions are less likely to 
be prosperous. 

is highest in Sub-Saharan Africa (62 per cent), where 
basic services are lacking not only in informal, but 
formal settlements, too. North Africa features the lowest 
prevalence (13 per cent). In Asia, the average proportion 
of urban populations living in slums ranges from 25 per 
cent in Western Asia to 35 per cent in South Asia. In Latin 
America and the Caribbean, average slum prevalence is 
24 per cent. To a large extent, regional patterns of slum 
prevalence reflect degrees of access to basic services such 
as water and sanitation, as well as the nature of urban 
development policies. 

urban poor, particularly in slums and squatter settlements. 
Deficient infrastructure can drive up the costs of doing 
business in urban areas and reduce firm productivity by 
as much as 40 per cent30, and its impact can be as large 
as those of crime, bureaucracy, corruption or financial 
market constraints.31 Deficient infrastructure is also a 
major impediment to trade and competitiveness in many 
developing countries, particularly landlocked and small 
island states. In the case of Africa, the proportion of paved 
roads in is about five times less than in high income OECD 
countries; the end-result of this infrastructure bottleneck 
is that transport costs are 63% higher in African countries 
compared with developed countries.32 This has major 
implications for competitiveness of African cities on local 
and international markets.

High incidence of slums and poverty
Slums feature the most deplorable living and environmental 
conditions and are characterized by inadequate water 
supply, poor sanitation, overcrowded and dilapidated 
housing, hazardous locations, insecurity of tenure and 
vulnerability to serious health risks – all of which have 
major implications for quality of life. Slums are also known 
for their atmosphere of fear and the social and economic 
exclusion of their residents.33 Slum dwellers are often 

Figure 3.1.2

Perceived impediments to the prosperity of cities 

Poor governance & weak institutions

Corruption

Inadequate infrastructure

High incidence of slums and poverty

High cost of doing business

Low levels of human capital

per cent of respondents
45

High levels of crime

40

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

Africa 

Asia 

LAC 

Arab States

All regions

Source: UN-Habitat City Monitoring Policy Survey, 2011

99 

FACT Large concentrations of slums impose enormous burdens 

on urban authorities that often lack the resources to 

provide even the most basic services, with obvious consequences 
on prosperity. Rather than opting for proactive perspective on 
urban development, cities with large concentrations of slums are 
likely to adopt antagonistic or fragmentary approaches, which 
among other shortcomings tends to be expensive in the long term.

Mumbai, India: where there is inadequate access to, or provision of, resources, people will improvise dwellings using whatever comes to hand. 

© 2012 Nicola Barranger/fotoLIBRA.com

High cost of doing business
In Africa, countries like Mauritania, Cameroon, Burundi, 
Benin, Eritrea, and Guinea Bissau are ranked low in terms 
of the ease of doing business.34 This means that their capital 
cities – Nouakchott, Yaoundé, Bujumbura, Porto Novo, 
Asmara and Bissau, will be characterized by a high cost 

of doing business and thus, likely to be less prosperous 
compared to other African cities located in countries where 
the cost of doing business in low. 

In Latin America and the Caribbean, Brazil, 

Honduras, Bolivia, Haiti and Suriname are ranked 
relatively low on the ease of doing business. In Brazilian 

100 

State of the World’s Cities 2012/2013cities, the business environment is bogged down by the 
labyrinth of bureaucracy. For instance, it takes an average 
of 119 days and 13 procedures to register a business.35 
Anyone wishing to start a business will require approval 
from no less than 12 different government agencies.36 
As one store owner lamented: “You need a document. 
But to have that document, you need to hand in seven 
documents. And to get each of these seven, there’s a 
different demand.”37 

Poorly developed human capital
Education is essential not just for nurturing, but also 
for attracting talents, and bolstering innovation. The 
development of Boston, Silicon Valley, Oxford and 
Cambridge (UK) clearly benefited from the presence of 
reputed universities.39 Availability of highly-skilled human 
capital in turn attracts and generates innovative and 
knowledge-based industries. 

Within the OECD, the productivity of some 

metropolitan areas has been attributed to human resource 
endowments. For instance in Montreal, the relatively low 
productivity of high value-added sectors has been linked to 
lower educational attainment and inadequate investment, 
particularly in small and medium-sized enterprises.40 
Similarly, in Istanbul and Mexico City, productivity and 
hence, prosperity, is hampered by low skills, as well as the 
extent of the informal sector, where adult education and 
skill upgrading are difficult to provide.41 

FACT The myriad 

of laws, taxes 

and regulations and 
bureaucracy involved in 
registering or running 
a business has been 
cited as one of the 
main reasons why 
40 per cent of Brazilian 
startup businesses 
hardly survive for more 
than two years. The 
cost of bureaucracy 
is staggering; in 2010 
bureaucracy cost the 
Brazilian economy 
46.3 billion reals.38 This 
has implications for the 
prosperity of cities in 
Brazil. 

Attracting and 

cultivating talents has 
become common practice 
for cities in the pursuit 
of prosperity. From New 
York, to Boston, London 
to Vienna, Dubai to 
Singapore, or Bangalore to 
Shenzhen, many cities can 
illustrate this phenomenon. 
Munich’s experience with 
vocational education can 
be particularly inspiring. 
The capital of Bavaria 
as well as the economic, 
cultural, technological and 
transportation centre of 
South Germany, Munich 
is one of Europe’s most 
prosperous cities. It ranked 

From Comparative Advantage to Urban Prosperity

FACT Just as a favourable business environment enhances the 

prosperity of urban areas, the high cost of doing business 
can serve as an impediment to cities becoming more prosperous. 
A high cost of doing business has obvious implications for 
investment, productivity, employment, income, taxation and 
poverty reduction – all of which impact on the prosperity of cities.

POLICy Low levels of 

human capital 
or labour can hinder urban 
prosperity. When it fails to 
develop and nurture human 
resources, a city will be less 
likely to be prosperous than 
those with highly educated 
labour forces. 

8th for technological 
innovation (as measured 
by international patent 
applications), among 
the 500 sample cities in 
the 2010 Global Urban 
Competitiveness Ranking; 
its GDP per capita was 
USD 58,197 in 2007 with 
three per cent economic 
growth on an annual 
average basis in 2001-2007.42 Munich’s manufactured 
products enjoy a good international reputation and export 
competitiveness. The city’s large proportion of high-skilled 
workers, nurtured through its vocational education system, 
has been crucial to the city’s prosperity. 

High crime rates
Crime is a major deterrent to domestic and foreign 
investment and can cause capital flight. In Africa, more 
than 29 per cent of business people report that crime was 
a significant investment constraint.43 Investors generally 
worry about violent crime for fear of direct losses to 
business and lack of security for staff. 

High crime rates can have a crippling effect on the 

FACT According to the 

prosperity of cities. In Lusaka, for instance, fear of crime in 
the poverty-stricken community of Chawama can prevent 
teachers from showing up 
at work.45 In South Africa, 
a survey of major cities 
showed that over a quarter 
of respondents would not 
consider opening a business 
due to fear of crime, with 
more than 25 per cent 
saying they were reluctant 
to allow their children to 
walk to school, while 30 per 
cent stopped using public 
transportation.46 In large 

surveyed by UN-Habitat, 
crime emerges as another 
major impediment to the 
prosperity of cities. No 
city can claim to be truly 
prosperous if it is crime-
ridden and the population 
lives in a perpetual state of 
insecurity. 

local experts 

101 

FACT In Latin America, the financial burden of violent crime 

is equivalent to 25 per cent of GDP in Colombia and 

El Salvador; 12 per cent in Mexico and Venezuela; 11 per cent 
in Brazil; and five per cent in Peru.44 In Jamaica, crime has a 
pernicious effect on national tourism and is often cited as a major 
reason for the country’s weak economy. 

Endnotes

1 

2 

3 
4 

5 

6 

7 

UN-Habitat (2008) State of the World’s Cities Report 2008/09: Harmonious Cities, 
Earthscan, London. 
Shabou, A., N. Soboh, K. Jalouka, and D. A. Thaib (2011) City Report on Aqaba, 
Unpublished UN-Habitat background study for “State of the World’s Cities Report 
2012/2013”
UN-Habitat (2008) op.cit.
Costas, S. (2011) Urban Tourism and Urban Change: Cities in a Global Economy, New 
York, Routledge 
Spence, M (2008) “Preface”, in Urbanization and Growth, Spence M. , P.C. Annez., 
and R. Buckley (eds.), Commission on Growth and Development, World Bank, 
Washington DC.
Annez, P.C. and R. Buckley (2008) “Urbanization and growth: Setting the context”, in 
Urbanization and Growth, Spence M. , P.C. Annez., and R. Buckley (eds.), Commission 
on Growth and Development, World Bank, Washington DC.
UN-Habitat (2012) The State of Arab Cities 2012: Challenges of Urban Transition, 
UN-Habitat, Nairobi.
UN-Habitat (2006) State of the World’s Cities 2006/07, Earthscan, London. 
UN-Habitat (2004) State of the World’s Cities 2004/05, Earthscan, London.
Ibid.

8 
9 
10 
11  Scipes, K. (2006) ‘Venezuela and South Africa: Redistributive policies vs. neo-liberal 

economic policies’, Third World Traveler, http://www.thirdworldtraveler.com/
Venezuela_page/Venez_SAfrica_EconPolicies.html

12  Hailu, D. and F. V. Soares(2008) ‘Cash transfers in Africa and Latin America: An 

overview”, Poverty in Focus, Number 15, International Policy Centre for Inclusive 
Growth, Brasilia, pp: 3-5.

13  Britto, T (2008) ‘Brazil’s Bolsa Família: Understanding its origins and challenges’, 

Poverty in Focus, Number 15, International Policy Centre for Inclusive Growth, 
Brasilia, pp: 6-7.

14  Soares, F. V., S. Soares, M .Medeiros, , and R. G. Osório, (2006) ‘Cash transfer 

programmes in Brazil: Impacts on inequality and poverty‘ , International Policy Centre 
for Inclusive Growth working Paper, Number 21, International Poverty Centre Brasilia
15  UN-Habitat (2009) Planning Sustainable Cities: Global Report on Human Settlements 

2009. Earthscan, London
16  UN-Habitat(2009) op. cit.
17  Sharma, S. (2005) ‘Democracy, good governance, and economic development’, 

Taiwan Journal of Democracy, vol 3 (1), pp: 29-62.

18  Sharma, S. (2005) op. cit.
19  Holcombe, R. G. (2012) ‘Democracy and Prosperity,’ in Young, B. C. (ed.) Institutional 

Economics and National Competitiveness, Routledge, London 

20  World Bank and International Finance Corporation (2011) Doing Business 2012: 

Doing Business in a More Transparent World, World Bank.Washington DC 

21  The Economist (2012) ‘Business in Rwanda: Africa’s Singapore?’, The Economist, 

February 25, http://www.economist.com/node/21548263

22  World Bank (2009) Getting people and traffic moving again in Lagos, http://web.

worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/EXTABOUTUS/IDA/0,,contentMDK:22229765~men
uPK:4754051~pagePK:51236175~piPK:437394~theSitePK:73154,00.html
 BBC (2011) ‘South Africa Gautrain opens Johannesburg-Pretoria route’, BBC News, 
August 2, http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-africa-14371113

23 

Latin America cities, high numbers of murders deter people 
from working evenings and at night.47 

All these factors have implications for local economies, 
quality of life and the attractiveness of public spaces, on top 
of lost opportunities for socioeconomic advancement that 
are so crucial for the prosperity of cities.

24  Hidalgo, D.(2008) ‘Why is TransMilenio still so special?’, The City Fix, August 5, http://

thecityfix.com/blog/why-is-transmilenio-still-so-special/

25  Sharma, S. (2005) op. cit.
26  Oyeyinka, B. O. (2012) ‘Institutional capacity and policy for latecomer technology 

development’, International Journal of Technological Learning, Innovation and 
Development, Vol. 5, (1/2), pp. 85-110.

27  UN-Habitat (2007) Enhancing Urban Safety and Security: Global Report on Human 

Settlements 2007,Earthscan, London

28  Dong, B and Torgler, (2010) The Consequences of Corruption: Evidence from China, 

Center for in Economics, Management and the Arts Working Paper No. 2010-06, 
http://www.crema-research.ch/papers/2010-06.pdf

29  Arimah, B. C. (2005) ‘What drives infrastructure spending in cities of developing 

30 

countries?’, Urban Studies, Vol 42 (8), pp. 1345-1368
 Escribano, A. ,J.L. Guasch, and J. Pena (2008) ‘Impact of Infrastructure Constraints 
on Firm Productivity in Africa, Africa Infrastructure Diagnostic Study Working Paper 9, 
World Bank, Washington, DC. 

31  Foster, V., and C. Briceno-Garmendia (2010) Africa’s Infrastructure: A Time for 

Transformation, World Bank, Washington, DC.

32  African Economic Outlook (2012) Progress in Infrastructure Developments, 

http://www.africaneconomicoutlook.org/en/outlook/trade_policies/progress-in-
infrastructure-developments/

33  Bloom, D. E., D. Canning, and G. Fink (2008) ‘Urbanization and the wealth of nations’, 

Science, Vol. 319, pp. 772 - 775.

34  World Bank and International Finance Corporation (2011) op. cit.
35 
36  Gomes, L . (2012) ‘Brazil’s labyrinth of bureaucracy’, BBC News, May 16, http://www.

Ibid.

bbc.co.uk/news/business-18020623
Ibid.

37 
38  Gomes (2012) op.cit.
39  Pengfei, Ni (2011) Driving factors of Prosperity: An Empirical Analysis Global Cities, 

background paper for ‘State of the World Cities Report 2012/13’

Ibid.

40  OECD (2006) Competitive Cities in the Global Economy, OECD, Paris 
41 
42  Pengfei, Ni (2011) op. cit.
43  UNODC (2005) Crime and Development in Africa, http://www.unodc.org/pdf/

African_report.pdf

44  Moser, C. , A.Winton, and A.Moser (2005) ‘Violence, Fear among the Urban Poor 
in Latin America’ In The Urban Poor in Latin America, Fay, M (ed.) World Bank, 
Washington, DC. 

45  Moser, C. O. N. and J. Holland (1997) ‘Confronting crisis in Chawama, Lusaka 

Zambia’, Household Responses to Poverty and Vulnerability, Vol 4, Urban Programme 
Management Policy Paper 24, World Bank, Washington, DC.

46  UNODC (2005) op.cit.
47  Hamermesh, D. S. (1998) Crime and the Timing of Work, National Bureau of 

Economic Research Working Paper 6613,NBER, Boston

102 

State of the World’s Cities 2012/2013Chapter 3.2

Innovating to Support 
the Transition to the 
City of the 21st Century

Cities have played a major role in creativity and innovation 
throughout history. Creative people and systems, 
innovative milieus, knowledge creation mechanisms, 
and new technological developments have all primarily 
happened in cities and all contributed to societal 
development and prosperity.

Creativity and 

POLICy The cities 

and countries 
best placed for economic 
growth and prosperity are 
those that invest in building 
knowledge and innovation 
institutions and related 
systems with strong support 
from public authorities and 
the private sector.3 

innovation are largely 
influenced by six main 
types of factors: (1) 
locational advantages 
(i.e., economies of 
agglomeration and 
‘positive externalities’ 
at regional scale); (2) 
knowledge networks; (3) 
cultural factors; (4) the 
economic environment; 
(5) organizational factors; and (6) state/government 
interventions (i.e., policies, incentives, institutions). 

Creativity and innovation involve a variety of areas 

‘Innovation’, as glorified in association with ‘creative 

that range from technology, institutions and organizations, 
modes of operation, information and knowledge, finance 
and human development. Innovation can also take a 
variety of forms, including improved project design and 
quality, changes in organization and management, higher 
efficiency, high- and medium-tech industrial development, 
creation of new linkages and coordination mechanisms, 

FACT Creativity and 

innovation 
can flourish in many 
other areas that do 
not automatically 
contribute to economic 
development per se 
such as developing and 
managing urban life, 
the renewal of social 
institutions, better urban 
policies, development of 
knowledge networks, etc. 

scientific research and 
the commercialisation 
of technical knowledge.1 
This goes to show that, to 
a large extent, creativity 
and innovation are already 
embedded in economic 
functions and under 
the control of financial 
capital.2 In technologies 
and the arts alike, 
innovation is increasingly 
dominated by the private 
sector.

cities’, the ‘creative class’ and ‘city competition’, more often 
than not is in the sole benefit of business and economic 
elites,4 and it fails to integrate the various dimensions 
of prosperity, particularly equitable development and 
environmental sustainability.

Innovation is a creative capital that is brought to bear 

on various dimensions of development and prosperity, 
in the process unleashing undeveloped potential and 
making fuller use of local resources and assets. The 
culture of creativity must be embedded in the way 
cities operate.6 Therefore, it is not just for government 
or business, but also 
for communities and 
the public at large to 
contribute their own 
powers of imagination. 
And this has to be not just 
encouraged but legitimised 
as well, in a bid to broaden 
the range of solutions to 
urban issues. 

Report, is a broader 
notion that has to do 
with creative approaches 
to planning, economy, 
social inclusion, 
environment, culture and 
local identity.5 

FACT Innovation, as 

defined in this 

103 

Box 3.2.1

Measuring Innovation and Creativity

In 2000 a “Creative City Index” was developed to measure 
‘the imaginative pulse of cities’, combining a variety of 
indicators ranging from political and public frameworks, 
diversity, vitality and expression, openness and tolerance, 
entrepreneurship, vision, liveability, learning and 
professionalism, among 10 specific dimensions. In 2007, 
Melbourne-based “2thinkNow” developed an “Innovation 
Cities Program” along with an “Innovation Cities Index” in a 
bid to enhance understanding of the links between innovation 
and the way cities operate. The measure also uses a large 
variety of indicators, involving cultural assets, infrastructure 
and networked markets in areas such as commerce, finance, 
food, the arts, health, technology, religion, the media, etc. 
On this basis, cities are classified in five categories: ‘nexus’ 
(cities featuring critical innovations),’hub’ (cities that are 
influential in key areas), ‘node’ (cities combining broad-
ranging performance and imbalances), ‘influencer’ (cities that 
are competitive but unbalanced on the whole), and ‘upstart’ 
(cities with potential for future performance).

Source: UN-Habitat (2012) Decentralization in Iraq: Challenges and 
Solutions for Federal and Local Governments, Nairobi: UN-Habitat

POLICy A creative city must establish a balance between 

‘hardware’ factors – infrastructure and technology – 
and ‘software’ factors (including mind-set, dynamics of place, the 
connection between thinkers and doers, and a change-friendly 
environment).7

THE FACTORS BEHIND URBAN INNOvATIvENESS 
Innovation can emanate from a creative worker, a 
community leader, a business person, an artist, a public 
servant or a scientist, etc. Innovation can respond to a 
specific problem, reduce risks, anticipate challenges, result 
in new products or process, or harness existing or emerging 
opportunities. For the purposes of urban prosperity, 
innovation has a clear role in improved conditions for 
populations and the way they live, work, move, relax and 
more generally make the most of the urban advantage. 

POLICy The culture of 

creativity must 

be embedded in the way 
cities operate.8

If its existing 

creative capital is to be 
enhanced, or activated 
where dormant, a city 
should become a locus 
where sociocultural 
diversity can be staged, 

and where links can flourish among both individuals and 
institutions. In practice, all of this requires well-adapted 
physical environments, which in turn have to do with 
urbanization economies9 and better urban planning. From 
a more institutional point of view, support to knowledge 
exchange and networking is another way of stimulating 
creative capital, along with favourable conditions for 
research and development. As for the productive sector, 
creative stimulation can also derive from economies of 
agglomeration and an entrepreneur-friendly environment. 

It may come as no surprise that in Asia, most 

local experts saw a strong link between research and 
development (R&D), on the one hand, and enhanced 
prosperity on the other, with public authorities and other 
stakeholders playing significant roles in the areas of 
business, industry and technology. 

This was the case in Singapore, Hyderabad and 

Bangalore (India), Shenzhen and Chongqing (China), 
Gaziantep (Turkey) and Cebu (the Philippines). In 
Singapore, gross expenditure on R&D increased from 
1.9 per cent in 1990 to 2.8 per cent 2008 and three 
per cent in 201010, with the focus on applied research, 
technology, sustainable urban living and ‘clean’ energy.11 
In Bangalore, the emergence of the city as a knowledge 
hub is a visible impact of policy, entrepreneurship and 
innovation. With more than 66 engineering colleges and 
55 polytechnics, the city has developed as a centre for 
scientific innovation, research in aeronautics and electronics 
with strong public research facilities.12 Biotechnologies 
and computer/communications also feature highly in 
Hyderabad, India’s pharmaceutical capital, with support 
from central government and more than 40 research 
and educational institutions.13 Shenzhen has developed 
an endogenous innovation strategy led by the state with 
investments from government agencies, industries and 
universities. In few years, 
the city has developed a 
high-tech, modern service 
industry, actively promoting 
industrial transformation 
and upgrade, focusing 
on electronics, biological 
engineering and new 
material technology. 
The city has also made 
important innovations 
in the service industry 
(finance, logistics and 

survey shows 
that five main factors 
are at play when cities 
innovate: innovative 
urban management, 
entrepreneurial capacity, 
the promotion of 
arts and culture, the 
emergence of industrial 
clusters, and research 
and development (R&D). 

FACT UN-Habitat 

104 

State of the World’s Cities 2012/2013Innovating to Support the Transition to the City of the 21st Century

Singapore: an innovative bronze sculpture of five boys jumping into the river for a swim, by local sculptor Chong Fah Cheong, installed at 
the Open Air Interpretive Centre along the Singapore River serves to remind viewers of the essential freedoms that underpin a vital and 
prosperous city.

© Sengkang

105 

FACT In contrast to 

Asia, the share 
of R&D as a per cent of 
GDP expenditure in Africa 
and Latin America is low, 
where not next to nil. In the 
absence of any systematic 
public sector involvement, 
creativity and innovation 
largely remain the purview 
of the private sector. 

culture) as a way to drive 
economic growth and 
prosperity.14 Still in China, 
Chongqing has utilized 
a state-led investment to 
stimulate the economy and 
improve social welfare by 
optimizing endogenous 
development through 
research and technology. 
Chongqing strategy “Three 
Centers, Two Hubs, and 
One Base” connects 

business, finance and education with a strong support of 
infrastructure, communication and a modern base of high-
tech industry.15 In southeast Turkey, Gaziantep – one of 
the oldest inhabited cities in the world – has deliberately 
embraced R&D and innovation, with various educational 
institutions explicitly supporting entrepreneurship. Business 
has cooperated with public authorities to launch a number 
of initiatives known as Trademark City, Smart Industry, 
Teknopark, Innovation Valley and R&D Movement to 

open up markets, diversify the economy and promote 
employment in the search of prosperity.16

With the exception of South Africa and Brazil, which 
recorded the highest expenditure on R&D as a percentage 
of GDP in their respective regions (around 1 per cent 
in 2008), the Latin America region and the Sub-Saharan 
Africa had an average expenditure of about 0.6 per cent. 
In some African countries such as Mali, Mozambique, 
Nigeria, Senegal, Uganda, Zambia, among many others, this 
expenditure was under 0.4 per cent.17 

A vARIETy OF SOCIAL AND 
INSTITUTIONAL INNOvATIONS 
Many factors stand in the way of urban innovation, 
especially in developing countries. Not all these factors 
have been sufficiently identified, understood or addressed. 
Still, seven major types of deficiency seem to play significant 
roles: (1) poor physical and knowledge infrastructure; (2) an 
absence of appropriate innovation policies (due to lack of 
interest or understanding); (3) limited financial resources; 
(4) weak local institutions (formal or informal); (5) 
unavailability of human resources (number and qualification 

Nairobi, Kenya: children play in a schoolyard in Kibera. The newly introduced Pesapal system enables 
school fees to be paid by the Internet or mobile telephone.

© Meunierd/Shutterstock.com

106 

of personnel); (6) lack of 
stakeholder participation 
and coordination in 
the elaboration and 
implementation of 
innovation policies; and (7) 
poor incentives (if any). 

In other cases, the 

problems instead lie 
in technology transfer 
and poor adaptation 
to local know-how.18 
But then ‘home-made’ 
innovations, too, can be 
poorly related to local 
and national conditions, 
or overlook the needs 
of the underprivileged, 
when they fail “to take 
into due consideration the 
plurality of knowledge and 
technological options” that 
are locally available.19

The city of 

Johannesburg has adopted 
an innovative governance 

State of the World’s Cities 2012/2013Innovating to Support the Transition to the City of the 21st Century

model to rebuild local government and improve service 
delivery. Bangalore in India has launched technology-
based public-private experiments in governance in a bid 
better to deliver public services, too. In Latin America 
and the Caribbean, Rosario, just like Santo Domingo, has 
introduced significant institutional innovations in terms of 
participatory governance. In Nairobi, Kenya, the private 
sector has launched ‘Pesapal’ a new payment platform 
enabling low- and middle-income residents to conduct 
e-commerce transactions and even to pay school fees via cell 
phones or the Internet. 

Many other social and institutional innovations involve 
the creation of new systems and models to meet the needs 
of underserved populations in a more efficient, effective, 
and sustainable manner. In Iran’s Tehran, the scope of the 
WHO-UN-Habitat ‘Urban HEART’ Programme has been 
extended to assess equity under not just under the health 
dimension but also a more general social perspective. 
Shenzhen has created a multilevel social security system 
that includes basic social insurance, poverty insurance, 
compensation for job seekers, and special care for patients 
and the disabled, which includes the migrant population 
that represents up to 75 per cent of the population.20 
Chongqing has created investment companies to activate 
state-owned capital to speed up the construction of 
infrastructure and public facilities, using a combination of 
innovative funding mechanisms: taxes, land reserves, fees, 
state bonds and state-owned capital.21 

Social and institutional innovation can take the form of 
enlightened rules or legislation. In Cebu, the Philippines, an 
ordinance now encourages those employed in outsourced 
business processing services to enrol in (post)graduate 
studies, in a bid to expand the pool of highly skilled people. 
Rosario, Argentina, has declared itself a “Human Rights 
City”, with a commitment to openness, transparency and 
accountability.22 Some other institutional innovations 
connect urban planning and design with the use of social 

FACT Innovations are 

often copied 

or transferred from 
abroad. More often than 
not though, this causes 
problems as foreign 
innovation runs against 
the grain of the social or 
cultural features of the 
target communities. 

public space. In Colombia, 
Bogotá has improved 
many diverse public spaces 
(sidewalks, public parks 
and libraries) in a bid to 
rebuild social cohesion. 
Singapore’s ‘Skyway’ is a 
spectacular aerial walkway 
among giant man-made 
trees that collect rainwater 
and generate solar energy, 

and is an invitation to view 
the city from a different 
perspective. In Korea, 
the municipality of Seoul 
resorts to urban design to 
improve the efficiency and 
enhance the attractiveness 
of the city with innovative 
projects, such as the ‘Han 
River Renaissance’ scheme 
and the ‘City in the Park’ 
initiative.23

POLICy Cities have 

interest 

to promote social and 
institutional innovations in 
response to local problems 
to address social needs 
and improve the efficiency 
and quality of urban 
management. 

THE TRANSFORMATIvE POWER OF INNOvATIONS
Almost by definition, innovation processes are not linear, 
nor are they easily controllable. However, as far as urban 
innovation is concerned, a consistent basic pattern seems to 
be at work. Whether in response to new risks or immediate 
emergencies, or in more ordinary circumstances, urban 
innovation seems to result from cooperation and dialogue 
among a broad variety of stakeholders. Such dialogue acts 
as a catalyst, bringing together a variety of perspectives, 
resources, capacities and types of human capital.24 

Innovations introduce knowledge, products, processes 
and programmes that change the ways of doing business or 
using resources, or even social attitudes and preferences. 
Innovations are at the core of all economic processes and 
they contribute to knowledge generation and information 
flows’.25 Innovations of a technological nature have added 
value and helped transform 
the urban space (e.g., 
connectivity, proximity 
and distance, de-location 
of manufacturing). 
Although innovations 
take place mainly in major 
metropolitan centres, 
they are not restricted to 
big cities. 

to strengthen the links 
between policy-makers, 
business, academia, civil 
society and a variety of 
practitioners to promote 
urban innovations. 

POLICy It is in cities’ 

best interests 

The transformative 
power of innovation is 
closely linked to the various 
components of prosperity –
productivity, infrastructure, 
quality of life, equity 
and environmental 
sustainability. Innovation 
can contribute to any of 

107 

FACT Local authorities 

are becoming 
increasingly aware that 
promoting interactions, 
synergies and adequate 
environments can 
enhance local creative 
capital and prosperity. 

these dimensions or respond to the supporting institutions 
and policies at the core of these dimensions (see the 
‘Wheel of Prosperity’, Chapter 1.4) steering the course 
of the city along the path of prosperity and sustainable 
development. From this more general, strategic perspective, 
innovation can bring four major types of benefits: (1) 
reviving and sustaining the social economy (e.g.. better 
policies for human needs satisfaction); (2) changes in 
social relations (e.g. new societal arrangements, new social 
pact); (3) reinforcing existing, or creating new, institutions 
for improved urban management and governance (e.g., 
regulation of land or social conflicts, new legislation); 
and (4) forward-looking changes to the urban space (e.g. 
resource redistribution, expanded access to services and 
public goods). Any value added by all these social and 

A pedestrian bridge (part of the railing stolen for scrap) near Cape 
Town, South Africa 

© 2012 Rodger Shagam/fotoLIBRA.com

institutional innovations will accrue primarily to society 
as a whole, rather than private individuals or groups26, 
enhancing the prospects of prosperity and giving its full 
meaning to the notion of ‘spatial justice’.27 

Being a social construct, any city can be steered and 

shaped towards higher levels of prosperity. A fresh, different 
vision of urban planning and design can combine with new, 
more insightful change narratives and development ideas. 
As urban risks and challenges keep changing over space 
and time, existing safeguards, instruments or mechanisms 
must come under review and be adjusted as and where 
required. Innovation must also help reduce the cost of 
urban living. Innovative rules and legislation must support 
the transformation of the existing urban model. The 
current model is unsustainable for several reasons: endless 
physical expansion, intensive energy use, alarming and 
dangerous contributions to climate change, multiple forms 
of inequality and exclusion, and inability to provide decent 
jobs and livelihoods.28 If ongoing urbanization is to usher 
in the city of the 21st century, then this transformation must 
be grounded in a more effective and sustainable use of 
urban space. The city of the 21st century is a reinvented city 
that is more productive, equitable and sustainable. It is a 
more prosperous city. 

Urban Prosperity Through 
Planning and Design

In the midst of ongoing demographic, socioeconomic or 
environmental cross-currents, cities must reassert control 
over their destinies with reinvigorated urban planning and 
design for the sake of shared prosperity and harmonious 
development. 

This imperative comes as a reminder of the fact that so 
far, in most cities of the developing world, modern urban 
planning (where any) has proved unable to nurture shared 
socioeconomic advancement. For all the paraphernalia of 
legislation, complex regulations and spatial design plans, 
a majority of those cities have continued with the flawed 
models which, as ‘advanced’ countries have finally found 
out, are unsustainable in a variety of ways. 

Cities have found themselves woefully unprepared 
in the face of the spatial and demographic challenges 
associated with urbanization, not to mention those of 
an environmental nature. With a few commendable 

108 

State of the World’s Cities 2012/2013exceptions, modern urban planning has failed to integrate 
the urban poor in the socioeconomic fabric of the city. 
As an expert in Bangalore put it, “The poor have survived 
despite master planning.”30 Understood primarily as a 
technical tool, planning has been unable to address the 
power relations that have been at work to the detriment of 
the great majorities of urban populations. Planning has also 
proved unable to prevent environmental degradation or the 
formation of slums, and is notable for serious shortcomings 
in terms of transport and urban mobility. 

Conceived as a comprehensive, long-term strategy, 
a master plan – the quintessence of modern planning – 
typically represents an ideal end-state for a particular city 
with serious gaps between the initial vision and actual 
results. This has ensued in what a scholar in 1996 called 
“the dark side of planning”31, something an expert in 
Montevideo has referred to as “urban plans that are at odds 
with the notion of prosperity.”32

The shortcomings of modern urban planning have 

triggered significant reform since the 1980s and 1990s, in an 
effort to move away from comprehensive plans, top-down 
decision-making and wide-ranging regulation.33 A more 
flexible approach was adopted to improve conditions in 
cities, through ‘strategic planning’ and other methods that 
are more pragmatic, incremental and typically focused on 
‘getting things done’. However, too many ‘strategic urban 
plans’ have effectively imposed an entrepreneurial view of 
the city, promoting mostly economic prosperity and often 
turning into marketing gimmicks in all but name, complete 
with oversized architectural designs and mega-developments. 
In emerging or developing countries, these initiatives 
typically favour the gentrification of entire areas and, at times, 
massive displacement in order to make room for highways, 
skyscrapers, luxury compounds, shopping malls, etc., at the 
expense of the habitat and livelihoods of the poor.34

UN-Habitat policy analysis in 50 cities in Asia, Africa, 
Latin America and the Arab States (2011) shows that up 

FACT Whatever 

the planning 

approach, powerful 
political and economic 
interests keep interfering 
with the design and 
implementation of 
strategic plans and 
the pursuit of urban 
prosperity for all. 

to 80 per cent of local 
experts believe that the 
benefits of economic 
prosperity mainly serve the 
interests of the wealthy and 
politicians (a view shared 
by up to 90 per cent of 
African experts). Through 
political influence, bribery 
and corruption, these 
powerful interest groups 

Innovating to Support the Transition to the City of the 21st Century

FACT From Asia to Africa to Latin America, ‘master’, 

‘blueprint’ and layout plans have had similar, 

harmful consequences in countless numbers of cities: spatial 
segregation, social exclusion, excessive mobility needs and 
consumption of energy, together with poor regard for the 
potential economies of scale and agglomeration that any city 
can offer.29 

manage to distort urban plans, dodge spatial or legal rules, 
reduce the production of public goods and manipulate 
the power of eminent domain; in the process they 
capture unfair shares of  a city’s potential, resources and 
prosperity to the detriment of large, poor majorities of 
urban populations.

The New Urbanism Movement of the early 1980s 

broke with conventional master-planning and introduced 
a number of welcome innovations: liveable, pedestrian-
friendly cities, dense neighbourhoods with mixes of 
housing and job-creating commercial and business sites, 
together with mixed land uses having a diversity of 
buildings in terms of style, size, price and function – all 
of this with a strong focus on local communities.35 For all 
these fresh efforts, though, a conventional approach to 
urban development has remained dominant to this day. 
In developing and emerging countries alike, cities are still 
hostages to a mix of homogeneous forms or functions on 
the one hand, and spatial /social segregation on the other 
hand. Urban areas continue to expand across endless 
peripheries, with serious, pervasive problems of traffic 
congestion, enhancing the dependence on motor vehicles 
and intensive use of expensive fossil fuels. This dominant 
type of city is detrimental to the built heritage and the 
environment, including 
surrounding agricultural 
land, as well as biodiversity. 
This is the pattern which 
UN-Habitat refers to as 
the “Global Standard 
Urbanization Model 
of the 20th Century” 
(GS20C),36 which 
privileges individualism, 
consumerism, new 
(artificial) values and 
lifestyles, excessive mobility 
and privatization of the 
public space. 

model appears to be 
predominant across 
the world, being 
largely driven by land 
speculation and real 
estate interests that 
build cities according to 
financial and economic 
parameters often 
radically at odds with 
shared prosperity.37 

FACT Today, the 

GS20C 

109 

RE-POSITIONING URBAN PLANNING AT THE 
HUB OF THE WHEEL OF PROSPERITy 
“The city has many scars to treat and many wounds to cure; 
urban planning is powerless to do that”38, claims an expert in 
Santo Domingo (Dominican Republic). Still, in the 50 cities 
surveyed by UN-Habitat in 2011, efficient urban planning 
and urban management are perceived as the most important 

POLICy If urban planning 

is to be in a 

better position to address 
the shortcomings of the 
GS20C model, both theory 
and practice must come 
under serious review to 
‘rescue’ the discipline from 
its role as a mere technical 
tool, restoring it to its 
rightful position in the public 
sphere.

POLICy As a decision-

making tool 

urban planning must better 
defend the ‘public’ against 
the menace of ever-
expanding ‘private’ interests 
and its consequences: 
shrinking public spaces 
and reduced provision of 
public goods, which affect 
more collective, intangible 
dimensions like quality 
of life, social interaction, 
cultural identity and social 
values. 

FACT Very often 

planning has 

failed to represent correctly 
collective values and 
agreements, instead 
of contributing to the 
perpetuation of the urban 
divide with daunting, 
outdated, irrelevant 
requirements. 

making; (iii) deployment of the fullness of its functions 
across the five dimensions of shared prosperity; and (iv) 
support for these functions with adequate financing.

Restoration of confidence: Public confidence must 
be restored in the capacity of urban planning (alongside 
other urban power functions) to represent the interests of 
all the population – including the poor, women, children, 
youth, elderly or disabled people, immigrants and ethnic 
minorities – so that the public, collective interest prevails at 
all times and across the whole jurisdiction over any other, 
and more particularly the vested or special interests of the 
rich and powerful. 

Repositioning: If it is to play this stronger role to the 
full, urban planning must be re-positioned. No longer a 
mere technical functionality, urban planning must sit at the 
core of urban power. Urban planning can only be as good 
as the values it represents and the governance mechanisms 
that frame it. 

conditions for shared 
prosperity.39 

For any revival or 

reinvigoration of urban 
planning to take place 
in the pursuit of shared 
prosperity, four conditions 
must be met: (i) restoration 
of public confidence; (ii) 
repositioning of urban 
planning in decision-

Box 3.2.2

Streetwise versus Petrol-Powered Prosperity

In Peru’s capital Lima, it has taken ‘only’ an open-air public staircase all the way downhill to the city 
centre to change the name of an informal settlement from fearful ‘Quick Sands’ to ‘The Belt of Hope’. 
This goes to show the regenerating power of planning for urban public spaces and their decisive role 
in shared prosperity – well away from the constraints of the outdated automobile-based model of 
urban development. 

Indeed, public spaces, as symbolized by ‘the street’, can make significant contributions to 
socioeconomic prosperity, if only they are adequately configured. The street acts as the interface 
between public and private spaces, with retail businesses and jobs dependent on the quality of the 
pedestrian environment. In British towns, customers were found to spend nearly twice as much 
when walking instead of driving. In Mexico, research has shown that ‘walkability’ improves home 
and land values. 

Public spaces provide the physical support for urban infrastructure. However, particularly in 
the developing world, streets are designed mainly for motorized traffic, overlooking the human 
dimension and only adding to congestion with more or wider streets. The resulting huge imbalance 
in transport options damages other aspects of urban functionality. A number of cities have 
sought to counter this trend in a variety of ways. As early as 1962 motor vehicles were banned 
from Copenhagen’s main street and bicycle commuting was facilitated. In Melbourne, improved 
sidewalks, new pedestrian streets, squares and urban design have together increased pedestrian 
traffic by 39 per cent in daytime and 100 per cent at night. Combined with other modes of popular 
transport like biking and walking, Bus Rapid Transport (BRT) has spread from Curitiba (Colombia) 
to Jakarta, Bogotá, Guatemala City, Guangzhou, Istanbul, Mexico City, Brisbane and Los Angeles, 
among others. 

Upgraded and better designed public spaces have the potential to improve overall quality of life. 
In Cape Town under the Dignified Places Programme, more than 40 projects have brought dignity, 
beauty and better functionality to various areas, in the process demonstrating that after decades of 
repression it was once again possible to meet and talk in a shared space.

110 

State of the World’s Cities 2012/2013Working on the five ‘spokes’: Interdependencies and 
interactions among the five ‘spokes’ in the ‘wheel of urban 
prosperity’ (productivity, infrastructure, quality of life, 
equity and environmental sustainability) can be deliberately 
enhanced (as opposed to being allowed to occur all by 
themselves) through the strategies and interventions that 
are part and parcel of urban planning. More specifically, it 
is in the power of a well-planned decision or well-calibrated 
choice in one dimension of prosperity − for example, the 
design of a street supporting multimodal transport as part 
of the infrastructure development of the city − not just to 
make that particular part of the urban space more accessible 
or pedestrian-friendly, but in the process also to improve 
productivity (shops, street-trading, etc.), quality of life and 
social inclusion (see Box 3.2.1.). 

Financial support: For urban planning to work more 

efficiently as an urban power function, it must be reinforced 
from a financial and legal point of view. Cities need more 
permanent funding mechanisms to support the provision 
of public goods and the design and implementation of 
sustainable technical solutions if their performance and 
functionality are to be improved. 

Few cities or countries are in a proper legal position to 

do that, and where they are, they find themselves faced with 
systematic interference by special interest groups or political 
expediency.40 Here again, the public interest must prevail, 
and governments must look to improve and enforce the 
mechanisms that enable local authorities to capture urban 
land and site values, in the process generating the revenues 
needed to extend prosperity to the poorest areas.41 

ExPANDING PROSPERITy:  
CHANGING CITy LANDSCAPES
In many cities, urban planning has been instrumentalised by 
the real estate business. Cities that respond to the interests 
of the better-off or only focus on strategic economic 
interventions in specific spaces tend to create enclaves of 

POLICy UN-Habitat 

calls for 

a fresh, different type 
of urban planning and 
design – one that has 
the power to transform 
city landscapes and 
expand existing 
enclaves of prosperity 
to the entire city. 

prosperity for a select few. 
Urban planning can be 
so unrealistic or over-
ambitious as to overlook 
the need to steer and 
control spatial expansion, 
with large parts of the city 
ignoring existing plans or 
regulations. “The city falls 
out of the map, making 
it irrelevant”, deplores 

Innovating to Support the Transition to the City of the 21st Century

POLICy Restoring urban planning at the central point of the 

‘wheel’, where a solid and efficient institutional ‘hub’ 
holds together, controls and activates the five ‘spokes’ , can only 
enhance the conditions for sustained, shared prosperity. 

an expert in Panama 
City.42 Either by action or 
omission, this type of urban 
planning contributes to 
the production of spatial 
inequities, rather than 
better shared prosperity. 

This reinvigorated 

POLICy Land legislation 

and planning 

must combine to put 
municipal authorities 
in a better position to 
extract land values and 
related capital gains, with 
the additional revenue 
available for the funding of 
infrastructure extensions 
and other projects. 

notion of urban planning 
comes with a new value 
system that relies on 
effective institutions, well-
adapted laws and regulations, sustainable urban solutions and 
active civic involvement in public affairs. This type of planning 
signals a paradigm shift towards a new urban pattern − the 
city of the 21st century: a city that can better respond to the 
challenges of our age, optimizing resources to harness the 
potentialities of the future; a people-centred city, one that is 
capable of transcending the inefficient, unsustainable GS20C 
model, in the process integrating and nurturing the five 
dimensions of urban prosperity as defined in this Report. 
However, if urban planning is to be reinvigorated, it 

must shift away from the ‘spoke’ of productivity, where it has 
been predominantly operating these past several decades, 
to the centre of the ‘wheel’, right in the ‘hub’: indeed this 
is where, as an urban power function, planning will be in a 
better position to make its beneficial influence felt across all 
the ‘spokes’, increasing the 
scope of shared prosperity 
across the whole of the 
city. This will, of course, 
involve political choices 
and commitments, which 
must be turned into tools, 
regulations and sustainable 
technical solutions, which 
will be all the better 
accepted by society at large 
as they are seen to embed 
shared prosperity across the 
whole urban space. 

position to ensure equitable 
development, preserve 
the natural environment, 
promote inexpensive energy 
sources, provide necessary 
infrastructures and ensure 
inclusive economic growth. 
The city of the 21st century 
builds the conditions of 
prosperity for all. 

POLICy The 21st 

century is in a 

111 

FACILITATING ACCESS TO ‘COMMONS’, 
PROvIDING PUBLIC GOODS, IMPLEMENTING 
SUSTAINABLE SOLUTIONS 
Facilitating Access to ‘Commons’: A prosperous city 
facilitates equitable access to the ‘commons’. These include 
water, air, biodiversity, knowledge and other shared 
resources, including public infrastructure, together with 
more intangible forms like a better environment, sense of 
identity and cultural and symbolic spaces that in principle 
belong to everyone. 

Cities with islands of prosperity tend to enclose the 

‘commons’, restrict their use to a selected few, or deplete 
them through unsustainable use. 

Prosperous cities require ‘commons resource pools’, 

which can take the form of institutional arrangements where 
conflicts are solved through negotiation, and consensus is 
built for decision-making. ‘Commons’ also include any legal 
or statutory provisions facilitating community participation 
in planning decisions, available quality information, 
transparency as well as cultural norms and social compacts. 

Some public goods, such as community civic centres, 

will often be found to function as ‘space commons’, 
facilitating the integration of marginal and voiceless groups, 
in the process promoting pluralism and diversity, which are 
inseparable from shared prosperity. 

Providing public goods43: A prosperous city makes a 
profusion of public goods available to all: efficient public 

POLICy UN-Habitat’s 

reinvigorated 
notion of urban planning 
involves sustainable use 
and equitable access to 
the ‘commons’ through 
appropriate policies and 
schemes. 

FACT In general, the 

production AND 
enjoyment of public goods 
rely on a set of ‘commons’ 
such as better connectivity, 
public security and safety, 
predictability, property rights 
under their various forms, 
street nomenclature, etc. 

transport, educational 
opportunities, healthcare, 
quality public spaces such 
as libraries, recreation 
areas, parks and open 
spaces, etc. A substantial 
part of urban well-being 
is derived from access to 
and consumption of these 
public goods, which in 
principle must be ‘non-
excludable’ (everyone can 
enjoy their benefits) and 
‘non-rivalry’ (individual 
consumption of the good 
does not decrease the 
amount available for 
consumption by others).44 
Enclaves of prosperity 

‘fence in’ or restrict the 
availability of public goods, 

concentrating public investment in selected areas only, 
limiting access and privatizing control over a number of 
such goods. 

The provision of public goods contributes to 

economic advancement with environmental preservation 
and quality of life, which, incidentally, are fundamental 
‘smart growth’ concerns, too.45 Bogotá has transformed 
its own landscape with a variety of public goods such as 
multi-modal transport, social infrastructure and quality 
public spaces that have contributed to sharing more of 
the benefits of prosperity with poor and middle-income 
neighbourhoods. Still in Colombia, Medellín has resorted 
to bold civic architecture, public spaces and other public 
goods in a bid to enhance collective prosperity. Involvement 
of urban planning with education, culture, infrastructure, 
safety and community development has enabled the 
municipality to connect poor barrios (which, according to 
the head of municipal planning, “always had lots of energy, 
but were disconnected from the city”) with more affluent 
neighbourhoods, in the process planting the seeds of mutual 
trust and expanding shared prosperity.46 

Acting from the ‘hub’ of the ‘wheel for prosperity’, 

urban planning can identify strategies and plan for optimal 
production of public goods, in the process contributing 
to social capital, enhancing sense of place, safety and 
security, integrating social groups (e.g., youth), and 
increasing the economic value of the areas where these 
goods are provided. This strategy can generate widespread 
benefits to all urban residents, expanding prosperity across 
different areas. Such prosperity in turn can be leveraged for 
maintenance and further enhancement of public goods.

Implementing Sustainable Solutions: Prosperous cities 

POLICy A 

must plan and implement a variety of technical solutions 
to improve the functionality of the city and achieve a 
sustainable urban form. 
Although solutions can 
vary according to local 
conditions, UN-Habitat 
has identified a number 
of key interventions in 
various areas to assist the 
transition away from the 
current “Global Standard 
Urbanization Model of the 
20th Century” (GS20C), 
which is unsustainable 
on many accounts, to the 
city of the 21st century. 

reinvigorated 
notion of urban planning 
would give any city 
tighter public control 
over the use of land, 
change the form and 
function of cities 
based on sustainable 
development principles, 
as well as expand the 
provision of, and access 
to, public goods. 

112 

State of the World’s Cities 2012/2013Innovating to Support the Transition to the City of the 21st Century

POLICy Acting at the space level (form and function of the 

city), urban planning can steer the overall functioning 

of the ‘wheel’, modulating each dimension of prosperity and 
ensuring synergies between them in order to maintain overall 
balance and sustainable growth, regardless of city size or level of 
development. 

empowers structures through infrastructure and facilities 
(education, healthcare, commerce, manufacturing and 
culture/entertainment).

Devise multimodal mobility strategies: Urban planning 

can provide alternatives to the current widespread 
dependency on private motorised vehicles and reinforce 

London, UK: the Olympic Park for the 2012 Olympics Stratford 
was constructed on brownfield sites in an area of East London 
that had been previously rundown. After the Olympic games, the 
site is to be used to accommodate low cost housing as well as 
leisure activities.

© 2012 Alistair Laming/fotoLIBRA.com

As suggested earlier, it is in the power of well-calibrated 
planning rules and interventions to help embed the five 
dimensions of shared prosperity across the length and 
breadth of any urban jurisdiction. 

Making more functional the city, preserving access to the 
commons and producing useful public goods can be achieved 
through five different, sustainable types of intervention:

Increase population density to sustainable levels: More 
intense land occupation and activities result in sustainable 
population densities which contain or reduce urban sprawl 
and depletion of limited resources. Greater proximity will, in 
turn, facilitate supply and distribution of goods and services. 
An efficient layout (together with adequate land legislation 
and policies) can reduce the cost of infrastructure. On top 
of suburban densification and sprawl remediation, land use 
can be intensified through area redevelopment, planning for 
new areas with higher densities, ‘brownfield’ development 
(i.e., decontaminating and developing land previously used 
for industrial or certain commercial purposes), building 
conversions, and transit-oriented developments.

Encourage social 
diversity and mixed 
land-use: Land planning 
can bring about 
clusters of land uses in 
appropriate locations, 
with the flexibility 
needed to adapt to the 
changing requirements 
of the population. Urban 
planning must facilitate the 
deployment of common 
spaces that allow encounter, 
interaction and dialogue 
between different social-
ethnic groups. Moreover, 
physical urban structure 
facilitates communication 
between economic activities 
and residential areas, 
providing employment 
and services on a 
neighbourhood scale, with 
positive repercussions on 
productivity, infrastructure, 
equity, quality of life and 
the environment. Urban 
design strengthens and 

113 

use of public transport in combination with non-motorized 
modes and proper sidewalks. An integrated urban transport 
strategy generates immediate effects on productivity, including 
reductions in travel times. Improved transport systems come 
with environmental benefits such as better air quality due to 
reduced exhaust fumes. Accessibility for all potential users is 
essential to ensure equal mobility opportunities.

Plan infill development and guided expansion: Urban 

planning must combine both of these for the sake of proper 
density and provision of affordable urban land. Infill 
development can revitalize dilapidated areas in the city. In 
those developing countries where urbanization continues 
apace, new areas must be developed for the benefit of 
newcomers if further slum expansion is to be avoided. 
Properly planned spatial patterns can reduce pressure on 
land, provide for urban services and alleviate the burden 
over existing infrastructure. In addition, forward-looking 
planning can put a halt to land speculation while facilitating 
access to affordable housing and urban services. 

Promote Livable public spaces and vibrant streets: 

Public spaces and streets must be seen as multifunctional 
areas for social interaction, economic exchange and cultural 
expression among a wide diversity of participants. It is for 
planning to organize for those public spaces, and for design 
to encourage their use, in the process enhancing a sense of 
identity and belonging. Safety and security are important 
dimensions to be considered in any such design, together 
with vital underground infrastructure (water, energy and 
communications). 

Empowering Laws 
and Institutions for 
Urban Prosperity

The success of some of the cities as highlighted in 
this Report is based on specific combinations of laws, 
regulations, institutions and processes. In almost all cases, 

FACT As the proximate reflection of society’s values, and as 

an emanation of political and social relations, laws and 
institutions serve as the most powerful instrument available to 
shape urban development. 

advances along the five dimensions of prosperity are either 
accelerated or impeded by existing bodies of laws and 
regulations, the strength of enforcement, as well as by the 
configuration, capacity and flexibility of the institutions 
responsible for steering urban development. In recent years, 
there has been a resurgence of policy reviews and scholarly 
studies striving to address the normative and organizational 
underpinnings of urban change.

To paraphrase Amartya Sen’s dictum about nations 

and democracy, a city does not need to be deemed fit for a 
prosperity-oriented legal and institutional system; rather, 
it must become fit through such a system – which, again, is 
needed now, and for the city as a whole.47 

At a time when so many crisis-struck nations find that a 
fresh start on the path of prosperity depends more than ever 
on cities, these must mobilise their potential to the full.48 
More than ever, cities need empowering, not forbidding 
legal and institutional systems for their prosperity. Cities 
need such systems now − and they are at hand’s reach, 
if only public authorities found the political will (as this 
chapter will show, some do). The universal demand for 
justice, fairness and legitimacy transcends cultural barriers. 
Therefore, it can be met in a variety of ways through a 
variety of frameworks, as determined by local urban power 
functions. These form the hub that drives the ‘wheel of 
urban prosperity’, supplying the laws and regulations that 
support and shape the five ‘spokes’, adjusting them over 
time as conditions, needs and fresh risks may require. 
However, in all parts of the world, law and institutions have 
always been shaped by the complex interactions of socio-
cultural factors, with new forces constantly bringing their 
own influences to bear.49 

Business, academia, civil society – non-governmental 

POLICy Promoting 

and grassroots organisations, trade unions and professional 
associations, political 
parties, etc. − are all the 
legitimate expressions of 
the various forms which 
a city’s specific potential 
can take; and the needs to 
which these stakeholders 
give ‘voice’ relate to the 
preservation and further 
development of their 
respective potentials. 

prosperity 
involves deployment of 
proper laws, regulations 
and institutions 
which have a direct 
or indirect bearing on 
equity, productivity, 
infrastructures and living 
standards, and which 
extend across the length 
and breadth of the 
whole jurisdiction of the 
relevant urban authority. 

Urban power 

functions – governance, 
urban planning, legal and 

114 

State of the World’s Cities 2012/2013Innovating to Support the Transition to the City of the 21st Century

Table 3.2.1

Urban Planning/Design & Prosperity

Prosperity 
Dimensions

Urban Planning

Productivity

Harness the benefits of agglomeration economies 

Improve access to productive advantage (knowledge, quality of the environment, etc.)
Provide sufficient public space for circulation of goods and people and deploy adequate 
infrastructure.
Provide efficient transport systems for people and goods
Encourage polycentric urban development, allowing synergies between centres and  
sub-centres
Promote mixed-land use to enhance economies of agglomeration and scale with better 
clustering
Intensify urban nodes and corridors to maximize the benefits of concentration

Commons/Goods/
Sustainable Solutions

Commons

Commons
Public goods

Sustainable solutions

Infrastructure 
development

Provide clean infrastructure, closing ‘energy waste loops’ to preserve climate, air and water 
quality Improve connectivity. 
Expand multimodal transport systems with sidewalks and bicycle infrastructure 
Provide social Infrastructure such as civic centres, libraries, sports facilities, etc.)

Commons

Public goods

Ensure eco-efficiency of infrastructural systems 

Sustainable solutions

Support density through integrated infrastructure development, enhancing efficiency and access

Quality of life

Enhance identity and culture through symbolic spaces and heritage preservation

Commons

Equity 
and social 
inclusion 

Environmental 
sustainability

Improve safety and security 

Support place-making through urban design

Ensure high quality of public spaces that engage interaction among communities

Public goods

Promote a system of green spaces

Enhance the role of the street as a multi-functional urban space and integrate natural  
spaces and recreational areas

Sustainable solutions

Enhance freedom of movement
Provide well–located, adequate public infrastructure and amenities (incl. education,  
health, recreation, etc.)
Create mixed neighbourhoods with the diversity of jobs and housing options.
Plan infill development and guided expansions 
Promote mixed-used land development, ensuring involvement from marginalised groups. 
Improve connectivity between neighborhoods and access to services.
Turn land and development thereof into a revenue source.

Ensure clean air, unpolluted water and preservation of biodiversity. 
Act on climate change adaptation/mitigation 
Maximize the natural benefits of the site (sunlight, water bodies, winds, etc.) 
Plan for restoration of ecosystems
Enhance public parks, waterfront and ‘green’ areas for recreational and productive purposes 
Use “passive urban design” to reduce carbon emissions
Plan for urban density to reduce energy consumption and settlements footprint
Reduce fragmentation of natural systems; reduce spatial footprint through careful design of 
infrastructure networks and settlements.

Commons
Public Goods

Sustainable solutions

Commons

Public goods
Sustainable solutions

115 

framework, or any disconnect between the hub and the 
spokes, interferes with the operation of the ‘wheel’ and 
makes any existing momentum unsustainable (such as based 
on only one of the five dimensions).

THE LEGAL-INSTITUTIONAL BASIS OF THE  
20TH-CENTURy CITy
Advances in industrial development, consolidation of the 
market economy and the permeating influence of liberal 
democracy (both in its origin in the West and the post-
colonial variant in the developing world) have created a 
shared legal and regulatory foundation in much of the urban 
world. The legal, regulatory and institutional fundamentals 
of the contemporary city tend to be identical, differing only 
in levels of development, institutional characteristics and 
performance ability. Indeed, the legal-institutional basis of 
the 20th-century city is fairly uniform; and this explains the 
similarities not only in functional modalities but also in the 
all-too visible imbalances characterizing the 20th-century 
city in its generic sense (i.e., spatial segregation, social 
exclusion, a predominance of motorised mobility, high 

POLICy The crucial 

role of public 

FACT In the cities 

of the world 

authorities is to harness the 
various types of societal 
powers and potentials 
through appropriate urban 
power functions. 

today, the power to be 
mobilised against the crisis 
emanates from a variety of 
stakeholders, not just public 
authorities, although these 
retain a decisive role. 

regulatory frameworks and 
strong institutions – form 
the ‘hub’ that controls the 
‘wheel of urban prosperity’ 
and give it direction, 
pace and momentum 
(see Chapter 1.1). Shared 
prosperity requires the 
predominance of the public 
interest as embodied in 
public authorities50 to 
ensure that none of the five 
‘spokes’ gain prevalence to 
the detriment of the others. 
Abstract values and norms 
are institutions because 
they guide individual 
and collective action.51 
Box 3.2.2 shows how, in 
China and in Europe centuries ago, the State imposed the 
prevalence of the public over other interests and needs, 
treating them all equitably for the sake of shared prosperity. 
The powers and functions that are part of the governance 
structure of a city may derive from promulgated city charters, 
local government frameworks, or directly from the national 
Constitution. The rights and responsibilities granted to 
individuals and firms in cities are all dictated by prevailing 
legal frameworks. Similarly, the interactions among urban 
residents as well as the modalities of production, distribution 
and consumption of urban space have always been regulated 
by explicit and implicit codes of behaviour and practice. The 
transformative potential of any city has, therefore, always 
been a function of the enabling scope of its laws, regulations 
and institutions. The degree to which such instruments can 
be deployed as they are, or consolidated, or even reformed 
will determine a city’s degree of prosperity. 

In the metaphor of the ‘Prosperity Wheel’, the legal and 
institutional framework as a whole acts as the ‘hub’ which 

FACT Laws and the 

associated 
institutional set-up 
have determined the 
very genesis of the 
modern city, both in its 
essence as well as its 
functionality. 

steers the development 
of the five dimensions 
(‘spokes’) of prosperity, 
modulating momentum, 
relaying its energy to the 
other dimensions, and 
maintaining the overall 
balance of the ‘wheel’. 
Internal dysfunctions in 
the legal and institutional 

116 

Karnataka, Bangalore, India: A road sign hangs over the entrance 
to ‘Electronics City’, an industrial complex dedicated to the IT 
and electronics industries. Located ten miles (16km) outside 
Bangalore, the complex has been hugely successful in attracting 
foreign investment.

© Chris Stowers/Panos Pictures

State of the World’s Cities 2012/2013Box 3.2.3

Individual versus collective interests

The legal foundation of the 20th-century city lies in the 
ancient tenets of Roman Law and the Napoleonic Code, 
together with the subsequent elaboration into modern civil 
and common law. The gist of this legal corpus is the pre-
eminence of the individual, who is considered as possessed 
of inherent rights as represented in the 18th century French 
Revolution’s Declaration of the Rights of Man and the Citizen. 
Within this individualistic legal tradition, property rights reign 
supreme, with the emphasis on the rights of owners to the 
detriment of their social implications and other, broader, 
collective interests, including duties and responsibilities. With 
particular regard to urban settings, ‘land and property are 
conceived largely as commodities whose economic value is 
determined by the owners’ interests.’52 In this system, the 
role of the State at all levels is relegated to harmonizing and 
mediating these interests, and to oversee those assets and 
facilities that require collective use. 

energy consumption and poor regard for the potential for 
agglomeration economies. 

TOWARDS A NEW LEGAL-URBAN ORDER FOR 
HOLISTIC PROSPERITy
During the last two decades, the pitfalls of the conventional 
urban development model have become more glaring. As 
shown in the previous section (Urban Prosperity through 
Planning and Design) the potential of cities has not been 
fully harnessed, a more common trend has developed where 
urban development tends to be spatially fragmented and the 
benefits of prosperity remains socially segmented. 

In contrast, over the past two decades some Brazilian 

cities have taken to re-examining the prevailing urban 
legal order, with bold practical schemes inspired by a set 
of alternative, radical urban doctrines and jurisprudence 
which depart from the classical liberal legalism exalting 
individualism and private property. After a long period 

FACT those few 

cities featuring 

balanced and 
sustainable prosperity 
have effectively 
deployed adequate 
laws, regulations and 
institutions in support of 
their transformation.

of consultations and 
negotiations, a nationwide 
City Statute was adopted 
in 2001 enshrining a Right 
to the City. The Statute 
makes an important 
contribution to urban 
law, facilitating shared 
prosperity, particularly 
in the context of a 

Innovating to Support the Transition to the City of the 21st Century

FACT Although the 20th-century city tends to exhibit fair 

degrees of vibrancy and dynamism, whatever attendant 

prosperity it experiences is often skewed and unsustainable – and 
therefore ridden with perennial crises. 

developing country. The Statute also “broke with the 
long-standing tradition of civil law and set the basis of 
a new legal-political paradigm for urban land use and 
development control.”53 A prominent scholar highlights 
four dimensions of Brazil’s 2001 City Statute: “A 
conceptual one, providing elements for the interpretation 
of the constitutional principle of the social functions of 
urban property and of the city; the regulation of new 
instruments for the construction of a different urban order 
by the municipalities; the indication of processes for the 
democratic management of cities; and the identification 
of legal instruments for the comprehensive regularisation 
of informal settlements in private and public urban 
areas.”54 This new urban legal order has had highly 
visible effects. As a nation and at macro-economic level, 
Brazil is among a handful of countries in the world that 
has been able to achieve remarkable growth rates for 
much of the early years of this century, despite the global 
economic turbulence. More significantly, Brazilian cities 
have been able to expand the middle class segments of 
their populations and to improve economic and living 
conditions for substantial numbers of poor residents. 
Although still very high, cities are reducing income 
inequalities, as measured by the Gini coefficient, which 
decreased from 0.606 in 1990 to 0.569 in 2009.55 

REvITALIzED ‘RIGHTS TO THE COMMONS’ AND 
ExPANSION OF THE PUBLIC REALM
‘Commons’ reinforce the social function of property and 
that of the city as a whole, while recognizing the dynamism 
of private assets. Laws, regulations and institutions as 
factors of restraint, opportunity and action, act as the levers 
that can optimize the social 
function of property and 
balance it out with private 
rights and assets. It must 
be stressed here that this 
social function is not about 
ownership rights or their 
transactional implications. 
Rather, it is essentially 

prosperity 
is about enhancing the 
public realm, equitable 
sharing of public goods and 
consolidating rights to the 
commons for all. 

POLICy Shared urban 

117 

POLICy As cities work 

on the five 

dimensions of prosperity, 
there also occurs a 
progressive expansion in 
the size of the commons. 
More amenities are brought 
into collective use and more 
access is provided, enabling 
larger numbers of urban 
residents to use and enjoy 
shared spaces, services and 
facilities. 

FACT The capacity for 

a city to maintain 

extensive and quality 
shared spaces and facilities 
provides a good indication 
of its degree of prosperity. 

about user rights for 
enhanced human value.

The ‘Right to 

the Commons’ is an 
ancient concept in legal 
jurisprudence originating 
in feudal England, where 
it referred to the extension 
of user rights for all on 
a manor’s grazing land. 
Lately, the notion has 
resurfaced in urban settings 
(including public goods, 
societal institutional 
arrangements, public 
culture, and heritage sites), 
where it is perceived as an 
effective way of countering 
not just rampant enclosures 
and appropriations, but 
also the rise of duality 
under the form of inequity 
and segregation. 

In this respect, cities such as Helsinki, Toronto and 

Barcelona, which achieve high rankings on the UN-
Habitat City Prosperity Index (CPI), feature more 
extensive public realms than Monrovia, Nairobi or Dakar, 
or similar cities with low CPI readings. 

Legal and regulatory instruments exert a major 
bearing on the origination and preservation of the 
commons, and also in ensuring indiscriminate access. 
Statutes, ordinances and regulations are the bases for the 
guidelines and standards regulating spatial layouts and 
construction designs. The same applies to institutional 

FACT In this era of 

enclosures, 

privatization and even 
invasion of the traditional 
urban commons (including 
beaches, river banks, 
forests, school yards and 
even pavements), the size 
and quality of a city’s overall 
public space acts as a 
good indicator of shared 
prosperity. 

relationships, functional 
allocations and authority 
designation, besides 
resource distribution. The 
legal framework in turn 
enables civic organisations 
and community activities. 
Equally significant is the 
overall manner in which 
legal-regulatory and 
institutional frameworks 
delineate the public and 
private spheres and guide 
the interaction between 

and within them in the everyday workings of the city. 

One component of the commons that lately has 

attracted a lot of attention is the management of public 
spaces.56 In Panama City, one of the local experts surveyed 
by UN-Habitat put it as follows: “The more degraded 
public space, the more degraded the citizen, because public 
space is not only about quality of life but also the expression 
of citizenship”.57 Another local expert, in Santo Domingo, 
underscored the same point perhaps more incisively: 
“Citizens need to gain positive empowerment, to defend 
space enclaves where public life is still alive and where laws 
and norms for doing so are available.”58

REvISITING URBAN CODES FOR SHARED 
PROSPERITy
Rules and regulations constitute a key instrument in urban 
management and development. That is why appropriate 
institutions are required to ensure implementation 
and enforcement as well as awareness building and 
mobilization. Rules and regulations have significant roles 
to play, as they generally steer and circumscribe planning 
and construction. One author has even gone so far as to 
ascribe the ‘shaping and misshaping of American cities’ to 
poor planning regulations.59 Indeed, zoning regulations, 
building codes, utility standards, deed restrictions and 
the many other instruments that shape the urban built 
environment, will determine not only the pattern, use 
and form of spaces and structures, but will also strongly 
influence the quality of life in cities.

rules and 

POLICy Laws, 

The review of regulatory frameworks is of particular 
importance for those cities in the developing world that 
have long operated with 
externally derived standards 
and codes, who, must 
also tend to effective 
implementation and 
enforcement capacities. 
Revisiting the codes 
developed for formerly 
colonial or apartheid cities 
like Nairobi, Dar es Salaam 
or Johannesburg in a bid 
to achieve an inclusive 
urban form is a challenging 
endeavour. This calls not 
only major for institutional 
restructuring, but also a 
revision of zoning and 

institutions must 
be kept alert, not 
inert, to current and 
evolving needs and 
risks if a city’s whole 
human potential is 
to be harnessed, 
not repressed – 
empowering the whole 
population with “basic 
capabilities” or “generic 
conditions of agency” 
at the service of 
today’s and tomorrow’s 
prosperity. 

118 

State of the World’s Cities 2012/2013Innovating to Support the Transition to the City of the 21st Century

building codes to support urban reforms, not to mention 
squatter regulation and slum upgrading. On top of that, 
cities today must provide accommodative measures, allowing 
for progressive construction, smaller plot sizes and multiple 
variants of land tenure. Similarly, utility standards must be 
adjusted, and new development financing channels devised, 
in the face of inequity and exclusion. 

INSTITUTIONAL TRANSFORMATION
Some of the real-life experiences outlined in this chapter 
suggest that when it comes to structuring the urban power 
functions that form the hub of the ‘prosperity wheel’, it 
is for every city to make its own choices. Indeed, many 
choices have already been made; but common to all is the 
adaptation and consolidation of key institutions which 
harness the energy and engagement of all stakeholders in 
a city. Major stakeholders, such as business, professionals, 
civic organisations, besides neighbourhood associations, 
must be provided with an institutional avenue for effective 
engagement with urban prosperity – how it is generated 
and how it is shared. Such engagement transcends the 
traditional participatory practices of forums and consultative 

FACT As some cities have found out, shared prosperity involves 

a serious review of regulatory frameworks. 

POLICy As some cities have come to realise, shared and 

integrated prosperity is a socio-political project, 
involving a commitment by all stakeholders and entailing a 
re-examination of laws, regulations, and the corresponding 
institutional framework.

mechanisms; it turns socioeconomic conditions into levers 
of enhanced prosperity, with every household and business 
considered as an asset to be safeguarded, optimized and 
promoted – empowered – for the benefit of all

An exemplary case of institutional innovation for shared 

prosperity is that of Medellín. During the past decade, 
the Colombian city’s prosperity has experienced major 
turnaround, as it endeavoured to overcome the combined 
challenges of poverty, inequality, exclusion and informality, 
besides rampant violence, through a whole new social 

Box 3.2.4

Law, institutions and the public interest

Urban space is shaped by laws, rules and institutions (or lack 
thereof) in response to the needs and requirements of varying 
numbers of stakeholders. In this sense, the prosperity of a city 
is also a legal and institutional construct, and the past has some 
lessons for early 21st century central and municipal governments. 
Major legal systems around the world have long recognised that 
far from being just an abstract norm, law and institutions have the 
capacity to shape up a variety of interests across ethnic, cultural 
and other divides. They do so within the spatial confines of their 
jurisdictions, and with a long-term view.61

This is the background against which the state has historically 
emerged as the apex body of an interdependent network of 
powerful repositories of different kinds of power – legal, religious, 
bureaucratic, economic, etc.62 In this role, the state has gradually 
built a monopoly over universality. This went hand in hand with the 
constitution of bureaucratic functions independent of particular 
interests – family, religion, the economy – with agents that were 
mandated to embody the public interest. Along with this came the 
constitution of a new, “public” kind of resources that embodied 
universality, or at any rate a degree of universality that was superior 
to that of previously existing resources. This public realm gradually 
stood out against particular interests, and also against private 
appropriation of public functions through patronage or nepotism. 

119 

As the state evolved into “the geometric focal point of all 
perspectives” and a principle of public order, it established a 
unified space – imposing spatial over social, genealogical or other 
types of proximity. In the process, public authority has gained 
more recognition from the various segments of society, which 
further consolidates both its privileged position and its efficiency. 
As a result, the notion of “public interest” can pave the way for 
consensus and mobilization; at any rate, it sheds light on reality 
and becomes a shared evaluation criterion.

Historically, in China as in Europe, the city has served as the 
privileged locus of the emergence of the state and the public 
interest as we know them today. In 11th century Western 
Europe63, it fell to municipal authorities to control violence as 
well as economic and political relations. Although the poor were 
effectively left out of some functions, they were equal members 
of the assemblies in charge of endorsing municipal officials and 
laws (including those on economic activities). Moreover, purchase, 
sale and mortgaging of land and buildings were open to all. At the 
time, the protections and safeguards provided by cities also aimed 
at preserving their prosperity from heavy-handed monarchs or 
emperors.

POLICy Shared 

prosperity is 
not accidental, nor is it 
an automatic outcome of 
economic growth or market 
forces. It is a human, 
collective construct which 
requires vision, leadership 
and a coherent programme 
of action. 

FACT In Helsinki, the 

enabling potential 

of legal and regulatory 
instruments is used to build 
a dynamic institutional 
framework which enhances 
shared prosperity. 

by national, state and local government, including Greater 
Bangalore authority. The private-public partnership model 
seems to be the driving factor behind the city’s enhanced 
prosperity, together with a well-adapted regulatory 
framework for Information Technology Parks, an attractive 
environment for highly skilled labour, and facilitating the 
establishment of training and research institutions. 

dispensation. Conditions 
have been put in place for 
civic mobilisation, bringing 
together politicians, the 
private sector, professionals 
and communities, with the 
aim of building a future 
that benefits everyone. The 
collective energy behind 
this compact reconstructs 
the foundations of 
shared prosperity in all 
socioeconomic spheres. 
Helsinki, a city that 

features prominently in the 
UN-Habitat City Prosperity 
Index, has invested in 
human capital, promoted 
innovation and developed 
strong institutions, using a 
multi-prong approach to 
enhanced prosperity.60

Legal and institutional 

POLICy Shared and 

integrated 
prosperity in cities is 
about the reclaiming of a 
sense of community and 
sustainability through urban 
power functions. 

transformation for the 
sake of prosperity is not 
confined to the cities of the 
developed world. Despite 
the formidable challenges 
facing them, a number of 
Asian and African cities 
are taking significant steps, with some already achieving 
visibly higher degrees of prosperity. Cities such as Bangalore 
and Hyderabad, South Africa’s Gauteng urban region, 
Nairobi, Dakar and Dar es Salaam are all engaged in the 
pursuit of shared, sustainable prosperity through effective 
legal, regulatory and institutional frameworks. Bangalore 
clearly demonstrates the challenges of higher prosperity 
path against a developing country background; but the city 
benefits from strong institutional synergies, with investment 

A pedestrian footbridge at night in the modern city of 
Shenzhen, China.

© Fuyu Liu/Shutterstock.com

Endnotes

1 

2 

3 
4 
5 

Oyelaran-Oyeyinka, B. and P.G. Sampath (2010) Latecomer Development: Innovation 
and Knowledge for Economic Growth, Routledge, London and New York.
Kratke, S. (2011) The Creative Capital of Cities: Interactive Knowledge Creation and 
The Urbanization Economies of Innovation, Wiley-Blackwell ,Chichester 
Oyelaran-Oyeyinka, B. and P.G. Sampath (2010) op. cit.
Kratke, S. (2011) op. cit. 
Landry, C. (2000) The Creative City, Earthscan, London.

6 
7 
8 
9 

Landry, C. (2000) The Creative City, Earthscan, London.
Ibid.
Landry, C. (2000) op. cit.
‘Urbanization economies’ refer to the advantages gained from a specific urban 
location: proximity to markets, available labour force, communications, and auxiliary 
business services. 

120 

State of the World’s Cities 2012/2013Innovating to Support the Transition to the City of the 21st Century

10  Government of Singapore (2010) Singapore Budget 2010 - Towards an Advanced 

37  Buhigas, M. (2012), Efficient Urban Planning and Management, background paper for 

Economy: Superior Skills, Quality Jobs, Higher Incomes, http://www.mof.gov.sg/
budget_2010/speech_toc/pd.html.

‘State of the World Cities Report 2012/13’

38  Castellanos, G. (2011) City Report on Santo Domingo. Unpublished UN-Habitat 

11  Centre for Livable Cities (2011) City Report on Singapore, Unpublished UN-Habitat 

background study for “State of the World’s Cities Report 2012/2013”

background study for “State of the World’s Cities Report 2012/2013”

12  Belliapa, S.G. (2011) City Report on Bangalore, Unpublished UN-Habitat background 

study for “State of the World’s Cities Report 2012/2013”

13  Vejella, S. (2011) City Report on Hyderabad, Unpublished UN-Habitat background 

39  A highest percentage of respondents in all regions found that planning and 

management is the most important factor, while the majority of respondents in LAC 
opined that decentralization of policies and appropriate laws and regulation plays a 
more important role. 

study for “State of the World’s Cities Report 2012/2013”

40  ONU-HÁBITAT (2012) El estado de las ciudades de América Latina y el Caribe 2012, 

14  Jin, L. and Y. Liu (2011) City Report on Shenzhen, Unpublished UN-Habitat 

background study for “State of the World’s Cities Report 2012/2013”

15  The city’s GDP rose from 136.024 billion Yuan in 1997 to 789.424 billion Yuan 
in 2010. Even during the serious financial crisis of 2008 and 2009, Chongqing 
maintained a high growth rate of GDP of 14% [ Liu, Y. and Y. Wang (2011) City Report 
on Chongqing, Unpublished UN-Habitat background study for “State of the World’s 
Cities Report 2012/2013”]

16  Kurtul,P. F. (2011) City Report on Gaziantep, Unpublished UN-Habitat background 

study for “State of the World’s Cities Report 2012/2013”

17  World Bank (2012) World Bank Data:World Development Indicators & Global 
Development Finance, Online database last updated July 9 2012, http://data.
worldbank.org

18  SET-DEV (2011) Technological Responsibility:Guidelines for a shared governance 
of the processes of socialisation of scientific research and innovation, within an 
interconnected world, http://www.set-dev.eu/images/pdf/setdev-pg2110728?e6227e
3a1ee01ab67932453dd186b586=fe92758461b428418da8873e8a9fc566 
Ibid. 

19 
20  Jin, L. and Y. Liu (2011) op. cit.
21 

In ten years of reform and development, the total assets of state-owned enterprises 
increased from 160 billion Yuan to one trillion Yuan, nearly seven-fold increase [Liu, Y. 
and Y. Wang (2011) op. cit.]
 UN-Habitat (2010) State of the World’s Cities 2010/2011 : Cities for All: Bridging the 
Urban Divide, Earthscan, London

22 

23  UN-Habitat (2010) ‘Scaling New Heights: New Ideas in Urban Planning’, Urban World, 

Vol. 1, Issue, 4, October. Nairobi. 

24  James, P.A., K. Deiglmeier and D. T. Miller (2008) ‘Rediscovering Social Innovations’, 

Stanford Social Innovation Review, http://www.ssireview.org/articles/entry/
rediscovering_social_innovation/ 

25  Castells, M. (1996) The Information Age: Economy, Society and Culture – Volume 1 – 

The Rise of the Network Society, Blackwell, Oxford

26  James, P.A., K. Deiglmeier and D. T. Miller (2008) op. cit.
27  Soja, E. W. (2010), Seeking Spatial Justice, University of Minnesota Press, 

Minneapolis

ONU-HÁBITAT ,Rio de Janeiro (to be published) 

41  Earth Right Institute (2011), Land Rights and Land Value Capture, http://www.

earthrights.net/docs/long_form_brochure_lrlvc.html; UN-Habitat (2008), Municipal 
financing and urban development, UN-Habitat , Nairobi

42  Mendoza, I. R. (2011) City Report on Panama City, Unpublished UN-Habitat 

background study for “State of the World’s Cities Report 2012/2013”

43  The notion of fixed social capital, which encompasses all assets of society that are 
not mobile (or soft) but are solid and owned by the public is equivalent to the ‘public 
goods’ mentioned in this chapter. 

44  UNIDO (2008) Public Goods for Economic Development, UNIDO, Vienna, http://www.

unido.org/fileadmin/user_media/Publications/documents/Public%20goods%20
for%20economic%20development_sale.pdf

45  The CLEAR Network (2006), Urban Planning and Smart Growth, http://www.clear.

london.ca/Urban_Planning.html 

46  Kimmelman, M. (2012), ‘A City Rises, Along With Its Hopes’, New York Times, May 18, 

http://www.nytimes.com/2012/05/20/arts/design/fighting-crime-with-architecture-
in-medellin-colombia.html?_r=1&pagewanted=all. 

47  Sen, A. K., (1999) ‘Democracy as a universal Value’, Journal of Democracy , vol 10 

48 

(3), Washington, DC, pp. 3-17
‘Cities have always been exposed to brutal economic pressures from overseas; 
the nation state has always, to a greater or smaller extent, tried to cushion these 
pressures.’ [Pierre, J. (2011) The Politics of Urban Governance Palgrave Macmillan, 
Basingstoke]

49  Menski, W. (2006) Comparative Law in a Global Context: The Legal Systems of Asia 

50 

and Africa, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
‘It could well be argued that the growing significance of non-elected actors in 
urban politics in many countries only increases the need for political control and 
accountability.’ [Pierre, J. (2011) op.cit.]

51  Pierre, J. (2011) op.cit.
52  Fernandes, E. and M.M.M. Copello (2009) ‘Law and Land Policy in Latin America: 

Shifting Paradigms and Possibilities for Action’, Land Lines, Lincoln Institute of Land 
Policy, Cambridge, MA

53  Fernandes, E. (2007a)’ Implementing the urban reform agenda in Brazil’, Environment 

28  Cohen, M.(2012), Reinventing the Future: Designing Urban 3.0, unpublished proposal 

& Urbanization Vol 19(1), pp. 177–189

for UN-Habitat Habitat 3 Summit. 

29  Clos, J. (2012) Urbanization Challenges of the 21st Century, Unpublished document, 

UN-Habitat, Nairobi

30  Belliapa, S.G. (2011) City Report on Bangalore. Unpublished UN-Habitat background 

study for “State of the World’s Cities Report 2012/2013” 

31  Flyvbjerg, B. (1996) ‘The Dark Side of Planning: Rationality and Realrationalität,’ in 

54  Fernandes, E. (2007b) “Constructing the `Right to the City’ in Brazil”, Social & Legal 

Studies, Vol. 16(2), pp. 201-219; 
 UN-Habitat database (2012). 

55 
56  See, for instance, Gehl, J. (2010) Cities for People, Island Press, Washington DC.
57  Mendoza, I. R. (2011) City Report on Panama City, Unpublished UN-Habitat 

background study for “State of the World’s Cities Report 2012/2013”

Seymour, M., Mazza ,L., and R. Burchell (eds.), Explorations in Planning Theory , 
Center for Urban Policy Research Press, New Brunswick, NJ. pp. 383-394.

58  Castellanos, G. (2011) City Report on Santo Domingo, Unpublished UN-Habitat 

background study for “State of the World’s Cities Report 2012/2013”

32  Viana, I. (2011) City Report on Montevideo, Unpublished UN-Habitat background 

59  Talen, E. (2012) City Rules: How Regulations Affect Urban Form, Island Press, 

study for “State of the World’s Cities Report 2012/2013”

Washington DC.

33  López, E. M. (2011), New Urban Planning: Going Back to Basics, Unpublished 

60  Karvinen, M. (2005) Innovation and creativity strategies in Helsinki Metropolitan Area 

document, UN-Habitat, Nairobi 

34  Kothari, M. and S. Chaudhry (2009), Taking the right to the city forward: Obstacles 

– reinvention of regional governance, proceedings of the 41st ISoCaRP Congress 
2005, Bilbao, Spain

and promise, background paper for ‘State of the World Cities Report 2010/11’

61  Berman, Harold. J. (1983) Law and Revolution: The formation of the Western Legal 

35  Briney, A. (2009) New Urbanism is Taking Planning to a New Level, http://geography.

about.com/od/urbaneconomicgeography/a/newurbanism.htm

Tradition, vol. 1, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press; Menski (2006) op.cit.
62  Bourdieu, P. (2012) Sur l’Etat – Cours au Collège de France 1989-1992, Raisons 

36  Clos, J. (2012) op.cit. This ‘global standardization process’ is also referred by 

professionals like David Mangin (Mangin, D. (2004) La Ville franchisée: Formes et 
structures de la ville contemporaine, Editions de la Villette, Paris 

d’Agir/Seuil, Paris

63  Berman (1983) op. cit.; Sassen, S. (2006) Territory, Authority, Rights: From Medieval 

to Global Assemblages, Princeton University Press, Princeton

121 

Statistical 

Annex

GENERAL DISCLAIMER
The designations employed and presentation of the data in the Statistical Annex do not imply 
the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Secretariat of the United Nations 
concerning the legal status of any country, city or area of its authorities, or concerning the 
delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.

Table 1: City Prosperity Index and components

Table 2: Proportion of urban population living in slums and urban slum population, by country 1990-2009

Table 3:  Urban population, proportion of urban population living in slum area and urban slum population, by region,  

1990-2012

Table 4:  City population and city population growth rate of urban agglomerations with 750,000 Inhabitants or More in 2009, 

by Country, 1950-2025 (thousands)

Table 5: Urban Population and Urbanization by Country, 1990-2030

Table 1

City Prosperity Index and components

Country

Austria

United States

Canada
United Kingdom
Sweden
Finland
Ireland
Norway
France
Japan
Australia
New Zealand
Netherlands
Switzerland
Denmark
Belgium
Spain
Italy
Poland
Portugal
Hungary
Greece
Czech Republic
Republic of Korea
Russia
Brazil

City

Vienna

New York

Toronto
London
Stockholm
Helsinki
Dublin
Oslo
Paris
Tokyo
Melbourne
Auckland
Amsterdam
Zurich
Copenhagen
Brussels
Barcelona
Milan
Warsaw
Lisbon
Budapest
Athens
Prague
Seoul
Moscow
São Paulo

City 

Prosperity 
Index (CPI) 

with 5 

City 

Prosperity 
Index (CPI) 

with 4 

Productivity 

Dimensions

Dimensions*

Index

Quality of  
life Index

Infrastructure 

Enivronment 

Index

Index

Equity  
Index

0.925

0.825

0.890
0.904
0.898
0.924
0.913
0.924
0.897
0.905
0.903
0.862
0.895
0.884
0.913
0.883
0.876
0.870
0.883
0.853
0.881
0.862
0.871
0.861
0.793
0.757

0.939

0.940

0.874
0.923
0.896
0.890
0.901
0.870
0.895
0.850
0.867
0.854
0.866
0.868
0.855
0.862
0.829
0.868
0.846
0.827
0.808
0.800
0.855
0.801
0.806
0.742

0.936

0.934

0.934
0.934
0.934
0.933
0.929
0.929
0.927
0.925
0.925
0.922
0.915
0.914
0.911
0.910
0.909
0.908
0.901
0.899
0.894
0.889
0.882
0.876
0.870
0.836

122 

0.882

0.866

0.907
0.898
0.925
0.905
0.867
0.914
0.925
0.931
0.875
0.889
0.872
0.858
0.871
0.864
0.912
0.895
0.864
0.867
0.867
0.885
0.771
0.903
0.813
0.803

0.996

0.994

0.997
0.997
0.995
0.997
0.996
0.997
0.996
0.989
0.996
0.994
0.995
0.997
0.997
0.997
0.995
0.997
0.990
0.995
0.990
0.996
0.992
0.989
0.960
0.918

0.932

0.941

0.963
0.920
0.921
0.944
0.958
0.939
0.895
0.936
0.967
0.958
0.933
0.941
0.928
0.922
0.908
0.876
0.911
0.916
0.921
0.884
0.926
0.822
0.908
0.894

0.883

0.502

0.733
0.793
0.767
0.890
0.850
0.903
0.788
0.828
0.820
0.657
0.818
0.772
0.922
0.783
0.755
0.733
0.817
0.692
0.833
0.762
0.827
0.807
0.550
0.507

Statistical Annex

Table 1

City Prosperity Index and components

City 

Prosperity 
Index (CPI) 

with 5 

City 

Prosperity 
Index (CPI) 

with 4 

Productivity 

Country

City

Dimensions

Dimensions*

Index

Quality of  
life Index

Infrastructure 

Enivronment 

Index

Index

Equity  
Index

Kazakhstan
China
Romania
Mexico
Turkey
Jordan
Thailand 
Ukraine
Viet Nam
Armenia
China
South Africa
Indonesia
South Africa
Philippines
Egypt
Morocco
Honduras
Moldova
India
Kenya
Cambodia
Mongolia
Guatemala
Cameroon
India
Côte d’Ivoire
Nepal
Bangladesh
Uganda
Nigeria
Ghana
Bolivia
Ethiopia
Senegal
Zimbabwe
United Republic of Tanzania
Zambia
Niger
Mali
Madagascar
Guinea
Liberia

Almaty
Shanghai
Bucharest
Mexico City
Ankara
Amman
Bangkok
Kyïv
Hà Noi
Yerevan
Beijing
Cape Town
Jakarta
Johannesburg
Manila
Cairo
Casablanca
Tegucigalapa
Chisinau
Mumbai 
Nairobi
Phnom Penh
Ulaanbaatar
Guatemala City
Yaoundé 
New Delhi
Abidjan
Kathmundu
Dhaka
Kampala
Lagos
Accra
La Paz
Addis Ababa
Dakar
Harare
Dar es Salaam
Lusaka
Niamey
Bamako
Antananarivo
Conakry
Monrovia

0.830
0.826
0.836
0.709
0.780
0.771
0.733
0.798
0.756
0.779
0.799
0.590
0.769
0.479
0.723
0.722
0.647
0.652
0.698
0.694
0.593
0.677
0.675
0.614
0.618
0.635
0.578
0.598
0.633
0.581
0.496
0.560
0.551
0.501
0.581
0.493
0.571
0.434
0.482
0.491
0.465
0.449
0.313

0.833
0.832
0.821
0.816
0.806
0.796
0.794
0.781
0.776
0.769
0.762
0.758
0.743
0.742
0.737
0.730
0.700
0.694
0.693
0.688
0.673
0.666
0.664
0.646
0.623
0.617
0.599
0.594
0.593
0.590
0.582
0.576
0.565
0.564
0.552
0.542
0.530
0.507
0.456
0.452
0.446
0.416
0.285

0.751
0.671
0.707
0.743
0.699
0.697
0.719
0.579
0.712
0.635
0.667
0.628
0.636
0.654
0.676
0.679
0.634
0.541
0.340
0.645
0.481
0.544
0.493
0.440
0.492
0.596
0.452
0.385
0.545
0.512
0.475
0.347
0.363
0.503
0.510
0.246
0.427
0.316
0.402
0.401
0.171
0.133
0.048

0.822
0.836
0.767
0.764
0.802
0.790
0.747
0.757
0.761
0.850
0.836
0.645
0.733
0.645
0.647
0.743
0.513
0.729
0.850
0.739
0.559
0.613
0.777
0.556
0.555
0.690
0.440
0.621
0.539
0.486
0.634
0.592
0.621
0.534
0.384
0.451
0.371
0.463
0.426
0.416
0.558
0.461
0.381

0.872
0.900
0.968
0.900
0.842
0.887
0.871
0.968
0.912
0.870
0.911
0.933
0.741
0.880
0.775
0.916
0.827
0.709
0.895
0.745
0.860
0.728
0.632
0.823
0.666
0.786
0.767
0.740
0.673
0.507
0.576
0.737
0.745
0.521
0.794
0.899
0.607
0.590
0.485
0.544
0.511
0.607
0.411

0.897
0.950
0.867
0.866
0.891
0.824
0.850
0.874
0.733
0.745
0.663
0.875
0.881
0.816
0.868
0.616
0.891
0.829
0.894
0.632
0.889
0.809
0.804
0.866
0.827
0.448
0.842
0.704
0.627
0.956
0.659
0.728
0.606
0.724
0.596
0.864
0.822
0.766
0.521
0.460
0.812
0.809
0.886

0.818
0.800
0.900
0.405
0.683
0.680
0.533
0.873
0.683
0.817
0.967
0.217
0.885
0.083
0.669
0.692
0.472
0.510
0.717
0.715
0.357
0.722
0.722
0.502
0.600
0.712
0.500
0.617
0.817
0.550
0.262
0.500
0.502
0.313
0.712
0.338
0.767
0.233
0.602
0.683
0.552
0.612
0.457

* The CPI with 4 dimensions does not include the equity index
Source: United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat), Global Urban Indicators Database 2012.

123 

Table 2

Proportion of urban population living in slums and urban slum population, by country 1990-2009

Proprotion of urban population living in slum areaa

Region and Country (thousands) 

Urban Slum Population at Mid-year by Major Area,  

1990

1995

2000

2005

2007

2009

1990

1995

2000

2005

2007

2009

Major area, region,  
country or area
AfricA 
Angola
Benin
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros
Congo
Côte d’Ivoire
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Egypt
Equatorial Guinea
Ethiopia
Gabon
Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Morocco
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
Senegal
Sierra Leone
Somalia
South Africa
Togo
Uganda
United Republic of Tanzania
Zambia
Zimbabwe
ASIA
China
Mongolia
Bangladesh

 
79.3
78.8
 
50.8
87.5
98.9
65.4
 
53.4
 
50.2
 
95.5
 
 
65.5
80.4
 
54.9
 

93.0
66.4
94.2
37.4
75.6
34.4
83.6
77.3
96.0
70.6
 
 
46.2
 
75.0
77.4
57.0
4.0

43.6
68.5
87.3

 
76.8
72.4
 
49.6
89.7
96.4
65.4
 
54.3
 
39.2
 
95.5
 
 
58.8
68.8
 
54.8
 

88.6
66.4
84.8
35.2
76.9
34.1
83.1
73.5
87.9
59.8
 
 
39.7
 
75.0
73.7
57.1
3.7

40.5
66.7
84.7

 
74.3
65.9
 
48.4
91.9
93.9
65.4
 
55.3
 
28.1
 
88.6
 
 
52.1
57.3
 
54.8
 

84.1
66.4
75.4
24.2
78.2
33.9
82.6
69.6
79.7
48.9
 
 
33.2
 
75.0
70.1
57.2
3.3

37.3
64.9
77.8

86.5
71.8
59.5
64.3
47.4
94.1
91.3
68.9
53.4
56.2
76.4
17.1
66.3
81.8
38.7
45.4
45.4
45.7
83.1
54.8
35.1

80.6
66.4
65.9
13.1
79.5
33.9
82.1
65.8
71.6
43.3
97.0
73.5
28.7
62.1
66.7
66.4
57.2
17.9

32.9
57.9
70.8

65.8
69.8

 
46.1
95.9
89.3

49.9
57.0
61.7
17.1
 
76.4
 

40.1

 
54.7
53.7
68.3
76.2
68.9
65.9
13.1
80.5
33.5
81.7
62.7
65.1
38.8
 
73.6
23.0
 
60.1
63.5
57.3
24.1

29.1
 
61.6

76.2
70.8
59.5
64.3
46.6
95.0
90.3
68.9
51.7
56.6
69.1
17.1
 
79.1
 
34.8
42.8
45.7
 
54.8
44.4

78.0
67.7
65.9
13.1
80.0
33.6
81.9
64.2
68.3
41.1
 
73.6
23.0
 
63.4
65.0
57.3
21.0

31.0
57.9
66.2

124 

1,311
960

2,532
943
1,257
80

1,616
1,109

3,160
1,113
1,507
91

1,897
1,374

3,826
1,296
1,844
101

2,674

3,366

4,158

12,607

10,704

8,447

5,819

7,562

8,653

3,571
1,385

4,070
1,517

4,473
1,490

2,343

2,859

3,400

2,470
725
1,902
4,490
2,161
135
1,016
26,549
372
2,071

2,997
893
2,066
4,904
3,216
165
1,219
31,538
397
2,051

3,486
1,192
2,247
3,713
4,381
200
1,475
36,951
874
1,955

8,834

8,950

8,475

1,833
4,539
1,930
138

2,214
5,335
2,083
140

1,473
3,719
1,778
121

13,1670
866
19,999

7,756
2,260
1,762
452
4,585
1,470
2,312
119
1,098
5,066
14,491
5,677
157
9,729
443
373
4,755
1,390
362
4,069
163

4,046
1,572
2,496
2,205
5,714
239
1,787
42,783
1,129
2,010
1,824
2,161
8,179
1,486
2,403
6,271
2,350
801

878
27,831

7,466
2,423
2,029
508
4,870
1,551
2,509
124
1,119
5,496
14,375
5,903

7,019
2,595

5,188
1,642
2,714

1,134
5,979
14,079
6,143

10,067

10,427

313
4,817
1,489

4,396
223

4,225
1,786
2,743
2,308
6,311
254
1,944
45,195
1,165
2,030

2,316
6,814

2,487
6,713
2,483
963

4,848

4,762
290
1,282
4,460
2,027
3,009
2,416
6,940
272
2,121
47,612
1,208
2,048

2,486
7,055

2,578
7,200
2,633
1,141

180,560

27,542

151,437 169,102 183,544 182,934
915
27,770

882
25,819

860
23,535

State of the World’s Cities 2012/2013Statistical Annex

Table 2

Proportion of urban population living in slums and urban slum population, by country 1990-2009

Major area, region,  
country or area

Proprotion of urban population living in slum areaa

Region and Country (thousands) 

Urban Slum Population at Mid-year by Major Area,  

1990

1995

2000

2005

2007

2009

1990

1995

2000

2005

2007

2009

121,022
1,194
18,054

122,231 119,698 112,913 109,102
2,850
28,529

2,100
23,890

1,585
20,688

54.9
70.6
51.0
 
50.8
 
 
54.3
 
60.5
16.9
 
 
 
 
23.4
 

India
Nepal
Pakistan
Cambodia
Indonesia
Lao People’s Democratic Republic
Myanmar
Philippines
Thailand
Viet Nam
Iraq
Jordan
Lebanon
Saudi Arabia
Syrian Arab Republic
Turkey
Yemen
LATIn AmERICA AnD THE CARIBBEAn 
Argentina
Belize
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Costa Rica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador
French Guiana
Grenada
Guadeloupe
Guatemala
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
Saint Lucia
Suriname
Trinidad and Tobago
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)

30.5
 
62.2
36.7
 
31.2
 
27.9
 
 
 
 
 
58.6
 
93.4
 

23.1
89.1
 
 
66.4
 
 
 
 

48.2
67.3
49.8
 
42.6
 
 
50.8
 
54.6
16.9
 
 
 
 
20.7
 

31.7
 
58.2
34.1
 
26.8
 
24.4
 
 
 
 
 
53.3
 
93.4
 

21.5
74.5
 
 
56.3
 
 
 
 

41.5
64.0
48.7
 
34.4
 
 
47.2
 
48.8
16.9
 
 
 
 
17.9
 

32.9
 
54.3
31.5
 
22.3
 
21.0
 
 
 
 
 
48.1
 
93.4
 

19.9
60.0
 
 
46.2
 
 
 
 

34.8
60.7
47.5
78.9
26.3
79.3
45.6
43.7
26.0
41.3
52.8
15.8
53.1
18.0
10.5
15.5
67.2

26.2
 
50.4
29.0
9.0
17.9
10.9
17.6
21.5
28.9
10.5
6.0
5.4
42.9
33.7
70.1
34.9
60.5
14.4
45.5
23.0
17.6
36.1
11.9
3.9
24.7
32.0

32.1
59.4
47.0
 
23.0
 
 
42.3
26.5
38.3
52.8
17.7
 
 
22.5
14.1
76.8

23.5
18.7
48.8
28.0
 
16.1
 
16.2
 
 
 
 
 
40.8
33.5
70.1
 

14.4
45.5
 
 
36.1
 
 
 
 

29.4
58.1
46.6
 
23.0
 
 
40.9
27.0
35.2
52.8
19.6
 
 

13.0
 

20.8
 
47.3
26.9
 
14.3
 
14.8
 
 
 
 
 
38.7
33.2
70.1
 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 

Notes: (a) Computed from country household data using the four components of slum (improved water, improwed sanitation, durable housing and sufficient living area.
Source: United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat), Global Urban Indicators Database 2012.

125 

104,679
3,075
29,965

22,456

23,255

18,134
5,841
9,396
10,361
824

2,516
7,022
5,140

8,521
28
3,030
45,309

18,302
6,146
9,224
10,759
971

6,728

7,737

3,080
44,947

5,306

4,899

1,067

1,024

2,619
73
3,230

2,660
72
3,557

11,906
1,437

7,801

27,559

29,017

29,691

16,479

17,158

17,613

8,118
2,131

8,852
2,439

9,395
2,828

7,773

7,859

7,714

2,630
27,158
2,052
24,777
1,277
6,701
17,972
5,539
9,491
9,974
689
1,877
3,442
1,080
7,422
4,088

8,622

9,772

10,953

9,274

2,305
40,527

2,590
42,789

2,794
44,604

7,077

6,884

6,404

1,135

1,143

1,145

2,146

2,301

2,438

1,893

2,393

2,876

13,760
1,929

14,457
1,860

14,800
1,676

9,964

9,566

8,776

2,972
45,428
1,285
5,670
291
1,100
1,786
1,079
16
2
24
2,572
73
2,908
1,170
840
11,574
1,388
526
608
7,540
5
13
40
7,861

Table 3

Urban population, proportion of urban population living in slum area and urban slum population, by region, 1990-2012

Urban Population at Mid-year by Major Area, Region (thousands)a

Major region or area

Developing Regions
Northern Africa
Sub-Saharan Africa 
Latin America and the Caribbean
Eastern Asia
Southern Asia
South-eastern Asia
Western Asia
Oceania

1990

1,406,473
58,552
146,640
311,042
352,808
317,857
138,996
79,005
1,572

1995

1,658,909
66,491
181,532
352,267
429,924
369,356
165,445
92,146
1,748

2000

1,930,248
73,996
220,535
393,420
512,043
424,294
197,360
106,691
1,908

2005

2,228,145
82,209
266,848
432,646
619,535
481,719
220,814
122,294
2,080

2007

2,341,589
85,843
287,548
447,430
652,715
506,248
230,851
128,796
2,158

2010

2,514,583
91,590
321,300
468,757
699,813
545,479
246,701
138,654
2,289

2012

2,634,197
95,602
345,564
482,496
731,647
573,698
257,677
145,126
2,387

Proportion of urban population (per cent) 

Major region or area

1990

1995

2000

2005

2007

2010

2012

Developing Regions
Northern Africa
Sub-Saharan Africa 
Latin America and the Caribbean
Eastern Asia
Southern Asia
South-eastern Asia
Western Asia
Oceaniac

34.5
48.5
28.3
70.3
29.1
26.5
31.6
60.5
24.4

37.2
50.0
30.6
73.0
33.4
27.7
34.5
62.1
24.1

39.9
51.2
32.7
75.5
38.0
29.0
38.2
63.7
23.5

42.7
52.4
34.9
77.7
44.5
30.2
39.9
65.2
23.0

43.7
53.0
35.8
78.5
46.3
30.8
40.6
65.7
22.9

45.0
54.0
37.2
79.6
48.7
31.7
41.8
66.6
22.8

45.9
54.6
38.2
80.3
50.3
32.4
42.7
67.1
22.9

Notes: (a) United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs Population Division - World Urbanization Prospects: The 2009 Revision
(b) Population living in household that lack either improved water, improved sanitation, sufficient living area (more than three persons per room), or durable housing
(c) Trends data are not available for Oceania. A constant figure does not mean there is no change 
Source: United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat), Global Urban Indicators Database 2012.

126 

State of the World’s Cities 2012/2013Statistical Annex

Major region or area

Developing Regions
Northern Africa
Sub-Saharan Africa 
Latin America and the Caribbean
Eastern Asia
Southern Asia
South-eastern Asia
Western Asia
Oceania

1990

650,444
20,126
102,641
104,794
154,175
181,667
68,852
17,810
379

Urban Slum Population at Mid-year by Region (thousands)b

1995

711,832
18,798
122,635
110,871
174,363
190,758
74,049
19,936
421

2000

759,915
15,054
143,255
114,993
191,563
194,364
78,246
21,980
460

2005

793,723
10,984
168,005
110,129
204,253
192,842
75,443
31,565
501

2007

803,280
11,463
179,538
110,412
202,809
192,325
73,744
32,470
520

2010

819,969
12,226
198,168
110,194
197,529
190,647
76,540
34,112
552

2012

862,569
12,762
213,134
113,424
206,515
200,510
79,945
35,704
575

Proportion of urban population living in slum (per cent)

Major region or area

1990

1995

2000

2005

2007

2010

2012

Developing Regions
Northern Africa
Sub-Saharan Africa 
Latin America and the Caribbean
Eastern Asia
Southern Asia
South-eastern Asia
Western Asia
Oceaniac

46.2
34.4
70.0
33.7
43.7
57.2
49.5
22.5
24.1

42.9
28.3
67.6
31.5
40.6
51.6
44.8
21.6
24.1

39.4
20.3
65.0
29.2
37.4
45.8
39.6
20.6
24.1

35.6
13.4
63.0
25.5
33.0
40.0
34.2
25.8
24.1

34.3
13.4
62.4
24.7
31.1
38.0
31.9
25.2
24.1

32.6
13.3
61.7
23.5
28.2
35.0
31.0
24.6
24.1

32.7
13.3
61.7
23.5
28.2
35.0
31.0
24.6
24.1

Notes: (a) United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs Population Division - World Urbanization Prospects: The 2009 Revision
(b) Population living in household that lack either improved water, improved sanitation, sufficient living area (more than three persons per room), or durable housing
(c) Trends data are not available for Oceania. A constant figure does not mean there is no change 
Source: United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat), Global Urban Indicators Database 2012.

127 

Table 4

City population and city population growth rate of urban agglomerations with 750,000 Inhabitants or More in 2009,  
by Country, 1950-2025 (thousands)

City Population of  

Urban Agglomerations (’000)

City Population Growth Rate of  

 Urban Agglomerations (%)

Country/City

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

2020

2025

1990-
1995

1995-
2000

2000-
2005

2005-
2010

2010-
2015

2015-
2020

2020-
2025

AFgHAnISTAn
Kabul
ALgERIA
El Djazaïr (Algiers)
Wahran (Oran)
AngOLA
Huambo
Luanda
ARgEnTInA
Buenos Aires
Córdoba
Mendoza
Rosario
San Miguel de Tucumán
ARmEnIA
Yerevan
AUSTRALIA
Adelaide
Brisbane
Melbourne
Perth
Sydney
Wien (Vienna)
AzERBAIjAn
Baku
BAngLADESH
Chittagong
Dhaka
Khulna
Rajshahi
BELARUS
Minsk
BELgIUm
Antwerpen
Bruxelles-Brussel
BEnIn
Cotonou
BOLIvIA
La Paz
Santa Cruz

1,282

1,616

1,963

2,994

3,731

4,616

5,665

6,888

4.63

3.90

8.44

4.41

4.26

4.09

3.91

1,815
647

2,023
675

2,254
705

2,512
736

2,800
770

3,099
827

3,371
902

3,595
970

326
1,568

444
1,953

578
2,591

775
3,533

1,034
4,772

1,305
6,013

1,551
7,080

1,789
8,077

10,513 11,154 11,847 12,551 13,074 13,401 13,606 13,708
1,638
1,200
1,016
759
1,084
1,354
924
611

1,601
990
1,322
899

1,493
917
1,231
831

1,552
956
1,280
868

1,348
838
1,152
722

1,423
876
1,186
781

1,275
802
1,121
666

2.17
0.86

6.17
4.39

1.18
1.21
1.11
0.68
1.71

2.17
0.86

5.25
5.66

1.21
1.11
0.88
0.55
1.63

2.17
0.86

5.87
6.20

1.15
1.09
0.88
0.58
1.58

2.17
0.90

5.78
6.01

0.82
0.96
0.91
0.75
1.23

2.03
1.43

4.64
4.62

0.49
0.78
0.84
0.78
0.89

1.68
1.73

3.46
3.27

0.30
0.61
0.68
0.64
0.70

1.29
1.47

2.85
2.63

0.15
0.46
0.53
0.48
0.54

1,175

1,142

1,111

1,104

1,112

1,120

1,132

1,143

-0.55

-0.55

-0.14

0.14

0.15

0.22

0.18

1,046
1,329
3,117
1,160
3,632
1,539

1,074
1,471
3,257
1,273
3,839
1,544

1,102
1,603
3,433
1,373
4,078
1,549

1,133
1,780
3,641
1,484
4,260
1,642

1,168
1,970
3,853
1,599
4,429
1,706

1,214
2,096
4,022
1,687
4,592
1,753

1,263
2,178
4,152
1,753
4,733
1,779

1,307
2,245
4,261
1,810
4,852
1,801

0.53
2.04
0.88
1.87
1.11
0.06

0.51
1.71
1.05
1.51
1.21
0.07

0.55
2.10
1.17
1.56
0.87
1.17

0.61
2.03
1.13
1.49
0.78
0.76

0.78
1.24
0.86
1.07
0.72
0.55

0.79
0.76
0.64
0.77
0.61
0.30

0.68
0.61
0.51
0.64
0.50
0.25

1,733

1,766

1,806

1,867

1,972

2,082

2,190

2,291

0.37

0.45

0.67

1.09

1.08

1.01

0.90

2,023
6,621
985
521

3,308

4,180

4,962

5,680

2,578
7,265
8,332 10,285 12,555 14,648 16,623 18,721 20,936
1,133
2,511
1,328
606

2,211
1,164

1,933
1,013

1,682
878

1,464
764

1,285
678

6,447

4.85
4.60
2.79
3.02

4.99
4.21
2.53
2.27

4.68
3.99
2.60
2.39

3.43
3.08
2.79
2.77

2.70
2.53
2.78
2.86

2.53
2.38
2.69
2.78

2.39
2.24
2.54
2.63

1,607

1,649

1,700

1,775

1,852

1,905

1,917

1,917

0.52

0.61

0.85

0.86

0.56

0.12

0.01

893
1,680

906
1,715

925
1,776

945
1,840

965
1,904

979
1,941

984
1,948

985
1,948

0.28
0.41

0.43
0.70

0.43
0.70

0.42
0.69

0.28
0.39

0.10
0.07

0.02
0.00

504

577

642

720

844

1,016

1,217

1,445

2.73

2.13

2.28

3.19

3.69

3.62

3.44

1,062
616

1,267
833

1,390
1,054

1,524
1,325

1,673
1,649

1,840
1,916

2,005
2,103

2,156
2,261

3.53
6.04

1.85
4.69

1.85
4.59

1.87
4.37

1.90
3.01

1.72
1.86

1.45
1.45

128 

State of the World’s Cities 2012/2013Statistical Annex

Table 4

City population and city population growth rate of urban agglomerations with 750,000 Inhabitants or More in 2009,  
by Country, 1950-2025 (thousands)

City Population of  

Urban Agglomerations (’000)

City Population Growth Rate of  

 Urban Agglomerations (%)

Country/City

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

2020

2025

1990-
1995

1995-
2000

2000-
2005

2005-
2010

2010-
2015

2015-
2020

2020-
2025

BRAzIL
Aracaju
Baixada Santista
Belém
Belo Horizonte
Brasília
Campinas
Cuiabá
Curitiba
Florianópolis
Fortaleza
Goiânia
Grande São Luís
Grande Vitória
João Pessoa
Londrina
Maceió
Manaus
Natal
Norte/Nordeste Catarinense
Pôrto Alegre
Recife
Rio de Janeiro
Salvador
São Paulo
Teresina
BULgARIA
Sofia
BURkInA FASO
Ouagadougou
CAmBODIA
Phnum Pénh (Phnom Penh)
CAmEROOn
Douala
Yaoundé
CAnADA
Calgary
Edmonton
Montréal
Ottawa-Gatineau
Toronto
Vancouver

527
1,319
1,393
4,093
2,257
1,975
606
2,138
609
2,554
1,366
844
1,221
741
554
798
1,159
800
709
3,236
2,958

691
1,638
1,963
5,237
3,292
2,533
728
2,951
882
3,280
1,880
1,173
1,613
918
709
1,068
1,577
1,099
936
3,791
3,542

606
1,468
1,748
4,659
2,746
2,264
686
2,494
734
2,875
1,635
1,066
1,398
827
613
952
1,392
910
815
3,505
3,230

782
1,819
2,191
5,852
3,905
2,818
772
3,462
1,049
3,719
2,146
1,283
1,848
1,015
814
1,192
1,775
1,316
1,069
4,092
3,871

849
1,949
2,351
6,260
4,296
3,018
813
3,791
1,162
4,011
2,327
1,367
2,008
1,089
889
1,282
1,913
1,460
1,162
4,316
4,107

902
453
2,045
1,184
2,460
1,129
6,463
3,548
4,474
1,863
3,146
1,693
861
510
3,953
1,829
1,233
503
4,170
2,226
2,439
1,132
1,440
672
2,109
1,052
1,151
652
944
491
1,353
660
2,009
955
1,545
692
1,230
603
4,469
2,934
2,690
4,259
9,595 10,174 10,803 11,368 11,950 12,404 12,617 12,650
2,331
4,411
14,776 15,948 17,099 18,647 20,262 21,300 21,628 21,651
1,004

883
2,014
2,427
6,420
4,433
3,109
843
3,913
1,210
4,130
2,405
1,415
2,078
1,129
925
1,329
1,979
1,519
1,207
4,428
4,219

2,644

2,968

3,422

3,918

4,243

4,370

706

900

950

984

614

789

843

2.99
2.15
4.20
2.86
3.84
3.08
3.43
3.12
3.85
2.75
3.75
4.54
2.97
2.54
2.39
3.77
3.87
2.89
3.22
1.96
1.90
1.17
2.53
1.53
2.77

2.83
2.14
4.54
2.59
3.92
2.74
2.49
3.07
3.72
2.37
3.60
4.68
2.72
2.21
2.04
3.55
3.68
2.58
2.78
1.59
1.76
1.20
2.31
1.39
2.24

2.60
2.18
2.32
2.34
3.62
2.24
1.18
3.37
3.67
2.63
2.80
1.90
2.85
2.09
2.89
2.30
2.49
3.79
2.78
1.57
1.84
1.02
2.84
1.73
1.32

2.49
2.10
2.19
2.22
3.42
2.14
1.16
3.19
3.48
2.51
2.65
1.79
2.72
2.01
2.78
2.19
2.36
3.60
2.66
1.53
1.78
1.00
2.71
1.66
1.30

1.63
1.39
1.41
1.35
1.91
1.37
1.04
1.82
2.04
1.51
1.62
1.28
1.66
1.39
1.75
1.46
1.50
2.08
1.67
1.07
1.18
0.75
1.60
1.00
1.09

0.79
0.66
0.64
0.50
0.63
0.60
0.72
0.63
0.81
0.58
0.66
0.68
0.69
0.73
0.80
0.72
0.67
0.78
0.76
0.51
0.54
0.34
0.59
0.31
0.70

0.42
0.30
0.27
0.13
0.19
0.24
0.42
0.20
0.37
0.20
0.27
0.35
0.30
0.38
0.41
0.36
0.30
0.34
0.37
0.18
0.19
0.05
0.19
0.02
0.40

1,191

1,168

1,128

1,169

1,196

1,211

1,215

1,215

-0.38

-0.70

0.71

0.46

0.25

0.06

0.00

537

667

921

1,328

1,908

2,643

3,457

4,332

4.32

6.45

7.32

7.25

6.52

5.37

4.51

615

836

1,160

1,354

1,562

1,803

2,093

2,427

6.14

6.55

3.10

2.87

2.86

2.99

2.96

931
754

1,155
948

1,432
1,192

1,767
1,489

2,125
1,801

2,478
2,103

2,815
2,392

3,131
2,664

738
831
3,154
918
3,807
1,559

809
859
3,305
988
4,197
1,789

953
924
3,471
1,079
4,607
1,959

1,056
1,017
3,603
1,119
5,035
2,093

1,182
1,113
3,783
1,182
5,449
2,220

1,262
1,178
3,925
1,236
5,706
2,318

1,315
1,227
4,048
1,285
5,875
2,400

1,364
1,274
4,165
1,333
6,029
2,479

4.30
4.59

1.84
0.67
0.94
1.48
1.95
2.75

4.30
4.59

3.26
1.47
0.98
1.74
1.86
1.81

4.20
4.45

2.06
1.92
0.74
0.75
1.78
1.33

3.69
3.80

2.27
1.80
0.98
1.09
1.58
1.18

3.07
3.11

1.30
1.14
0.74
0.89
0.92
0.86

2.55
2.57

0.82
0.81
0.62
0.78
0.59
0.70

2.13
2.15

0.73
0.74
0.57
0.74
0.52
0.65

129 

Table 4

City population and city population growth rate of urban agglomerations with 750,000 Inhabitants or More in 2009,  
by Country, 1950-2025 (thousands)

City Population of  

Urban Agglomerations (’000)

City Population Growth Rate of  

 Urban Agglomerations (%)

Country/City

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

2020

2025

1990-
1995

1995-
2000

2000-
2005

2005-
2010

2010-
2015

2015-
2020

2020-
2025

CHAD
N'Djaména
CHILE
Santiago
Valparaíso
CHInA
Anshan, Liaoning
Anyang
Baoding
Baotou
Beijing
Bengbu
Benxi
Changchun
Changde
Changsha, Hunan
Changzhou, Jiangsu
Chengdu
Chifeng
Chongqing
Cixi
Dalian
Dandong
Daqing
Datong, Shanxi
Dongguan, Guangdong
Dongying
Foshan
Fushun, Liaoning
Fuxin
Fuyang
Fuzhou, Fujian
Guangzhou, Guangdong
Guilin
Guiyang
Haerbin
Haikou
Handan
Hangzhou
Hefei
Hengyang
Hohhot
Huai'an
Huaibei
Huainan

477

565

647

732

829

960

1,170

1,445

3.38

2.72

2.48

2.48

2.93

3.96

4.23

4,616
733

4,964
771

5,275
803

5,605
837

5,952
873

6,237
911

6,408
946

6,503
973

1.46
1.02

1.21
0.83

1.21
0.83

1,234
410
471
1,044
6,788
447
759
2,192
275
1,089
730
2,955
345
3,123
207
1,884
543
757
917
553
395
429
1,289
600
142
875
3,072
561
1,080
2,392
331
525
1,476
1,100
504
635
330
290
724

1,307
556
645
1,212
8,138
554
807
2,446
450
1,504
883
3,403
483
4,342
367
2,311
607
905
981
1,416
498
569
1,323
633
265
1,316
4,745
652
1,417
2,860
494
653
1,887
1,298
632
798
520
423
872

1,515
1,033
1,042
1,826

1,663
1,130
1,213
1,932

1,827
1,220
1,385
2,072

1,037
1,044
4,046
913
2,655
2,267
5,441
931

2,120
1,384
1,417
753
1,628
884
1,406
2,388
9,757 11,455 12,385 13,335 14,296 15,018
1,222
1,215
4,673
1,064
3,066
2,624
6,224
1,092
9,850 10,514 11,065
994
850
4,132
3,599
1,014
867
2,112
1,797
1,602
1,375
6,852
5,971
1,334
1,123
6,242
5,455
1,647
1,434
1,070
912
1,119
957
3,201
3,727
9,669 10,409 10,961
1,317
1,120
2,679
2,325
5,080
4,473
1,772
2,065
1,764
1,488
4,735
4,145
2,626
3,029
1,488
1,263
2,258
1,907
1,278
1,095
1,147
1,364
1,854
1,583

914
969
3,597
849
2,415
2,062
4,961
842
9,401
781
3,306
795
1,546
1,251
5,347
949
4,969
1,378
821
874
2,787
8,884
991
2,154
4,251
1,586
1,249
3,860
2,404
1,099
1,589
998
962
1,396

794
911
3,143
801
2,197
1,876
4,467
761
7,266
725
3,060
736
1,294
1,141
4,692
773
4,033
1,368
739
804
2,368
8,165
867
2,015
3,789
1,410
1,007
3,516
2,065
936
1,264
914
775
1,212

687
857
2,730
735
2,077
1,068
3,919
677
6,039
650
2,833
679
1,082
1,049
3,631
628
754
1,358
667
695
1,978
7,330
757
1,860
3,419
738
811
2,411
1,532
793
1,005
818
617
1,049

1,990
1,326
1,524
2,243

1,142
1,136
4,409
994
2,885
2,466
5,886
1,020

928
3,896
947
1,981
1,500
6,483
1,246
5,903
1,544
999
1,045
3,509

1,231
2,519
4,800
1,937
1,652
4,470
2,850
1,393
2,118
1,195
1,275
1,738

130 

1.15
6.07
6.28
2.98
3.63
4.29
1.22
2.19
9.82
6.45
3.81
2.82
6.74
6.59
11.44
4.08
2.24
3.58
1.34
18.82
4.64
5.63
0.52
1.06
12.42
8.15
8.69
2.99
5.44
3.57
8.02
4.33
4.91
3.32
4.53
4.59
9.06
7.53
3.71

1.15
6.08
6.29
2.98
3.63
4.29
1.22
2.19
9.82
6.46
3.81
2.82
6.74
6.60
11.44
4.08
2.24
3.58
1.34
18.83
4.64
5.63
0.52
1.06
19.30
8.15
8.70
2.99
5.44
3.57
8.02
4.34
4.91
3.32
4.53
4.59
9.06
7.53
3.71

1.81
6.32
3.30
5.23
3.21
2.91
1.22
2.81
1.73
1.12
11.27
2.62
2.33
3.70
2.16
1.54
1.60
3.58
1.68
5.13
4.14
33.53
0.16
2.05
2.91
3.59
2.16
2.71
1.60
2.06
12.96
4.33
7.55
5.97
3.31
4.59
2.24
4.55
2.88

1.20
0.83

1.86
1.79
3.03
1.13
1.56
2.80
1.22
2.70
1.16
1.89
1.89
2.10
2.02
5.15
1.50
1.54
1.56
3.56
1.84
2.61
4.09
4.17
0.15
2.12
1.69
3.26
1.69
2.68
1.33
2.30
2.35
4.32
1.87
3.04
3.22
4.57
1.76
4.32
2.82

0.94
0.86

1.89
1.53
2.67
1.41
1.48
2.53
1.50
2.35
1.47
1.89
1.90
1.85
2.03
0.93
1.70
1.70
1.73
3.00
1.89
2.21
3.37
1.86
0.79
2.09
1.81
2.77
1.69
2.45
1.53
1.02
2.21
3.50
1.42
1.76
2.79
3.66
1.85
3.52
2.52

0.54
0.76

1.71
1.67
1.91
1.58
1.39
1.91
1.68
1.72
1.69
1.66
1.68
1.57
1.81
1.30
1.75
1.59
1.75
1.96
1.74
1.64
2.09
1.58
1.49
1.83
1.76
1.84
1.48
1.89
1.60
1.41
1.78
2.09
1.51
1.64
1.95
2.09
1.75
2.12
1.86

0.29
0.57

1.27
1.32
1.32
1.25
0.99
1.36
1.35
1.16
1.36
1.22
1.24
1.12
1.37
1.02
1.38
1.17
1.37
1.28
1.31
1.11
1.36
1.12
1.29
1.37
1.36
1.20
1.03
1.35
1.23
1.14
1.28
1.32
1.15
1.22
1.33
1.28
1.34
1.35
1.30

State of the World’s Cities 2012/2013Statistical Annex

Table 4

City population and city population growth rate of urban agglomerations with 750,000 Inhabitants or More in 2009,  
by Country, 1950-2025 (thousands)

City Population of  

Urban Agglomerations (’000)

City Population Growth Rate of  

 Urban Agglomerations (%)

Country/City

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

2020

2025

1990-
1995

1995-
2000

2000-
2005

2005-
2010

2010-
2015

2015-
2020

2020-
2025

Huizhou
Huludao
Jiamusi
Jiangmen
Jiaozuo
Jieyang
Jilin
Jinan, Shandong
Jingzhou
Jining, Shandong
Jinjiang
Jinzhou
Jixi, Heilongjiang
Kaohsiung
Kunming
Lanzhou
Lianyungang
Linyi, Shandong
Liuzhou
Lufeng
Luoyang
Luzhou
Maoming
Mianyang, Sichuan
Mudanjiang
Nanchang
Nanchong
Nanjing, Jiangsu
Nanning
Nantong
Nanyang, Henan
Neijiang
Ningbo
Panjin
Pingdingshan, Henan
Puning
Putian
Qingdao
Qinhuangdao
Qiqihaer
Quanzhou
Rizhao
Shanghai
Shantou

336
431
539
314
500
327
1,251
2,134
479
542
212
675
732
1,431
1,679
1,561
442
542
809
391
938
421
327
468
564
1,226
411
2,944
1,118
534
392
533
909
467
606
214
370
1,882
501
1,218
356
390

205
351
469
190
395
176
1,090
1,923
301
343
98
592
650
1,372
1,100
1,290
344
260
637
275
725
273
173
289
479
912
279
2,497
759
470
228
415
634
367
431
76
311
1,332
358
1,115
174
248

551
529
619
519
631
608
1,435
2,592
761
856
456
770
823
1,488
2,561
1,890
567
1,130
1,027
556
1,213
649
617
758
665
1,648
606
3,472
1,445
607
672
685
1,303
593
852
603
439
2,659
702
1,331
728
613

1,828
1,120
1,092
1,448
1,236
1,158
2,489
4,044
1,392
1,394
1,303
1,068
1,366
1,971
3,915
2,896
1,183
1,827
1,788
1,276
1,999
1,123
1,053
1,331
1,000
3,436
1,078
5,845
2,669
1,850
1,135
1,165
2,959
1,101
1,307
1,255
1,327
4,159
1,165
2,019
1,462
1,086
7,823 10,171 13,224 15,184 16,575 17,840 19,094 20,017
4,222

1,713
1,045
1,020
1,355
1,155
1,081
2,338
3,813
1,302
1,304
1,216
998
1,278
1,850
3,691
2,724
1,105
1,713
1,675
1,192
1,875
1,049
983
1,244
933
3,236
1,006
5,524
2,508
1,734
1,060
1,088
2,782
1,028
1,222
1,172
1,241
3,923
1,088
1,894
1,367
1,014

1,562
940
927
1,236
1,045
980
2,135
3,522
1,183
1,193
1,080
918
1,166
1,711
3,405
2,507
1,002
1,571
1,527
1,069
1,716
955
896
1,133
855
2,978
914
5,076
2,306
1,586
967
991
2,536
932
1,120
1,060
1,147
3,622
993
1,740
1,238
922

1,384
795
817
1,103
900
855
1,888
3,237
1,039
1,077
858
857
1,042
1,611
3,116
2,285
878
1,427
1,352
889
1,539
850
803
1,006
783
2,701
808
4,519
2,096
1,423
867
883
2,217
813
1,024
911
1,085
3,323
893
1,588
1,068
816

1,212
648
711
977
755
732
1,647
2,951
899
972
636
814
927
1,548
2,857
2,085
732
1,297
1,183
706
1,373
751
717
883
724
2,380
705
3,966
1,826
767
774
781
1,897
696
942
763
1,052
3,029
800
1,453
898
715

724

950

1,247

3,375

3,502

3,704

3,983

9.90
4.09
2.78
10.02
4.68
12.36
2.75
2.08
9.25
9.15
15.38
2.63
2.36
0.83
8.45
3.82
4.99
14.67
4.78
7.05
5.14
8.67
12.69
9.62
3.29
5.92
7.74
3.30
7.74
2.55
10.79
5.00
7.20
4.79
6.81
20.76
3.43
6.91
6.74
1.77
14.34
9.03
5.25
5.43

9.91
4.09
2.78
10.02
4.68
12.37
2.75
3.89
9.26
9.16
15.38
2.63
2.36
0.79
8.45
3.82
4.99
14.67
4.78
7.05
5.14
8.67
12.70
9.62
3.29
5.92
7.74
3.30
5.13
2.55
10.80
5.00
7.20
4.79
6.81
20.76
3.43
6.91
6.74
1.77
14.34
9.03
5.25
5.43

15.77
4.08
2.78
12.67
3.59
3.73
2.75
2.59
3.33
2.53
6.64
1.12
2.36
0.79
2.19
1.96
5.12
2.76
2.82
4.78
2.48
2.90
2.98
3.07
1.69
7.35
3.05
2.66
4.68
4.70
2.83
2.63
7.51
3.22
2.01
4.71
17.48
2.61
2.61
1.76
4.19
3.08
2.76
19.91

2.66
4.07
2.77
2.42
3.50
3.10
2.74
1.85
2.91
2.06
5.99
1.02
2.36
0.80
1.73
1.83
3.63
1.91
2.68
4.60
2.29
2.49
2.28
2.59
1.58
2.53
2.71
2.61
2.76
12.36
2.26
2.46
3.12
3.10
1.68
3.55
0.62
1.85
2.21
1.77
3.46
2.65
1.75
0.74

2.42
3.36
2.52
2.28
2.99
2.73
2.46
1.69
2.59
2.04
4.61
1.38
2.24
1.20
1.78
1.85
2.65
1.93
2.43
3.70
2.17
2.33
2.20
2.39
1.75
1.95
2.48
2.33
1.91
2.17
2.18
2.31
2.69
2.73
1.79
3.02
1.11
1.72
2.12
1.83
2.95
2.44
1.47
1.12

1.84
2.11
1.92
1.84
2.01
1.96
1.81
1.59
1.91
1.79
2.37
1.67
1.83
1.56
1.61
1.66
1.94
1.73
1.85
2.17
1.78
1.88
1.85
1.87
1.76
1.66
1.91
1.69
1.68
1.78
1.84
1.87
1.85
1.97
1.74
2.02
1.58
1.59
1.82
1.70
1.99
1.90
1.36
1.46

1.30
1.38
1.37
1.33
1.36
1.37
1.25
1.18
1.34
1.33
1.37
1.36
1.34
1.27
1.18
1.23
1.36
1.29
1.30
1.37
1.28
1.37
1.37
1.34
1.38
1.20
1.37
1.13
1.24
1.29
1.36
1.36
1.23
1.37
1.34
1.36
1.33
1.17
1.36
1.28
1.34
1.37
0.94
1.16

131 

Table 4

City population and city population growth rate of urban agglomerations with 750,000 Inhabitants or More in 2009,  
by Country, 1950-2025 (thousands)

City Population of  

Urban Agglomerations (’000)

City Population Growth Rate of  

 Urban Agglomerations (%)

Country/City

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

2020

2025

1990-
1995

1995-
2000

2000-
2005

2005-
2010

2010-
2015

2015-
2020

2020-
2025

Shaoguan
Shaoxing
Shenyang
Shenzhen
Shijiazhuang
Suzhou, Jiangsu
Taian, Shandong
Taichung
Tainan
Taipei
Taiyuan, Shanxi
Taizhou, Jiangsu
Taizhou, Zhejiang
Tangshan, Hebei
Tianjin
Ürümqi (Wulumqi)
Weifang
Wenzhou
Wuhan
Wuhu, Anhui
Wuxi, Jiangsu
Xiamen
Xi'an, Shaanxi
Xiangfan, Hubei
Xiangtan, Hunan
Xianyang, Shaanxi
Xining
Xinxiang
Xuzhou
Yancheng, Jiangsu
Yangzhou
Yantai
Yichang
Yichun, Heilongjiang
Yinchuan
Yingkou
Yiyang, Hunan
Yueyang
Zaozhuang
Zhangjiakou
Zhanjiang
Zhengzhou
Zhenjiang, Jiangsu
Zhongshan

237
181
3,651
875
1,372
689
367
765
669
2,737
1,637
158
912
996
4,558
1,149
634
1,111
3,417
442
992
639
2,157
554
456
317
592
450
781
392
455
422
492
855
384
458
191
305
303
558
486
1,134
328
393

350
332
4,081
2,304
1,621
952
577
864
697
2,698
2,024
290
1,042
1,177
5,513
1,399
885
1,318
4,763
529
1,182
952
2,821
685
564
500
707
586
1,033
513
565
717
583
835
468
535
360
518
508
667
630
1,663
472
736

517
608
4,562
6,069
1,914
1,316
910
978
723
2,630
2,503
535
1,190
1,390
6,670
1,705
1,235
1,565
6,638
634
1,409
1,416
3,690
847
698
790
844
762
1,367
671
702
1,218
692
815
571
624
678
881
853
797
818
2,438
679
1,376

766
731
4,788
7,931
2,192
1,992
1,073
1,106
750
2,627
2,819
662
1,259
1,614
7,278
2,025
1,457
2,187
7,204
759
2,435
1,765
4,382
1,278
806
908
1,032
884
1,715
1,071
871
1,383
879
796
720
728
760
997
1,014
913
908
2,715
832
1,768

845
853
5,166
9,005
2,487
2,398
1,239
1,251
777
2,633
3,154
795
1,338
1,870
7,884
2,398
1,698
2,659
7,681
908
2,682
2,207
4,747
1,399
926
1,019
1,261
1,016
2,142
1,289
1,080
1,526
959
779
911
848
820
1,096
1,175
1,043
996
2,966
1,007
2,211

7.79
12.09
2.23
19.36
3.33
6.47
9.09
2.45
0.79
-0.29
4.25
12.23
2.66
3.33
3.81
3.95
6.67
3.43
6.64
3.60
3.51
7.95
5.37
4.25
4.25
9.14
3.55
5.26
5.60
5.38
4.33
10.59
3.40
-0.47
3.97
3.08
12.69
10.62
10.36
3.56
5.21
7.65
7.27
12.51

7.80
12.09
2.23
19.37
3.33
6.47
9.09
2.47
0.76
-0.51
4.25
12.24
2.66
3.33
3.81
3.95
6.67
3.43
6.64
3.60
3.51
7.95
5.37
4.25
4.25
9.14
3.55
5.26
5.60
5.38
4.33
10.59
3.40
-0.47
3.97
3.08
12.69
10.62
10.36
3.56
5.21
7.65
7.27
12.52

7.86
3.69
0.96
5.35
2.71
8.29
3.30
2.47
0.71
-0.02
2.38
4.24
1.13
2.99
1.75
3.43
3.31
6.69
1.64
3.60
10.94
4.40
3.43
8.21
2.88
2.77
4.00
2.96
4.54
9.33
4.33
2.55
4.79
-0.47
4.66
3.08
2.26
2.47
3.45
2.72
2.08
2.16
4.06
5.02

1.96
3.08
1.52
2.54
2.52
3.71
2.88
2.46
0.72
0.04
2.24
3.66
1.21
2.95
1.60
3.39
3.06
3.90
1.28
3.59
1.93
4.47
1.60
1.81
2.78
2.32
4.02
2.79
4.44
3.72
4.31
1.97
1.74
-0.45
4.69
3.07
1.52
1.89
2.95
2.66
1.86
1.76
3.82
4.47

1.56
2.71
1.79
1.75
2.30
1.76
2.57
2.30
1.19
0.68
2.11
3.10
1.49
2.59
1.64
2.86
2.67
3.19
1.44
3.04
1.91
3.59
1.19
1.87
2.52
2.21
3.31
2.52
3.56
2.68
3.50
1.97
1.61
0.43
3.76
2.71
1.70
1.93
2.62
2.43
1.92
1.80
3.19
3.57

1.71
1.96
1.56
1.49
1.75
1.64
1.89
1.83
1.64
1.39
1.68
2.05
1.64
1.85
1.48
1.88
1.87
1.94
1.44
2.02
1.66
2.04
1.44
1.72
1.91
1.83
2.05
1.90
2.04
1.91
2.10
1.73
1.71
1.47
2.18
1.96
1.74
1.76
1.90
1.88
1.77
1.62
2.04
2.04

1.37
1.37
1.11
1.03
1.22
1.22
1.31
1.31
1.38
1.20
1.18
1.38
1.30
1.26
1.05
1.22
1.27
1.21
1.05
1.36
1.20
1.24
1.12
1.30
1.36
1.34
1.31
1.34
1.24
1.31
1.34
1.28
1.35
1.37
1.36
1.37
1.37
1.33
1.32
1.34
1.34
1.19
1.35
1.24

995
1,077
6,108

1,066
914
1,153
977
5,650
6,457
9,827 10,585 11,146
2,789
3,235
3,021
2,619
1,653
1,409
1,642
1,403
825
959
3,102
2,725
4,043
3,504
1,101
928
1,442
1,671
2,487
2,130
9,713
8,559
3,231
2,767
1,941
2,271
3,650
3,119
9,347
8,253
1,252
1,057
2,951
3,405
3,112
2,641
5,726
5,038
1,786
1,536
1,050
1,236
1,334
1,138
1,761
1,488
1,152
1,355
3,015
2,559
1,731
1,474
1,529
1,287
1,684
1,958
1,210
1,039
917
795
1,312
1,099
972
1,148
1,043
892
1,408
1,206
1,574
1,339
1,178
1,384
1,281
1,097
3,734
3,245
1,399
1,181
2,643
3,114

3,044
2,842
1,548
1,538
895
2,921
3,812
1,028
1,566
2,335
9,216
3,040
2,131
3,436
8,868
1,169
3,206
2,926
5,414
1,674
1,155
1,247
1,649
1,267
2,833
1,622
1,430
1,836
1,132
856
1,225
1,072
974
1,317
1,473
1,294
1,198
3,519
1,308
2,927

132 

State of the World’s Cities 2012/2013Statistical Annex

Table 4

City population and city population growth rate of urban agglomerations with 750,000 Inhabitants or More in 2009,  
by Country, 1950-2025 (thousands)

City Population of  

Urban Agglomerations (’000)

City Population Growth Rate of  

 Urban Agglomerations (%)

Country/City

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

2020

2025

1990-
1995

1995-
2000

2000-
2005

2005-
2010

2010-
2015

2015-
2020

2020-
2025

737

867

5,677

6,214

220
430
777
368
250

419
593
1,207
467
368

1,363
5,494
759
1,757
645
571
2,372

1,229
4,740
650
1,552
561
506
2,135

Zhuhai
Zhuzhou
Zibo
Zigong
Zunyi
CHInA, HOng kOng SAR
Hong Kong
COLOmBIA
Barranquilla
Bogotá
Bucaramanga
Cali
Cartagena
Cúcuta
Medellín
COngO
Brazzaville
COSTA RICA
San José
CôTE D'IvOIRE
Abidjan
Yamoussoukro
CUBA
La Habana (Havana)
CzECH REPUBLIC
Praha (Prague)
1,194
DEm. PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC OF kOREA
P’yongyang
2,749
DEmOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE COngO
451
Kananga
4,590
Kinshasa
450
Kisangani
Lubumbashi
826
Mbuji-Mayi
749
DEnmARk
København (Copenhagen)
DOmInICAn REPUBLIC
Santo Domingo
ECUADOR
Guayaquil
Quito

353
3,564
362
655
580

1,808
1,217

1,572
1,088

2,535
218

2,108

2,151

1,035

1,048

1,522

1,661

2,102
136

704

830

1,212

2,526

799
819
1,874
592
541

1,224
923
2,168
847
679

1,252
1,025
2,456
918
843

1,315
1,137
2,752
982
1,005

1,420
1,244
3,004
1,067
1,118

1,516
1,330
3,192
1,142
1,198

12.89
6.45
8.80
4.75
7.72

12.90
6.45
8.80
4.75
7.72

8.55
2.39
2.92
7.17
4.55

0.44
2.10
2.49
1.62
4.31

0.98
2.07
2.28
1.35
3.52

1.54
1.80
1.75
1.65
2.14

1.31
1.34
1.22
1.35
1.37

6,667

6,883

7,069

7,398

7,701

7,969

1.81

1.41

0.64

0.54

0.91

0.80

0.68

1,531
6,356
855
1,950
737
632
2,724

1,719
7,353
964
2,164
842
700
3,127

1,867
8,500
1,092
2,401
962
774
3,594

2,145

2,255
2,015
9,521 10,129 10,537
1,375
1,213
2,938
2,627
1,076
1,223
963
848
4,019
4,494

1,303
2,800
1,158
910
4,294

2.06
2.95
3.08
2.48
2.77
2.41
2.11

2.32
2.92
2.39
2.08
2.68
2.04
2.76

2.32
2.91
2.39
2.08
2.67
2.03
2.76

1.65
2.90
2.49
2.08
2.66
2.03
2.78

1.53
2.27
2.11
1.80
2.23
1.82
2.24

1.25
1.24
1.43
1.28
1.47
1.41
1.33

1.00
0.79
1.08
0.97
1.10
1.13
0.91

986

1,172

1,323

1,504

1,703

1,878

3.31

3.44

3.46

2.42

2.55

2.49

1.95

1,032

1,232

1,461

1,655

1,799

1,923

3.25

3.48

3.54

3.41

2.50

1.67

1.33

3,032
348

3,564
556

4,125
885

4,788
1,273

5,550
1,559

6,321
1,797

3.74
9.36

3.58
9.37

3.24
9.36

2.92
9.32

2.98
7.27

2.95
4.06

2.60
2.83

2,187

2,187

2,130

2,100

2,095

2,094

0.40

0.33

0.00

-0.53

-0.28

-0.05

-0.00

1,172

1,164

1,162

1,165

1,168

1,173

-0.29

-0.38

-0.14

-0.02

0.04

0.06

0.08

2,777

2,805

2,833

2,859

2,894

2,941

1.70

0.20

0.20

0.20

0.18

0.24

0.33

552
5,611
535
995
924

705
7,106
664
1,252
1,190

878

1,324

1,087

1,583
8,754 10,668 12,788 15,041
1,461
2,744
2,658

1,221
2,304
2,232

1,002
1,899
1,838

812
1,543
1,488

4.92
5.06
4.34
4.62
5.09

4.03
4.02
3.45
3.73
4.20

4.89
4.72
4.32
4.60
5.06

4.40
4.17
4.03
4.17
4.48

4.26
3.96
4.19
4.15
4.22

3.95
3.62
3.96
3.87
3.88

3.57
3.25
3.58
3.49
3.50

1,077

1,125

1,186

1,228

1,238

1,238

0.25

0.54

0.87

1.05

0.70

0.16

0.01

1,813

1,981

2,180

2,381

2,552

2,691

1.74

1.76

1.77

1.92

1.76

1.39

1.06

2,077
1,357

2,386
1,593

2,690
1,846

2,941
2,035

3,153
2,188

3,328
2,316

2.80
2.25

2.78
2.18

2.77
3.20

2.39
2.95

1.79
1.95

1.39
1.45

1.08
1.13

133 

Table 4

City population and city population growth rate of urban agglomerations with 750,000 Inhabitants or More in 2009,  
by Country, 1950-2025 (thousands)

City Population of  

Urban Agglomerations (’000)

City Population Growth Rate of  

 Urban Agglomerations (%)

Country/City

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

2020

2025

1990-
1995

1995-
2000

2000-
2005

2005-
2010

2010-
2015

2015-
2020

2020-
2025

970

3,063

1,224

1,791

9,061

EgyPT
Al-Iskandariyah 
(Alexandria)
Al-Qahirah (Cairo)
EL SALvADOR
San Salvador
ETHIOPIA
Addis Ababa
FInLAnD
Helsinki
FRAnCE
698
Bordeaux
961
Lille
Lyon
1,265
Marseille-Aix-en-Provence 1,305
854
Nice-Cannes
Paris
9,330
Toulouse
654
gEORgIA
Tbilisi
gERmAny
Berlin
Hamburg
Köln (Cologne)
München (Munich)
gHAnA
Accra
gHAnA
Kumasi
gREECE
Athínai (Athens)
Thessaloniki
gUATEmALA
Ciudad de Guatemala 
(Guatemala City)
gUInEA
Conakry
HAITI
Port-au-Prince
HOnDURAS
Tegucigalpa
HUngARy
Budapest

3,422
1,639
950
1,218

3,070
746

1,134

2,005

1,197

696

871

803

895

578

3,277

3,592

3,973

4,387

4,791

5,201

5,648

1.35

1.83

2.02

1.98

1.76

1.64

1.65

9,707 10,170 10,565 11,001 11,663 12,540 13,531

1.38

0.93

0.76

0.81

1.17

1.45

1.52

1,112

1,248

1,401

1,565

1,691

1,789

1,891

2.73

2.32

2.32

2.21

1.55

1.13

1.10

2,144

2,376

2,633

2,930

3,365

3,981

4,757

3.60

2.05

2.05

2.13

2.77

3.36

3.56

943

1,019

1,067

1,117

1,153

1,170

1,174

1.58

1.56

0.92

0.91

0.65

0.28

0.07

730
984
1,313
1,331
874
9,510
714

799
1,015
1,412
1,413
936

763
1,004
1,362
1,363
899

838
1,033
1,468
1,469
977

913
1,107
1,575
1,577
1,059
9,739 10,105 10,485 10,777 10,880 10,884
1,003

899
1,092
1,559
1,560
1,045

875
1,066
1,523
1,524
1,018

962

912

989

844

778

0.88
0.47
0.74
0.39
0.46
0.38
1.75

0.89
0.41
0.73
0.48
0.56
0.48
1.72

0.93
0.22
0.73
0.73
0.82
0.74
1.63

0.95
0.35
0.77
0.77
0.86
0.74
1.55

0.86
0.62
0.74
0.74
0.81
0.55
1.07

0.55
0.50
0.46
0.46
0.52
0.19
0.55

0.29
0.26
0.21
0.21
0.27
0.01
0.28

1,160

1,100

1,093

1,120

1,136

1,138

1,138

-1.07

-1.07

-0.12

0.48

0.28

0.05

0.00

3,471
1,707
965
1,241

3,384
1,710
963
1,202

3,391
1,739
976
1,254

3,450
1,786
1,001
1,349

3,489
1,818
1,015
1,401

3,498
1,825
1,018
1,412

3,499
1,825
1,018
1,413

0.29
0.81
0.31
0.37

-0.51
0.04
-0.04
-0.62

0.04
0.34
0.28
0.85

0.34
0.53
0.50
1.46

0.23
0.35
0.26
0.75

0.05
0.08
0.06
0.17

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.01

1,415

1,674

1,985

2,342

2,722

3,110

3,497

3.35

3.35

3.41

3.30

3.01

2.66

2.35

909

1,187

1,519

1,834

2,139

2,448

2,757

5.34

5.34

4.94

3.76

3.08

2.70

2.38

3,122
771

3,179
797

3,230
821

3,257
837

3,283
853

3,312
868

3,346
886

0.34
0.66

0.37
0.67

0.31
0.60

0.17
0.40

0.16
0.36

0.17
0.37

0.21
0.40

839

908

984

1,104

1,281

1,481

1,690

0.89

1.57

1.62

2.30

2.97

2.90

2.64

1,045

1,219

1,411

1,653

2,004

2,427

2,906

3.11

3.08

2.92

3.17

3.84

3.83

3.61

1,427

1,693

2,171

2,143

2,481

2,868

3,246

4.60

3.42

4.96

-0.25

2.93

2.90

2.48

677

793

901

1,028

1,181

1,339

1,493

3.16

3.16

2.57

2.63

2.77

2.51

2.18

1,893

1,787

1,698

1,706

1,711

1,711

1,711

-1.15

-1.15

-1.02

0.09

0.05

0.01

0.00

134 

State of the World’s Cities 2012/2013Table 4

City population and city population growth rate of urban agglomerations with 750,000 Inhabitants or More in 2009,  
by Country, 1950-2025 (thousands)

Statistical Annex

City Population of  

Urban Agglomerations (’000)

City Population Growth Rate of  

 Urban Agglomerations (%)

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

2020

2025

1990-
1995

1995-
2000

2000-
2005

2005-
2010

2010-
2015

2015-
2020

2020-
2025

Country/City

InDIA
Agra
Ahmadabad
Aligarh
Allahabad
Amritsar
Asansol
Aurangabad
Bangalore
Bareilly
Bhiwandi
Bhopal
Bhubaneswar
Chandigarh
Chennai (Madras)
Coimbatore
Delhi
Dhanbad
Durg-Bhilainagar
Guwahati (Gauhati)
Gwalior
Hubli-Dharwad
Hyderabad
Indore
Jabalpur
Jaipur
Jalandhar
Jammu
Jamshedpur
Jodhpur
Kanpur
Kochi (Cochin)
Kolkata (Calcutta)
Kota
Kozhikode (Calicut)
Lucknow
Ludhiana
Madurai
Meerut
Moradabad
Mumbai (Bombay)
Mysore
Nagpur
Nashik

1,095
3,790
554
928
844
891
708
4,744
664
479
1,228
504
667
5,836
1,239

1,511
5,122
763
1,152
1,152
1,258
1,049
6,465
787
745
1,644
790
928
6,919
1,619

1,293
4,427
653
1,035
990
1,065
868
5,567
722
603
1,426
637
791
6,353
1,420

1,886
6,277
960
1,415
1,439
1,579
1,331
7,913
963
957
2,039
1,017
1,166
8,253
1,999

1,703
5,717
863
1,277
1,297
1,423
1,198
7,218
868
859
1,843
912
1,049
7,547
1,807

2,089
6,892
1,068
1,570
1,597
1,751
1,478
8,674
1,072
1,066
2,257
1,131
1,296
9,043
2,212

2,313
933
7,567
3,255
1,189
468
1,742
830
1,771
726
1,941
727
1,641
568
9,507
4,036
1,192
604
1,186
362
2,497
1,046
1,258
395
1,440
564
9,909
5,338
1,088
2,449
9,726 12,407 15,730 19,493 22,157 24,160 26,272 28,568
1,812
805
1,604
670
1,445
564
1,423
706
1,299
639
8,894
4,193
2,939
1,088
1,862
879
4,205
1,478
1,262
502
1,184
356
1,891
817
1,454
654
4,501
2,001
2,184
1,103
10,890 11,924 13,058 14,284 15,552 16,924 18,449 20,112
1,216
1,378
3,858
2,387
1,856
2,035
1,166
12,308 14,111 16,086 18,205 20,041 21,797 23,719 25,810
1,293
3,505
2,165

1,328
1,172
1,053
1,039
946
6,751
2,173
1,367
3,131
917
857
1,387
1,061
3,364
1,610

1,633
1,445
1,300
1,280
1,168
8,110
2,659
1,679
3,813
1,134
1,064
1,705
1,308
4,084
1,971

1,472
1,301
1,170
1,152
1,050
7,396
2,405
1,514
3,458
1,020
956
1,537
1,177
3,706
1,779

1,189
1,044
932
940
855
6,117
1,914
1,231
2,748
811
739
1,239
951
3,020
1,464

915
780
675
779
705
4,825
1,314
981
1,826
588
458
938
743
2,294
1,229

1,046
905
797
855
776
5,445
1,597
1,100
2,259
694
588
1,081
842
2,641
1,340

604
835
1,906
1,183
1,132
975
520

708
1,849
886

692
875
2,221
1,368
1,187
1,143
626

776
2,089
1,117

789
924
2,567
1,572
1,255
1,328
744

853
2,351
1,381

884
1,007
2,873
1,760
1,365
1,494
845

942
2,607
1,588

982
1,115
3,169
1,947
1,509
1,656
941

1,045
2,875
1,763

1,093
1,240
3,497
2,156
1,674
1,836
1,048

1,163
3,175
1,954

135 

523
781
1,614
1,006
1,073
824
436

640
1,637
700

3.20
3.04
3.39
2.23
3.00
4.06
4.38
3.23
1.87
5.62
3.21
4.90
3.36
1.78
2.60
4.87
2.56
3.03
3.60
1.97
1.95
2.81
3.77
2.19
4.23
3.16
5.00
2.75
2.54
2.73
2.17
1.82
2.89
1.33
3.33
3.24
1.07
3.36
3.53
2.73
2.01
2.44
4.71

3.32
3.11
3.29
2.17
3.20
3.56
4.09
3.20
1.67
4.60
3.00
4.69
3.40
1.70
2.73
4.75
2.67
2.98
3.32
1.88
1.93
2.42
3.91
2.29
4.26
3.31
5.01
2.84
2.51
2.82
1.73
1.82
2.71
0.94
3.06
2.91
0.95
3.18
3.68
2.62
1.85
2.44
4.63

3.13
2.92
3.11
2.15
3.02
3.33
3.79
2.99
1.73
4.23
2.85
4.30
3.20
1.71
2.62
4.29
2.58
2.84
3.14
1.90
1.95
2.33
3.62
2.25
3.91
3.13
4.58
2.72
2.44
2.68
1.76
1.79
2.62
1.10
2.89
2.78
1.11
3.00
3.45
2.48
1.88
2.36
4.24

2.38
2.20
2.44
2.06
2.37
2.47
2.65
2.20
1.95
2.84
2.28
2.86
2.46
1.74
2.20
2.56
2.21
2.32
2.43
1.99
2.02
1.97
2.54
2.09
2.61
2.44
2.97
2.26
2.18
2.16
1.90
1.70
2.26
1.71
2.25
2.26
1.68
2.35
2.56
1.92
1.99
2.07
2.79

2.04
1.87
2.14
2.05
2.08
2.08
2.12
1.84
2.09
2.18
2.02
2.17
2.11
1.79
2.02
1.73
2.06
2.09
2.11
2.07
2.08
1.83
2.03
2.04
1.99
2.13
2.19
2.06
2.09
1.93
2.00
1.69
2.12
2.05
1.96
2.03
2.00
2.06
2.15
1.68
2.08
1.96
2.09

2.04
1.87
2.14
2.08
2.08
2.07
2.09
1.84
2.14
2.14
2.03
2.13
2.11
1.83
2.03
1.68
2.08
2.10
2.11
2.11
2.13
1.85
2.01
2.07
1.96
2.13
2.14
2.07
2.11
1.94
2.05
1.73
2.14
2.12
1.97
2.04
2.07
2.06
2.14
1.69
2.13
1.98
2.05

2.04
1.87
2.14
2.08
2.08
2.06
2.09
1.83
2.13
2.14
2.03
2.13
2.11
1.83
2.03
1.68
2.07
2.09
2.11
2.11
2.12
1.84
2.00
2.07
1.95
2.13
2.14
2.07
2.11
1.94
2.05
1.73
2.13
2.11
1.97
2.03
2.07
2.06
2.14
1.69
2.12
1.98
2.05

Table 4

City population and city population growth rate of urban agglomerations with 750,000 Inhabitants or More in 2009,  
by Country, 1950-2025 (thousands)

City Population of  

Urban Agglomerations (’000)

City Population Growth Rate of  

 Urban Agglomerations (%)

Country/City

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

2020

2025

1990-
1995

1995-
2000

2000-
2005

2005-
2010

2010-
2015

2015-
2020

2020-
2025

1,087
2,430
453
638
607
574
613
730
1,468
801
705
299
1,096
1,013
821
1,018

Patna
Pune (Poona)
Raipur
Rajkot
Ranchi
Salem
Solapur
Srinagar
Surat
Thiruvananthapuram
Tiruchirappalli
Tiruppur
Vadodara
Varanasi (Benares)
Vijayawada
Visakhapatnam
InDOnESIA
454
Bandar Lampung
2,035
Bandung
596
Bogor
8,175
Jakarta
689
Malang
1,718
Medan
1,130
Palembang
389
Pekan Baru
1,243
Semarang
2,467
Surabaya
Ujung Pandang
816
IRAn (ISLAmIC REPUBLIC OF)
685
Ahvaz
1,094
Esfahan
693
Karaj
Kermanshah
608
1,680
Mashhad
622
Qom
Shiraz
946
1,058
Tabriz
Tehran
6,365
IRAQ
Al-Basrah (Basra)
Al-Mawsil (Mosul)
Baghdad
Irbil (Erbil)
Sulaimaniya

474
736
4,092
536
402

1,331
2,978
553
787
712
647
720
833
1,984
853
768
392
1,273
1,106
914
1,168

578
2,097
668
8,322
725
1,816
1,287
481
1,333
2,544
918

784
1,230
903
675
1,854
744
1,030
1,165
6,687

631
889
4,598
644
483

1,658
3,655
680
974
844
736
853
954
2,699
885
837
523
1,465
1,199
999
1,309

743
2,138
751
8,390
757
1,912
1,459
588
1,427
2,611
1,031

868
1,382
1,087
729
2,073
843
1,115
1,264
6,880

759
1,056
5,200
757
580

2,030
4,412
824
1,186
990
834
1,002
1,088
3,558
927
916
678
1,676
1,303
1,095
1,465

790
2,280
880
8,795
773
2,023
1,331
699
1,359
2,623
1,159

960
1,553
1,317
781
2,348
938
1,203
1,369
7,044

837
1,236
5,327
874
696

2,321
5,002
943
1,357
1,119
932
1,133
1,216
4,168
1,006
1,010
795
1,872
1,432
1,207
1,625

799
2,412
1,044
9,210
786
2,131
1,244
769
1,296
2,509
1,294

1,060
1,742
1,584
837
2,652
1,042
1,299
1,483
7,241

923
1,447
5,891
1,009
836

2,569
5,505
1,050
1,508
1,243
1,035
1,258
1,349
4,607
1,114
1,120
888
2,071
1,584
1,337
1,798

2,839
6,050
1,167
1,672
1,380
1,152
1,398
1,497
5,071
1,239
1,245
989
2,292
1,756
1,484
1,992

3,137
6,649
1,298
1,855
1,533
1,281
1,552
1,662
5,579
1,377
1,383
1,101
2,536
1,947
1,647
2,206

903
2,739
1,251

972
842
2,925
2,568
1,162
1,344
9,709 10,256 10,850
959
2,586
1,456
967
1,528
2,923
1,621

891
2,419
1,356
898
1,424
2,738
1,512

830
2,266
1,271
834
1,334
2,576
1,409

1,317
2,161
2,038
1,029
3,277
1,299
1,590
1,814
8,387

1,267
2,092
8,043
1,447
1,249

1,160
1,914
1,796
905
2,919
1,143
1,406
1,606
7,614

1,023
1,676
6,614
1,158
988

1,249
2,056
1,937
974
3,128
1,232
1,510
1,724
8,059

1,139
1,885
7,321
1,301
1,121

136 

4.05
4.07
4.00
4.21
3.21
2.38
3.20
2.62
6.01
1.25
1.71
5.43
2.99
1.75
2.14
2.73

4.84
0.59
2.26
0.36
1.03
1.11
2.59
4.26
1.40
0.62
2.35

2.69
2.33
5.30
2.11
1.97
3.56
1.70
1.91
0.99

5.71
3.78
2.34
3.65
3.66

4.40
4.09
4.13
4.26
3.39
2.58
3.41
2.72
6.16
0.73
1.74
5.73
2.81
1.62
1.79
2.29

5.01
0.39
2.36
0.16
0.88
1.03
2.51
4.02
1.36
0.51
2.34

2.03
2.33
3.70
1.55
2.23
2.49
1.58
1.64
0.57

3.68
3.44
2.46
3.23
3.66

4.04
3.76
3.83
3.93
3.19
2.51
3.21
2.62
5.53
0.93
1.79
5.19
2.69
1.67
1.82
2.25

1.22
1.29
3.17
0.94
0.40
1.13
-1.83
3.47
-0.98
0.09
2.34

2.01
2.34
3.84
1.36
2.50
2.14
1.52
1.59
0.47

1.96
3.15
0.48
2.88
3.66

2.68
2.51
2.69
2.69
2.45
2.22
2.45
2.23
3.16
1.65
1.95
3.19
2.22
1.88
1.95
2.07

0.23
1.13
3.41
0.92
0.35
1.04
-1.35
1.89
-0.94
-0.89
2.21

1.99
2.29
3.69
1.40
2.43
2.11
1.54
1.60
0.55

1.96
3.15
2.01
2.88
3.66

2.03
1.92
2.15
2.11
2.11
2.11
2.10
2.07
2.01
2.04
2.07
2.22
2.02
2.02
2.05
2.02

1.03
1.25
2.14
1.05
1.08
1.23
0.43
1.63
0.57
0.53
1.69

1.80
1.89
2.52
1.55
1.92
1.85
1.58
1.60
1.00

2.05
2.94
2.32
2.74
3.34

2.00
1.89
2.13
2.07
2.10
2.13
2.10
2.09
1.92
2.12
2.12
2.15
2.03
2.07
2.09
2.05

1.41
1.29
1.48
1.10
1.42
1.30
1.30
1.47
1.31
1.22
1.41

1.48
1.43
1.52
1.48
1.38
1.49
1.42
1.41
1.14

2.15
2.35
2.03
2.33
2.52

1.99
1.89
2.12
2.07
2.10
2.12
2.10
2.09
1.91
2.11
2.11
2.15
2.03
2.06
2.09
2.05

1.47
1.31
1.43
1.13
1.48
1.33
1.41
1.48
1.41
1.31
1.40

1.07
1.00
1.01
1.10
0.94
1.07
1.04
1.02
0.80

2.14
2.08
1.88
2.13
2.17

State of the World’s Cities 2012/2013Statistical Annex

Table 4

City population and city population growth rate of urban agglomerations with 750,000 Inhabitants or More in 2009,  
by Country, 1950-2025 (thousands)

City Population of  

Urban Agglomerations (’000)

City Population Growth Rate of  

 Urban Agglomerations (%)

Country/City

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

2020

2025

1990-
1995

1995-
2000

2000-
2005

2005-
2010

2010-
2015

2015-
2020

2020-
2025

916

946

989

1,037

1,099

1,179

1,261

1,337

0.65

0.87

0.96

1.15

1.42

1.34

1.17

2.73
1.31
2.39

-0.23
0.13
0.12
-0.24
-0.45

0.73
0.04
0.02
0.44
0.20
0.26
0.46
0.51

2.22
1.76
1.81

-0.19
0.14
0.15
-0.20
-0.38

0.40
0.19
-0.01
0.49
0.17
0.73
0.90
0.67

0.87
1.89
1.65

0.07
0.24
0.32
0.06
0.03

0.33
0.17
-0.01
0.42
0.14
0.65
0.79
0.58

0.98
1.66
1.44

0.09
0.14
0.27
0.08
0.15

0.12
0.06
-0.00
0.15
0.05
0.23
0.28
0.21

0.99
1.17
0.96

0.00
0.01
0.10
0.00
0.02

0.01
0.01
-0.00
0.02
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.02

0.87
0.92
0.71

0.00
0.00
0.09
0.00
0.01

0.00
0.00
 —
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

-0.28
0.09
0.14
-0.14
-0.48

1.04
0.54
0.49
0.71
0.03
1.31
1.09
0.64

1,007

1,042

1,105

1,186

1,272

1,364

2.67

0.68

0.68

1.19

1.41

1.39

1.40

1,159

1,267

1,383

1,482

1,554

1,612

0.52

0.90

1.78

1.75

1.38

0.95

0.72

687
2,230

830
2,814

1,003
3,523

1,216
4,303

1,479
5,192

1,795
6,246

3.65
4.81

3.67
4.79

3.79
4.65

3.78
4.50

3.86
4.00

3.91
3.76

3.87
3.69

1,499

1,888

2,305

2,592

2,790

2,956

-3.13

4.62

4.61

3.99

2.35

1.47

1.16

770

820

864

912

967

1,034

2.03

1.82

1.27

1.03

1.08

1.17

1.36

612

702

831

1,035

1,270

1,501

3.32

2.75

2.75

3.39

4.39

4.08

3.35

1,487

1,777

1,937

2,033

2,090

2,135

-0.39

3.19

3.57

1.72

0.97

0.55

0.42

836

1,202

827

728

807

932 -16.18

11.76

7.27

-7.47

-2.56

2.06

2.88

1,022

1,059

1,108

1,192

1,286

1,364

2.64

0.77

0.71

0.89

1.48

1.51

1.17

1,361

1,590

1,879

2,235

2,658

3,148

4.20

3.04

3.10

3.34

3.47

3.46

3.39

137 

888
651
2,752

992
712
3,012

1,036
782
3,272

1,089
850
3,515

1,144
901
3,689

1,195
944
3,823

5.74
3.12
3.73

2,985
2,232
855
3,385
1,694

2,956
2,248
861
3,352
1,662

2,967
2,276
875
3,362
1,665

2,980
2,292
887
3,375
1,678

2,981
2,293
891
3,376
1,679

2,981
2,293
896
3,376
1,680

2,771
2,063
1,805
3,199

2,716
2,044
1,806
3,122

2,816
2,081
1,804
3,267

2,833
2,088
1,804
3,292

2,834
2,487
2,088
1,986
1,804
1,760
2,947
3,295
11,035 11,052 11,165 11,258 11,337 11,365 11,368 11,368
2,721
2,319
2,021
2,413
32,530 33,587 34,450 35,622 36,669 37,049 37,088 37,088

2,834
2,088
1,804
3,295

2,718
2,410

2,687
2,376

2,721
2,413

2,601
2,284

2,508
2,184

775
610
2,442

582
522
2,026

2,619
2,040
1,804
3,055

3,063
2,208
844
3,450
1,775

3,020
2,218
850
3,425
1,733

IRELAnD
Dublin
ISRAEL
Hefa (Haifa)
Jerusalem
Tel Aviv-Yafo  
(Tel Aviv-Jaffa)
ITALy
Milano (Milan)
Napoli (Naples)
Palermo
Roma (Rome)
Torino (Turin)
jAPAn
Fukuoka-Kitakyushu
Hiroshima
Kyoto
Nagoya
Osaka-Kobe
Sapporo
Sendai
Tokyo
jORDAn
Amman
kAzAkHSTAn
Almaty
kEnyA
Mombasa
Nairobi
kUWAIT
Al Kuwayt (Kuwait City)
kyRgyzSTAn
703
Bishkek
LAO PEOPLE’S DEmOCRATIC REPUBLIC
Vientiane
533
LEBAnOn
Bayrut (Beirut)
LIBERIA
Monrovia
LIByAn ARAB jAmAHIRIyA
Tarabulus (Tripoli)
mADAgASCAR
Antananarivo

2,476
2,135

572
1,755

476
1,380

1,190

1,293

1,392

1,268

1,080

1,109

948

1,169

851

973

862

984

1,042

464

451

635

Table 4

City population and city population growth rate of urban agglomerations with 750,000 Inhabitants or More in 2009,  
by Country, 1950-2025 (thousands)

City Population of  

Urban Agglomerations (’000)

City Population Growth Rate of  

 Urban Agglomerations (%)

Country/City

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

2020

2025

1990-
1995

1995-
2000

2000-
2005

2005-
2010

2010-
2015

2015-
2020

2020-
2025

mALAWI
Blantyre-Limbe
Lilongwe
mALAySIA
Johore Bharu
Klang
Kuala Lumpur
mALI
Bamako
mExICO
Aguascalientes
Chihuahua
Ciudad de México 
(Mexico City)
Ciudad Juárez
Culiacán
Guadalajara
Hermosillo
León de los Aldamas
Mérida
Mexicali
Monterrey
Puebla
Querétaro
Saltillo
San Luis Potosí
Tampico
Tijuana
Toluca de Lerdo
Torreón
mOngOLIA
Ulaanbaatar
mOROCCO
Agadir
Dar-el-Beida (Casablanca)
Fès
Marrakech
Rabat
Tanger
mOzAmBIQUE
Maputo
Matola

370
266

446
362

538
493

667
662

856
865

1,103
1,115

1,407
1,422

1,766
1,784

417
345
1,120

516
466
1,213

630
631
1,306

797
849
1,405

999
1,128
1,519

1,175
1,361
1,670

1,295
1,503
1,820

1,382
1,603
1,938

3.73
6.17

4.28
6.01
1.58

3.74
6.17

4.01
6.07
1.47

4.30
5.89

4.68
5.93
1.47

4.99
5.35

4.53
5.68
1.56

5.06
5.08

3.25
3.75
1.89

4.87
4.87

1.94
1.99
1.72

4.55
4.54

1.31
1.29
1.26

746

910

1,110

1,368

1,699

2,086

2,514

2,971

3.96

3.97

4.19

4.32

4.11

3.73

3.35

631
625

734
683

829
760

552
539

1,073
971
15,312 16,811 18,022 18,735 19,460 20,078 20,476 20,713

1,039
939

926
840

995
899

809
606
3,011
454
961
664
607
2,594
1,686
561
491
665
563
760
835
882

997
690
3,431
552
1,127
765
690
2,961
1,692
671
577
774
609
1,017
981
954

1,225
749
3,703
616
1,290
848
770
3,266
1,907
795
643
858
659
1,287
1,417
1,014

1,308
791
4,051
697
1,429
931
851
3,579
2,109
911
720
952
709
1,472
1,498
1,105

1,394
836
4,402
781
1,571
1,015
934
3,896
2,315
1,031
801
1,049
761
1,664
1,582
1,199

1,470
881
4,648
840
1,673
1,081
997
4,118
2,460
1,111
859
1,120
806
1,789
1,661
1,273

1,528
918
4,796
878
1,739
1,127
1,040
4,253
2,551
1,160
897
1,168
842
1,861
1,725
1,325

1,575
950
4,902
909
1,791
1,164
1,075
4,351
2,620
1,198
928
1,206
871
1,915
1,776
1,367

2.69
2.94
1.87

4.19
2.60
2.61
3.89
3.19
2.83
2.57
2.65
0.07
3.58
3.21
3.04
1.54
5.82
3.22
1.55

3.02
1.77
1.39

4.11
1.63
1.53
2.19
2.70
2.06
2.21
1.96
2.40
3.39
2.16
2.06
1.60
4.71
7.35
1.22

2.42
2.15
0.78

1.32
1.10
1.80
2.48
2.04
1.85
1.99
1.83
2.02
2.71
2.28
2.09
1.46
2.69
1.11
1.73

2.23
2.00
0.76

1.28
1.11
1.66
2.28
1.90
1.74
1.86
1.70
1.86
2.47
2.11
1.94
1.41
2.44
1.10
1.63

1.43
1.36
0.62

1.05
1.04
1.08
1.46
1.26
1.25
1.30
1.11
1.22
1.51
1.40
1.32
1.16
1.45
0.98
1.19

0.86
0.87
0.39

0.77
0.84
0.63
0.89
0.78
0.83
0.85
0.65
0.72
0.86
0.88
0.84
0.86
0.79
0.75
0.81

0.66
0.67
0.23

0.60
0.68
0.44
0.68
0.58
0.65
0.66
0.46
0.53
0.64
0.68
0.64
0.69
0.58
0.59
0.62

572

661

764

873

966

1,050

1,129

1,202

2.90

2.90

2.67

2.03

1.66

1.47

1.25

403
2,682
685
578
1,174
423

536
2,951
785
681
1,379
510

609
3,043
870
755
1,507
591

693
3,138
963
837
1,647
686

783
3,284
1,065
928
1,802
788

869
3,537
1,173
1,023
1,973
877

948
3,816
1,277
1,114
2,139
958

1,020
4,065
1,371
1,198
2,288
1,030

776
319

921
401

1,096
504

1,341
636

1,655
793

1,994
961

2,350
1,139

2,722
1,326

5.70
1.91
2.72
3.26
3.22
3.73

3.43
4.55

2.58
0.62
2.04
2.07
1.77
2.98

3.47
4.56

2.57
0.62
2.04
2.07
1.77
2.98

4.03
4.68

2.44
0.91
2.02
2.06
1.80
2.75

4.21
4.41

2.07
1.49
1.92
1.95
1.81
2.16

3.73
3.84

1.75
1.52
1.70
1.72
1.62
1.75

3.29
3.39

1.46
1.26
1.42
1.44
1.35
1.46

2.94
3.04

138 

State of the World’s Cities 2012/2013Table 4

City population and city population growth rate of urban agglomerations with 750,000 Inhabitants or More in 2009,  
by Country, 1950-2025 (thousands)

Statistical Annex

City Population of  

Urban Agglomerations (’000)

City Population Growth Rate of  

 Urban Agglomerations (%)

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

2020

2025

1990-
1995

1995-
2000

2000-
2005

2005-
2010

2010-
2015

2015-
2020

2020-
2025

636
 —
2,907

718
 —
3,213

810
 —
3,553

915
57
3,928

1,034
1,024
4,350

1,176
1,185
4,873

1,331
1,344
5,456

1,484
1,499
6,022

2.43
 —
2.01

2.43
 —
2.01

2.43
2.45
 — 57.77
2.01
2.04

2.57
2.92
2.27

2.48
2.52
2.26

2.18
2.18
1.98

398

509

644

817

1,037

1,295

1,589

1,915

4.92

4.70

4.76

4.78

4.44

4.10

3.73

936
951

988
981

1,005
991

1,023
1,000

1,049
1,010

1,076
1,026

1,097
1,044

1,110
1,057

1.09
0.62

0.34
0.19

0.37
0.19

0.49
0.19

0.50
0.31

0.40
0.36

0.23
0.24

870

976

1,063

1,189

1,404

1,566

1,631

1,671

2.30

1.71

2.24

3.33

2.17

0.82

0.48

735

865

887

909

944

1,015

1,103

1,192

3.26

0.50

0.50

0.74

1.46

1.67

1.54

432

542

680

848

1,048

1,302

1,643

2,105

4.54

4.55

4.42

4.22

4.35

4.65

4.96

484
330
689
1,739
515
493
961
2,095
4,764
598
622
680
592

545
526
845
1,993
580
556
1,083
2,360
5,966
673
704
766
667

614
832
975
2,236
653
627
1,220
2,658
7,233
758
798
863
752

914
2,563
1,523
3,276
972
934
1,811
3,922

785
1,995
1,302
2,837
835
802
1,561
3,395

1,058
2,977
1,758
3,760
1,125
1,081
2,087
4,495

1,203
691
3,361
1,315
1,992
1,124
4,237
2,509
1,279
735
1,229
706
2,362
1,375
2,993
5,060
8,767 10,578 12,427 14,162 15,810
1,480
1,576
1,681
1,471

1,303
1,389
1,482
1,295

1,127
1,201
1,283
1,120

970
1,032
1,104
963

854
904
972
847

2.38
9.31
4.08
2.73
2.38
2.39
2.39
2.38
4.50
2.37
2.49
2.38
2.39

2.38
9.16
2.85
2.30
2.38
2.39
2.39
2.38
3.85
2.37
2.49
2.38
2.39

2.38
9.16
2.85
2.30
2.38
2.39
2.39
2.38
3.85
2.37
2.49
2.38
2.39

2.55
8.33
2.95
2.46
2.55
2.56
2.55
2.52
3.76
2.54
2.65
2.55
2.56

3.04
5.01
3.13
2.88
3.03
3.04
2.97
2.89
3.22
3.01
3.04
3.00
3.02

2.93
3.00
2.88
2.75
2.92
2.93
2.84
2.73
2.61
2.90
2.90
2.88
2.90

2.57
2.43
2.50
2.39
2.56
2.57
2.48
2.37
2.20
2.54
2.53
2.52
2.54

684

729

774

818

888

946

985

1,019

1.28

1.19

1.12

1.64

1.25

0.82

0.68

1,520
848
950
343
7,147
3,970
953
769
414
1,087

1,804
1,019
1,077
452

2,140
1,224
1,222
595

2,496
1,441
1,394
737

3,252
1,893
1,822
985

2,849
1,652
1,590
856

3,704
2,165
2,084
1,132

4,200
2,464
2,373
1,295
8,467 10,021 11,618 13,125 14,818 16,693 18,725
9,150 10,308
4,653
2,474
2,174
1,097
2,128
1,868
905
504
1,113
1,272
3,008
2,646
1,286

8,087
1,901
1,632
968
2,318

7,132
1,659
1,422
841
2,026

5,449
1,263
1,066
614
1,520

6,294
1,453
1,242
729
1,772

3.43
3.69
2.51
5.54
3.39
3.17
2.82
3.27
3.96
3.36

3.41
3.67
2.52
5.47
3.37
3.16
2.83
3.27
3.93
3.34

3.08
3.26
2.64
4.28
2.96
2.88
2.80
3.05
3.45
3.07

2.64
2.74
2.64
3.00
2.44
2.50
2.66
2.72
2.85
2.68

2.65
2.72
2.73
2.83
2.43
2.51
2.72
2.74
2.82
2.69

2.60
2.68
2.68
2.77
2.38
2.47
2.68
2.70
2.78
2.65

2.51
2.59
2.60
2.68
2.30
2.38
2.59
2.61
2.69
2.56

Country/City

myAnmAR
Mandalay
Nay Pyi Taw
Yangon
nEPAL
Kathmandu
nETHERLAnDS
Amsterdam
Rotterdam
nEW zEALAnD
Auckland
nICARAgUA
Managua
nIgER
Niamey
nIgERIA
Aba
Abuja
Benin City
Ibadan
Ilorin
Jos
Kaduna
Kano
Lagos
Maiduguri
Ogbomosho
Port Harcourt
Zaria
nORWAy
Oslo
PAkISTAn
Faisalabad
Gujranwala
Hyderabad
Islamabad
Karachi
Lahore
Multan
Peshawar
Quetta
Rawalpindi

139 

Table 4

City population and city population growth rate of urban agglomerations with 750,000 Inhabitants or More in 2009,  
by Country, 1950-2025 (thousands)

City Population of  

Urban Agglomerations (’000)

City Population Growth Rate of  

 Urban Agglomerations (%)

Country/City

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

2020

2025

1990-
1995

1995-
2000

2000-
2005

2005-
2010

2010-
2015

2015-
2020

2020-
2025

PAnAmA
Ciudad de Panamá 
(Panama City)
PARAgUAy
Asunción
PERU
Arequipa
Lima
PHILIPPInES
Cebu
Davao
Manila
Zamboanga
POLAnD
Kraków (Cracow)
Warszawa (Warsaw)
PORTUgAL
Lisboa (Lisbon)
Porto
PUERTO RICO
San Juan
REPUBLIC OF kOREA
Bucheon
Busan
Daegu
Daejon
Goyang
Gwangju
Incheon
Seongnam
Seoul
Suweon
Ulsan
ROmAnIA
Bucuresti (Bucharest)
RUSSIAn FEDERATIOn
Chelyabinsk
Kazan
Krasnoyarsk
Moskva (Moscow)
Nizhniy Novgorod
Novosibirsk
Omsk
Perm
Rostov-na-Donu  
(Rostov-on-Don)

847

953

1,072

1,216

1,378

1,527

1,652

1,758

2.36

2.36

2.51

2.51

2.04

1.59

1.24

1,091

1,287

1,507

1,762

2,030

2,277

2,505

2,715

3.32

3.15

3.13

2.83

2.30

1.91

1.61

564
5,837

628
6,582

678
7,294

732
8,081

789
8,941

903

848

953
9,659 10,145 10,530

612
854
7,973
444

661
1,001
9,401
509

787
1,325

860
1,519

1,162
721
1,152
2,080
9,958 10,761 11,628 12,587 13,687 14,916
1,201

1,046
1,881

945
1,701

1,082

973

854

721

605

735
1,628

748
1,652

756
1,666

757
1,693

756
1,712

756
1,720

756
1,722

756
1,722

2,537
1,164

2,600
1,206

2,672
1,254

2,747
1,303

2,824
1,355

2,907
1,407

2,973
1,448

3,009
1,473

2.17
2.40

1.53
3.17
3.30
2.71

0.35
0.29

0.49
0.72

1.52
2.05

1.75
2.81
1.15
3.47

0.21
0.17

0.55
0.77

1.52
2.05

1.76
2.80
1.55
3.50

0.04
0.33

0.55
0.77

1.52
2.02

1.77
2.72
1.55
3.38

1.43
1.55

1.89
2.27
1.58
2.61

1.25
0.98

2.04
2.02
1.68
2.13

1.09
0.75

2.09
2.01
1.72
2.09

-0.03
0.22

-0.01
0.09

-0.00
0.02

-0.00
0.00

0.55
0.77

0.58
0.76

0.45
0.57

0.24
0.35

1,539

1,855

2,237

2,601

2,743

2,763

2,763

2,763

3.74

3.74

3.01

1.07

0.14

0.00

 —

651
3,778
2,215
1,036
241
1,122
1,785
534

771
3,813
2,434
1,256
493
1,249
2,271
842
10,544 10,256
748
945

628
673

763
3,673
2,478
1,362
744
1,346
2,464
911
9,917
932
1,011

833
3,533
2,466
1,438
859
1,413
2,527
934
9,825
1,037
1,047

909
3,425
2,458
1,509
961
1,476
2,583
955
9,773
1,132
1,081

948
3,407
2,474
1,550
1,012
1,513
2,621
974
9,767
1,180
1,106

960
3,409
2,481
1,562
1,025
1,524
2,630
983
9,767
1,193
1,116

961
3,409
2,481
1,562
1,026
1,525
2,631
984
9,767
1,194
1,117

3.39
0.18
1.88
3.85
14.28
2.16
4.82
9.10
-0.55
3.50
6.80

-0.23
-0.75
0.36
1.62
8.25
1.49
1.62
1.59
-0.67
4.42
1.36

1.77
-0.78
-0.10
1.09
2.88
0.97
0.51
0.48
-0.19
2.13
0.69

1.73
-0.62
-0.06
0.97
2.23
0.86
0.43
0.45
-0.11
1.74
0.65

0.85
-0.11
0.12
0.54
1.03
0.50
0.29
0.39
-0.01
0.84
0.45

0.24
0.01
0.06
0.15
0.25
0.15
0.07
0.19
-0.00
0.21
0.18

0.03
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.01
0.00
0.02
-0.00
0.01
0.02

2,040

2,018

1,949

1,931

1,934

1,947

1,959

1,963

-0.21

-0.69

-0.19

0.03

0.12

0.13

0.05

1,129
1,092
910
8,987
1,420
1,430
1,144
1,076
1,022

1,082
1,096
911

1,094
1,112
920

1,104
1,092
911

1,094
1,140
961

1,095
1,159
991

1,095
1,164
998

1,095
1,164
999
9,201 10,005 10,418 10,550 10,641 10,662 10,663
1,375
1,253
1,398
1,428
1,112
1,140
972
1,044
1,041
1,038

1,256
1,397
1,114
974
1,040

1,267
1,397
1,124
982
1,046

1,253
1,398
1,112
972
1,038

1,286
1,400
1,140
992
1,056

1,331
1,426
1,136
1,014
1,061

-0.45
-0.01
0.02
0.47
-0.65
-0.03
-0.07
-0.59
0.38

-0.40
0.07
0.02
1.67
-0.65
-0.03
-0.07
-0.59
0.38

0.21
0.29
0.18
0.81
-0.69
-0.38
0.08
-0.43
-0.10

0.01
0.49
0.88
0.25
-0.29
-0.04
-0.28
-0.20
-0.19

0.01
0.35
0.62
0.17
-0.19
0.00
-0.18
-0.16
-0.12

0.00
0.08
0.14
0.04
-0.04
0.00
-0.04
-0.04
-0.03

0.00
0.00
0.01
0.00
-0.00
0.00
-0.00
-0.00
-0.00

140 

State of the World’s Cities 2012/2013Statistical Annex

Table 4

City population and city population growth rate of urban agglomerations with 750,000 Inhabitants or More in 2009,  
by Country, 1950-2025 (thousands)

City Population of  

Urban Agglomerations (’000)

City Population Growth Rate of  

 Urban Agglomerations (%)

Country/City

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

2020

2025

1990-
1995

1995-
2000

2000-
2005

2005-
2010

2010-
2015

2015-
2020

2020-
2025

Samara
Sankt Peterburg  
(Saint Petersburg)
Saratov
Ufa
Volgograd
Voronezh
Yekaterinburg
RWAnDA
Kigali
SAUDI ARABIA
Ad-Dammam
Al-Madinah (Medina)
Ar-Riyadh (Riyadh)
Jiddah
Makkah (Mecca)
SEnEgAL
Dakar
SERBIA
Beograd (Belgrade)
SIERRA LEOnE
Freetown
SIngAPORE
Singapore
SOmALIA
Muqdisho (Mogadishu)
SOUTH AFRICA
Cape Town
Durban
Ekurhuleni (East Rand)
Johannesburg
Port Elizabeth
Pretoria
Vereeniging
SPAIn
Barcelona
Madrid
Valencia
SUDAn
Al-Khartum (Khartoum)
SWEDEn
Stockholm
SWITzERLAnD
Zürich (Zurich)

1,244
4,989

1,208
4,836

1,173
4,719

1,146
4,598

1,131
4,575

1,121
4,561

1,119
4,557

1,119
4,557

-0.58
-0.62

901
1,078
999
880
1,350

890
1,063
1,005
867
1,326

878
1,049
1,010
854
1,303

853
1,032
994
847
1,307

822
1,023
977
842
1,344

802
1,017
967
839
1,370

798
1,016
965
838
1,376

797
1,016
964
838
1,377

-0.25
-0.27
0.11
-0.30
-0.35

-0.58
-0.49

-0.25
-0.27
0.11
-0.30
-0.35

-0.48
-0.52

-0.60
-0.33
-0.32
-0.17
0.06

-0.27
-0.10

-0.74
-0.18
-0.34
-0.12
0.56

-0.16
-0.06

-0.49
-0.10
-0.21
-0.07
0.39

-0.04
-0.01

-0.11
-0.02
-0.05
-0.02
0.09

-0.00
-0.00

-0.01
-0.00
-0.00
-0.00
0.00

219

278

497

775

939

1,138

1,392

1,690

4.77

11.63

8.86

3.85

3.84

4.02

3.88

409
529
2,325
1,742
856

533
669
3,035
2,200
1,033

639
795
3,567
2,509
1,168

766
944
4,193
2,860
1,319

902
1,104
4,848
3,234
1,484

1,013
1,236
5,373
3,569
1,642

1,109
1,351
5,809
3,868
1,789

1,197
1,456
6,196
4,138
1,924

5.30
4.69
5.33
4.66
3.76

3.63
3.45
3.23
2.63
2.45

3.62
3.45
3.23
2.62
2.45

3.26
3.12
2.90
2.46
2.35

2.33
2.27
2.06
1.97
2.02

1.80
1.77
1.56
1.61
1.72

1.53
1.50
1.29
1.35
1.46

1,405

1,688

2,029

2,434

2,863

3,308

3,796

4,338

3.67

3.68

3.64

3.25

2.89

2.75

2.67

1,130

1,128

1,122

1,116

1,117

1,131

1,149

1,168

-0.03

-0.11

-0.11

0.03

0.25

0.31

0.32

529

603

688

785

901

1,046

1,219

1,420

2.62

2.63

2.62

2.76

2.99

3.06

3.05

3,016

3,480

4,018

4,267

4,837

5,059

5,219

5,362

2.86

2.88

1.20

2.51

0.90

0.63

0.54

1,035

1,147

1,201

1,415

1,500

1,795

2,156

2,588

2.04

0.92

3.28

1.17

3.59

3.67

3.66

2,155
1,723
1,531
1,898
828
911
743

4,101
4,414
776

2,394
2,081
1,894
2,265
911
951
800

4,318
4,688
785

2,715
2,370
2,326
2,732
958
1,084
897

4,560
5,014
795

3,091
2,638
2,824
3,263
1,002
1,274
1,029

4,815
5,409
804

3,405
2,879
3,202
3,670
1,068
1,429
1,143

5,083
5,851
814

3,579
3,026
3,380
3,867
1,126
1,514
1,211

5,315
6,213
832

3,701
3,133
3,497
3,996
1,173
1,575
1,262

5,443
6,379
857

3,824
3,241
3,614
4,127
1,222
1,637
1,313

5,477
6,412
873

2.10
3.77
4.26
3.53
1.93
0.85
1.48

1.03
1.20
0.25

2.52
2.60
4.11
3.75
1.00
2.61
2.30

1.09
1.35
0.24

2.59
2.15
3.88
3.55
0.90
3.24
2.75

1.09
1.52
0.24

1.93
1.75
2.51
2.35
1.27
2.29
2.09

1.09
1.57
0.24

1.00
1.00
1.08
1.05
1.06
1.16
1.16

0.89
1.20
0.44

0.67
0.69
0.68
0.66
0.83
0.79
0.82

0.48
0.53
0.58

0.65
0.68
0.66
0.64
0.82
0.77
0.81

0.12
0.10
0.38

2,360

3,242

3,949

4,518

5,172

6,046

7,005

7,953

6.35

3.95

2.69

2.70

3.12

2.95

2.54

1,038

1,138

1,206

1,248

1,285

1,309

1,327

1,345

1.83

1.16

0.69

0.59

0.36

0.28

0.26

1,006

1,048

1,078

1,114

1,150

1,177

1,196

1,217

0.83

0.56

0.65

0.64

0.45

0.32

0.35

141 

Table 4

City population and city population growth rate of urban agglomerations with 750,000 Inhabitants or More in 2009,  
by Country, 1950-2025 (thousands)

City Population of  

Urban Agglomerations (’000)

City Population Growth Rate of  

 Urban Agglomerations (%)

Country/City

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

2020

2025

1990-
1995

1995-
2000

2000-
2005

2005-
2010

2010-
2015

2015-
2020

2020-
2025

619

644

5,888

1,691
1,554
309
565

907
2,561
370
819
595
6,552
1,741
508

SyRIAn ARAB REPUBLIC
Dimashq (Damascus)
Halab (Aleppo)
Hamah
Hims (Homs)
THAILAnD
Krung Thep (Bangkok)
TOgO
Lomé
TUnISIA
Tunis
TURkEy
Adana
Ankara
Antalya
Bursa
Gaziantep
Istanbul
Izmir
Konya
UgAnDA
Kampala
UkRAInE
Dnipropetrovsk
Donetsk
Kharkiv
Kyiv (Kiev)
Odesa
Zaporizhzhya
UnITED ARAB EmIRATES
Dubayy (Dubai)
Sharjah
UnITED kIngDOm
Birmingham
Glasgow
Liverpool
London
Manchester
Newcastle upon Tyne
West Yorkshire
UnITED REPUBLIC OF TAnzAnIA
Dar es Salaam

2,301
1,217
831
7,654
2,282
877
1,449

1,162
1,097
1,586
2,574
1,092
873

473
229

1,316

755

1,854
1,864
361
684

2,063
2,204
495
856

2,294
2,605
676
1,072

2,597
3,087
897
1,328

2,918
3,510
1,060
1,536

3,213
3,864
1,180
1,702

3,534
4,244
1,307
1,881

1.85
3.64
3.12
3.83

2.13
3.35
6.27
4.49

2.13
3.35
6.26
4.49

2.48
3.39
5.65
4.29

2.33
2.57
3.34
2.91

1.93
1.92
2.14
2.06

1.90
1.88
2.05
1.99

6,106

6,332

6,614

6,976

7,399

7,902

8,470

0.73

0.73

0.87

1.07

1.18

1.31

1.39

795

1,020

1,310

1,667

2,036

2,398

2,763

5.00

5.00

5.00

4.82

4.00

3.27

2.84

682

711

734

767

814

864

911

1.16

0.84

0.63

0.87

1.21

1.19

1.04

1,011
2,842
471
981
710
7,665
1,966
610

1,123
3,179
595
1,180
844
8,744
2,216
734

1,245
3,572
736
1,413
992

1,361
3,906
838
1,588
1,109

1,465
4,174
909
1,711
1,197

1,556
4,401
969
1,816
1,274

1,635
4,591
1,022
1,906
1,341
9,710 10,525 11,164 11,689 12,108
3,224
2,487
871
1,186

3,083
1,125

2,917
1,057

2,723
978

2.18
2.08
4.83
3.62
3.54
3.14
2.43
3.66

2.10
2.25
4.67
3.69
3.47
2.63
2.39
3.69

2.06
2.33
4.26
3.60
3.22
2.10
2.31
3.42

1.79
1.79
2.62
2.33
2.22
1.61
1.81
2.31

1.46
1.33
1.61
1.50
1.53
1.18
1.38
1.56

1.21
1.06
1.28
1.19
1.24
0.92
1.11
1.26

0.99
0.85
1.06
0.97
1.02
0.70
0.90
1.04

912

1,097

1,318

1,598

1,982

2,504

3,189

3.79

3.68

3.68

3.85

4.31

4.67

4.83

1,119
1,061
1,534
2,590
1,064
847

1,077
1,026
1,484
2,606
1,037
822

1,052
997
1,464
2,673
1,007
797

1,004
966
1,453
2,805
1,009
775

974
946
1,446
2,894
1,010
761

967
941
1,444
2,914
1,011
758

967
941
1,444
2,915
1,011
758

-0.77
-0.67
-0.66
0.13
-0.52
-0.60

650
311

906
444

1,264
637

1,567
809

1,772
926

1,934
1,016

2,076
1,096

6.36
6.11

2,291
1,186
829
7,908
2,264
883
1,468

2,285
1,171
818
8,225
2,248
880
1,495

2,283
1,160
811
8,506
2,237
880
1,521

2,302
1,170
819
8,631
2,253
891
1,547

2,337
1,193
837
8,693
2,287
911
1,575

2,375
1,218
857
8,753
2,325
932
1,606

2,415
1,245
878
8,816
2,364
954
1,637

-0.09
-0.52
-0.05
0.65
-0.16
0.14
0.27

-0.77
-0.67
-0.66
0.13
-0.52
-0.60

6.64
7.12

-0.05
-0.26
-0.26
0.79
-0.14
-0.07
0.36

-0.47
-0.57
-0.28
0.51
-0.57
-0.61

6.67
7.22

-0.02
-0.19
-0.18
0.67
-0.10
-0.01
0.34

-0.93
-0.64
-0.15
0.96
0.04
-0.56

4.30
4.78

0.17
0.17
0.21
0.29
0.14
0.26
0.34

-0.61
-0.41
-0.10
0.63
0.02
-0.36

2.46
2.69

0.30
0.39
0.44
0.14
0.30
0.43
0.37

-0.14
-0.09
-0.02
0.14
0.01
-0.08

1.76
1.86

0.32
0.42
0.47
0.14
0.33
0.46
0.38

-0.01
-0.01
-0.00
0.01
0.00
-0.00

1.42
1.51

0.33
0.43
0.48
0.14
0.33
0.47
0.39

1,668

2,116

2,680

3,349

4,153

5,103

6,202

4.75

4.75

4.73

4.46

4.30

4.12

3.90

142 

State of the World’s Cities 2012/2013Statistical Annex

Table 4

City population and city population growth rate of urban agglomerations with 750,000 Inhabitants or More in 2009,  
by Country, 1950-2025 (thousands)

City Population of  

Urban Agglomerations (’000)

City Population Growth Rate of  

 Urban Agglomerations (%)

Country/City

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

2020

2025

1990-
1995

1995-
2000

2000-
2005

2005-
2010

2010-
2015

2015-
2020

2020-
2025

2,184
569
1,849
3,428
714
955
461
7,374
1,335
1,680
950
3,219
616
1,528
3,703
573
783
635
2,922
921
742
1,233
708

UnITED STATES OF AmERICA
Atlanta
Austin
Baltimore
Boston
Bridgeport-Stamford
Buffalo
Charlotte
Chicago
Cincinnati
Cleveland
Columbus, Ohio
Dallas-Fort Worth
Dayton
Denver-Aurora
Detroit
El Paso
Hartford
Honolulu
Houston
Indianapolis
Jacksonville, Florida
Kansas City
Las Vegas
Los Angeles- 
Long Beach-Santa Ana
Louisville
McAllen
Memphis
Miami
Milwaukee
Minneapolis-St. Paul
Nashville-Davidson
New Orleans
New York-Newark
Oklahoma City
Orlando
Philadelphia
Phoenix-Mesa
Pittsburgh
Portland
Providence
Raleigh
Richmond

711
893
4,725
2,025
1,681
1,181
1,047
310
696

2,781
720
1,962
3,726
799
966
596
7,839
1,419
1,734
1,040
3,665
659
1,747
3,804
623
818
676
3,353
1,063
811
1,297
973

5,153
1,373
2,579
5,034
1,193
1,181
1,183
9,936
1,887
2,166
1,478
5,421
909
2,662
4,608
887
1,067
923
5,051
1,674
1,157
1,697
2,147
10,883 11,339 11,814 12,303 12,762 13,156 13,463 13,677

4,691
1,215
2,320
4,593
1,055
1,045
1,043
9,204
1,686
1,942
1,313
4,951
800
2,394
4,200
779
942
812
4,605
1,490
1,022
1,513
1,916

4,886
1,277
2,421
4,773
1,108
1,096
1,098
9,513
1,764
2,029
1,376
5,145
841
2,501
4,363
820
989
854
4,789
1,562
1,074
1,584
2,011

5,036
1,329
2,508
4,920
1,154
1,142
1,144
9,758
1,831
2,104
1,432
5,301
878
2,590
4,500
856
1,031
891
4,937
1,623
1,119
1,645
2,086

3,542
913
2,083
4,049
894
977
769
8,333
1,508
1,789
1,138
4,172
706
1,998
3,909
678
853
720
3,849
1,228
886
1,365
1,335

4,306
1,107
2,206
4,363
987
1,000
946
8,818
1,600
1,856
1,236
4,657
754
2,240
4,036
732
894
767
4,322
1,387
962
1,438
1,721

866
532
976
4,946
1,311
2,397
755
1,009

1,108
757
901
268
1,262
829
6,275
3,969
1,603
1,228
2,984
2,087
1,034
577
1,039
1,044
16,086 16,943 17,846 18,727 19,425 19,968 20,374 20,636
923
1,575
6,135
4,063
2,106
2,173
1,482
879
1,070

891
1,526
6,004
3,965
2,045
2,110
1,435
848
1,034

812
1,400
5,626
3,684
1,887
1,944
1,317
769
944

854
1,468
5,833
3,840
1,971
2,035
1,380
812
991

748
1,165
5,160
2,934
1,755
1,595
1,178
549
822

773
1,306
5,395
3,418
1,807
1,811
1,249
692
888

810
377
899
4,431
1,269
2,236
660
1,024

729
1,020
4,938
2,437
1,717
1,372
1,111
413
757

925
701
1,053
5,436
1,362
2,557
848
996

979
789
1,117
5,750
1,428
2,693
911
858

1,028
833
1,173
5,967
1,495
2,808
958
921

1,071
870
1,221
6,142
1,554
2,905
999
984

143 

4.84
4.73
1.19
1.66
2.25
0.23
5.10
1.22
1.22
0.63
1.81
2.59
1.37
2.68
0.54
1.67
0.86
1.27
2.76
2.87
1.78
1.02
6.34
0.82

1.34
6.87
1.64
2.20
0.65
1.38
2.69
-0.30
1.04
0.51
2.66
0.88
3.71
0.43
3.01
1.18
5.71
1.66

4.84
4.73
1.19
1.66
2.25
0.23
5.10
1.22
1.22
0.63
1.81
2.59
1.37
2.68
0.54
1.67
0.86
1.27
2.76
2.87
1.78
1.02
6.34
0.82

1.34
6.87
1.64
2.20
0.65
1.39
2.69
-0.30
1.04
0.51
2.66
0.88
3.71
0.43
3.01
1.18
5.71
1.66

3.90
3.87
1.15
1.49
1.99
0.45
4.16
1.13
1.19
0.73
1.65
2.20
1.33
2.29
0.64
1.56
0.93
1.25
2.32
2.45
1.63
1.04
5.08
0.81

1.30
5.51
1.52
1.89
0.76
1.30
2.32
-0.26
0.96
0.67
2.29
0.89
3.05
0.58
2.54
1.16
4.63
1.54

1.72
1.85
1.01
1.03
1.32
0.89
1.94
0.86
1.05
0.90
1.21
1.22
1.17
1.33
0.80
1.23
1.04
1.14
1.27
1.42
1.23
1.02
2.14
0.73

1.14
2.36
1.19
1.12
0.94
1.03
1.44
-2.99
0.73
0.98
1.38
0.84
1.50
0.87
1.42
1.07
2.11
1.21

0.81
1.00
0.85
0.77
0.98
0.95
1.03
0.66
0.90
0.87
0.95
0.77
1.01
0.87
0.76
1.02
0.98
1.00
0.78
0.94
0.98
0.91
0.97
0.61

0.98
1.10
0.97
0.74
0.91
0.84
1.01
1.43
0.55
0.99
0.95
0.72
0.83
0.87
0.91
0.93
1.08
0.99

0.60
0.80
0.70
0.61
0.82
0.82
0.82
0.51
0.75
0.73
0.79
0.60
0.86
0.70
0.62
0.86
0.83
0.85
0.61
0.77
0.82
0.77
0.73
0.46

0.83
0.86
0.81
0.58
0.77
0.68
0.84
1.33
0.40
0.85
0.78
0.58
0.64
0.73
0.73
0.79
0.86
0.83

0.46
0.65
0.56
0.46
0.67
0.67
0.67
0.36
0.60
0.58
0.64
0.45
0.71
0.55
0.47
0.71
0.68
0.71
0.46
0.62
0.67
0.62
0.58
0.32

0.68
0.71
0.66
0.43
0.63
0.54
0.69
1.18
0.26
0.71
0.63
0.43
0.49
0.59
0.58
0.64
0.71
0.68

Table 4

City population and city population growth rate of urban agglomerations with 750,000 Inhabitants or More in 2009,  
by Country, 1950-2025 (thousands)

City Population of  

Urban Agglomerations (’000)

City Population Growth Rate of  

 Urban Agglomerations (%)

Country/City

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

2020

2025

1990-
1995

1995-
2000

2000-
2005

2005-
2010

2010-
2015

2015-
2020

2020-
2025

1,546

1,584

2,100

2,116

1,336
658
1,244
840
1,229
2,514
3,095
1,457
2,453
2,014
1,886
649
1,341
3,651

1,178
621
1,104
792
1,134
2,356
2,961
1,376
2,206
1,950
1,717
582
1,286
3,376

Riverside-San Bernardino
Rochester
Sacramento
Salt Lake City
San Antonio
San Diego
San Francisco-Oakland
San Jose
Seattle
St. Louis
Tampa-St. Petersburg
Tucson
Virginia Beach
Washington, D.C.
URUgUAy
Montevideo
UzBEkISTAn
Tashkent
vEnEzUELA (BOLIvARIAn REPUBLIC OF)
Barquisimeto
Caracas
Maracaibo
Maracay
Valencia
vIET nAm
Da Nang - CP
Hà Noi
Hai Phòng
Thành Pho Ho Chí Minh  
(Ho Chi Minh City)
yEmEn
Sana'a'
zAmBIA
Lusaka
zImBABWE
Harare

838
2,816
1,501
831
1,213

742
2,767
1,303
760
1,053

470
1,344
1,585
3,802

388
1,136
1,474
3,411

1,047

1,255

653

1,034

757

902

1,516
696
1,402
890
1,333
2,683
3,236
1,543
2,727
2,081
2,072
724
1,397
3,949

1,691
738
1,555
944
1,436
2,853
3,386
1,632
2,991
2,160
2,253
798
1,461
4,239

1,807
780
1,660
997
1,521
2,999
3,541
1,718
3,171
2,259
2,387
853
1,534
4,460

1,891
820
1,739
1,047
1,593
3,125
3,683
1,797
3,305
2,357
2,492
898
1,605
4,635

1,962
857
1,805
1,091
1,655
3,231
3,804
1,865
3,415
2,442
2,581
936
1,668
4,779

2,021
888
1,861
1,129
1,707
3,316
3,900
1,922
3,504
2,511
2,653
970
1,720
4,891

2.53
1.14
2.39
1.17
1.62
1.30
0.89
1.14
2.12
0.65
1.88
2.18
0.83
1.57

2.53
1.14
2.39
1.17
1.62
1.30
0.89
1.14
2.12
0.65
1.88
2.18
0.83
1.57

2.18
1.15
2.08
1.17
1.49
1.23
0.91
1.13
1.85
0.74
1.68
1.94
0.89
1.42

1.32
1.12
1.30
1.10
1.15
1.00
0.89
1.03
1.17
0.89
1.15
1.33
0.97
1.01

0.91
1.01
0.92
0.97
0.92
0.82
0.79
0.90
0.83
0.85
0.86
1.01
0.91
0.77

0.74
0.86
0.75
0.83
0.77
0.67
0.64
0.75
0.66
0.71
0.70
0.85
0.76
0.61

0.59
0.71
0.60
0.68
0.62
0.52
0.50
0.60
0.51
0.56
0.55
0.70
0.62
0.46

1,605

1,622

1,635

1,644

1,653

1,657

0.49

0.26

0.21

0.16

0.11

0.11

0.04

2,135

2,169

2,210

2,279

2,420

2,616

0.15

0.17

0.32

0.37

0.62

1.20

1.55

946
2,864
1,724
898
1,392

570
1,631
1,704
4,336

1,067
2,929
1,973
973
1,592

692
2,144
1,831
5,264

1,180
3,090
2,192
1,057
1,770

838
2,814
1,970
6,167

1,273
3,292
2,357
1,138
1,905

997
3,516
2,164
7,140

1,350
3,467
2,488
1,208
2,014

1,146
4,056
2,432
8,067

1,413
3,605
2,593
1,266
2,103

1,291
4,530
2,722
8,957

2.42
0.35
2.82
1.77
2.82

3.86
3.35
1.45
2.17

2.43
0.34
2.77
1.56
2.76

3.86
3.88
1.45
2.63

2.39
0.45
2.70
1.59
2.69

3.85
5.46
1.45
3.88

2.02
1.07
2.10
1.67
2.12

3.85
5.44
1.46
3.17

1.52
1.27
1.45
1.48
1.48

3.47
4.45
1.88
2.93

1.17
1.03
1.08
1.19
1.11

2.78
2.86
2.34
2.44

0.92
0.78
0.83
0.93
0.86

2.38
2.21
2.25
2.09

1,365

1,801

2,342

2,934

3,585

4,296

9.18

5.55

5.54

5.26

4.51

4.01

3.62

1,073

1,265

1,451

1,666

1,941

2,267

3.49

3.49

3.29

2.74

2.77

3.05

3.10

1,379

1,513

1,632

1,856

2,170

2,467

3.62

1.89

1.85

1.51

2.57

3.13

2.57

Source: United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division (2010) World Urbanization Prospects: The 2009 Revision, United Nations, New York.

144 

State of the World’s Cities 2012/2013Statistical Annex

Table 5

Urban Population and Urbanization by Country, 1990-2030

Country

1990

2000

2010

2020

2030

1990

2000

2010

2020

2030

Urban Population (’000)

Level of urbanization (%)

AFRICA
Algeria
Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon
Cape Verde
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros
Congo
Côte d'Ivoire
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Djibouti
Egypt
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Gabon
Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mayotte
Morocco
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Réunion
Rwanda
Saint Helena
Sao Tome and Principe
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone

13,168
3,960
1,654
567
1,218
356
4,981
156
1,078
1,271
122
1,329
5,011
10,299
424
25,124
132
499
6,095
641
343
5,454
1,723
288
4,271
224
887
3,305
2,657
1,093
2,018
789
464
33
12,005
2,857
392
1,215
34,343
491
387
2
51
2,932
35
1,345

18,246
6,995
2,553
917
2,083
536
7,910
235
1,410
1,964
155
1,770
7,524
15,168
555
30,032
205
650
9,762
989
639
8,584
2,603
387
6,204
377
1,252
4,083
4,143
1,796
2,982
1,041
510
71
15,375
5,601
590
1,785
53,078
650
1,096
2
75
3,995
41
1,501

34,097
21,784
8,275
1,769
11,958
2,362
20,304
468
2,978
7,843
356
3,883
20,873
53,382
956
56,477
527
2,780
31,383
1,853
1,943
22,565
8,219
979
20,884
999
3,725
7,060
13,048
8,395
10,491
2,478
681
168
27,157
18,199
1,541
7,641
144,116
972
4,550
2
173
10,269
62
4,384

23,555
11,112
3,873
1,209
4,184
937
11,655
313
1,755
3,179
195
2,335
10,906
23,887
670
36,664
275
1,127
14,158
1,292
1,018
12,524
3,651
494
9,064
560
1,961
5,098
6,082
3,102
4,777
1,395
542
100
18,859
8,996
840
2,719
78,818
787
1,938
2
103
5,450
47
2,241

29,194
16,184
5,751
1,506
7,523
1,524
15,941
394
2,268
5,054
259
3,118
15,574
36,834
798
45,301
379
1,845
20,800
1,579
1,449
17,274
5,580
678
13,826
775
2,739
6,181
8,953
5,240
7,325
1,859
595
129
23,158
13,208
1,161
4,417
109,859
891
2,993
2
136
7,524
54
3,134

145 

52.1
37.1
34.5
41.9
13.8
6.3
40.7
44.1
36.8
20.8
27.9
54.3
39.7
27.8
75.7
43.5
34.7
15.8
12.6
69.1
38.3
36.4
28.0
28.1
18.2
14.0
40.9
75.7
23.6
11.6
23.3
39.7
43.9
36.1
48.4
21.1
27.7
15.4
35.3
81.2
5.4
41.6
43.6
38.9
49.3
32.9

59.8
49.0
38.3
53.2
17.8
8.3
49.9
53.4
37.6
23.4
28.1
58.3
43.5
29.8
76.0
42.8
38.8
17.8
14.9
80.1
49.1
44.0
31.0
29.7
19.7
20.0
44.3
76.4
27.1
15.2
28.3
40.0
42.7
47.7
53.3
30.7
32.4
16.2
42.5
89.9
13.8
39.7
53.4
40.3
51.0
35.5

66.5
58.5
42.0
61.1
25.7
11.0
58.4
61.1
38.9
27.6
28.2
62.1
50.6
35.2
76.2
43.4
39.7
21.6
16.7
86.0
58.1
51.5
35.4
30.0
22.2
26.9
47.8
77.9
30.2
19.8
35.9
41.4
41.8
50.1
58.2
38.4
38.0
17.1
49.8
94.0
18.9
39.7
62.2
42.4
55.3
38.4

71.9
66.0
47.2
67.6
34.4
14.8
65.5
67.4
42.5
33.9
30.8
66.3
57.8
42.0
77.6
45.9
43.3
27.5
19.3
88.8
65.0
58.4
41.4
32.8
26.6
34.5
52.1
80.3
34.9
25.5
43.7
45.4
43.4
51.6
64.0
46.3
44.4
19.3
56.8
95.7
22.6
41.7
69.0
46.5
61.1
42.8

76.2
71.6
53.7
72.7
42.8
19.8
71.0
72.5
48.4
41.2
36.5
70.9
64.1
49.2
80.2
50.9
49.4
34.4
23.9
90.6
71.0
64.7
48.6
38.6
33.0
42.4
57.6
82.9
41.4
32.4
51.3
51.7
48.0
55.7
69.2
53.7
51.5
23.5
63.6
96.3
28.3
46.4
74.0
52.5
66.6
49.0

Table 5

Urban Population and Urbanization by Country, 1990-2030

Urban Population (’000)

Level of urbanization (%)

Country

Somalia
South Africa
Sudan
Swaziland
Togo
Tunisia
Uganda
United Republic of Tanzania
Western Sahara
Zambia
Zimbabwe
ASIA
Afghanistan
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Brunei Darussalam
Cambodia
China
China, Hong Kong SAR
China, Macao SAR
Cyprus
Dem. People’s Republic of Korea
Georgia
India
Indonesia
Iran (Islamic Republic of)
Iraq
Israel
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Lao People’s Democratic Republic
Lebanon
Malaysia
Maldives
Mongolia
Myanmar
Nepal
Occupied Palestinian Territory
Oman
Pakistan
Philippines

1990

1,956
19,121
7,211
198
1,182
4,760
1,964
4,807
190
3,117
3,033

2,277
2,390
3,876
434
22,908
90
169
1,221
301,995
5,677
371
454
11,760
3,005
220,260
54,252
31,958
12,602
4,079
77,726
2,350
9,301
2,100
1,660
649
2,472
9,014
56
1,264
10,092
1,692
1,462
1,218
35,400
30,333

2000

2,458
25,528
11,661
244
1,917
5,996
2,952
7,614
264
3,643
4,205

4,148
1,989
4,158
574
33,208
143
237
2,157
453,029
6,667
441
540
13,581
2,498
288,430
86,219
42,952
16,722
5,563
82,633
3,798
8,417
2,188
1,744
1,187
3,244
14,424
75
1,358
12,956
3,281
2,267
1,719
49,088
37,283

2010

3,505
31,155
17,322
257
2,945
6,980
4,493
11,883
434
4,733
4,837

6,581
1,984
4,639
715
46,149
246
308
3,027
635,839
7,069
548
619
14,446
2,225
364,459
102,960
53,120
20,822
6,692
84,875
5,083
9,217
3,001
1,918
2,136
3,712
20,146
126
1,675
16,990
5,559
3,269
2,122
66,318
45,781

2030

7,851
39,032
33,267
400
5,795
9,115
12,503
29,190
704
9,340
9,086

16,296
2,186
6,044
984
83,408
451
450
5,870
905,449
8,185
611
797
16,633
2,218
590,091
145,776
71,767
33,930
8,583
85,700
7,063
11,525
4,218
2,625
4,699
4,374
28,999
242
2,316
28,545
12,902
5,810
3,184
121,218
72,555

2020

5,268
35,060
24,804
307
4,261
8,096
7,381
18,945
606
6,584
6,839

10,450
2,087
5,332
852
62,886
348
379
4,214
786,761
7,701
588
705
15,413
2,177
463,328
122,257
63,596
26,772
7,673
85,848
5,998
10,417
3,637
2,202
3,381
4,065
25,128
186
2,010
22,570
8,739
4,447
2,645
90,199
57,657

146 

1990

2000

2010

2020

2030

29.7
52.0
26.6
22.9
30.1
57.9
11.1
18.9
86.2
39.4
29.0

18.1
67.4
53.7
88.1
19.8
16.4
65.8
12.6
26.4
99.5
99.8
66.8
58.4
55.0
25.5
30.6
56.3
69.7
90.4
63.1
72.2
56.3
98.0
37.8
15.4
83.1
49.8
25.8
57.0
24.7
8.9
67.9
66.1
30.6
48.6

33.2
56.9
33.4
22.6
36.5
63.4
12.1
22.3
83.9
34.8
33.8

20.2
64.7
51.2
88.4
23.6
25.4
71.1
16.9
35.8
100.0
100.0
68.6
59.4
52.6
27.7
42.0
64.2
67.8
91.4
65.2
78.3
56.3
98.2
35.2
22.0
86.0
62.0
27.7
56.9
27.8
13.4
72.0
71.6
33.1
48.0

37.4
61.7
40.1
21.4
43.4
67.3
13.3
26.4
81.8
35.7
38.3

22.6
64.2
51.9
88.6
28.1
34.7
75.7
20.1
47.0
100.0
100.0
70.3
60.2
52.7
30.0
44.3
70.8
66.2
91.9
66.8
78.5
58.5
98.4
34.5
33.2
87.2
72.2
40.1
62.0
33.6
18.6
74.1
73.0
35.9
48.9

43.0
66.6
47.4
22.3
50.5
71.2
15.9
31.8
83.9
38.9
43.9

26.4
65.7
54.2
89.4
33.9
42.4
79.3
23.8
55.0
100.0
100.0
72.7
62.1
54.7
33.9
48.1
75.9
66.6
92.4
69.4
79.8
62.3
98.6
35.7
44.2
88.6
78.5
51.5
67.0
40.7
24.8
76.6
75.7
39.9
52.6

49.9
71.3
54.5
26.2
57.3
75.2
20.6
38.7
85.9
44.7
50.7

32.2
69.0
58.6
90.6
41.0
50.0
82.3
29.2
61.9
100.0
100.0
75.7
65.7
58.7
39.7
53.7
79.8
69.4
93.1
73.0
82.0
66.8
98.7
40.1
53.1
90.0
82.2
60.1
71.6
48.1
31.7
79.4
78.7
45.6
58.3

State of the World’s Cities 2012/2013Table 5

Urban Population and Urbanization by Country, 1990-2030

Urban Population (’000)

Level of urbanization (%)

Statistical Annex

Country

Qatar
Republic of Korea
Saudi Arabia
Singapore
Sri Lanka
Syrian Arab Republic
Tajikistan
Thailand
Timor-Leste
Turkey
Turkmenistan
United Arab Emirates
Uzbekistan
Viet Nam
Yemen
EUROPE
Albania
Andorra
Austria
Belarus
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Channel Islands
Croatia
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Faeroe Islands
Finland
France
Germany
Gibraltar
Greece
Holy See
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland
Isle of Man
Italy
Latvia
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Malta
Monaco
Montenegro

1990

431
31,740
12,451
3,016
3,217
6,224
1,679
16,675
154
33,204
1,653
1,476
8,241
13,418
2,577

1,198
50
5,045
6,769
9,573
1,691
5,854
45
2,441
7,750
4,361
1,115
14
3,958
42,095
58,080
28
5,979
1
6,824
231
2,000
36
38,032
1,844
5
2,499
309
325
29
282

2000

586
36,967
16,615
4,018
2,971
8,577
1,635
19,417
198
43,027
2,062
2,599
9,273
19,263
4,776

1,280
61
5,267
7,030
9,899
1,597
5,516
45
2,504
7,565
4,540
951
17
4,252
45,466
59,970
29
6,537
1
6,596
260
2,250
40
38,395
1,616
5
2,345
366
359
32
387

2010

1,445
40,235
21,541
4,837
2,921
12,545
1,862
23,142
329
52,728
2,562
3,956
10,075
27,046
7,714

1,645
76
5,666
7,162
10,421
1,828
5,357
47
2,546
7,656
4,761
931
20
4,549
53,398
60,598
31
6,868
1
6,791
308
2,842
41
41,083
1,517
5
2,181
419
388
33
384

2020

1,679
42,362
26,617
5,219
3,360
15,948
2,364
27,800
538
62,033
3,175
4,915
11,789
36,269
12,082

2,027
85
6,003
7,219
10,792
2,028
5,215
52
2,657
7,929
4,923
942
23
4,805
58,267
60,827
32
7,307
1
7,011
349
3,370
41
42,840
1,471
6
2,096
480
405
34
394

147 

2030

1,891
43,086
31,516
5,460
4,339
19,976
3,121
33,624
848
70,247
3,793
5,821
14,500
46,585
17,844

2,301
96
6,372
7,070
11,070
2,170
5,012
59
2,781
8,202
5,058
955
26
4,947
61,043
60,993
31
7,785
1
7,180
372
3,889
43
44,395
1,453
7
2,080
547
413
35
417

1990

2000

2010

2020

2030

92.2
73.8
76.6
100.0
18.6
48.9
31.7
29.4
20.8
59.2
45.1
79.1
40.2
20.3
20.9

36.4
94.7
65.8
66.0
96.4
39.2
66.4
31.4
54.0
75.2
84.8
71.1
30.6
79.4
74.1
73.1
100.0
58.8
100.0
65.8
90.8
56.9
51.7
66.7
69.3
16.9
67.6
80.9
90.4
100.0
48.0

94.9
79.6
79.8
100.0
15.8
51.9
26.5
31.1
24.3
64.7
45.8
80.3
37.4
24.5
26.3

41.7
92.4
65.8
69.9
97.1
43.2
68.9
30.5
55.6
74.0
85.1
69.4
36.3
82.2
76.9
73.1
100.0
59.7
100.0
64.6
92.4
59.1
51.8
67.2
68.1
15.1
67.0
83.8
92.4
100.0
58.5

95.8
83.0
82.1
100.0
14.3
55.7
26.3
34.0
28.1
69.6
49.5
84.1
36.2
30.4
31.8

51.9
88.0
67.6
74.7
97.4
48.6
71.5
31.4
57.7
73.5
86.9
69.5
40.3
85.1
85.3
73.8
100.0
61.4
100.0
68.1
93.4
61.9
50.6
68.4
67.7
14.3
67.0
85.2
94.7
100.0
61.5

96.5
85.6
84.2
100.0
15.5
60.2
28.0
38.9
33.2
74.0
54.6
86.8
37.8
37.0
38.2

60.7
84.9
70.3
79.2
97.7
55.2
74.3
34.2
61.5
75.0
88.6
70.7
42.2
87.4
89.7
75.6
100.0
64.8
100.0
71.8
94.3
65.5
51.2
70.9
68.4
15.0
68.5
87.4
96.0
100.0
62.4

96.9
87.7
86.2
100.0
19.6
65.4
32.5
45.8
39.9
77.7
60.4
88.8
42.7
44.2
45.3

67.4
85.1
73.8
82.6
97.9
61.7
77.5
39.1
66.5
78.0
90.1
73.4
46.6
89.2
91.8
78.3
100.0
69.3
100.0
75.5
95.0
69.8
53.9
74.6
70.9
18.0
71.5
89.1
96.6
100.0
65.7

Table 5

Urban Population and Urbanization by Country, 1990-2030

Urban Population (’000)

Level of urbanization (%)

Country

1990

2000

2010

2020

10,270
3,052
23,351
4,782
2,041
12,350
108,670
22
4,822
2,969
971
29,266
7,112
4,914
1,103
34,435
44,726

Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Republic of Moldova
Romania
Russian Federation
San Marino
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
TFYR Macedonia
Ukraine
United Kingdom
LATIn AmERICA AnD THE CARIBBEAn
Anguilla
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina
Aruba
Bahamas
Barbados
Belize
Bolivia
Brazil
British Virgin Islands
Cayman Islands
Chile
Colombia
Costa Rica
Cuba
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador
Falkland Islands (Malvinas)
French Guiana
Grenada
Guadeloupe
Guatemala
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Martinique
Mexico

8
22
28,268
32
204
85
90
3,707
110,565
6
26
10,984
22,670
1,560
7,767
47
4,072
5,662
2,624
2
87
32
381
3,664
222
2,026
1,983
1,169
310
59,566

12,222
3,411
23,719
5,563
1,828
11,734
107,582
25
5,369
3,025
1,008
30,707
7,445
5,268
1,194
32,814
46,331

11
25
33,291
42
250
97
120
5,143
141,416
8
40
13,252
28,666
2,321
8,382
46
5,452
7,423
3,503
2
124
37
422
5,068
217
3,079
2,832
1,330
345
74,372

13,799
3,856
23,187
6,515
1,679
12,177
102,702
30
5,525
2,975
1,002
35,073
7,870
5,591
1,212
31,252
49,295

15
27
37,572
50
291
114
164
6,675
169,098
10
57
15,251
34,758
2,989
8,429
45
7,074
9,222
3,983
2
177
41
460
7,111
218
5,307
3,930
1,420
362
86,113

14,824
4,297
23,135
7,148
1,833
12,839
100,892
31
5,871
3,031
1,035
38,542
8,333
5,922
1,260
30,860
53,001

18
32
41,554
54
331
134
213
8,265
187,104
11
61
16,958
40,800
3,643
8,462
47
8,560
11,152
4,583
2
229
48
476
9,893
233
7,546
5,263
1,521
370
96,558

148 

2030

15,501
4,700
23,481
7,585
1,938
13,296
99,153
32
6,252
3,168
1,110
40,774
8,799
6,336
1,331
30,243
56,901

19
40
44,726
59
367
151
268
9,799
197,874
14
65
18,247
46,357
4,259
8,550
50
9,793
12,813
5,287
3
288
55
485
13,153
265
9,450
6,656
1,660
376
105,300

1990

2000

2010

2020

2030

68.7
72.0
61.3
47.9
46.8
53.2
73.4
90.4
50.4
56.5
50.4
75.4
83.1
73.2
57.8
66.8
78.1

100.0
35.4
87.0
50.3
79.8
32.7
47.5
55.6
73.9
37.8
100.0
83.3
68.3
50.7
73.4
67.7
55.2
55.1
49.2
74.2
74.5
33.4
98.6
41.1
29.6
28.5
40.5
49.4
86.3
71.4

76.8
76.1
61.7
54.4
44.6
53.0
73.4
93.4
53.0
56.2
50.8
76.3
84.0
73.3
59.4
67.1
78.7

100.0
32.1
90.1
46.7
82.0
38.3
47.8
61.8
81.2
39.4
100.0
85.9
72.1
59.0
75.6
67.2
61.7
60.3
58.9
67.6
75.1
35.9
98.4
45.1
28.7
35.6
45.5
51.8
89.7
74.7

82.9
79.4
61.0
60.7
47.0
57.5
73.2
94.1
56.1
55.0
49.5
77.4
84.7
73.6
59.3
68.8
79.6

100.0
30.3
92.4
46.9
84.1
44.5
52.2
66.5
86.5
41.0
100.0
89.0
75.1
64.4
75.2
67.2
69.2
66.9
64.3
73.6
76.4
39.3
98.4
49.5
28.6
52.1
51.6
52.0
89.0
77.8

86.5
82.6
61.7
66.4
54.2
63.0
74.5
94.4
60.0
55.7
50.4
79.4
85.8
75.2
61.6
71.9
81.4

100.0
32.5
93.8
48.8
86.1
51.1
56.9
71.0
89.5
45.2
100.0
91.0
78.0
69.4
75.6
69.4
74.8
72.5
69.3
78.2
78.6
44.5
98.5
54.7
31.3
64.4
57.6
53.7
89.1
80.7

88.6
85.2
64.9
71.4
60.9
68.2
76.9
94.9
64.8
59.2
54.5
81.9
87.3
77.8
66.0
75.3
83.7

100.0
38.4
94.6
52.5
87.9
57.9
62.3
75.2
91.1
51.6
100.0
92.3
81.0
73.9
77.6
73.1
78.8
76.8
73.7
81.6
81.4
51.2
98.6
60.6
37.2
71.6
63.4
57.8
90.0
83.3

State of the World’s Cities 2012/2013Statistical Annex

Table 5

Urban Population and Urbanization by Country, 1990-2030

Urban Population (’000)

Level of urbanization (%)

Country

Montserrat
Netherlands Antilles
Nicaragua
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
Puerto Rico
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Suriname
Trinidad and Tobago
Turks and Caicos Islands
United States Virgin Islands
Uruguay
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
nORTHERn AmERICA
Bermuda
Canada
Greenland
Saint Pierre and Miquelon
United States of America
OCEAnIA
American Samoa
Australia
Cook Islands
Fiji
French Polynesia
Guam
Kiribati
Marshall Islands
Micronesia (Fed. States of)
Nauru
New Caledonia
New Zealand
Niue
Northern Mariana Islands
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Pitcairn
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Tokelau
Tonga
Tuvalu
Vanuatu
Wallis and Futuna Islands

1990

1
163
2,166
1,300
2,069
15,004
2,546
14
41
44
244
104
9
91
2,767
16,638

2000

1
163
2,792
1,941
2,960
18,994
3,614
15
44
49
303
140
16
101
3,033
21,940

2010

1
187
3,337
2,624
3,972
22,688
3,949
17
49
54
364
186
31
104
3,119
27,113

2020

1
199
4,077
3,233
5,051
26,389
4,112
21
58
60
418
250
35
102
3,264
31,755

2030

1
200
4,860
3,751
6,102
29,902
4,178
26
74
68
466
328
38
96
3,382
35,588

60
21,214
44
6
191,914

63
24,389
46
6
227,651

65
27,309
48
5
261,375

66
30,426
49
6
293,732

66
33,680
49
6
321,698

38
14,596
10
301
109
122
25
31
25
9
102
2,869
1
39
10
619
—
34
43
—
21
4
28
—

51
16,710
11
384
124
144
36
36
24
10
127
3,314
1
62
13
711
 —
39
65
—
23
4
41
—

64
19,169
15
443
140
168
44
45
25
10
146
3,710
1
81
17
863
 —
36
99
—
24
5
63
—

76
21,459
17
501
160
188
54
56
29
11
169
4,058
1
96
20
1,194
 —
38
152
—
28
6
95
—

87
23,566
19
566
186
208
67
65
38
11
200
4,382
1
111
23
1,828
 —
46
230
—
35
7
140
—

1990

2000

2010

2020

2030

12.5
85.6
52.3
53.9
48.7
68.9
72.2
34.6
29.3
41.4
60.0
8.5
74.3
87.7
89.0
84.3

100.0
76.6
79.7
88.9
75.3

80.9
85.4
57.7
41.6
55.9
90.8
35.0
65.1
25.8
100.0
59.5
84.7
30.9
89.7
69.6
15.0
 —
21.2
13.7
 —
22.7
40.7
18.7
 —

11.0
90.2
54.7
65.8
55.3
73.0
94.6
32.8
28.0
45.2
64.9
10.8
84.6
92.6
91.3
89.9

100.0
79.5
81.6
89.1
79.1

88.8
87.2
65.2
47.9
52.4
93.1
43.0
68.4
22.3
100.0
59.2
85.7
33.1
90.2
70.0
13.2
 —
22.0
15.7
 —
23.0
46.0
21.7
 —

14.3
93.2
57.3
74.8
61.5
76.9
98.8
32.4
28.0
49.3
69.4
13.9
93.3
95.3
92.5
93.4

100.0
80.6
84.2
90.6
82.3

93.0
89.1
75.3
51.9
51.4
93.2
43.9
71.8
22.7
100.0
57.4
86.2
37.5
91.3
83.4
12.5
 —
20.2
18.6
 —
23.4
50.4
25.6
 —

16.9
94.7
61.0
80.3
67.1
80.3
99.5
35.4
30.6
54.6
73.5
18.1
96.5
96.5
93.4
95.0

100.0
82.0
86.5
91.8
84.9

94.8
90.6
81.4
56.4
52.7
93.5
46.5
75.3
25.1
100.0
58.5
86.9
43.0
92.4
89.6
14.1
 —
20.5
23.0
 —
25.6
55.6
31.0
 —

21.6
95.5
65.8
83.6
71.9
83.0
99.6
41.6
36.1
60.7
77.3
23.7
97.4
97.0
94.3
95.8

100.0
84.0
88.4
92.8
87.0

95.6
91.9
84.9
61.7
56.6
94.2
51.7
78.8
30.3
100.0
62.7
88.1
49.4
93.3
92.0
18.2
—
24.0
29.2
 —
30.4
61.5
38.0
 —

Source: United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division (2010) World Urbanization Prospects: The 2009 Revision, United Nations, New York.

149 

STATE OF THE
WORLD’S CITIES

2012/2013

Prosperity of Cities

The City is the Home of Prosperity. It is the place where human beings find satisfaction of basic needs 
The City is the Home of Prosperity. It is the place where human beings find satisfaction of basic needs 
and access to essential public goods. The city is also where ambitions, aspirations and other material 
and access to essential public goods. The city is also where ambitions, aspirations and other material 

and immaterial aspects of life are realized, providing contentment and happiness. It is a locus at 
and immaterial aspects of life are realized, providing contentment and happiness. It is a locus at 

which e prospects of prosperity and individual and collective well-being can be increased.
which e prospects of prosperity and individual and collective well-being can be increased.

However, when prosperity is restricted to some groups, when it is used to pursue specific interests, or 
However, when prosperity is restricted to some groups, when it is used to pursue specific interests, or 
when it is a justification for financial gains for the few to the detriment of the majority, the city becomes 
when it is a justification for financial gains for the few to the detriment of the majority, the city becomes 

the arena where the right to shared prosperity is claimed and fought for. As people in the latter part 
the arena where the right to shared prosperity is claimed and fought for. As people in the latter part 
of 2011 gathered in Cairo’s Tahrir Square, in Madrid’s Puerta del Sol, in front of London’s St Paul’s 
of 2011 gathered in Cairo’s Tahrir Square, in Madrid’s Puerta del Sol, in front of London’s St Paul’s 

cathedral, or in New York’s Zuccotti Park, they were not only demanding more equality and inclusion; 
cathedral, or in New York’s Zuccotti Park, they were not only demanding more equality and inclusion; 

they were also expressing the need for prosperity to be shared across all segments of society.
they were also expressing the need for prosperity to be shared across all segments of society.

What this new edition of State of the World’s Cities shows is that prosperity for all has been 
What this new edition of State of the World’s Cities shows is that prosperity for all has been 

compromised by a narrow focus on economic growth. UN-Habitat suggests a fresh approach to 
compromised by a narrow focus on economic growth. UN-Habitat suggests a fresh approach to 

prosperity beyond the solely economic emphasis, including other vital dimensions such as quality of 
prosperity beyond the solely economic emphasis, including other vital dimensions such as quality of 
life, adequate infrastructures, equity and environmental sustainability. The Report proposes a new 
life, adequate infrastructures, equity and environmental sustainability. The Report proposes a new 
tool – the City Prosperity Index – together with a conceptual matrix, the Wheel of Prosperity, both of 
tool – the City Prosperity Index – together with a conceptual matrix, the Wheel of Prosperity, both of 

which are meant to assist decision makers to design clear policy interventions.
which are meant to assist decision makers to design clear policy interventions.

The Report advocates for the need of cities to enhance the public realm, expand public goods and 
The Report advocates for the need of cities to enhance the public realm, expand public goods and 
consolidate rights to the ‘commons’ for all as a way to expand prosperity. This comes in response to 
consolidate rights to the ‘commons’ for all as a way to expand prosperity. This comes in response to 
the observed trend of enclosing or restricting these goods and commons in enclaves of prosperity, or 
the observed trend of enclosing or restricting these goods and commons in enclaves of prosperity, or 

depleting them through unsustainable use.
depleting them through unsustainable use.

The Report maps out major policy steps to promote a new type of city – the city of the 21st century – that 
The Report maps out major policy steps to promote a new type of city – the city of the 21st century – that 
is a ‘good’, people-centred city. One that is capable of integrating the tangible and more intangible aspects 
is a ‘good’, people-centred city. One that is capable of integrating the tangible and more intangible aspects 
of prosperity, and in the process shedding off the inefficient, unsustainable forms and functionalities of the 
of prosperity, and in the process shedding off the inefficient, unsustainable forms and functionalities of the 
city of the previous century. By doing this, UN-Habitat plays a pivotal role in ensuring that urban planning, 
city of the previous century. By doing this, UN-Habitat plays a pivotal role in ensuring that urban planning, 

legal, regulatory and institutional frameworks become instruments of prosperity and well-being.
legal, regulatory and institutional frameworks become instruments of prosperity and well-being.

United Nations Human Settlements 
Programme (UN-HABITAT) 
P.O. Box 30030, Nairobi, Kenya 
Tel: +254 20 7621 234 
Fax: +254 20 7624 266/7

S
T
A
T
E
O
F
 

 

T
H
E

 
 

W
O
R
L
D
’
S
C
I
T
I
E
S

 

 
 

2
0
1
2
/
2
0
1
3

 
 
 
 

P
r
o
s
p
e
r
i
t
y
 
o
f
 

C

i
t
i
e
s

I T Y

L

I

B

A

A I N

ENVIRONMENTAL S U S T

P

R

O

D

U

C

T

I

V

I

T

Y

PROSPERITY

INFRASTRUCT U R E

EQUITY AND SOCIA

C

L

L IN

U

S
I

O

N

E
F
I
L
F 
Y O
QUALIT

STATE OF THE 
WORLD’S CITIES 

2012/2013

Prosperity of Cities

World Urban 
Forum Edition

