STATE OF URBAN  
YOUTH REPORT

2012-2013

Youth in the Prosperity of Cities

The increasing prominence of the youth bulge in most urban areas presents a unique opportunity, as they 
represent the most dynamic human resource available. Their numbers today are larger than at any point in 
human history. Yet this group suffers the most from urban unemployment and often feels that they lack equal 

access to opportunities. This is especially acute in developing countries, which have a relatively youthful 

population that must be mobilised to realise greater economic and social development goals.   

Today, 90 million youth around the world are unemployed (or 47 per cent of the total number of unemployed) 
and an additional 300 million belong in the “working poor” category —they are in unskilled, insecure jobs and 
live in poor conditions. This Report takes a closer look at the condition of youth in major urban centres in four 

developing nations - Accra (Ghana), São Paulo (Brazil), Bangalore (India) and Cairo (Egypt).

The conditions of these cities, and the way they are perceived by young people, are seen as representative 
of those in their respective regions, and therefore provide a reasonable basis for policy recommendations 
focused on shared prosperity for urban youth. The four-city survey demonstrates that young people suffer 

disproportionately from poor prospects and  

low quality employment.

The developing world continues to feature the fastest growing numbers of youth unemployment  

and persistent rural-to-urban migration; if these young people are to realise their potential,  

they need innovative solutions that are anchored in local realities.

 Survey outcomes suggest that educational and training systems must be better  

aligned with the current and future needs of young people. In this regard,  

it would be helpful to share experiences and to investigate alternative  

educational arrangements for the provision of basic literacy, job skills training  

and lifelong education. This Report is a step in that direction.

Young people in the survey want equity for better shared prosperity both for their own and their cities’ benefit, 

and they regard education as the best way of bringing about a more equitable type of urban development. 

They point to other significant challenges like structural constraints and lack of a democratic culture in their 

respective cities. These are issues over which local authorities wield a degree of influence that puts them 
in the best possible position to take remedial action. Local authorities must also seek to mainstream youth 

issues into all aspects of their planning and operations policy areas.

The report recommends a better match between skills and labour markets through vocational training and 
with the participation of the private sector. ‘Soft’ skills matter more in service-oriented economies, young 

people in informal settlements need entrepreneurial abilities, and capacities must be better geared to 

knowledge-intensive business services. 

HS/089/12E 
ISBN(Series): 978-92-1-133400-5 
ISBN(Volume): 978-92-1-132504-1

United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat) 
P O Box 30030, Nairobi, 00100, Kenya 
Tel: +254 20 762 3025 
Fax: +254 20 762 3080

www.unhabitat.org/publications

I T Y

B I L

A

A I N

T

S

ENVIRONMENTAL  S U

EQUITY AND SOCIA

L IN

C

L

U

S
I

O

N

 
E
F
I
L
 
F

Y O
QUALIT

P
R
O

D

U

C

T

I

V

I

T

Y

PROSPERITY

INFRASTRUCT U R E

STATE OF URBAN  
YOUTH REPORT

2012-2013

YOUTH iN THE PROSPERiTY OF CiTiES

STATE OF URBAN  
YOUTH REPORT  

2012-2013

Youth in the Prosperity of Cities

Core Team
Director and Principal Author: Oyebanji Oyelaran-Oyeyinka
Coordinators: Mutinta Munyati
Contributors and Advisors: Subramonia Ananthakrishnan, 
Hoda Mansour, Sarah Bryce, Padma Prakash, Ndali Ojeikere, 
Kaushalesh Lal, Boladale Abiola Adebowale, Willem Kt Vanvliet, 
Paul Wambua, Victoria Chebet, Catherine Tololwo, John 
Anugraha, Guenter Karl, Markandey Rai, Douglas Ragan, Thierry 
Naudin and Oluyomi Ola-David. 
Administrative Support: Jacqueline Macha, Grace Nduru
Design and Layout: Andrew Ondoo
Sponsor: Government of Norway

First published in Nairobi in 2013 by UN-Habitat.  
Copyright © United Nations Human Settlements Programme 2013

All rights reserved 
United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat) 
P. O. Box 30030, 00100 Nairobi GPO KENYA 
Tel: 254-020-7623120 (Central Office) 
www.unhabitat.org

HS/089/12E 
iSBN (Series): 978-92-1-133400-5 
iSBN (Volume): 978-92-1-132504-1

Disclaimer
The designations employed and the presentation of the material in 
this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever 
on the part of the Secretariat of the United Nations concerning the 
legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, 
or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers of boundaries. 

Views expressed in this publication do not necessarily 
reflect those of the United Nations Human Settlements 
Programme, the United Nations, or its Member States.

Excerpts may be reproduced without authorization, 
on condition that the source is indicated.

Front cover photos

infrastructure: © Maria Fleischmann /World Bank
Productivity: © iRiN
Environmental Sustainability: © UN-Habitat
Equity and Social inclusion: © iRiN  
Quality of life: © World Bank
Photos Credits:

Page X: © Bzzuspajk/Shutterstock
Page 1: © Gerardo Pesantez/ World Bank 
Page 7: © Arindam Banerjee / Shutterstock
Page 14: © Gerhard Jörén / World Bank
Page 20: © Ladywewa /Shutterstock
Page 20: © Simone D. McCourtie /World Bank
Page 29: © Eirik Brun Sorlie
Page 34: © Heba Aly/iRiN

ii

State of the Urban YoUth report  2012/2013Table of Contents

Foreword 
Country Profiles 
Definitions 

Quick facts 

The countries and cities under review 

Main Findings, Messages and Policy Recommendations 

Policy Actions and Recommendations 

CHAPTER 1.0: Youth and the Prosperity of Cities 
introduction 

Methodology 

Conceptual Framework 

CHAPTER 2.0: Youth and Quality of Life 

introduction 

CHAPTER 3.0: Urban Youth Employment and Productive Cities 
Cities as Engines of Economic Growth 

Declining Youth Employment 

CHAPTER 4.0: Urban Infrastructure Policies and Institutions 
introduction 
Electricity 
Urban Mobility and infrastructure 
Telecommunications infrastructure 
Access to Basic Services 
infrastructure for recreation 

CHAPTER 5.0: Prosperity and Equity-Based Youth Development 
Political inclusion 
Economic inclusion 
Societal implications of inequality 

CHAPTER 6.0: Conclusions and Recommendations 
Findings from the field surveys 

References 

v
viii
viii

x

x

xii

xiv

1
1

3

5

7

7

14
14

15

20
20
22
23
25
26
26

29
31
31
34

37
37

43

iii

Youth in the ProsPeritY of CitiesList of Boxes, Figures and Tables

BOXES

Box 1.1: Field Study Methodology in Four Cities 
Box 3.1: Sustainable Livelihoods in Accra, Ghana: YouthWorks! 
Box 3.2: Creating jobs and building houses, while reducing waste:  Techamos Una Mano  
Box 4.1: improving sanitation, creating jobs and promoting social inclusion in Cairo 
Box 4.2: Young Urban Environmental Leaders Project 
Box 5.1: Youth-Led Development in Civic Participation and Job Creation 
Box 5.2: Urban Youth in Governance and Development 
Box 6.1: Renewable Energy for Youth Entrepreneurs:  Liberian initiative creates clean energy jobs while improving educational opportunities 

FIGURES

Figure 1.1: Regional Distribution of the Youth Population, 2012 
Figure 1.2: Youth andProsperity in Cities: Conceptual Framework 
Figure 2.1:  Young people’s rating of the importance of factors contributing to a sense of prosperity by city 
Figure 2.2: What is preventing youth in your city from becoming more prosperous? 
Figure 3.1: Global youth employment and employment - to - population ratio, 1991 to 2011 
Figure 3.2: What hampers economic productivity in your city the most? 
Figure 3.3: is urban economic growth in your city generating youth employment? 
Figure 4.1: importance of infrastructure Development to Youth Prosperity Concerns 
Figure 4.2: Ease of infrastructure access by youth in 4 cities 
Figure 4.3: Youth perceptions of infrastructure problems by city 
Figure 4.4: What is the most important effect on youth of infrastructure underdevelopment in your city? 
Figure 5.1: Reasons why Urban initiatives Promoting Youth Equity are not Effective 
Figure 5.3: Factors Limiting Greater Equality for Youth in Four Cities 
Figure 5.4: Who Benefits from Economic Prosperity? 
Figure 6.1: Which factor has enabled youth in your city to become more prosperous? 

TABLES

Table 1.1: Regional Distribution of the Youth Population, 2012 
Table 1.2: Survey respondents in four cities by age (N=443) 
Table 1.3: Proportion of young people stating that their local government is committed to dimensions of prosperity (by city) 
Table 2.1: Young people’s rating of the importance of factors contributing to a sense of prosperity by city 
Table 2.2: Categories of Violence to which Youth are Subjected  
Table 2.3: What is preventing youth in your city from becoming more prosperous? 
Table 3.1: Youth unemployment rate 2011 by region 
Table 3.2: What hampers economic productivity in your city the most? 
Table 4.1: importance of infrastructure Development to Youth Prosperity Concerns 
Table 4.2: Ease of infrastructure access by youth in 4 cities 
Table 4.3: Youth Perceptions of infrastructure Problems by City (per cent) 
Table 4.4: What is the most important effect on youth of infrastructure underdevelopment in your city? 
Table 5.1: Equity in Four Cities Youth Field Survey Responses in Accra, Bangalore, Cairo, and  São Paulo (per cent) 
Table 5.2: Reasons why Urban initiatives Promoting Youth Equity are not Effective 
Table 5.3: Who Benefits from Economic Prosperity? 
Table 5.4: Factors Limiting Greater Equality for Youth in Four Cities 
Table 6.1: incidence of austerity measures in 158 countries, 2010-2012 
Table 6.2: Which factor has enabled youth in your city to become more prosperous? 
 

iV

4
18
18
26
25
35
35
42

2
5
8
12
15 
16
17
21
22
23
24
32
34
33
41

3
4
6
9
11
13
15 
16
20
21
23
25
30
31
32
33
38
40

State of the Urban YoUth report  2012/2013Foreword

I am pleased to present the 

second State of the Urban Youth 
report focusing on Youth and the 
Prosperity of Cities. This Report 
builds on the 2010/11 edition, 
“Leveling the Playing Field – 
Inequality of Youth Opportunity” 
and its insights into the state 
of urban youth. Much like the 
findings of the previous report, this 

one provides further evidence of the fundamental importance 
of job oriented education to the development of urban youth. 

At a time when the global economy is looking for paths 

to recovery and seeking innovative, ideas to rejuvenate itself, 
young people may offer the best hope.  The events of the Arab 
Spring demonstrated that youth can be a powerful social force 
for positive change. The unexpected nature of these events, 
point to an underlying problem that afflicts youth in all 
corners of our world.  The question is, why, in an increasingly 
urbanised world, are young people underappreciated by many 
governments and not at the forefront of economic activity and 
innovation?

The developing world continues to feature the fastest growing 
numbers of youth unemployment and persistent rural-to-urban 
migration; if these young people are to realise their potential, 
they need innovative solutions that are anchored in local 
realities. 

Survey outcomes suggest that educational and training 
systems must be better aligned with the current and future 
needs of young people. In this regard, it would be helpful to 
share experiences and to investigate alternative educational 
arrangements for the provision of basic literacy, job skills 
training and lifelong education. This Report is a step in that 
direction.

Young people in the survey want equity for better shared 

prosperity both for their own and their cities’ benefit, and they 
regard education as the best way of bringing about a more 
equitable type of urban development. They point to other 
significant challenges like structural constraints and lack of a 
democratic culture in their respective cities. These are issues 
over which local authorities wield a degree of influence that 
puts them in the best possible position to take remedial action. 
Local authorities must also seek to mainstream youth issues into 
all aspects of their planning and operations policy areas.

The increasing prominence of the youth bulge in most urban 

The report recommends a better match between skills and 

areas presents a unique opportunity, as they represent the 
most dynamic human resource available. Their numbers today 
are larger than at any point in human history. Yet this group 
suffers the most from urban unemployment and often feels 
that they lack equal access to opportunities. This is especially 
acute in developing countries, which have a relatively youthful 
population that must be mobilised to realise greater economic 
and social development goals.  

 Today, 90 million youth around the world are unemployed 

(or 47per cent of the total number of unemployed) and 
an additional 300 million belong in the “working poor” 
category —they are in unskilled, insecure jobs and live in poor 
conditions. This Report takes a closer look at the condition 
of youth in major urban centres in four developing nations - 
Accra (Ghana), São Paulo (Brazil), Bangalore (India) and Cairo 
(Egypt).

The conditions of these cities, and the way they are perceived 

by young people, are seen as representative of those in their 
respective regions, and therefore provide a reasonable basis for 
policy recommendations focused on shared prosperity for urban 
youth. The four-city survey demonstrates that young people 
suffer disproportionately from poor prospects and low quality 
employment.

labour markets through vocational training and with the 
participation of the private sector. ‘Soft’ skills matter more 
in service-oriented economies, young people in informal 
settlements need entrepreneurial abilities, and capacities must 
be better geared to knowledge-intensive business services. 

With their typical dynamism and energy, young people can 

exercise a unique multiplier effect on urban prosperity: the 
more they are allowed to benefit, the more they can give back, 
for the overall good of the society. 

“No nation can achieve prosperity unless it makes education one 
of its central concerns. Education brings honour, independence and 
freedom  to  a  government  and  its  people”  -  16  year-old  Supawat 
Yasothon province, Thailand. 

Joan Clos 

Under-Secretary-General and Executive Director
United Nations Human Settlements Programme  

(UN-Habitat)

V

Youth in the ProsPeritY of CitiesYouth in the 
Prosperity of Cities

Vi

State of the Urban YoUth report  2012/2013Vii

Youth in the ProsPeritY of CitiesCountry Profiles 

Profiles of Countries under review

Human Development Indicator, HDI

HEALTH

Public Expenditure on health, (per cent of GDP)

Under-five mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)

Life expectancy at birth

INCOME

GDP per capita (2005 PPP  USD)

INFRASTRUCTURE

Country

Brazil

Egypt

Ghana

India

3.5

21

73.5

2.4

21

73.2

4.3

69

64.2

1.1

66

65.4

9,414

5,151

1,410

2,993

Mobile cellular subscriptions (per 100 people)

100.00

87.11

71.49

61.42

GENDER

Adolescent fertility rate (births per 1,000 women aged 15-19)

Labor force participation rate (Ratio of female to male shares)

Gender inequality index

Maternal mortality ratio (deaths of women per 100,000 live births)

EDUCATION

Mean years of schooling (of adults over 25)

Public expenditure on education (per cent of GDP)

DEMOGRAPHY

Population, total both sexes (thousands)

Youth (ages 15-24) as per cent of total population

Population, urban (per cent)

per cent  living in slums

UNEMPLOYMENT

Total unemployment rate (per cent of total labor force)

Unemployment rate for youth (per cent of total labor force ages 15-24)

Unemployment, youth female (per cent of female labor force ages 15-24)

Unemployment, youth male (per cent of male labor force ages 15-24)

75.6

0.734

0.449

58

7.2

5.1

46.6

0.297

0.599

82

6.4

3.8

71.1

0.981

0.598

350

7.1

5.4

86.3

0.404

0.617

230

4.4

3.1

196,655.0

82,536.8

24,965.8

1,241,492.0

17.2

86.9

26.9

8.30

17.8

23.1

13.9

19.7

43.5

13.1

9.40

24.8

47.9

17.2

19.9

52.2

40.1

3.60

16.6

16.7

16.4

19.2

30.3

29.4

4.40

10.5

10.8

10.4

DEFINITIONS:
a)  Mobile cellular telephone are subscriptions to a public 

mobile telephone service using cellular technology, which 
provide access to the public switched telephone network. 
The subscriptions may be post-paid and/or prepaid.

b)  Labor Force Participation Rate is the ratio of female to 

male in the working-age population (ages 15–64) that are 
actively engaged in the labor market, by either working or 
actively looking for work

c)  The Gender Inequality Index (GII) reflects gender-based 

inequalities in three dimensions – reproductive health, 
empowerment, and economic activity. Reproductive 
health is measured by maternal mortality and adolescent 
fertility rates; empowerment is measured by the share of 
parliamentary seats held by each gender and attainment 
at secondary and higher education by each gender; 
while economic activity is measured by the labor market 
participation rate for each gender.

Viii

State of the Urban YoUth report  2012/2013d)  The Proportion of urban population living in slums is 

c)  Unemployment refers to the share of the labor force that is 

the aggregate sum of the urban population living in slum 
households. A slum household is defined as a group of 
individuals living under the same roof lacking one or more 
of the following conditions: access to improved water; 
access to improved sanitation; sufficient-living area; 
durability of housing; and security of tenure. However, 
since information on secure tenure is not available for most 
of the countries, only the first four indicators are used to 
define slum household, and to also estimate the proportion 
of urban population living in slums.

without work but seeking and available for employment. 
However, definitions of labor force and unemployment 
differ by country.

d)  Youth unemployment refers to the share of the labor force 

ages 15-24 without work but seeking and available for 
employment. 

Sources:
http://hdr.undp.org/en/data/profiles/
http://hdrstats.undp.org/images/explanations/GHA.pdf
http://data.worldbank.org/country
http://mdgs.un.org/unsd/mdg/Data.aspx
http://esa.un.org/unpd/wpp/index.htm

iX

Youth in the ProsPeritY of CitiesYouth Building Brigades constructing the One Stop Youth Centre in Dar es Salaam. © Gadi KalugendoQuick facts:

The Countries and Cities 
under review

Ghana has a population of about 24 million, of which 27per 
cent lives on less than 1.25 US dollar a day with 25per cent of 
the working-age population unemployed. In 2010 population 
density was 107.2 per sq. km. 

In 2011 Ghana’s gross domestic product (GDP – on a 2011 

purchasing power parity (PPP) basis) per capita was USD 
3,100) to which the capital Accra contributes 33per cent, and 
the labour force in 2010 totalled 11.5 million .

With an estimated population of 3.9 million, Accra is today 
one of the largest and fastest-growing cities in Africa, with an 
annual demographic growth rate of 3.3per cent.

Accra is a youthful city, with an estimated 40.6per cent of 
the population aged between 15 and 34 (in the year 2000). 
These are increasingly susceptible to poverty, with Accra’s 
unemployment (10.4per cent) more than twice the national rate 
(4.1per cent) or that of other urban areas in the country (4.7per 
cent). In terms of gender (15-24 years) female unemployment 
(9.1per cent) is lower than male (11.8 per cent). Only 20.3per 
cent of Accra’s youth (15-24 years) are economically active. 

India is one of the most populous nations in the world (1.3 

billion) (with an annual demographic growth rate of 1.3 per 
cent. Some 30 per cent of the population live in urban areas 
(2010) and the annual urbanization rate of 2.4 per cent (2010-
15 EST.).

Bangalore is the largest city in the State of Karnataka, south-
central India. With an estimated population of 9.6 million in 
2011, cosmopolitan Bangalore is the third most populous city 
in India. Roughly 10 per cent of the population live in slums, 
a relatively low proportion when compared with other cities in 
the developing world. Density was 4,378/sq.km. in 2011  
( 2,985/ sq.km. in 2001). The total area under Bangalore 
district jurisdiction is  2,190 sq.km.

Average literacy rate (2011) is 88.5 per cent. The total 

number of literate residents in Bangalore District was 
7,609,962 (2011) of which 4,146,709 male and 3,463,253 
female. 

More than 62 per cent of Bangalore’s population is 

between 19 and 34 years old. Including over 15 year olds, the 
proportion rises to 64per cent. The workforce is predominantly 
aged 24 to 29.  In the past, Bangalore had hardly any slums and 
almost all areas were equally well provided with basic amenities.  
This is not the case today and young people are very concerned 
about a deterioration that affects them deeply. Finally, 42per 
cent of the population use public transport. 

Brazil is the largest country in South America with a 

population expected to reach 205 million by end of 2012, with 
a density of 23.04/sq. km and a population growth rate of 
1.1per cent. 

São Paulo is the country’s largest city with a population of 
20 million over an area of 1,525 sq.km. It is the financial and 
economic capital of Brazil.

São Paulo has the largest slum population in South America 

(about four million, or 20per cent of the total population). 

X

The rapid growth of informal housing dates back to 1980, 
when they were host to only fiveper cent of the population.  
Although both natural growth and rural-urban migration have 
reduced significantly, the housing problem remains immense in 
São Paulo.

Brazil’s population growth rate was 1.26per cent between 

2005 and 2010. The urban population was 164 million in 2010 
and is expected to reach 174 million by 2015 (or 87per cent of 
the total population).The Municipality of São Paulo is home 
to 1.8 million young people between 15 and 24 years of age, 
representing just over 16per cent of the city’s total population 
(11.2 million) .

Some 62 of Brazilians are aged 29 or under. The youth (15-
24) unemployment rate stands at 17.8per cent. In 2011, GDP 
per capita rose to USD11,600 (USD10,700 in 2010). São 
Paulo alone is responsible contributes 40per cent to national 
GDP. 

Egypt is the most populous country in the Middle East and 

the third-most populous on the African continent (after Nigeria 
and Ethiopia). 

Cairo (al-Qahirah- population: over 11.2 million) is one of 
the most densely populated cities in the world (1,540/ sq.km.) 
and is home to 21.5 per cent of the country’s total population. 

Egypt’s GDP per capita was USD6,500 in 2011. Cairo 
accounts for 50 per cent of national GDP and 40 per cent 
of manufacturing outputs. Despite the relatively high rates 
of economic growth in recent years, living conditions for the 
average Egyptian have remained poor, contributing to public 
discontent. The unemployment rate was an estimated 12.2 per 
cent in 2011, up from 9 per cent in 2010, as rural-to-urban 
migration remains significant.

In Cairo, the labour force is about 2.2 million and 9 per cent 
of the population live in poverty, out of which 2.2 per cent are 
in extreme poverty. 

While Cairo is one of the largest cities in the world, it holds 
an average position in terms of services, and a relatively low one 
for economic and financial wealth. 

Sources: 
Ghana: World Population Prospects; World Development Prospects; Human Development 

Report 2010; UNDESA, 2010; CIA, World Fact Book, 2011; World Bank National 
Accounts Data; ILO, 2011; Population of Accra, Ghana, 2010. 

India: CIA, World Fact Book, 2011; 2011 Census. 
Brazil: UN Population Division, World Population Prospects 2011; CIA, World Fact Book, 

July 2012; World Bank, 2011; 2010 National Census. 

Egypt: UNDESA, World Urbanization Prospects - The 2011 Revision; CIA, World Fact Book, 

2011.

Xi

Youth in the ProsPeritY of Cities© Bartlomiej Magierowski / ShutterstockMain Findings, Messages and Policy 
Recommendations

1.   The Youth Bulge: The Demographic Dynamics 

3.   Fifty per cent youth unemployed, Large 

A rising youth population – what is generally known as 
the “urban youth bulge” – makes it imperative to address 
the various dimensions of urban youth against the broader 
background of prosperity. Youth are society’s most important 
and dynamic human resource. There are more people under the 
age of 25 today than ever, totalling nearly three billion - or half 
of humankind − of which 1.3 billion between ages 12 and 24. 
Most live in urban areas. 

2.   More Youth, More Youth Poverty

Urban areas in developing countries account for over 90 
per cent of the world’s urban demographic growth, and it is 
estimated that as many as 60 per cent of all urban dwellers 
will be under the age of 18 by 2030, with most living in slums 
and informal settlements. Nearly 45 per cent of young people 
around the world— almost 515 million—live on less than two 
US dollars a day. 

Numbers of “Working Poor”

Today nearly 90 million young people around the world are 
unemployed (47 per cent of the total number of unemployed) 
and an additional 300 million are “working poor”—i.e., 
in unskilled, insecure employment, and in unsatisfactory 
conditions. The vast majority work in the informal sector and 
live in slums. Indeed, 85 per cent of the new employment 
around the world is informal and slum-based, forcing young 
people into low-income jobs with little scope for advancement. 
The largest number of youth in this situation is in Africa. 

Young people suffer disproportionately from low-quality 

employment with poor prospects – ‘dead-end’ jobs. They are 
more likely than adults to be among the working poor, i.e. 
low-paid employment. About 152 million young workers 
(more than a quarter) live in poor households (with per capita 
expenditure below USD1.25 a day)1. Young people account for 
24 per cent of the world’s total working poor, compared with 18 per 
cent of all global employment. 

4.   Fifty per cent of young people believe 

economic growth is not generating 
employment for them

The UN-Habitat Youth Survey shows that 52 per cent of 

respondents were positive about the ability of urban economies 
to generate employment for young people, except in Cairo 
where a large majority of respondents (96 per cent) took a 
negative view. 

5.   Education is the Key to Urban Employment 

Opportunities  

Education is considered the key factor for equal opportunity 
and access to decent jobs. As many as 86 per cent of youth in 
the Survey say  that local access to primary school is free and 
equitable but this proportion falls to 36 per cent for secondary 
school and is negligible when it comes to higher education. 
Now, this has serious implications for politics and policy-
making — the operations of government, legal systems, and 
regulatory agencies, and indeed, of all the institutions that 
assign and enforce  individual rights and mediate conflicts 
among citizens— is influenced by the distribution of political 
power (or influence, or ‘voice’) in society. Inefficiency or 

Xii

State of the Urban YoUth report  2012/2013With Increasing Urbanization and poverty in urban areas, Urban Agriculture is providing food  and jobs in Bugesera, Rwanda. © Julius Mwelu/UN-Habitatasymmetry of access to these institutions will perpetuate the 
institutional structures that preserve the interests of the most 
powerful to the detriment of large majorities of the population. 

6.   Sound Health and Education Infrastructure 

bring Quality of Life

Alongside education, the UN-Habitat Youth Survey points 
to health as the other main factor for human development and 
quality of life. This suggests that higher capital expenditure 
on health and education constitutes a sound development 
strategy and is one of the best uses to which cities can put 
their resources. Healthy children learn better and healthy 
adults work better— both being major assets to any city. Not 
unsurprisingly, education is regarded as the best way of gaining 
empowerment (‘agency’), reducing poverty and improving 
urban productivity. 

7.   Discriminatory Practices do not Promote 

Prosperity

A large proportion of the youths in multi-racial São Paulo 
(81 per cent) cited widespread discrimination based on race, 
ethnic origin or religion when it came to gaining opportunities 
to education and employment. However, in Accra (87.5 per 
cent), Bangalore (55.3 per cent) and Cairo (76 per cent) young 
survey respondents did not mention any such discrimination, 
and in all four cities, a significant majority (an overall 61 per 
cent) said there was no discrimination based on race, ethnic 
origin or religion. 

8.   Equity enhances the Productivity and 

Prosperity of Youth

Equity is perceived by young people as contributing to 
economy efficiency, which has a major role to play for the 
general well-being of any city. Equity also creates the conditions 
for individual capacity-building through quality education 
and skills, which in turn enhance individual ability for civic 
engagement, representation and participation in cultural and 
political life. 

9.   The benefits of urban Prosperity are not evenly 

distributed 

A substantially large percentage of young people in the 

four sample cities find that economic prosperity is not evenly 
distributed across the various social segments of their age 
cohort.   

10.  As many as 75 per cent of young people rank 
unemployment, unequal access to education 
and corrupt institutions as constraints on 
shared urban prosperity 

Survey respondents ranked the main existing constraints on 
shared urban prosperity as follows: lack of employment, which 
was ranked the highest in Accra (80 per cent) and Bangalore 
(72 per cent). In Cairo, the highest factor was ruling elites’ 
control over public institutions (76 per cent) whereas youths in 
São Paulo chose unequal access to education.           

11.  Physical and Knowledge Infrastructure

 Adequate, well-managed infrastructure — improved 

water and sanitation, reliable and sufficient power supply, 
efficient transport networks and modern information and 
communications technology — contributes to wealth creation 
and prosperity in its various dimensions, such as raising 
quality of life and productivity. Cities with healthy, well-
educated workforces are also more likely to be productive and 
competitive. 

12.  Over 50 per cent Rank efficient Transport 

Infrastructure as Key to Prosperity

 Over 50 per cent of respondents find that an efficient 

public transport system is essential for the proper functioning 
and prosperity of cities. Sustainable transport has brought 
huge benefits to a number of cities, enhancing their potential 
for shared prosperity. Apart from facilitating mobility, young 
respondents to the survey relate transport infrastructure directly 
and indirectly to six different outcomes: economic growth; 
improved access to health and education; improved quality of life; 
improved slum conditions, reduced poverty; and reducing spatial 
disparities.

13.  Health, Education and mobility nurture Youth 

Prosperity 

In all the cities except Cairo, the critical infrastructural 

factors contributing to urban youth prosperity are found to be 
“improving access to health and education” while the second 
most important factor is “facilitating mobility”. 

Xiii

Youth in the ProsPeritY of Cities14.  Over 40 per cent believe Corruption and lack 

of Good Governance promote Inequality

Of the six factors interfering with urban prosperity, 42 

per cent of young Survey respondents rank corruption and 
lack of good governance as the major impediments. Next to 
corruption, inefficient and ineffective government ranks very 
high, and more so in Latin America and Africa than in Asia and 
Arab States. 

15.  Knowledge and skill deficiencies hinder urban 

productivity

 25 per cent of young people in the Survey rank lack of 

appropriate knowledge and skills development as the major 
impediment to youth’s contribution to urban productivity. 
Productive cities are gifted with an abundance of well-educated 
labour, sound infrastructure, mature financial markets, stable 
political systems and well- grounded market institutions, which 
are all based on appropriate knowledge and skills. In addition, 
urban productivity is generally linked to stable macroeconomic 
conditions and sound institutions. 

16.  Poor Democratic Culture and Unfair Market 
Practices undermine Equitable Development

Discriminatory practices, lack of democratic culture, 

inefficient, ineffective and corrupt political institutions tend to 
undermine equitable development. As a result, markets are not 
always the most equitable or most efficient means of resource 

allocation, since they tend to be systematically skewed to the 
detriment of young people from underprivileged backgrounds 
regardless of their potential. 

17. Predetermined Circumstances Undermine 

Equality of Opportunity in Cities

The degree of inequity of outcomes (e.g., earnings and assets) 

that defines youth inequality in urban life is closely related to 
the unequal opportunities that occur in successive life stages. In 
this respect, the Survey confirms earlier findings that unequal 
access often begins in childhood and continues into youth and 
adulthood, perpetuating the disadvantage faced in the early 
years. Historical and generational determinants of inequitable 
youth opportunities and deprivation in different interconnected 
spheres of urban activity tend to perpetuate disadvantages 
across the whole extent of an individual’s life. 

POLICY ACTIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

1.   National and City-level Policies should 

confront the effects of structural change on 
skill requirements

Cities in developing countries should deal specifically with 
structural unemployment. This particular form of the more 
general problem of lack of labour demand arises from deep-
seated obstacles or inefficiencies in urban labour markets (as 

XiV

Youth at One Stop Centre Kigali, Rwanda undergoing computer training. © Julius Mwelu/UN-Habitatopposed, for example, to a short-lived recession). Structural 
unemployment may result from mismatches between the 
characteristics of labour demand and supply in terms of 
necessary skill-sets, or from shifts in the structure of the 
urban economy (e.g., from manufacturing to services, or from 
low-skilled manual to highly skilled, knowledge-intensive 
occupations), which may require a combination of demand-
side and supply-side policy responses.

2.   The need for government policies

There is a need for government policies to specifically address 

youth unemployment and  harness the potential of cities in 
favour of full and decent employment. National governments 
have both the powers and resources to act strategically with 
macroeconomic and legal frameworks that can enhance 
economic conditions and opportunities for young people. 

3.   Incentives and Policies to target Equitable 

Youth Employment

Policies including industrial and investment in economic 

infrastructure; tax and incentives, vocational training schemes 
employment and labour market regulations should aim at a 
more equitable labour market for urban youth. 

4.   Build  Institutional and Policy Capacities of 

Municipalities to create Employment

Institutional capacity-building and a sharper municipal 

focus on urban economic development should be promoted 
through adequate mechanisms (e.g., involving unemployed 
young people in the household services sector).  In this respect, 
efforts should be made to align the functions of government 
departments and agencies and to build cooperative relationships 
with regional and local authorities. 

5.   Build Complementary Strategic Partnerships 

with the Private Sector

Youth employment-enhancing policies should encourage 
municipal authorities to forge partnerships with the private 
sector to foster emerging job-creating social businesses. 

6.   Finance   Formal and Vocational Training and 

Learning

A national urban policy should empower urban authorities 

to devise and deliver coherent strategies for sustained 
employment growth. In particular, formal and professional 
learning should be systematically connected, as in Germany 
where youth combine schooling with on-going work 
experience. Since municipal authorities are more familiar than 
national governments with local economic conditions, they 
could be more responsive to opportunities in their respective 
jurisdictions. 

7.   Build Policies for Equitable Youth Prosperity on 

Empirical Evidence

Policies looking to spread the benefits of urban prosperity 
to young people should be shaped by evidence as well as an 
understanding of economic trends and forces, emerging market 
realities and distinctive local assets and problems. 

8.   Municipalities should provide direct Business 

Support 

 Municipalities can and should provide support to business, 

including new firms, in the form of suitable land, financial 
assistance as well as public works programmes and training 
schemes for the vulnerable age group that is youth. In low- and 
middle-income countries, municipal authorities should secure 
financial and technical support from central governments for 
financing infrastructure and services required to gain economic 
dynamism that  creates employment for young people. 

9.   Invest in Technological Literacy, Numeracy and 

‘soft’ skills 

Expansion of the service sector generates demand for a 

variety of skill-sets. Literacy and numeracy skills have become 
more important, along with a range of ‘soft’ (i.e., interpersonal) 
skills such as communication, team-working and adaptability. 
Many (white collar) service occupations also require secondary 
and tertiary education because thinking ability and problem-
solving are important. Manual workers have struggled to 
adjust to deindustrialisation and the new skill demands (and 
occasionally lower earnings) of the service sector, leading to 
large-scale structural unemployment in former industrial cities. 
Urban authorities should enhance  technological skills through 
specific schemes.

10. Tackle Unemployment with Knowledge-

intensive Business Services (KIBS)

Knowledge-intensive Business Services (KIBS) have been 

gaining increasing shares in urban economies these past 
few years. These include financial services, accountancy, 
computer services, the media, advertising, design, legal 
services, data processing, research, engineering and other 
forms of consultancy. They demand highly qualified workers, 
usually university graduates, the higher demand for which is 
inciting more and more cities to compete for talent through 
attractive amenities and diverse career opportunities. Cities are 
increasingly encouraging local higher education institutions to 
expand, as this can be a very effective way of attracting youthful 
talent from elsewhere in the country or abroad. Municipal 
authorities can support these efforts by providing land or 
additional student accommodation (a significant determinant 
in young people’s choice of location for their studies). 

XV

Youth in the ProsPeritY of Cities12.  Use Higher Education and improved Skills-Sets 

to raise urban Productivity

Intellectual resources (human intelligence, knowledge, 

skills, ingenuity) are increasingly important determinants of 
prosperity as they raise productivity and nurture innovation. 
The emphasis on high-calibre human capital also reflects greater 
mobility against a background of rising incomes, improved 
communications and more outsourcing or subcontracting 
of various business functions. Any city intent on sustaining 
economic prosperity will aspire to higher-level functions if it is 
to safeguard its specific comparative advantage. Consequently, 
cities must invest in advanced skill-sets that cut across 
industries, on top of more generic and versatile resources. 
Examples include software engineers, designers, scientists, 
senior managers, accountants, marketing experts, surveyors and 
management consultants.

13. Educational Strategies for Low-Skilled Youth. 

Constraints on land and housing mean that considerable 

skills, physical resilience and use of personal networks are often 
required to gain access to urban labour markets. Evidence from 
developing countries suggests that young men and women are 
disproportionately represented in informal settlements because 
of the widespread poverty resulting from mass unemployment. 
For this reason, government funding will be required for both 
formal education, lifelong-learning and vocational training 
for these vulnerable youths, since equal opportunity is largely 
driven by access to education.

11. Invest in Youth Apprenticeship Training

School leavers who are not academically inclined should be 
encouraged and given incentives to  improve their vocational 
skills and qualifications. An alternative route to skills 
development is the apprenticeship system, whereby young 
people learn a trade and gain practical experience through a 
combination of ‘on the job’ mentoring and part-time ‘off the 
job’ training. Developing high level skills is vital for long-term 
career progress. Where youth unemployment is particularly 
high, it may also be appropriate to introduce a special 
employment subsidy to encourage employers to recruit young 
people.

Table 2

Defining a Prosperous City

A prosperous city is one that fosters:

Productivity

Contributes to economic growth and development, generates income, provides decent jobs and equal opportunities 
for all through effective economic policies and reforms

infrastructure development

Provides adequate infrastructure — water, sanitation, roads, information and communication technology —to 
improve living conditions and enhance productivity, mobility and connectivity 

Quality of life

Enhances public spaces for improved community cohesion and civic identity, and guarantees the safety and 
security of individuals and property

Equity and social inclusion

Ensures equitable (re)distribution of the benefits of a prosperity, reduces poverty and the incidence of slums, 
protects the rights of minority and vulnerable groups, enhances gender equality, and ensures civic participation in 
the social, political and cultural spheres

Environmental sustainability

Values the preservation of the urban environment and natural assets while ensuring growth with more energy 
efficiency and reduced pressure on surrounding land and natural resources, together with innovations to reduce 
environmental losses 

Source: UN-Habitat SWCR 2012/13

XVi

State of the Urban YoUth report  2012/2013Herat, Afghanistan : From right Parisa (16), Marzia (18), Maria (16) and Muzhgam (17) study in the library at the Female Experimental High School in Herat. The school is benefitting from the Education Quality Improvement Program (EQUIP)whose objective is to increase access to quality basic education, especially for girls. © Graham Crouch / World Bank14. Build young people’s Entrepreneurial 

Capabilities 

Entrepreneurial abilities are an important skill-set. Young 

people who are unable to find conventional employment 
can alternatively start their own businesses and create jobs 
or livelihoods by becoming self-employed or forming new 
enterprises. Weak labour markets and lack of welfare safety nets 
tend to encourage this kind of entrepreneurship – it serves as a 
last resort for people who would ordinarily prefer formal jobs in 
the public or private sector. The more successful entrepreneurs 
recognise commercial opportunities where others do not, and 
position themselves to take advantage with whatever resources 
at hand and to full effect; but in low-income countries they will 
find that credit markets are weak and unable to face the risks 
typically associated with innovation. Informal entrepreneurs 
tend to use family and social networks to secure additional 
support and recruit extra labour when needed; however, this is 
hardly sustainable, and some form of public support  becomes 
crucial.

15. Provide Physical and Knowledge Infrastructure 

An important dimension of a productive city is the provision 
of trunk infrastructure for water, sanitation, power supply and 
access, which prevents the formation of slums. Investment in 
infrastructure can deliver major benefits for urban economic 
growth, prosperity, poverty alleviation, environmental 
sustainability and health. 

XVii

Youth in the ProsPeritY of CitiesA woman vending food along the seaside of Jamestown, Accra. Ghana © Julius Mwelu UN-HabitatMoonbeam Youth training Centre, Mavoko, Kenya.© Victoria Chebet/UN-HabitatXViii

State of the Urban YoUth report  2012/2013Chapter 1.0

Youth and the 
Prosperity of Cities

INTRODUCTION

The previous edition of this Report (Leveling the playing 
field – Inequality of youth opportunity’) clearly showed that 
inequity, unequal opportunities and the related issues of 
unemployment and underemployment are, by far, among 
the greatest challenges faced by urban youth in the early 21st 
century. The report made it clear that in both the developed 
and the developing world, the formal sector is unable to 
provide adequate employment opportunities for young people 
seeking gainful work. The inability of national and urban 
economies to create quality jobs is one of the root causes not 
just of economic and social exclusion, but of the growth of 
informal economies, too. When young people in urban areas 
do find jobs, these are often with family-owned, small, low-
productivity businesses,  in other informal businesses, and as 
well in domestic employment– all of which are, characterised 
by low productivity and the attendant low incomes and little if 
any labour protection.

The experience of Mohammed Bouazizi, the 26 year old 
young Tunisian, who sold fruits and vegetables without a 
permit in Sidi Bouzid, Tunisia, demonstrates what young 
people go through while trying to make a living. On December 
17, 2010, Mohammed doused himself in petrol in front of 

1

a government building, immolating himself to protest the 
confiscation of his wares and the harassment and humiliation 
inflicted on him by a municipal official and her aides (Abouzeid 
2011)1. 

His suicide sparked a firestorm of demonstrations throughout 

the country. The unrest spread to Egypt and other Arab states, 
galvanizing the youths who challenged the autocratic regimes.  

These developments, commonly referred to as the Arab 

Spring, directed attention to the large youthful populations 
that dominate the demographic profiles of these countries, 
notably in urban centers. The events dramatically illustrated 
young people’s frequent inability to meet basic daily needs 
through sustainable livelihoods. They also brought to the fore 
their marginalization in the economic and political life of their 
communities and society at large. 

The UN Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC), 
adopted by the General Assembly in 1989 and since ratified 
by all but two countries worldwide, states that children (those 
under age 18) should be given a voice on all matters that affect 
them and that their views should be taken seriously.2  These 
matters include access to schools, housing, health care, jobs, 
and life chances more generally.  Also the General Resolution 
A/65/L.87 Outcome document of the High-level Meeting 
of the General Assembly on Youth: Dialogue and Mutual 
Understanding calls for full and effective participation of young 
people in the decision making processes.

Youth in the ProsPeritY of CitiesFigure 1.1
Regional Distribution of the Youth Population, 2012

4% 

Middle East

3% 

North Africa

14% 

Sub-Saharan Africa

10% 

Developed economies 
and European Union

9% 

Latin America  
and the Caribbean

27% 

South Asia 

9% 

South-East Asia  
and the Pacific

5% 

Central and South-Eastern Europe 
(Non-EU) and CiS

19% 

East Asia

Source: United Nations: World Population Prospects, the 2010 Revision database

Thus, there is a relationship between the aforementioned 

civic unrest, popular revolts and the lack of opportunities 
foryoung people to participate fully in the making of decisions 
that shape their lives. 

The demographic dynamics – and particularly the growing 
population of urban youth, known as the “urban youth bulge” 
– makes it imperative to address the diverse dimensions of 
the youth phenomenon against the broader background of 
prosperity. Youth are society’s most important and dynamic 
human resource. There are more people under the age of 25 
today than ever, totalling nearly three billion, or half of the 
total global population; 1.3 billion of that total are aged 12 
to 24. Most live in urban areas. Cities in developing countries 
account for over 90per cent of the growth in the world’s urban 
population. An estimated 60 per cent of that urban population 
will be under the age of 18 by 2030, and the majority of this 
high number live in slums and informal settlements. Nearly 
45 per cent of all young people around the world — almost 
515 million —live on less than two US dollars a day. In today’s 
world, nearly 90 million youth are unemployed (or 47 per 
cent of the total number of unemployed) and an additional 
300 million are too unskilled for secure, gainful jobs in 
decent conditions. The vast majority of these youth work in 
the informal sector and live in slums. Indeed, 85 per cent of 
the new employment around the world is made available by 

slum-based informal economies, forcing young people into 
low-income jobs with little scope for advancement. The largest 
numbers of youth in this situation are to be found in Africa. 

It is well recognised by now that the dynamics of wealth 
creation and urbanization are closely related and that urban 
areas do provide huge opportunities when the benefits of 
economic growth are equitably distributed. However, young 
people living in urban slums tend to experience greater 
deprivations compared with those in rural areas when it 
comes to access to education and other social amenities such 
as health. These youths also face greater challenges in finding 
dignified work, often resorting to jobs in largely unregulated, 
highly exploitative informal economies.  This is happening 
regardless of the goals of full employment and decent work 
that were endorsed at the 2005 World Summit, where heads of 
State “strongly supported fair globalisation and resolved to make 
the goals of full and productive employment and decent work for 
all, including for women and young people, a central objective 
of national development strategies, including poverty reduction 
strategies, as part of efforts to achieve the Millennium Development 
Goals.” Teenage girls and young women, in particular, face 
even greater barriers to decent livelihoods, with poorer access 
to education and jobs and often under threat of violence or 
harassment. Clearly, urban youth poverty merits attention in its 
own right, since this phenomenon involves some issues that are 

2

State of the Urban YoUth report  2012/2013Table 1.2

Regional Distribution of the Youth Population, 2012

City

Accra

Bangalore

Cairo

São Paulo

Urban Population

(million)

Slum Population 

(Thousands)

Rate of Youth 
Unemployment

(per cent)

National & City
GDP per capita
(USD 000s)

3.9 

9.6 

11.2 

4.0 

4, 848

104, 679

6, 143

44, 947

10.4

10

12.2

17.8

National: 1.7
City:  

National: 1.5
City:       6.5

National: 6.5
City:       3.0

National:  12.4
City:        4. 2

Source: UN-Habitat Youth Survey (2012)

distinct from those addressed in the typical analysis of poverty.

 This report makes heard the voices of young people in 

four cities of Accra, Bangalore, Cairo, and São Paulo  in the 
developing world. It puts forth their perceptions and opinions 
regarding their quality of life and their access to resources, 
including education, medical care, urban services, employment, 
and municipal institutions. Based on empirical evidence and 
contextualized by recent research, this report argues that city 
governments should treat their young populations not as a 
problem and a burden, but as a resource and an opportunity to 
attain greater prosperity.  The participation of young people in 
a city’s economy is a prerequisite for sustainable urban growth 
and  a sound investment in national development (World Bank 
2007).3  

Do youth see themselves as benefitting from urban 
prosperity?

On average, only 44per cent of 441 surveyed youth in Accra, 
Bangalore, Cairo, and São Paulo agreed that they benefit from 
the prosperity in their city.  However, this average obscures 
significantly between these cities:  Accra: 36per cent; Bangalore: 
82per cent; Cairo: 12per cent; and  São Paulo: 55per cent.

METHODOLOGY 

The primary basis for this report is provided by four 

background reports prepared by local researchers in four 
cities in developing regions as well as city Survey of youth 
complemented by Focus Group Discussions (FGDs).4 Cairo, 
Egypt, is of interest as a focal point of youth engagement in the 

Arab world. Its Revolutionary Youth Coalition created greater 
awareness of the importance of public space (particularly Tahrir 
Square) and the role of social media in the mobilization of 
youth.  Bangalore, India, is often seen as a successful Asian 
example of business process outsourcing in information 
technology, taking advantage of a relatively well educated 
young population.  Accra, Ghana, is a youthful African 
city, mentioned as effective in creating youth employment. 
São Paulo is an economic hub in South America that has 
experienced economic growth leading to greater prosperity, 
while still being plagued by high levels of inequality, violence 
and possessing a public education system that leaves many 
young people ill prepared for the job market.  These four 
cities were not selected to be representative of all cities in 
the developing world.  Rather, they provide a glimpse of the 
challenges and opportunities faced by young people in these 
and many other cities. 

3

Youth in the ProsPeritY of CitiesYoung businessman outside his office.©elwynn / ShutterstockTable 1.2

Survey respondents in four cities by age (N=443)

Accra

AGE

Total (N)

Bangalore

Cairo

15 - 18

19 - 21

22 - 24

25 +

19

9

28

56

112

21

52

20

12

105

Cities
São Paulo

11

12

22

80

125

All cities

65

14

19

3

101 

116

87

89

151

443

Box 1.1

Field Study Methodology in Four Cities

Cairo, Egypt.
The study included 125 respondents from age 15 to 32, 
selected from various locations, including Tahrir Square, Faculty 
of Economics and Political Science, Heliopolis Sporting Club 
and the El Youm 7 Newspaper and Lawyer Syndicate.  These 
locations were chosen to reflect a range of social classes and 
religions. While participants came from different backgrounds 
and professions, including advantaged and disadvantaged areas, 
a majority had their primary degree in English, and accordingly 
would not be drawn from populations living in high poverty areas 
with low educational attainment. Questions aimed at getting 
youth opinions on the levels and patterns of exclusion and 
inclusion and ways of achieving a more egalitarian distribution 
of the benefits of the city’s prosperity.

Bangalore, India
The study had 105 respondents, mostly between the ages of 
20 and 30, but including a few high-school students. Many 
were employed. Some were college students and job-seeking 
migrants.  They came from various areas in the city, with 
a reasonable spread across occupations, locations, and 
socioeconomic status, although logistical obstacles and lack of 
transportation led to a low representation of young people from 
the lower-middle class.  Focus Group Discussions were held 
following the survey.

São Paulo, Brazil
The study analyzed 101 respondents between 15 and 29 years 
old. They were drawn from the city’s largest informal settlement 
as well as a middle-class housing project, and a trades 
program, among others. About 65 per cent of them were high-
school students. The survey was carried out in partnership with 
five NGOs, involving eight organized youth groups.  About 20 
per cent of the responses came via the internet from youth with 
relatively high incomes and educational levels.  As an alternative 
to Focus Group Discussions, at the annual  São Paulo Municipal 
Youth Conference, 21 youth participated in individual or small 
group interviews to discuss key survey questions.

Accra, Ghana
in total, 112 youth were chosen according to socio-economic 
status, geographic location in Accra, level of education, and 
age to approximate a good cross representation of youth in 
the city of Accra. Participants were selected from  university 
students, high school students, youth living in low income areas, 
youth employed in the formal sector, youth employed in the 
informal sector (street hawkers, petty traders, apprentices, etc.), 
unemployed youth, members of various youth organizations 
(ethnic, religious and social), and youth living with disability.  The 
questionnaire was administered in conjunction with the Focus 
Group Discussion, and also given to members of various youth 
organizations, youth in the informal sector who were assisted 
with the completion process, and several students. 

4

Figure 1.2
Youth andProsperity in Cities: Conceptual Framework

ent
m
y
lo
p
m
E
 
d
n
a

 

y

t

i

v

i

t

c

u

d

o

r

P

Q u a l i ty of Life

Youth  

Prosperity  
of Cities

Equit y

I

n

f

r

a

s

t

r

u

c

t

u

r
e
 

D
e
v
e
l
o
p
m
ent

As related above, field surveys were conducted by UN-

Habitat and partners in all the four cities considered. Data was 
collected from a cross-section of young people through focus 
groups discussion and the Survey. The responses elicited on 
the various aspects of prosperity shaped the different chapters 
in this report. In total, 443 young people participated in the 
study distributed across several age groups. Accra and Cairo had 
a relatively strong representation of those 25 years and older, 
while Bangalore and São Paulo provided more input from 
younger age groups (See Table 1.2). 

The youth that participated in the study were chosen to 

demonstrate a range of perceptions found among young people 
in the four cities. The research methodology followed the same 
broad outlines including series of focus group discussions and 
survey in all the cities, however, specific research processes 
differed based on particular characteristics of each city. (See 
Box 1.1). The city reports also provided general background 
information related to population composition, economic 
trends, and issues of equity and inclusion.
CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK

Prosperity can be narrowly seen in terms of economic 

flourishing.  However, in a wider perspective in which this 
report is situated, prosperity includes other dimensions of 
thriving such as quality of life and equity. This report embraces 
this broader vision taking into account the conceptualization 
of prosperity adopted in the State of the World Cities 2012-
13 report. Figure 2 shows prosperity as comprising four key 

components:  economic productivity and employment, quality 
of life, infrastructure development, and equity.5

These components are closely interrelated. For example 
decent jobs require the right kind of education, skills and 
depending on the job requirement, some level of vocational 
training.  A city requires affordable and efficient transportation 
for young people to access its educational facilities and 
subsequent employment opportunities. Spatial mobility, in 
turn, requires a safe environment that enables young people to 
move around without fear. Equity aspects permeate all other 
components and patterns of social exclusion are seen in all 
areas. Discriminatory practices against youth are exacerbated by 
barriers associated with, for example, gender, race, and social 
class.

Age matters
On average, 28per cent of surveyed 15 to 8 year olds in 
Accra, Bangalore, Cairo and Sao Paulo stated that their city 
government is committed to equity.  However, only 6per cent of 
those aged 25 to 32 said so.

Building on the State of Urban Youth report 2010/11, 

this report emphasizes aspects it found central in the lives of 
youth, particularly inequality of opportunities and resultant 

5

Youth in the ProsPeritY of Citiesunequal outcomes. While it is important to identify objective 
conditions of urban prosperity, it is also critical to ascertain 
and recognize young people’s subjective assessments of these 
conditions and their place relative to them.  After all, it is their 
perceptions that guide their actions.6 Depending on how they 
evaluate their situation, youth will be inclined towards different 
behaviors, whether negative (e.g., crime) or positive (e.g., civic 
engagement). Therefore, this report details the opinions of 
young people themselves regarding various dimensions of urban 
prosperity, with special attention given to patterns of inclusion 
and exclusion.7 

Place matters

Almost 60 per cent of surveyed young people say that their level 
of prosperity is related to where they live in the city, ranging from a 
high of 89per cent in Cairo to a low of 44 per cent in Bangalore.

At the same time, young people do not form their evaluations 
in a vacuum and their context influences the circumstances and 
the future they see for themselves. Factors that are important in 
one city may be less significant elsewhere, while other factors 
may be shared in common across different cities. It is, therefore, 
helpful to use a comparative perspective.  Indeed, when 
asked how committed their city is to promoting the various 
dimensions of prosperity, the responses of the participating 
youth show similarities as well as differences.  For example, in 

all four cities, youth believe that the greatest local commitment 
is to infrastructure development, but the proportion of youth 
expressing this opinion ranges from as low as 8 per cent in  
São Paulo to a high of 42 per cent in Cairo.  The prosperity 
components where youth see the least commitment by 
their local governments likewise differs across the cities.  In 
Bangalore, youth least often say that there is a commitment to 
aspects of productivity (14 per cent), whereas it is quality of life 
in Bangalore (13per cent), and equity in Cairo (19 per cent) 
and  São Paulo (3 per cent).  These findings also make clear 
that the lowest levels of commitment perceived in one city, can 
exceed the highest commitment levels perceived elsewhere (see 
Table 1.3). 

A better understanding of these and related perceptions is 

important for informing policies that promote urban prosperity 
for all. 

The rest of the report is arranged after the conceptual model 

outlined above.  Chapter Two takes a broad perspective on 
quality of life that includes such issues as education, safety, 
social supports, and discrimination, while Chapter Three 
focuses more specifically on findings regarding economic 
productivity and employment.   Chapter Four examines 
urban infrastructure in greater depth and the ways in which 
its development creates or hinders opportunities for youth.  
Chapter Five focuses on important aspects of equity and 
the effectiveness of city policies in redressing the uneven 
distribution of benefits accruing from urban prosperity.  The 
last chapter concludes the report with implications for policy.

Table 1.3

Proportion of young people stating that their local government is committed to dimensions of prosperity (by city)

Bangalore

35 per cent

Cairo

20 per cent

 São Paulo

8 per cent

Accra

13 per cent

8

6

3

26

23

18

James & James.  This report acknowledges the importance of environmental 
sustainability as a pivotal component of urban prosperity and considers it a 
proper subject for separate coverage, as provided by documents emanating 
from the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development held in  Rio 
de Janeiro, Brazil, on June 20-22, 2012. See also State of the World’s Cities 
2012-13.

This point was first established by the Thomas Theorem in 1928 (Thomas 
and Thomas, 1928) and has since been corroborated by numerous empirical 
studies.

A well established literature demonstrates the importance of considering 
subjective quality of life dimensions, e.g., Zhenghui and Gareth (2009) 

47

42

19

6. 

7. 

6

Quality of Life

Productivity

infrastructure

Equity

Source: UN-Habitat Youth Survey ( 2012)

Endnotes

14

37

30

1. 

Bouazizi: The Man Who Set Himself and Tunisia on Fire. http://www.time.com/
time/magazine/article/0,9171,2044723,00.html. Accessed July 1, 2012

2. 

 See http://www2.ohchr.org/english/law/crc.htm

3.  World Development Report 2007: Development and the Next Generation.

4. 

5. 

UN-Habitat Youth Survey (2012).

See pp. 7-8, The prosperity of cities: Concept note for State of the World’s 
Cities Report 2012/13. 2010. No author given. UN-Habitat, Nairobi. This 
conceptualization roughly coincides with Friedmann’s (2006) seven clusters 
of city regions and is similar to the urban livelihoods framework, developed 
by Rakodi and Lloyd-Jones. Rakodi, C., & Lloyd-Jones, T. (2002). Urban 
livelihoods: A People-Centered approach to reducing poverty.  Earthscan/

State of the Urban YoUth report  2012/2013Chapter 2.0

Youth and Quality  
of Life

INTRODUCTION

A prosperous city provides the whole population, with 
adequate housing and decent basic services irrespective of 
race, ethnicity, gender or socioeconomic status, facilitating 
equal access to social amenities, public goods and sound 
environmental conditions. The phrase “quality of life” broadly 
defines the overall well-being of individuals or communities. 
The concept has been applied across a wide range of domains, 
particularly in international development, for instance the 
Human Development Index (HDI) and more recently the 
Multi-dimensional Poverty Index (MPI), which have been 
jointly developed by scholars, politicians and policy-makers. 
Quality of life is qualitatively different from standard of living, 
which derives largely from income; the measure of Quality 
of life includes proxy statistics for wealth, employment, the 
built environment, physical and mental health, education, 
recreation and leisure time, and sense of social belonging. For 
statistical purposes, both objective and subjective measures 
are now broadly used in the development agenda by decision-
makers, practitioners and policy-makers in a bid to address the 
challenges they face. For instance, politicians and economists 
have used quality of life measures to assess the liveability of a 
specific city or nation. The Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU) 
and Mercer’s Quality of Living Reports combine both subjective 
and objective proxies as determinants of quality of life.

For the purposes of this Report, the pursuit of quality of 
life is considered as one of the essential factors behind urban 

7

prosperity. The main variables include access to education, 
health and other basic services and in addition, to these core 
defining features are - a non-discriminatory social environment- 
where every citizen feels welcome and safe.

However, from the perspective of most young urban 

residents, who constitute a very large share of the world’s 
population today, prosperous cities are simply places where 
residents can find gainful jobs that pay a living wage. A 
prosperous city provides its citizens with basic services, 
including safe water and adequate sanitation. The inhabitants of 
a prosperous city have access to educational opportunities and 
health care. They are not at risk of forced eviction and enjoy 
secure tenure in affordable housing. They live in communities 
that are safe and environments that are clean. And, perhaps 

Youth in the ProsPeritY of CitiesGroup of students attending a training course at school.© Goodluz /Shutterstockmost importantly, prosperous cities are void of discriminatory 
practices and governed through inclusive local democratic 
processes (Van Vliet—2002).

Reflecting a broad view of quality of life, young people in 
Accra, Bangalore, Cairo and  São Paulo were asked about a 
range of factors contributing to their sense of prosperity. These 
factors included, employment, education, safety and security, 
active participation, housing, and transportation.  Table 2.1 
and Figure 2.1 show young people’s assessments of these factors 
in these cities.  A few findings stand out.  In three of four 
cities, youth see good quality education as contributing most 
to their prosperity. Indeed, primary education is free for a large 
majority in all cities, as is secondary education according to a 

large majority in Cairo (94 per cent) and  São Paulo (85 per 
cent ), although actual enrollment and drop-out rates can be 
problematic.  

Meaningful employment and a decent income also rank 

high as factors contributing to prosperity, but somewhat less 
so than education, suggesting that job opportunities fall short 
of the positions for which young people’s education prepares 
them.  In other words, education is not enough and local 
governments would do well to create jobs that match young 
people’s educational qualifications.  This point is well illustrated 
by experience reported by young men in India (See Chapter 3 
of this report).

Figure 2.1
Young people’s rating of the importance of factors contributing to a sense of prosperity by city

g
n
i
k
n
a
R

4.0

3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

Accra

Bangalore

Cairo

São Paulo

All cities

supporting economic growth

Improving environmental quality

Improving slum conditions & reducing poverty

Guiding and directing urban growth

Improving quality of life e.g sanitation

Facilitating mobility

Reducing disparities between rich and poor 
youth

Improving access to education and health

Ranking scale: 1→ Not contributing, 2→ Somewhat contributing, 3→ Contributing,  

4→ Contributing effectively, 5→ Fully contributing

Source: UN-Habitat Youth Survey (2012)

8

State of the Urban YoUth report  2012/2013Table 2.1

Young people’s rating of the importance of factors contributing to a sense of prosperity by city

A meaningful employment & decent income

Adequate housing with basic services

Easy access to internet

Security to live and work freely without fear

Availability of sport and recreational facilities

Good and affordable public transportation

Active participation in community affairs

Ability to use public spaces in the city

Good quality of education

Easy access to public leisure and culture

Quality of the natural and built environment

A sense of equity

Source: UN-Habitat Youth Survey (2012)

Accra

Bangalore

Cairo

São Paulo

All cities

4.24

3.71

3.76

4.15

3.68

3.77

3.04

3.29

4.19

3.35

3.43

3.71

3.66

3.47

3.50

3.68

3.28

3.64

3.27

3.29

4.22

3.50

3.73

3.93

1.93

2.10

2.63

2.85

2.26

2.29

1.91

1.86

2.03

1.85

1.84

1.94

3.85

3.91

3.92

3.75

3.44

3.60

3.56

3.71

4.09

4.00

3.60

3.81

3.36

3.24

3.42

3.58

3.13

3.28

2.89

2.98

3.56

3.11

3.09

3.29

Also considered important are safety to live and work freely 

without fear and a sense of equity.  Youth in Cairo point to 
easy access to the internet as the second most important factor 
contributing to prosperity.  This is interesting because research 
has shown the pivotal role of ICTs in facilitating the recent 
youthful uprisings in the Arab world.1 So also illustrating the 
ways in which profit-seeking social media corporations can 
restrict protest movements whose activities may run counter to 
goals of commercial gain.2

Active participation in community affairs was consistently 
rated as the factor least contributing to urban prosperity (see 
Figure 2.1).  This assessment likely reflects young people’s 
lack of influence in local decision making.  Their roles in 
the political sphere differ between cities, depending on local 
circumstances. 

In Bangalore, a group of NGOs launched a Civic 

Dialogue program to encourage systematic debate on youth 
participation, but focus group discussion concluded that the 
city administration has not been keen to formalize youth 
involvement.3  Focus groups in Cairo agreed that there is little 
youth involvement in local councils and recommended that 
youth be allowed to participate in the council’s work and in the 
formulation of local public policy.4 
  Youth in Accra have been mainly involved as foot soldiers 
in political campaigns, and as the main actors in sometimes 
violent confrontations demanding their reward in terms of 
promised job opportunities. They, too, would like to see better 

opportunities for their participation in local governance.5 
   Opportunities for civic engagement and political 
participation are closely related to dominant perceptions of 
youth as a population in need of resources versus views that 
accommodate young people as valuable partners in creating 
prosperous cities. These perceptions, in turn, underpin 
local policy approaches that create more or less equitable 
distributions of the costs and benefits of urban growth. The 
resulting patterns of inequity, and young people’s perceptions, 
are taken up in Chapter five of this report.

The low ranking of city prosperity by the youths in Cairo 
stand out in contrast to those of their counterparts in Accra, 
Bangalore and  São Paulo although Cairo is not  less wealthy a 
city.  
An explanation for the differences may lie in a study of 
residential satisfaction among the residents of a cooperative 
housing project, which found that resident’s involvement in the 
project’s operations and management correlated negatively with 
their levels of satisfaction.6 

What’s Your Dream for Brazil?

in a 2010 national survey, 1784 Brazilian youth between 18 and 
24 years of age responded to the question:  “What’s your dream 
for Brazil?” The top response was: less violence (18per cent).

9

Youth in the ProsPeritY of Cities  Possibly, those who were more involved experienced the 
associated frustrations resulting in less satisfaction.  Likewise, 
it is possible that youth in Cairo who engaged actively or 
emotionally with the tidal changes that swept through the 
country, became disappointed with subsequent developments.  
The dissolution of the Revolutionary Youth Coalition in July 
2012 reflects a splintering of Egypt’s youth movement and 
adds to the uncertainty of future of youth engagement in the 
Egyptian revolution. 7

“Security is bad for everyone, and the youth –  
especially the poor and slum dwellers --  are killed”

Paloma, 18 
Bela Vista, Sao Paulo

Safety 

A factor that features prominently in youth’s perceptions 
of prosperity is the role of safety and their ability to live and 
work freely without fear. Overall, only one in four youth report 
feeling safe.

However, this average conceals as much as it reveals. Feelings 

of safety, not surprisingly, differ by city.   

In Cairo, more than one out of every two youth feels safe, 

but in  São Paulo, a mere 1 per cent of youth say they feel 
safe. Violent deaths among young people in this city are much 
higher in the outlying areas than in the center, reflecting spatial 

The lack of toilet provision within a safe environment leads 
to fears among children and also about sexually motivated 
attacks on women and girls. Both of these concerns are 
related to distance of toilets from the home. in Nairobi, the 
lack of proximate facilities is a major risk to women, most 
of whom have to walk more than 300 metres to a toilet. 
Women report that it is risky for them to walk alone in the 
settlement after seven in the evening. Cost is a further 
factor that prevents use of sanitation facilities. in Durban 
(South Africa), women have access to piped supplies used 
for washing and water-borne sanitation but the increased 
emphasis on cost-recovery service management has led 
to expensive bills, and hence women are reluctant to flush 
the toilets and draw additional water.  
(Tacoli, 2012).

patterns of exclusion.  Although significantly lower than in 
1998, the São Paulo Youth Vulnerability Index still showed high 
rates of homicides in a 2008 survey among youths between 15-
and-24 age range (30.6 in the Metropolitan Region in 2008).8 
Indeed, research attests to the problems of violence in this city. 
A Social and Health Assessment study of incarcerated youth 
in  São Paulo found that exposure to violence in the 12 months 
prior to incarceration, after controlling for demographic and 
family variables, was associated with having peers involved 
in risk behavior; easy access to guns; and having slept on the 
street.9

10

State of the Urban YoUth report  2012/2013A community near Taolagnaro, Madagascar, began organizing nightly patrols following a rise in crime  © Guy Oliver/IRINAlthough the UN-Habitat survey did not collect gender 
specific data, other research shows that security concerns are 
especially prevalent among young women. A study of incidents 
reported by women victimized by violence in  São Paulo shows 
that the judicial process is often a difficult, long and expensive 
process, with little institutional protection.10 São Paulo was 
home of the first women’s police station, run exclusively by 
police women for women with the authority to investigate 
crimes against women, such as domestic violence, assault, and 
rape. There are now more than 300 women’s police stations 
throughout Brazil.11 
  

In Mumbai, women’s savings groups similarly work with 
the police to set up community police stations in informal 
settlements. Once established, one of their tasks is to close 
down illegal drinking places, helping to reduce alcohol abuse 
and hence domestic violence.12

Focus group discussions with youth in Bangalore concluded 
that poorly lit roads contributed to women’s lack of safety and 
that law and order agencies in the city do not attract respect 
from young people.13 Improved lighting of streets and other 
public spaces is one of several recommendations to reduce 
gender-based violence through urban upgrading; including 
supervised communal sanitary facilities, and better spatial 
integration of job and housing markets to reduce dependence 
on unsafe public transportation.14

Table 2.2

Categories of Violence to which Youth are Subjected 

Category of violence

Types of violence by perpetrators and/
or victims

Manifestations

Political

• State and non-state violence

• Guerrilla conflict
• Paramilitary conflict
• Political assassinations
• Armed conflict between political parties

institutional

Economic

•  Violence of state and other 

“informal” institutions

•  Including the private sector

• Extra-judicial killings by police
• Physical or psychological abuse by health and education workers
• State or community vigilante-directed social cleansing of gangs and street 

• Organized crime
• Business interests
• Delinquents
• Robbers

children

• Lynching of suspected criminals by community members

•  Intimidation and violence as means of resolving economic disputes
•  Street theft, robbery and crime
•  Kidnapping
•  Armed robbery
•  Drug-trafficking
•  Car theft and other contraband activities
•  Small-arms dealing
•  Assaults including killing and rape in the course of economic crimes
•  Trafficking in prostitutes
•  Conflict over scarce resources

Economic/social

• Gangs
• Street children (boys and girls)
• Ethnic violence

•  Territorial or identity-based “turf” 

violence; robbery, theft

•  Petty theft
•  Communal riots

Social

•  Intimate partner violence inside 

the home

•  Physical or psychological male–female abuse
•  Physical and sexual abuse, particularly prevalent in the case of stepfathers 

•  Sexual violence (including rape) 

but also uncles

in the public arena

•  Child abuse: boys and girls
•  Inter-generational conflict between 

parent and children

•  Gratuitous/routine daily violence

•   Physical and psychological abuse
•   Incivility in areas such as traffic, road rage, bar fights and 

 street confrontations

•   Arguments that get out of control

Source: Moser (2004).15

11

Youth in the ProsPeritY of CitiesFigure 2.2
What is preventing youth in your city from becoming more prosperous?

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

s
t
n
e
d
n
o
p
s
e
r
 
f
o
 
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
P

Accra

Bangalore

Cairo

São Paulo

All cities

Cost of conducting business 

Poor access to information

Deficient infrastructure

Lack of appropriate knowledge & skill development

Weak public institutions

Corruption /Lack of good governance

Source: UN-Habitat Youth Survey (2012)

Table 2.2 categorizes different types of violence to which 
youth can be subjected.  Significantly, it references mostly 
manifestations of physical violence and does not include, for 
example, white collar crime. Indeed, as seen, being safe from 
physical violence is a major concern of young people.  However, 
when asked what prevents youth in your city from becoming 
more prosperous, very few respondents selected high levels of 
crime as the primary factor (See Table 2.3 and Figure 2.2). It 
is nonviolent crime that stands out.  In Cairo, no less than 60 
per cent of surveyed youth indicated corruption as the single 
most important factor hindering their progress towards greater 
prosperity, as did 52 per cent in Bangalore.  In  São Paulo, 20 
per cent of youth agreed, making it the second most important 
factor in that city, as it was in Accra at 14 per cent.  

Drawing on labor stratification and life course perspectives, 
research has found that violent crime among younger adults is 
affected by both the quantity and the quality of work. Higher 
violent crime rates among young people was found to be higher 
when there were fewer jobs available to them and when those 
jobs were low wage.16

Some cities have employed innovative approaches that 

involve youth in efforts to increase safety and increase capacity 
for peaceful conflict resolution among citizens. For example, 
the City of Bogota hired some 400 youths, stationed at various 
points throughout the city, after training them as mimes 

12

to use art and humor, encouraging citizens to behave like 
good citizens, escorting elderly pedestrians across the street, 
discouraging littering and promoting respect for crosswalks 
among drivers. Measures to protect rights, enhance social 
services and expand the use of public spaces, particularly in 
poor communities, were a key component of Bogota’s quality 
of life campaign. The Bogota example shows that it is possible 
to take crime and civility seriously without criminalizing minor 
offences by coupling security measures with broader initiatives 
to strengthen democratic inclusion.17   

Using a more top-down approach, a U.S. city has sought a 
way to improve the quality of life for urban youth by passing 
a special initiative that sets goals for funded service activities 
and requires a comprehensive evaluation of outcomes.  A 
performance logic model was developed to guide the collection 
and reporting of evaluation data from grantees, as well as 
track community-wide indicators of quality of life for youth. 
Other key features of this comprehensive evaluation include 
the development of a performance index summarizing overall 
performance and the utilization of a post hoc measure of 
change due to program outcomes.18

State of the Urban YoUth report  2012/2013Table 2.3

What is preventing youth in your city from becoming more prosperous?

Accra

14.29

14.29

14.29

39.29

3.57

14.29

0.00

Bangalore

7.92

6.93

52.48

16.83

8.91

6.93

0.00

Cairo

0.80

4.00

64.00

29.60

0.00

1.60

0.00

São Paulo

All cities

11.11

8.08

20.20

36.36

12.12

4.04

8.08

8.24

8.24

38.67

30.66

5.72

6.64

1.83

100.00

100.00

100.00

100.00

100.00

Lack of appropriate infrastructure

High incidence of slums & poverty

Corruption

Poor governance & weak institutions

High level of crime

High cost of doing business

Lack of access to education

Source: UN-Habitat Youth Survey, 2012

Endnotes

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

See, for example, Analyzing the Role of iCTs in the Tunisian and Egyptian 
Unrest from an information Warfare Perspective.  Van Niekerk Brett; Pillay 
Kiru; Maharaj Manoj. iNTERNATiONAL JOURNAL OF COMMUNiCATiON  Volume: 
5   Pages: 1406-1416. 2011; How Egyptian and Tunisian youth hacked the 
Arab Spring. Streetbook Pollock, John). TECHNOLOGY REViEW. Volume: 114 
issue: 5. OCT 2011 and Mapping the Arabic blogosphere: politics and dissent 
online.  Etling Bruce; Kelly John; Faris Robert; et al. NEW MEDiA & SOCiETY.  
Volume: 12 issue: 8   Pages: 1225-1243. DEC 2010.

Social Media and the Activist Toolkit: User Agreements, Corporate interests, 
and the information infrastructure of Modern Social Movements . Youmans 
William Lafi; York Jillian C. JOURNAL OF COMMUNiCATiON  Volume: 62   
issue: 2   Pages: 315-329. APR 2012.

9. 

See Huculak, McLennan and Bordin (2011)

10.  Violence against women: a study of the reports to police in the city of 

itapevi, Sao Paulo, Brazil. Godoy Serpa da Fonseca Rosa Maria; Egry Emiko 
Yoshikawa; Guedes Rebeca Nunes; et al.MiDWiFERY.  Volume: 27   issue: 4   
Pages: 469-473. AUG 2011.

11.  Women’s Police Stations: Gender, Violence, and Justice in Sao Paulo, Brazil. 

Cecilia MacDowell Santos. 2005. London. Palgrave Macmillan.

12.  Patel and Mitlin (2010) cited in Tacoli (2012, p. 26).

13.  See Bangalore background report, p. 20.

14.  Moser, Winto, and Moser (2005, cited in Tacoli (2012, p. 27).

See Bangalore background report, p. 22.

See Cairo background report, p. 13.

See Accra background report, pp. 14-15.

Breslauer (1978)

See ismail and El Nagar (2012). 

See background report on Sao Paulo, p. 5.

15.  Moser (2004).

16.  See Krivo and Peterson (2004)

17.  Beckett and Godoy (2010)  

18.  A city initiative to improve the quality of life for urban youth: how evaluation 

contributed to effective social programming. Green, Ellis and Lee (2005) 

13

Youth in the ProsPeritY of CitiesChapter 3.0

Urban Youth 
Employment and 
Productive Cities

More than 18 per cent of today’s world population, which is 

more than 1.2 billion people, are between the ages of 15 and 
24.  The vast majority of them, 87 per cent, live in developing 
countries; 62 per cent of them live in Asia and 17 per cent of 
them live in Africa.1 A growing number of youth live in urban 
areas. Findings presented in this report show that youth in 
urban areas often lack access to housing, transportation and 
other basic services and have unequal access to opportunities 
for education, training, employment, and recreation.  Cities in 
the developing world are expected to account for about 90 per 
cent of the world’s projected urban growth.2  In other words, 
increasing numbers of young people live in cities in developing 
countries, where they face difficult economic, political and 
social challenges.  
CITIES AS ENGINES OF ECONOMIC GROWTH
A prosperous city fosters economic development and 

creates the conditions for provision of decent, productive and 
gainful jobs, along with equal opportunities and decent living 
standards for everyone. This is achieved through effective 
economic policies and reforms that take into account creativity, 

innovation, research and development, science and technology. 
A prosperous urban economy contributes to national growth, 
while employment acts as the main gateway out of poverty and 
an important step towards social integration. It is the basis of 
wealth creation and the primary instrument for equitable (re)
distribution of the benefits of prosperity.

In 2010, the World Bank launched the Innovative Cities 

dialogue series to help mayors and policymakers share 
innovations to improve urban life across the globe.3 Its monthly 
webinar series on “Cities as Engines of Economic Growth”, 
begun in 2012,  provides a forum for leading experts, policy 
makers and the private sector to discuss timely topics on city 
competitiveness.4  The notion of cities as economic growth 
engines is nothing new.  In the late 1980, scholars encouraged 
a view of cities to stimulate economic growth.5  It is also a tenet 
of the accompanying State of the World’s Cities report 2012-
2013.   

While there is no doubt that urban economic growth can 
lead to greater prosperity, it is also a fact that the potential 
of this growth is not equally realized for all urban residents.  
The benefits and costs of economic growth are not evenly 
distributed and some groups benefit more than others, while 
some bear a larger burden than others. Award-winning 
research in this regard has influenced numerous studies in 
various countries, showing that specific interests, particularly 
those related to real estate development, must be studied as 
stakeholders organize, lobby, manipulate and structure urban 

14

Figure 3.1

Global youth employment and employment - to - population ratio, 1991 to 20117

8

.

8
2
5

6

.

9
2
5

3

.

5
2
5

5

.

1
2
5

5

.

4
1
5

6

.

1
1
5

2

.

9
0
5

2

.

7
0
5

4

.

8
0
5

9

.

5
0
5

3

.

7
1
5

5

.

3
1
5

2

.

1
1
5

9

.

9
3
5

4

.

0
4
5

5

.

8
3
5

4

.

8
3
5

8

.

9
3
5

8

.

5
3
5

8

.

8
2
5

8

.

3
2
5

550.0

540.0

530.0

520.0

510.0

500.0

490.0

480.0

)
s
n
o

i
l
l
i

m

(
 
t
n
e
m
r
e
w
o
p
m
e
 
h
t
u
o
Y

Y
o
u
t
h
 
e
m
p
o
w
e
r
m
e
n
t
 
-
 
t
o
-
 
p
o
p
u
l
a
t
i
o
n
 
r
a
t
i
o
s
 
(
p
e
r
 
c
e
n
t
)

p = projection

Youth empowerment - to- population ratios (per cent)

Source: ILO, Trends Econometric Models, April 2010 .

land use patterns and the economic gains they generate.6  As is 
evident from this report, particularly Chapter Five, youth are 
among the groups who do not share equally in the prosperity 
generated in the cities where they reside.  As such, it is not 
sufficient for cities to be engines of growth; they must also 
function as agents of change to bring about greater prosperity 
for all (Van Vliet, 2002). 
DECLINING YOUTH EMPLOYMENT

The negative scissors effect of trends in youth employment 

and youth population growth have produced a rapidly growing 
job deficit for young people since about 2000 (See Figure 3.1). 

Recent reports published by the International Labour 

Organization point to this daunting challenge.  For example, 
using the most recent data available, the ILO report “Global 
Employment Trends for Youth 2012” shows increasing 
youth unemployment rates, particularly in the Middle East 
(26.5 per cent ) and North Africa (27.9 per cent ) where the 
unemployment rate has risen by almost 5 percentage points 
following the Arab Spring8 (See Table 3.1)

Currently, more than 75 million youth are unemployed 
worldwide, an increase of more than 4 million since 2007. 
Projections point to continuing high levels of youth joblessness 
(ILO 2012). Young women are particularly disadvantaged in 
the labour market access, as reflected in their low participation 
rates.  The gender gaps are especially large in South Asia 
(34.1per cent ), the Middle East (33.6 per cent ), North Africa 
(27.4 per cent , and Latin America & the Caribbean (19.9 per 
cent ).10

Clearly, an important role of cities in bringing greater 

prosperity to youth relates to the creation of appropriate jobs 
and the provision of adequate training that youth need in order 
to work in those jobs. The UN-Habitat field surveys carried out 
in Accra, Bangalore, Cairo and  São Paulo offer useful insights 
regarding the performance of their local governments in these 
areas.   More than 38 per cent of the young people surveyed 
state that their city is not making enough efforts and not 
committed to promoting productivity. 

Table 3.1

Youth unemployment rate 2011 by region9

WORLD

12.6per cent

Developed economies & Eur. Union

Central & S-E Europe & CiS

East Asia

S-E Asia & the Pacific

S-Asia

Latin America & the Caribbean

Middle East

North Africa

Sub-Saharan Africa

15

18.0

17.6

9.0

13.5

9.8

14.3

26.5

27.9

11.5

Youth in the ProsPeritY of CitiesTable 3.2

What hampers economic productivity in your city the most?

Cost of conducting business

Poor access to information

Deficient infrastructure

Lack of appropriate knowledge & skills development

Week public institutions

Corruption/lack of good governance

Source: UN-Habitat Youth Survey ( 2012)

Accra

21.43

10.71

1.79

44.64

5.36

16.07

Bangalore

10.89

5.94

6.93

15.84

5.94

54.46

Cairo

13.60

0.00

1.60

12.00

6.40

66.40

São Paulo

All cities

3.96

23.76

8.91

26.73

9.90

26.73

12.76

9.57

4.56

24.60

6.83

41.69

100.00

100.00

100.00

100.00

100.00

The proportion is even higher among older age groups:  22-24 
years: 44 per cent; and 25+ years old: 53 per cent . This finding 
likely reflects the greater difficulty older youth have in securing 
adequate jobs.   

When asked what hampers youth contributions to economic 
productivity, the most important reason given is corruption and 
lack of good governance (42 per cent). However, the relative 
importance of reasons differs by city. In São Paulo, lack of 
appropriate knowledge and skills is an equally important barrier 
as corruption (27per cent ) and poor access to information is 
also seen as a significant factor (24 per cent ).  In Accra, lack of 
appropriate knowledge and skills is considered by far the most 
important factor (45 per cent , whereas in Bangalore and Cairo 
young people see corruption and lack of good governance as the 
major impediments (54 per cent  and 64 per cent ).  (See Table 
3.2 and Figure 3.2 for these and related findings). 

Figure 3.2

What hampers economic productivity in your city the most?

Access to Credit

Young people’s entrepreneurial initiatives are often stifled 
by lack of access to credit.  Making Cents international’s 
global Youth inclusive Financial Services Linkage Program 
(YFS-Link) offers innovative, practical tools and guidance that 
assist financial service providers (FSPs) and youth serving 
organizations (YSOs) to serve young clients with appropriate 
financial services. in partnership with the Master Card 
Foundation, Making Cents develops strategies to address gaps 
in information, skills, and resources required for institutions to 
meet demand for financial services by young people. 

Source: http://www.makingcents.com

Corruption/lack of good governance
Week public institutions
Lack of appropriate knowledge & skills 
development
Deficient infrastructure
Poor access to information
Cost of conducting business

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

s
t
n
e
d
n
o
p
s
e
R

 
f
o

 
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
P

Accra

Bangalore

Cairo

São Paulo

All cities

Source: UN-Habitat Youth Survey ( 2012)

16

State of the Urban YoUth report  2012/2013Entra 21:  IT Training for Jobs

Entra 21 is an initiative developed by the international Youth 
Foundation to prepare Latin America and Caribbean (LAC) 
youth, 16 to 29 years of age, for today’s information-based 
economy. Entra 21 has been implemented widely by local and 
central governments, NGOs, and local businesses to improve the 
employability of disadvantaged youths. The program started in 
2002 with the goal of providing skills training in information and 
communication technology to 12,000 young workers in a 3-year 
period and to place at least 40 percent of them in employment. 
Entra 21 programs are co-financed by the Multilateral investment 
Fund of the inter-American Development Bank. 

Source: Puerto, S (2007). interventions to Support Young Workers in Latin 
America and the Caribbean: Regional Report for the Youth Employment 
inventory. Accessible at: http://siteresources.worldbank.org/iNTLM/
Resources/390041-1188243960961/YEi_LAC_07-01.pdf

In so far as these perceptions align with actual conditions, 

these findings indicate the importance of remedial policies 
and programs that target locally specific factors underlying the 
underutilization of young people’s contributions to economic 
productivity.  

About one-half of surveyed youth, also state that economic 

growth in their city does not generate youth employment, 
although there are considerable differences between the four 
cities notably in Cairo (See Figure 3.3). Unfortunately, a 
majority of these youth in the four cities studied (64 per 
cent ) say that their city does not have a long-term plan that 
encourages youth contributions to sustain productivity and 
prosperity of its inhabitants.  

They are more sanguine regarding programs and initiatives 
specifically addressing youth; 54 per cent say their cities have 
such a plan, but with large inter-city differences, ranging from 
a high of 81 per cent in  São Paulo to a low of 6 per cent in 
Cairo.  Of those who say that their cities have such initiatives, 
71 per cent indicate that they seek to enhance the quality of 
informal sector employment, while 68 per cent say that they 
aim to provide skills to increase young people’s employability.  

Figure 3.3

Is urban economic growth in your city generating youth employment?

Yes

No

100

80

60

40

20

0

Accra

Bangalore

Cairo

São Paulo

All cities

Source: UN-Habitat Youth Survey ( 2012)

17

Youth in the ProsPeritY of CitiesTaken as a whole, the picture that emerges is one in 
which youth do not generally see their city government as 
undertaking significant efforts to improve young people’s paths 
to greater prosperity.  And even when youth become highly 
qualified, city governments are not perceived as having a policy 
to retain such qualified individuals.  In fact, only one out of 
every four youths surveyed believed that their local or national 
government has any kind of policy targeting the employment 
of highly qualified youth.

 In line with the findings for Accra, Bangalore, Cairo 
and  São Paulo, field surveys carried out in four Chinese 
cities in cooperation with UN-Habitat, using the same set of 
instruments, found that job opportunities and level of pay were 
the most important push and pull factors causing young people 
to leave their hometown in search of better prospects in large 
cities.11 

Box 3.1

Sustainable Livelihoods in Accra, Ghana: YouthWorks!

Youth Empowerment Synergy Ghana (YES-Ghana)’s 
YouthWorks Project provides solid waste management 
training and capacity building for youth in Ashiedu-Keteke 
sub-metropolis of Accra. Through Youth Works, youth 
are mobilized to undertake youth-led service delivery in 
solid waste management. Youth beneficiaries sensitize 
residents on the benefits of environmental cleanliness and 
proper ways of managing solid waste. With funding from 
CHF international, YouthWorks allows youth to contribute 
to environmental sanitation while earning productive and 
sustainable livelihoods. Over 150 youth have already 
gained full employment through YouthWorks and the project 
contributes to improved sanitation in Accra’s low-income 
sub-metropolitan areas.

Source: http://www.yesghana.org; http://www.youth-employment-
inventory.org

  Notwithstanding the generally unfavourable assessment of 
the surveyed youth in the UN-Habitat and Chinese studies, 
there exist emerging programs and policies which point to 
possibilities of addressing the observed trends in ways that 
will lead to greater prosperity for young people. As discussed 
in Chapter Six of this report, attention is often focused on 
macro-level policies and frequently oriented to more developed 
economies, where data informing such policies are more readily 
available.  However, scattered evidence suggests that a different 
approach, addressing economic productivity at the local level 
may be an important strategy that deserves further exploration.

18

This Report finds that youth employment is a special challenge 
in cities around the world because of their youth-biased 
demographic structures. The global economic crisis has exposed 
the particular vulnerability of young people in the labour 
market. Youth who are not integrated into the world of work 
after leaving school risk long-term exclusion from productive 
engagement. Young people are also more likely than adults to 
be among the working poor in informal jobs. An unemployed 
youth represents a colossal waste of resource, a social hazard and 
a burden on families or the government social support schemes, 
where any. Being forced into precarious livelihoods by intense 
poverty and lack of social protection is a lost opportunity, since 
these young people might otherwise attend school or college 
and acquire the skills and abilities that could raise their future 
productivity and earnings.

Box 3.2

Creating jobs and building houses, while reducing waste:  
Techamos Una Mano 

Techamos Una Mano (Lend a Helping Hand) is a youth-
led initiative which transforms milk and juice boxes and 
plastic bottles into building materials that are used to build 
homes for low-income families in Oaxaca, Mexico. The 
project engages student volunteers, aged 15-20 to collect 
discarded materials and construct the homes. The students 
have since constructed ten houses while selling the excess 
waste they collect, including paper, aluminum, and glass to 
interested companies for project sustainability.

Source: www.iyfnet.org, www.tum.org

State of the Urban YoUth report  2012/2013On going training on carpentry and woodwork in youth centre, Afghanistan. © UN-HabitatEndnotes

1.  UN-Habitat. 2012. Youth 21. Building an Architecture for Youth Engagement in 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

the UN System. Nairobi: UNON.

ibid. p. 8.

See http://wbi.worldbank.org/wbi/stories/cities-seen-engines-growth-
incubators-innovation.

See http://einstitute.worldbank.org/ei/webinar/cities-engines-economic-
growth.

See The City: Engine Behind Economic Recovery. Edited by Leo H. Klaassen, 
Leo Van Den Berg and Jan Van Der Meer. Gower. 1990. 

6.  Urban Fortunes: The Political Economy of Place. Harvey Molotch and John 

Logan. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press. 1987 
(reissued with a new preface in 2007).

7. 

8. 

9. 

See Ortiz & Cummins (2012, p. 11).

iLO (2012) 

Source: iLO (2012, Annex 1, p. 43).

10.  iLO (2012, Annex 1, p. 45).

11.  See p. 36 ff. in Fengping Shan. 2012. Urban China Youth 2011; youth 

mobility, inequality and city prosperity. Hong Kong: Press of international 
Academy of Ecology and Life Protection Sciences.

19

Youth in the ProsPeritY of CitiesGreen cars are being charged, in Naples, Italy.  © Julius mwelu/UN-HabitatRickshaw driver working in Calcutta, India. Rickshaws have been around for more than a century, but they could soon be a thing of the past.© Hung Chung Chih / ShutterstockChapter 4.0

Urban Infrastructure 
Policies and Institutions

INTRODUCTION

Urban prosperity is critically dependent on a supportive 
physical urban infrastructure. These infrastructures include 
efficient transportation, effective communication technology, 
adequate sewage disposal and sanitation facilities, well-
functioning distribution systems for water and energy as well as 
the availability of technologies. This chapter will first provide a 
general overview of youth’s infrastructure perceptions in Accra, 

Bangalore, Cairo and  São Paulo, before considering in more 
detail spatial mobility and communication capability, two 
infrastructure factors that play increasingly important roles in 
the prosperity of young urban dwellers.

 No less than 75 per cent of youth surveyed  in Accra, 

Bangalore, Cairo and  São Paulo stated that the infrastructural 
resources in their city inadequately support productive 
activities.  This negative assessment was made by more than 
90 per cent of the surveyed youths in Accra and Cairo.  When 
asked how  infrastructure components most contribute to 
youth prosperity, there was general agreement that facilitating 
mobility is most important, followed by related concerns 
having to do with access to education and health services (See 
Figure 4.1 and Table 4.1).

Table 4.1

Importance of Infrastructure Development to Youth Prosperity Concerns

Accra

Bangalore

Cairo

São Paulo

All cities

Supporting economic growth

improving slum conditions & reducing poverty

improving quality of life e.g. sanitation

Facilitating mobility

improving environmental quality

Guiding and directing urban growth

Reducing disparities between rich and poor youth

improving access to education and health 

Source: UN-Habitat Youth Survey ( 2012)

3.12

2.62

2.85

3.21

2.87

3.26

2.72

3.48

2.14

1.78

2.17

2.65

2.03

2.08

1.60

1.82

2.88

2.91

2.92

2.81

2.73

2.90

2.59

3.13

2.78

2.44

2.59

2.94

2.61

2.74

2.37

2.87

3.09

2.60

2.51

3.13

2.91

2.85

2.71

3.26

20

Supporting economic growth

Improving slum conditions & reducing poverty

Improving quality of life e.g sanitation

Facilitating mobility

Improving environmental quality

Guiding and directing urban growth

Reducing disparities between rich and poor youth

Improving access to education and health 

Figure 4.1

Importance of Infrastructure Development to Youth Prosperity Concerns

3.5

3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

Accra

Bangalore

Cairo

São Paulo

All cities

Source: UN-Habitat Youth Survey (2012)

Various benefits of infrastructure development were 

considered in the survey and opinions were sought on the five-
point scale, from “ Not contributing” to Fully contributing. 
In rating their ease of access to specific infrastructure 
components, youth are most positive about their access to 
telecommunications across board: 3.49 on a five-point scale 
(See Figure 4.2 and Table 4.2).  In all four cities, youth also 
rated their access to electricity highly. At the other end of 
the spectrum, youth generally agreed that access to adequate 
sanitation was most problematic.  Youth in Accra and 
Bangalore also frequently mentioned access to water as an 
issue, whereas in Cairo and  São Paulo youth were more often 
concerned about urban transportation (See Figure 4.2 and 
Table 4.2).  

Table 4.2

Ease of infrastructure access by youth in 4 cities

Urban transport infrastructure

Water

Electricity

Sanitation

Telecommunication infrastructure

infrastructure for recreation

Source: UN-Habitat Youth Survey ( 2012)

Accra

Bangalore

Cairo

São Paulo

All cities

3.24

2.88

3.18

2.71

3.71

3.22

2.42

3.04

3.18

2.78

3.19

2.46

2.81

3.59

3.62

3.06

3.41

3.01

2.91

3.08

3.30

2.73

3.49

2.79

3.25

2.85

3.26

2.40

3.71

2.57

21

Youth in the ProsPeritY of CitiesMunicipal workers lay asphalt in the Atanasio Tzul avenue, zone 12, Guatemala City, Guatemala. © Maria Fleischmann /World BankFigure 4.2

Ease of infrastructure access by youth in 4 cities

g
n

i

k
n
a
R

4.0

3.5

3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

Urban transport infrastructure

Water

Electricity

Sanitation

Telecommunication infrastructure

infrastructure for recreation

Accra

Bangalore

Cairo

São Paulo

All Cities

Source: UN-Habitat Youth Survey ( 2012)

ELECTRICITY

Inquiring further about potential urban issues negatively 

affecting prosperity, more than 90 per cent of youth 
interviewed were again in general agreement about one 
issue; interruptions in the supply of electricity.  Power failure 
was cited as a problem by an average of 85 per cent of 
participating youth (See Figure 4.3 and Table 4.3).  Mentioned 
significantly less frequently were telephone line interruptions.  
It is revealing, however, that of nine major infrastructure 
components listed, even this least problematic one was seen 
by almost 50 per cent as having negative prosperity impacts.  
From these results, it appears that youth in these cities believe 
that infrastructure where they live and work leaves much to be 

desired and needs significant improvement in order to attain 
greater prosperity and prevent formation of slums.  

The participating youth gave more specific information 

when asked how infrastructure underdevelopment in their city 
affected them. They clearly indicate the cost of living as the by 
far most undesirable outcome of underdeveloped infrastructure 
in the cities where they live.  In Cairo, no less than 65 per cent 
of surveyed youth say so.  At the same time, high proportions 
of youth state that the effects of underdeveloped urban 
infrastructure are not evenly distributed and particularly impact 
low-income populations, most notably in Accra, where 45 
per cent say that the most important impact is the increased 
vulnerability of poor communities (See Table 4.4).

22

State of the Urban YoUth report  2012/2013Manager of Hyundai Heavy Industries contractor at E-power,  Kevin Jung J. H., (center) working at E-Power plant in Port-au-Prince, November 6, 2012.  © Dominic Chavez /World BankTable 4.3

Youth Perceptions of Infrastructure Problems by City (per cent)

Congested roads

Flooding

Power failures 

interruption of telephone lines

Shortages of portable water supply

Shortage of cooking gas and any other sources of energy

Leaking sewerage systems 

Poor facilities for pedestrians

Slow internet connections

Others

Source: UN-Habitat Youth Survey ( 2012)

URBAN MOBILITY AND INFRASTRUCTURE

The close linkage between urban infrastructure and equity is 
seen most clearly perhaps in the transportation systems of cities 
and the associated mobility of the young people living in them. 
Youth in the four cities studied for this report repeatedly talked 
about uneven access (See boxes with comments from youth in  
São Paulo, Cairo, and Bangalore).

Development of an adequate and efficient urban 

infrastructure that fosters greater prosperity involves numerous 
actors. In metropolitan areas, those actors operate at different 
levels of government.  

Figure 4.3

Youth perceptions of infrastructure problems by city

Accra

Bangalore

94.64

91.07

98.21

70.54

89.29

98.21

84.82

83.93

70.54

91.26

47.96

88.12

38.61

73.53

28.28

82.18

70.30

38.54

Cairo

92.00

0.00

80.80

35.20

75.20

80.80

85.60

88.00

32.80

100.00

100.00

100.00

São Paulo

All cities

87.13

76.24

73.27

42.57

40.59

30.69

66.34

83.17

72.28

4.55

91.38

51.83

85.19

46.70

70.45

61.78

80.18

81.78

53.00

94.21

Inequitable Infrastructure Access

“Access to proper infrastructure, services and resources is very 
limited.  Only the rich and part of the middle class can afford 
them. Where we live is determined by our economic status, so 
residents of poorer areas just can’t access basic services”

Focus Group Discussion, Cairo

100

80

60

40

20

0

Source: UN-Habitat Youth Survey ( 2012)

Accra

Bangalore

Cairo

São Paulo

All cities

23

Congested roads

Flooding

Power failures

Interruption of telephone lines

Shortages of potable water supply 

Shortage of cooking gas and any other sources of energy

Leaking sewerage systems

Poor facilities for pedestrians

Slow internet connections

Youth in the ProsPeritY of CitiesFigure 4.4

What is the most important effect on youth of infrastructure underdevelopment in your city?

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

Accra

Bangalore

Cairo

São Paulo

All cities

Increased vulnerability of poor communities

High cost of living

Disconnection of the city from neighboring urban areas

Extra cost on production

Discourages investments

Increased rate of accidents

Not applicable/don’t know

Source: UN-Habitat Youth Survey ( 2012)

Transportation Infrastructure

“The City of Sao Paulo does not have the necessary 
infrastructure for the mobility of its residents. Public 
transportation is lacking in all aspects: slow service, poor 
upkeep, and lack of respect for the transit users by employees.”

Lilian 
San Mateo, São Paulo

Proper coordination of their efforts is of paramount 

importance for the successful outcomes. Youth that were asked 
about their perceptions on how well coordinated efforts to 
provide infrastructure at city and regional levels are, did not 
have very positive opinions.  On average, more than 75 per 
cent stated that those efforts are not well coordinated.  Young 
people in Cairo were especially negative in their assessments: 95 
per cent thought that intergovernmental collaboration was not 
properly implemented.

The cities where young people live are nodes in regional 

and global flows of resources with localized destinations 
and transit points. Research has shown the pivotal role that 
spatial mobility plays in the everyday lives of young people, 
underscoring further the significance of a well-functioning 
transportation structure to access these resources, from training 
opportunities to jobs.  For example, a study in Accra, Ghana, 
found that young people’s mobility was bounded by a range 
of factors including labor market characteristics, gender 

24

and generational relations, and their spatial location on the 
outskirts of the city and the margins of the world. However, 
neither their daily mobility, nor their spatial imagination was 
restricted to their local community; real or imagined travel 
takes them to other parts of the city, into rural areas and 
across the nation’s borders.1   Cycling can be an inexpensive 
mode of transportation to access educational and employment 
opportunities.  In this regard, it is illuminating that cultural 
and other factors can complicate physical infrastructural 
issues.  One African study, also conducted in Accra, found that 
children from southern ethnic groups were not encouraged 
to cycle by their families. Among boys it was perceived 
as dangerous: the behavior of ‘rebellious, deviant school 
age males’. If girls dared to ride, they were considered of 
‘questionable sexuality’.2 
   Another study also examined mobility constraints, especially 
as these interact with household labor demands, and found that 
they restrict young people’s access to education and livelihood 
opportunities, particularly for girls.3

“Do wider roads really matter to the poorer classes? Most of 
these roads have hardly any pedestrian pavements and we only 
see many more cars.”

 Bangalore

State of the Urban YoUth report  2012/2013Table 4.4

What is the most important effect on youth of infrastructure underdevelopment in your city?

increased vulnerability of poor communities

High cost of living

Disconnection of the city from neighboring urban areas

Extra cost on production

Discourages investments

increased rate of accidents

Not applicable/don’t know

Source: UN-Habitat Youth Survey ( 2012)

Accra

44.64

33.93

1.79

3.57

5.36

0.00

10.71

100.00

Bangalore

23.96

35.42

9.38

8.33

0.00

13.54

9.38

100.00

Cairo

4.80

65.60

0.80

0.00

6.40

4.00

18.40

100.00

São Paulo

All cities

18.89

38.89

0.00

12.22

10.00

2.22

17.78

100.00

22.70

44.68

2.84

5.44

5.44

4.73

14.18

100.00

South Africa’s Shova Kalula (Ride Easy) National Bicycle 

Programme, which commenced in 2001, is a particularly 
interesting government initiative not least because of its scale: it 
aims to provide one million low-cost bicycles (used and new) in 
rural and peri-urban areas to disadvantaged groups, including 
children and youth. Certain problems notwithstanding, an 
early assessment concluded that the project was helping school 
children to arrive at school in better time, but lacked adequate 
consideration of gender; a new phase is now in progress.4
TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE

Constraints on spatial mobility can, in part, be offset by 
improved communication technologies.  The rapid rise in 
the adoption of mobile phones, dropping prices, increased 
licensing, and the expansion of ICT networks can mitigate 
transportation needs. Recent data show that 45 per cent of 
inhabitants in the developing world have a mobile phone, with 
one out of four Africans and one out of three Asians owning a 
mobile phone (ITU, 2010). Africa’s has more than 198 million 
mobile subscribers, with annual growth over the past five years 
averaging about 50 per cent.5 
  While there is sparse information on the use of mobile 
technology by young people specifically, a survey on youth 
access to ICTs done for the 2007 World Bank World 
Development report found that in India well over 50 per cent 
of youth surveyed had access to mobile phones.6 
  Research on youth and ICTs has found that of the five billion 
mobile phone owners globally, 1.6 billion were youth, who 
spend an estimated  USD 330 billion annually on mobile 
phones. It has also been estimated that by 2012 one in five of 
the youth who own mobile phones will live in India, making 
them more prolific than toilets in that country.7 

Box 4.1

Young Urban Environmental Leaders Project

Alma Ambiental’s Young Urban Environmental Leaders 
Project received funding from UN-Habitat Urban Youth Fund 
to provide youth residents of an impoverished urban social 
housing complex in Santo André ( São Paulo) with training, 
education, leadership, experience, and opportunities to take 
action on environmental issues in their community. Through 
the project, youth beneficiaries educate and mobilize 
residents and peers to take individual and collective action 
toward improved management of waste, environmental 
awareness, access to green space and public sanitation. 
Youth beneficiaries also intern for partner organizations to 
enhance their social inclusion in the City.

Sources: http://www.globalyouthdesk.org 

 In a national South African study, 81 per cent youth 

surveyed stated that they would rather spend their last R10 on 
their mobile phones than on food.8

A study of mobile phone use among nearly 3,000 youth 

in three sub-Saharan countries, using in-depth ethnographic 
research and a follow-up survey, found that virtual mobility 
of the mobile phone not only promotes young people’s 
inclusion in existing social networks but may also encourage 
the extension of social networks.  Given the fact that social 
networks play an important role in enabling households and 
individuals to move out of poverty, networking activity of all 
types is not only logical but also likely to expand as young 
people’s access to mobile phones expands.9

25

Youth in the ProsPeritY of Citiesas measured by GDP. Evidently, countries with higher GDP 
per capita allocate more resources to the social sector, allowing 
larger segments of society access to better infrastructure. In 
particular, this Report corroborated the association of per capita 
GDP and per capita expenditure on health (UN-Habitat 2010-
2011)
INFRASTRUCTURE FOR RECREATION

Cities that have been most successful in attracting foreign 

direct investment (competitive cities) are those that have vastly 
improved the range and quality of their infrastructure. This 
includes infrastructure for recreation. Developing adequate and 
improving existing infrastructure for recreation is necessary for 
the development and support of youth activities and ultimately 
the prosperity of cities. Varied research points to wide ranging 
benefits of these developments in the areas of employment, 
health and well-being, skills development, social capital and 
overall economic strength.

Lack of social infrastructure causes poor local services and 
weak social networks in the community as well as isolation, 
mental health problems, fear of crime, and issues with 
community cohesion.

Box 4.2

Improving sanitation, creating jobs and promoting social 
inclusion in Cairo

Cairo’s Zabballeen (Garbage People) have long been the 
invisible entrepreneurs on the frontlines of city cleanliness, 
recycling activities and environmental protection. The 
Zabballeen fight daily for legitimate entrepreneurial 
opportunities and rights accorded to corporate waste 
management companies. Now a youth-led Non-
Governmental Organization, Spirit of Youth Association, has 
been authorized to formally organize Cairo’s Zabballeen. 
Spirit of Youth advocates for the integration of garbage 
collectors into Cairo’s formal waste management. The 
initiative affords underprivileged youth educational and 
employment opportunities while improving their living 
environment and advocating for environmental cleanliness 
across Cairo.

Source: Global Alliance of Waste Pickers (http://globalrec.org)

The findings from these and other studies suggest that 

mobile communication technologies can help youth overcome 
transportation constraints that limit their livelihoods and can 
help increase their prosperity.
ACCESS TO BASIC SERVICES

Although UN-Habitat data indicate that housing conditions 

and access to basic services have improved from the 1990s 
onward, not only for cities as a whole but for those living in 
slum areas as well, great disparities persist between rich and 
poor. Those with the worst housing conditions also suffer from 
lower access to education and health services. The specific 
findings in the 2010-2011 State the Urban Youth Report 
indicate that; Youth and, by extension, children born within 
families living in highly deprived areas such as slums (and 
compared with non-slum dwellers within the richest wealth 
quintile) can have far less access to health services such as 
antenatal and delivery care as well as to immunization. Family 
resources expressed in terms of shelter (slums and nonslums) 
space have a significant impact on other instrumental 
capabilities such as education and access to basic services 
(water, sanitation, electricity). Infrastructure factors such as 
sanitation influence all the health dimensions that serve as 
measures of unequal opportunities. Combined with unsafe 
water supply and poor hygiene, poor sanitation is responsible 
for relatively high mortality rates among young slum dwellers. 
Poor sanitation is the primary determinant of water, air and 
food contamination. Access to improved sanitation and safe 
drinking water is positively associated with national wealth 

26

State of the Urban YoUth report  2012/2013A boy fetching water from a tap in Mathare slum Nairobi, Kenya.  © Julius Mwelu/UN-HabitatYouth centers are an ideal space to engage youth. They 
should however be designed to function as a multi-faceted 
and integrated community spaces which provides programs 
and services geared to facilitating positive lifestyle choices 
and career development opportunities. They should be centers 
for youth to channel their creative and personal expressions, 
provide opportunities for recreation, social, health-based and/
or other services oriented to the youth. As such, it is necessary 
that the city be involved in the operation of such a facility and 
the youth should be engaged in the design and operation of the 
facilities and programs, thereby empowering them, facilitating 
positive leadership skills and creating a sense of ownership in 
the facility.

Recreational activities may include sports, tourism, parks, 

playing fields and courts, recreational centers, museums, 
among others. All of which require building and maintenance 
of facilities which serve as meeting places for the youth.  Such 
amenities create a sense of belonging, identity and play a role 
in the building of social networks. They shape how inclusive 
a city is for the youth and they have a direct impact on local 
issues like policy and support for young people. Recreational 
infrastructure creates a platform to advance youth development, 
nurture talent while strengthening the contribution that these 
initiatives make towards enhancement of qualities of life for 
the community. They give youth an opportunity to spend 
time with themselves, others, meet new people, make new 
friends and socialize. Some help them in developing leadership 
qualities and interpersonal skills. And in addition, they increase 
opportunity for local employment.

27

Youth in the ProsPeritY of CitiesStudents from the Afghanistan National Institute of Music (ANIM) play in the Wolfensohn Atrium.  © World BankEndnotes

1. 

Langevang and Gough (2009) 

2.  Grieco, Turner and Kwakye (1995)  

4.  Mahapa (2003)  

5. 

international Telecommunications Union (2010). 

3.  Mobility, education and livelihood trajectories for young people in rural Ghana: 

6.  Halewood and Kenny (2007) 

a gender perspective. Porter, Gina. Hampshire, Kate; Abane, Albert; Tanle, 
Augustine; Esia-Donkoh, Kobina; Amoako-Sakyi, Regina Obilie; Agblorti, 
Samuel; Owusu, Samuel Asiedu. CHiLDRENS GEOGRAPHiES. Volume: 9 issue: 
3-4 Special issue: Si Pages: 395-410. 2011.

7. 

8. 

9. 

Rees (2011) 

ibid.

Porter, Hampshire, Abane, Muntali, Robson, Mashiri and Tanle (2012) 

28

State of the Urban YoUth report  2012/2013Women play football on the 28 September Stadium grounds. These days, the venue is again used for sporting events.  © Nancy Palus/IRINChapter 5.0

Prosperity and 
Equity-Based Youth 
Development

A Prosperous City is inclusive, pursuing reduction of poverty 

and inequality through a systematic (re)distribution of the 
benefits of development. This is achieved through protection 
of the rights of the poor, minorities and vulnerable groups, 
enhancing gender equality, and ensuring civic participation by 
all in the social, political and cultural spheres. Over the past 
few decades, the world has witnessed a steepening in income 
inequalities. Other forms of inequity related to opportunities 
in life, political participation, consumption and access to 
resources, among others, have persisted. Simultaneously, new 
forms of inequity have emerged, such as limited access to 
communication technologies, skill development and abilities. 

Inequalities is in large part generated and sustained by 
various factors related to power imbalances, socio-cultural 
values, identities and diverse forms of exclusion.  An individual 
will be treated inequitably on the basis of group identity 
such as gender, ethnicity or religion, or birthplace or parental 
background. Such discrimination reduces life opportunities 
and impairs enjoyment of basic rights and freedoms. However, 
no city can claim to be harmonious when large sections of the 
population are denied basic needs while others live in affluence.  
Therefore, the pursuit of equity is not only fundamental for 
the reduction of poverty and exclusion; it is also inherent to 

progress and development. A more equitable distribution 
of resources and opportunities; just laws and enforcement 
combined with a fair system of rules and relationships that 
govern institutions will lead to better access to services and 
social amenities to enhance a city’s prosperity, whatever its 
socio-economic status. 

More equitable cities feature lower degrees not just of 

poverty, but also ill health, exposure to various risks, violence 
and crime, mental illness and environmental problems. 
Prosperous, and equitable cities routinely safeguard the 
whole population against a wide variety of existing, evolving 
and foreseeable risks (of a legal, socioeconomic, health, 
environmental and other nature), including through (re)
distribution of the benefits of development. These safeguards 
provide the individual and collective sense of confidence in the 
present and the future that is inherent to shared prosperity; 
the absence of which triggered phenomena such as the Arab 
Spring. A fair amount of this confidence lies in the availability 
of multiple opportunities for individuals to fulfil their potential. 

Equity does not only enhance economic efficiency, which 
is needed to raise general well-being in the city; it also creates 
conditions for people to improve their capacities to represent 
themselves and participate in a more inclusive manner in a 
city’s cultural and political life. In the State of the World’s Cities 
2010/11 report, UN-Habitat laid down a series of practical 
steps to help cities become more inclusive from an equity 
perspective. These four steps include: providing universal public 
services, social protection, targeted action for underprivileged 
groups, and mechanisms for wealth redistribution. 

29

Youth in the ProsPeritY of CitiesTable 5.1

Equity in Four Cities Youth Field Survey Responses in Accra, Bangalore, Cairo, and  São Paulo (per cent)

Accra

Bangalore

Cairo

 São Paulo

All Cities

Political Inclusion

The work of the main agency responsible for ensuring equitable 
development in city is transparent and accountable

Different minority groups are represented in the city’s governance 
structures

Your city enables democratic local decision making

Local institutions support people’s civic and political involvement

Your city is removing barriers that limit people’s ability to 
exercise their civic rights and to participate in decision making

Economic inclusion

There have been sustained policies and programs over the past 
five years to reduce youth poverty

Social inclusion

Your city recognizes and promotes its residents’ cultural rights

Your city protects and promotes the human rights of all people

Gender disparities in access to different opportunities are being 
reduced

Source: UN-Habitat Youth Survey ( 2012)

30

47

66

71

54

52

72

79

62

55

36

50

49

40

54

54

41

60

3

1

2

2

4

4

3

2

23

34

31

43

43

40

57

54

31

53

29

28

39

40

33

40

44

37

48

Many young people struggle to make ends meet in the 
informal sector and support themselves through uncertain 
livelihoods,    Overall, they do not share in and enjoy the 
prosperity of their cities but rather face daily challenges and 
indignities resulting from persistent poverty. Their economic 
disadvantages may be exacerbated by discriminatory practices, 
hindering their access to life chances and, in the long term, 
lowering the quality of their personal and family lives while also 
limiting the contributions they can make to their communities.  
Poverty is multidimensional.  It includes monetary elements 

of income and wealth, but it also comprises less tangible 
aspects such as property rights, and access to services and 
infrastructure. In all of these and related aspects, poverty makes 
it difficult for young people to meet their basic needs and it 
blocks their access to opportunities that lead to prosperity. For 
many their poverty is accentuated by inequities; they experience 
poverty when others delight in the pleasures of wealth.  While 
inequality simply refers to different qualities (e.g., amounts, 
levels), inequity denotes an associated dimension of social 
injustice. Inequality may be justifiable.  For example, young 
children may need more medical care than healthy adults. 
However, inequity is inequality that is considered unjust, such 

as when women do not hold the same rights as men.  Abundant 
research has demonstrated the far-reaching implications of 
societal inequities. While objective measures of such inequities 
are essential to the formulation of redistributive policies and 
the implementation of  appropriate programs, studies have 
also shown the critical importance of subjective perceptions 
of inequity to people’s well-being and quality of life.1  The 
following sections of this report present findings from field 
surveys carried out among young people in Accra, Bangalore, 
Cairo, and  São Paulo.

Overall, youth in Accra speak more favorably about equity in 
their city, followed by youth in Bangalore, with  São Paulo not 
far behind.  The negative assessment by the young respondents 
in Cairo is noteworthy but  strikingly, to each of nine questions 
asking about equity, more than 50 per cent of the young people 
who participated in the field surveys, conducted in these four 
cities, responded negatively (See Table 5.1).  When examining 
the youth’s responses more closely, it is possible to distinguish 
several aspects of inequity:  political, economic, and socio-
cultural. 

30

State of the Urban YoUth report  2012/2013POLITICAL INCLUSION

On average, respondents were especially critical of the lack of 
transparency and accountability of the main agency responsible 
for ensuring equitable development in their city, and of the lack 
of representation of minority groups in the city’s governance 
structures (see Table 5.1). On average, only 39 per cent agreed 
that their city is enabling democratic local decision making and 
just 40 per cent agreed that local institutions support people’s 
civic and political involvement. An even smaller proportion 
(33per cent) believes that their city government is removing 
barriers that limit people’s ability to exercise their civic rights 
and to participate in decision making.  Just 15 per cent rank 
their national and city governments as being  very aware and 
active when it comes to equity and an overwhelming 78 per 
cent say that different levels of governments do not work 
together to develop appropriate initiatives to promote urban 
equality.  These findings indicate a largely marginalized youth 
population that does not have a high opinion of government 
policies and of the people and organizations responsible for 
them.

When asked why initiatives promoting youth equity are not 

effective, not surprisingly, lack of political will is mentioned 
by 50 per cent of youth across the four cities, cited more than 
three times as the next factors (institutions not performing 
efficiently and lack of adequate funding, each 15 per cent).  
Lack of political will is seen as especially prevalent by youth in 
Cairo (73 per cent ), while it is the most important reason for 
33 per cent in Accra where it is just slightly more important 
than inefficient institutions (31 per cent ), and lack of political 
will is foremost for 38 per cent in Bangalore, where as 30 per 
cent say that lack of citizen participation is key (See table 5.2 
and Figure 5.1).

Uneven Prosperity

Youth overwhelmingly believe that economic wealth and prosperity 
are not well distributed between different population groups:
•  Bangalore: 68per cent
 São  Paulo: 72per cent
• 
 Accra: 88per cent
• 
• 
 Cairo: 99per cent

UN-Habitat Field Survey

ECONOMIC INCLUSION

Even though young people are over-represented among 
the unemployed and underemployed, city governments are 
generally not seen actively pursuing ameliorative policies.  In 
Cairo, a mere 4 per cent of youth respondents said that their 
city had had sustained policies and programs over the last five 
years to reduce youth poverty.  In Accra, Bangalore and  São 
Paulo, the corresponding proportions were just over 50 per 
cent (Table 5.1).  They are not impressed by the outcomes of 
these efforts. Only 23 per cent say that economic growth in 
their city is effective or very effective in promoting progress and 
well-being among youth.  Moreover, insofar as urban policies 
produce results, youth see the economic benefits as being 
unevenly distributed.  They associate  economic prosperity 
benefits to the following:  youth connected to politicians and 
decision makers (79 per cent ), youth from wealthy homes (78 
per cent ), and well educated youth (57 per cent ).  In other 
words, a large majority believe that a good education does not 
overcome the disadvantages of not being born into a wealthy 

Table 5.2

Reasons why Urban Initiatives Promoting Youth Equity are not Effective

Lack of political will

institutions not performing efficiently & not stable

Lack of human resources to implement programmes

Lack of participation from the city residents

Lack of adequate funding

Total

Source: UN-Habitat Youth Survey ( 2012)

Accra

33.04

31.25

5.36

12.50

17.86

Bangalore

38.00

12.00

11.00

30.00

9.00

100.00

100.00

Cairo

72.58

4.84

0.81

3.23

18.55

100.00

São Paulo

All cities

51.55

13.40

9.28

10.31

15.46

49.65

15.24

6.24

13.39

15.47

100.00

100.00

31

Youth in the ProsPeritY of CitiesFigure 5.1

Reasons why Urban Initiatives Promoting Youth Equity are not Effective

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

Lack of political will

Institutions not performing efficiently & not stable

Lack of human resources to implement programmes

Lack of participation from the city residents

Lack of adequate funding

Accra

Bangalore

Cairo

São Paulo

All cities

Source: UN-Habitat Youth Survey ( 2012)

family or lack of access to influential individuals. Less than 
25 per cent see economic prosperity in their city as beneficial 
to youth living in poverty. The assessments are especially 
pessimistic in Cairo, where only 2 per cent see benefits for 
those in poverty and only 11 per cent believe there are benefits 
for the well-educated (See Table 5.3 and Figure 5.2).

Socio-cultural inclusion

In Accra, more than 70 per cent agreed that the city 

government recognizes and promotes its residents’ cultural 
rights. In Bangalore and  São Paulo the corresponding 
proportion was 54 per cent, while it was only 3 per cent in 
Cairo. In the last city, youth were more positive about the 
reduction of gender disparities in access to opportunities (23 
per cent ), but still far less optimistic than their counterparts 
in the other three cities in the study. Except for those in Accra, 
young people were less sanguine about the protection of the 

human rights of all people.  These findings indicate that large 
segments of the youth population in these four cities feel 
disenfranchised.

Factors Limiting Equality for Youth

The findings reported above clearly indicate that youth 

participating in the four cities hold rather dire views of 
equitable prosperity in their cities and often feel excluded 
politically, economically and socially. It is important to take 
note of these perceptions because youth represent a large 
proportion of the urban population. It is, therefore, well 
advised to consider as well the factors that youth consider as 
limiting greater levels of equality. Table 5.4 and Figure 5.3 
provide further insight in this regard.  Asked to rank nine 
factors on a five-point scale in terms of their importance, 
on average, the youth ranked lack of employment as most 
important at 3.77. 

Table 5.3

Who Benefits from Economic Prosperity?

Educated youth

Youth from wealthy families

Youth connected to the politicians and decision makers

Urban poor youth

Source: UN-Habitat Youth Survey ( 2012)

Accra

62.50

60.71

80.36

36.61

Bangalore

86.32

71.43

67.42

31.76

Cairo

11.20

97.60

99.20

2.42

São Paulo

All cities

79.21

77.23

63.37

28.71

56.81

77.62

79.16

23.70

32

State of the Urban YoUth report  2012/2013Figure 5.2

Who Benefits from Economic Prosperity?

100

80

60

40

20

0

Educated youth

Youth from wealthy families

Youth connected to the politicians and decision makers

Urban poor youth

Accra

Bangalore

Cairo

São Paulo

All cities

Source: UN-Habitat Youth Survey ( 2012)

The one exception was Cairo, where public institutions 

controlled by the ruling elite were seen as the greatest 
limitation at 3.84 (Table 5.4). Unequal access to education 
is also considered an important barrier, although, as shown 
above, educational advancement is not seen as sufficient to 
overcome disadvantages of family origin in terms of wealth and 
connections. In the light of young people’s unfavorable views 
of government initiatives to redress inequitable conditions, it 
is a further concern that youth generally believes that a weak 
civil society not, able to claim and protect their rights, is a 
contributing factor as well. Other research, conducted in the 
City of Santo Andre, South Eastern Brazil, with census data 

and local socioeconomic indicators, found that youth aged 
15 to 24 with access to wealth lived in more central locations, 
whereas others less fortunate lived in more peripheral areas. 
The study found significant  inequalities regarding conditions 
of work, study and living.2  This study supports the findings 
from the urban youth in the UN-Habitat field survey who 
believe that their city’s resources are often localized and that 
spatial structure plays a big role in who has access to what. 
Consequently, youth rank locational patterns where they live as 
an important factor in determining levels of equality (Table 5.4 
and Figure 5.3) 

Table 5.4

Factors Limiting Greater Equality for Youth in Four Cities

Accra

Bangalore

Cairo

São Paulo

All cities

Historic patterns of inequality 

Mother’s education

Unequal access to education

Where a youth lives (slums)

Lack of   employment

Public institutions controlled by ruling elite

Father’s education

Fathers profession

Weak civil society to defend rights

Source: UN-Habitat Youth Survey ( 2012)

2.98

2.87

3.34

3.25

3.61

3.39

3.11

3.50

3.50

3.06

3.33

3.68

3.66

3.77

3.84

3.68

3.78

3.69

3.44

3.24

3.89

3.63

3.64

3.61

3.24

3.34

3.72

3.10

3.08

3.68

3.60

3.77

3.61

3.26

3.48

3.61

2.96

2.84

3.80

3.85

4.02

3.54

2.96

3.23

3.54

33

Youth in the ProsPeritY of CitiesFigure 5.3

Factors Limiting Greater Equality for Youth in Four Cities

5

4

3

2

1

0

Accra

Bangalore

Cairo

São Paulo

All cities

Historic patterns of inequality

Mother’s education

Unequal access to education

Where a youth lives (slums)

Lack of employment

Public institutions controlled by ruling elite

Father’s education

Fathers profession

Weak civil society to claim or defend rights

Source: UN-Habitat Youth Survey ( 2012)

SOCIETAL IMPLICATIONS OF INEQUALITY

In previous chapters of this report, we have seen how 

inequality does manifest itself not  just as one form of exclusion. 
The youths in all the studied cities reported feelings of exclusion 
in the political, economic and social spheres. Inequality 
permeates all components of youth prosperity in these cities. 
It is evident in access to education and employment, access to 
urban infrastructural elements such as electricity, sanitation and 
transportation, and in various aspects of quality of life such as 
housing, public spaces, and personal safety. 

It is important to recognize that inequality affects not just 

individual lives, but has repercussions for the society as a whole.  
Indeed, a recent wide-ranging multi-nation study describes 
inequality as a general societal dysfunction.3 
  Using data from multiple sources, this research shows clear 
associations between income disparities and the quality of 
health, social relationships and human capital.   The greater the 
inequality, the higher the levels of distrust, homicides, teenage 
birth rates, child conflicts, drug abuse, infant mortality, obesity, 
imprisonment rates, and school drop-out rates.  The same 
research also reveals that inequality goes along with lower levels 
of social capital, shorter life expectancy, lower math and literacy 
scores, less social mobility and lower scores on a United Nations  
Children’s Fund (UNICEF) index comprising 40 indicators of 
child well-being (See Figures 5.4 and 5.5).  Furthermore, while 

34

it is those living in poverty who are most affected by inequality, 
cross-national comparison shows that those of comparable 
higher social classes are also impacted with individuals in more 
unequal societies doing worse than their counterparts in more 
equal societies.4

Bringing Attention to Unequal Infrastructure:  
Flood Protection in São Paulo

“We wanted to tell people that the floods were preventable and 
weren’t coincidental but a strategy to pressure residents to leave.  
Walking on stilts in the middle of the flood was a way to draw 
attention to the facts hidden in the media, a situation invisible to the 
rest of the population”

Leandro, 26 
São Paulo

 São Paulo has developed programs that aim to empower local 

actors to work in coordinated fashion toward improvements 
in the city’s quality of life. Successful experiments show that 
programs to foster cooperation between local actors, non 
governmental organizations, community organizations, and 
municipal governments have very positive effects.5 

State of the Urban YoUth report  2012/2013Box 5.1

Youth-Led Development in Civic Participation  
and Job Creation

Restless Development (RD) is an international youth-
led development agency working in over 50 countries 
to promote youth civic participation, livelihoods and 
employment, and sexual reproductive health. RD works 
to ensure governments and policy makers recognize and 
support the active role of young people in society at all 
levels; empowers young people with the skills, inspiration 
and resources to take up productive livelihoods and 
employment opportunities that contribute to improved 
household income and their local and national economies. 
Restless Development currently works full-time in india, 
Nepal, Sierra Leone, South Africa, Tanzania, Uganda, Zambia 
and Zimbabwe.

Source: www.restlessdevelopment.org 

  The challenge of these programs is to increase social capital 
available to poor urban dwellers by creating and reinforcing 
dense networks of intermediate organizations-civil associations, 
churches, community groups, schools, professional 
associations. Digital inclusion, social entrepreneurship, income 
generation, educational subsidies and job training, offer 
different ways of reducing social exclusion.6 
 All depend significantly on local organizational capacities 
and potential individual mobilization. Important changes are 
reported to occur when they are implemented cooperatively 
by local actors, government officials, and professionals within 
organized civil society.7

The concluding chapter will focus on the policy implications 
and recommendations arising from the  observations presented 
in this and preceding chapters .  The final chapter considers 
recommendations suggested by the youth in the cities of Accra, 
Bangalore, Cairo and  São Paulo, as well as recommendations 
emerging from the wider recent literature that is concerned 
with youth and urban development.

Safety of young women

Police are better known for their ‘moral policing’  
than for protecting women late at night 

Focus group discussion Bangalore 

The Need to Be Involved

“if we stay in our own community, in the poor suburbs, waiting for 
things to fall into our laps, it’s not going to happen. We have to 
reach out, go after things”

Alisson, 18 
São Paulo

Box 5.2

Urban Youth in Governance and Development

The Northern Patriots in Research and Advocacy (NORPRA)’s 
Urban Youth in Governance and Development (UYOGOD) 
Project aims to reduce poverty and unemployment through 
active participation of disadvantaged youth in urban 
governance in Bolgatanga Township (Ghana). UYOGOD’s 
major components include beneficiary and volunteer 
mobilization; meeting between beneficiaries and Local 
Government Authorities; and sensitization on policy 
interventions for youth empowerment. Meetings and forums 
allow youth beneficiaries to discuss and understand youth 
issues with city officials and politicians. UYOGOD is funded 
by UN-Habitat’s Urban Youth Fund.

Source: NORPRA First Quarter Report for 2011. Urban Youth in 
Governance and Development (available: www.globalyouthdesk.org)

35

Youth in the ProsPeritY of CitiesStudents in a technical education program supported by the World Bank in Antioquia, Colombia. © Charlotte Kesl /World BankEndnotes

1. 

2. 

See, for example, Wilkinson and Pickett (2009) 

Yonekura, Tatiana; Soares, Cassia Baldini; Minuci, Elaine Garcia; Sivalli 
Campos, Celia Maria; Trape, Carla Andrea (2010)

3. 

ibid., p. 173 ff.

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

ibid.

Jacobi (2006)

52  ibid.

53  ibid

36

State of the Urban YoUth report  2012/2013UN-Habitat Urban Youth Fund Grantees.© Eirik Brun SorlieChapter 6.0

Conclusions and 
Recommendations

This report is concerned with the ways and the extent to 

which youth benefit from and contribute to the prosperity of 
the cities where they live.  The conceptual framework adopted 
for the report views prosperity as possessing dimensions related 
to quality of life, economic productivity and employment, 
urban infrastructure and services, and equity.  Each of the 
preceding chapters focused and examined components of 
these dimensions.   Importantly, these chapters brought 
attention to the personal perceptions that youth hold of 
their living situation.  The decision to look at current urban 
developments through the eyes of young people themselves is 
deliberate.  It recognizes that young people’s choices regarding 
their own lives are based on how they themselves assess their 
personal situation, rather than a macro-level lens, giving an 
aggregate perspective from above that does not do justice to 
their individual situation. As such, this report aims to create 
a platform for young people to have their voices heard, in 
line with the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child. 
GA resolution. In summary, this report argues that city 
governments should treat their young populations not as a 
problem and a burden, but as a resource and an opportunity to 
attain greater prosperity.  The participation of young people in 
sustainable urban growth is also a sound investment in national 
development.

This final chapter reviews and summarizes the findings 

presented in the earlier chapters that discussed the field surveys 
conducted by UN-Habitat in Accra, Bangalore, Cairo and  
São Paulo. Taking into account and contextualized in the 
wider recent literature, these observations form the basis for 
recommendations for policy and further research.  
FINDINGS FROM THE FIELD SURVEYS

Data was collected from a cross-section of young people 

through focus groups and a survey with questions asking about 
the four components of prosperity. The participating youth 
were not chosen to be representative of all young people in 
these cities, but to indicate and illustrate a range of perceptions 
and views found among them. They resided in four cities of 
Accra, Bangalore, Cairo, and São Paulo. These four cities were 
not selected to be representative of all cities in the developing 
world.  Rather, they provide a glimpse of the challenges and 
opportunities faced by young people in these and many other 
cities. 

Quality of Life: When asked about a range of factors 
contributing to their sense of prosperity, several factors, 
including jobs, education, housing, and transportation stood 
out. Education was ranked as the most important factor, 
followed by meaningful employment and a decent income. 
Also considered important were safety to live and work freely 
without fear and a sense of equity. Youth in Cairo point to 
easy access to the internet as the second most important factor 
contributing to prosperity.  Active participation in community 
affairs was consistently rated as the factor least contributing 
to urban prosperity, likely reflecting young people’s lack of 
influence in local decision making. A striking finding is that, 

37

Youth in the ProsPeritY of Citiesoverall, only one out of every four young people surveyed 
opined that they are able to live and work freely without fear.  
In  São Paulo, only 1per cent of surveyed youth feel safe. Safety 
concerns are generally more prevalent among women.

Productivity and employment: Youth population growth 

and current economic trends are producing a growing job 
deficit for young people and continue to present tremendous 
challenges for local and national policy makers. Youth 
unemployment rates remain near all-time highs, with the 
highest rates seen in North Africa,  the Middle East and some 
countries in Europe.  Among young people, women often 
face added difficulties when seeking jobs because of gender 
discrimination. This gender gap is especially large in South Asia 
(34.1per cent ), the Middle East (33.6per cent ), North Africa 
(27.4per cent ), and Latin America & the Caribbean (19.9 per 
cent ).  

Many of the surveyed youth (38 per cent ) see their city as 
neither making enough efforts nor committed to promoting 
economic productivity, with a larger proportion in older age 
groups saying so. A majority (64 per cent ) say their city does 
not have a long-term youth-focused plan. Corruption and lack 
of good governance were cited as the most important hindrance 
to youth contributions to economic productivity.  

Infrastructure: Urban prosperity requires a supportive 
physical infrastructure. Yet, no less than 75 per cent of the 
surveyed youth in Accra, Bangalore, Cairo and  São Paulo 
stated that the infrastructural resources in their city do not 
adequately support productive activities. More than 90 per cent 
of them see congested roads as a problem negatively affecting 
urban prosperity. They also  view provisions that facilitate 
spatial mobility as being most important, followed by access to 
education and health services. Youth generally rated access to 
telecommunications and power favourably, but many agree that 
adequate sanitation is a problem. Of nine major infrastructural 
components, even the least problematic one (interruption of 
telephone lines) was cited by almost half of all respondents 
as having negative prosperity impacts. Overall, youth in the 

Table 6.1

Incidence of austerity measures in 158 countries, 2010-20123

Autherity Measures

Contracting public expenditures in 2012*

Cutting public capping the wage bill

Phasing-out or removing food and fuel subsidies

Targeting or further rationalizing social safety nets

Reforming pensions

UN-Habitat study believe that the urban infrastructure in the 
cities where they live and work needs significant improvement 
in order for them to attain greater prosperity. They perceive 
the high costs of living as the most undesirable outcome of 
underdeveloped urban infrastructure and they opined that the 
burdens of these deficiencies are disproportionately borne by 
low-income populations, whose communities are made more 
vulnerable.

Equity: The UN-Habitat’s field surveys revealed that youths 

in the four cities experience marginalization in the political, 
economic and social sphere.  For example, a majority take 
the view that the main agency responsible for equitable 
development in their city is not transparent and  the minority 
are not ably represented at the  local government.  Likewise, 
most do not discern sustained policies to reduce youth 
poverty or adequate protection of human rights. Youths 
cited lack of political will as one of the reasons for lack of 
effectiveness of youth equity initiatives. Only 23 per cent find 
that economic growth in their city promotes youth well-
being, and they observed that the benefits of that growth are 
unevenly distributed, with advantages accruing primarily to 
those connected to politicians or born into wealthy families. 
Educational advantage is not seen as sufficient to overcome 
these inequities.

Recommendations: Policymakers and researchers have 
shown increasing interest in young people’s economic and 
political marginalization. The urgency of addressing its negative 
fall-out for society at large is reflected in the tone of titles that 
headline recent reports, including terms such as “crisis” and 
“disaster.”1  This burgeoning interest is dominated by macro-
economic concerns with security, often in relation to financial 
stability and liberalizing markets. Much less attention is given 
to essential local aspects of the creation of decent jobs, earning 
a living wage, and the training and education needed to obtain 
the skills required for those jobs.   

Further, policy attempts to address the global economic crisis 

post-2008 have suffered from the incompatibility of austerity 

# of Countries

per cent of 
Countries

133

73

73

55

52

74.3

46.2

46.2

34.8

32.9

Source: Authors’ analysis of 158 iMF country reports published from Jan. 2010 to Feb. 2010 (see Ortiz and Cummins 2012) 
* Authors’ calculations based on IMF’s World Economic Outlook (September 2011); contractions are based on charges in total expenditure as a percent of GDP. and the the sample 
cover 179 countries.

38

State of the Urban YoUth report  2012/2013measures and job creation.  A review of recent IMF reports 
indicates four main policy options among the 158 countries 
surveyed. Overall, 73 countries are considering wage bill cuts/
caps, 73 are eliminating or phasing out subsidies (incl. for food 
and fuel), 55 are targeting social protection for the poorest, and 
52 are expanding retirement age and/or limiting benefits.2 
  All of these policies have the effect of reducing employment, 
exactly when young people need decent jobs more than ever.

Youth Training Centre in Kabul, Afghanistan.
© UN-Habitat

Youth Employment

Education does not produce jobs. Education raises productivity and 
fosters innovation, but promoting education will not generate jobs. 
The current generation is much more educated than their parents, 
but they have fewer employment opportunities. Young people need 
programs that help them enter the labor market

Source:Ortiz (2008)

“Social Policy.”In: National Development Strategies,   
Policy Notes. New York, United Nations

Recent reports, produced under ILO-auspices, contain 
numerous recommendations at various levels of specificity 
intended to create more job opportunities for young people.4 
They include broad rubrics such as wage policies, working 
conditions, and job security as well as more specific measures 
such as the Technical and Vocational Education and Training 
framework endorsed by members of the African Union; 
thereby establishing a national regulatory authority to oversee 
professional market demands and guide career development 
paths for youth (Tanzania), as well as setting up a Youth Desk 
in key government offices (Ethiopia).  Often overlooked in 
these and other recommendations is the obvious fact that place 
matters. Young people live in particular places, with their own 
distinct characteristics, requiring policies and programs that 
match local needs and priorities.5 
  Young people’s own voices are insufficiently heard in the 
formulation of recommendations and the decision making 
processes regarding those policies and programs.

The young people surveyed in UN-Habitat’s field studies 

were not asked specifically about their recommendations 
for actions and policies that would increase their prosperity.  
However, several related questions elicited responses that are 
pertinent. For example, when asked which factor they see as 
most influential in creating greater prosperity for youth, the 
most common response is the need for “a system that creates 
equal opportunities for all” (29 per cent ).  This view was found 
especially among youths in Bangalore (39 per cent ) and  São 
Paulo (49 per cent ), while youths in Accra pointed primarily to 

39

policies to create employment, and those in Cairo did not settle 
on any factor in particular.   

In responses to a similar question, inquiring about factors 

that have enabled youth to become more prosperous in 
their cities, the most common response was the “presence of 
institutions that perform efficiently” (20 per cent ).  However, 
in this case as well, there exist significant inter-city differences. 
In Accra, youth find the level of technological and industrial 
development more important, while the most frequent 
perception in Cairo is that no factors have led to greater youth 
prosperity in that city (See Table 6.2 and Figure 6.1).

Focus group discussions included very specific suggestions.  

For example, Ghanaian youth proposed that more attention 

Lead Country Network

The Youth Employment Network (YEN) Lead Country Network is a 
group of governments from developing and emerging countries 
that have voluntarily committed themselves to prioritizing youth 
employment on their national policy agendas. The Lead Country 
Network identifies benchmarks for successful youth employment 
initiatives that can be shared and replicated in peer Lead Countries. 
The Lead Country Network was created in 2001 under an U.N. 
resolution and as a joint policy response of the UN, World Bank, and 
iLO to improve employment opportunities for young people.

Source: www.ilo.org/yen

Youth in the ProsPeritY of CitiesTable 6.2

Which factor has enabled youth in your city to become more prosperous?

A charismatic & committed leader

Presence of institutions that perform efficiently

Development of a corporate culture promoting change

Creation of a new policy or legislation

Presence of external support

Technological & industrial development

Other

None

Source:  UN-Habitat Youth Survey ( 2012).

Accra

12.50

9.82

5.36

4.46

13.39

30.36

4.46

19.64

8.82

35.29

9.80

0.98

9.80

21.57

9.80

3.92

100.00

100.00

Bangalore

Cairo

São Paulo

All cities

3.20

15.20

1.60

8.80

1.60

6.40

4.00

59.20

100.00

6.00

23.00

21.00

6.00

11.00

8.00

12.00

13.00

7.52

20.27

8.88

5.24

8.66

16.40

7.29

25.74

100.00

100.00

Global Partnership for Youth Employment

The GPYE seeks to build and disseminate evidence on youth 
employment outcomes and effective programs to help address the 
challenges facing young people in their transition to work. The 
GPYE employs the technical and regional experience of partner 
organizations in youth employment research, programming, 
evaluation, and policy dialogue. The GPYE is a joint initiative of 
the World Bank Development Grant Facility, international Youth 
Foundation, Youth Employment Network, Arab Urban Development 
institute, and the Understanding Children’s Work Project. The 
partnership’s work focuses on Africa and the Middle East, regions 
most in need of better evidence on effective approaches to promote 
youth employment.

Source: http://www.gpye.org/about-us

be given to the rights of young people who are homeless or 
living with a disability.  They further recommended that the 
government should expedite implementation of the National 
Youth Policy as a framework to address identified youth 
challenges.7  Youth in Cairo also argued for initiatives that 
guarantee rights to housing and social inclusion and advocated 
for a participatory approach to the city’s youth policies.8 
  Youth in Bangalore pointed out the need for more space for 
youth participation, improved urban infrastructure and greater 
equity.9

As noted, the youths that participated in UN-Habitat’s 

survey conducted for this report were not statistically 
representative of all young people in these cities. Rather, they 
were chosen to indicate and illustrate a range of perceptions 
and views found among them. Likewise, Accra, Bangalore, 
Cairo, and  São Paulo, the four cities where the study was 
carried out, were not selected to be representative of all cities 
in the developing world.  However, when taken together, the 

40

survey responses and focus group discussions reveal noteworthy 
similarities as well as differences, which provide valuable 
insights into the challenges and opportunities faced by young 
people in these and many other cities around the world.  
Bearing these considerations and looking beyond specifics at the 
larger picture, several conclusions with implications for policy 
formulation and program development emerge from analysis of 
the responses provided by these young people.  

First of all, it is evident that clear differences exist  in how 

youth in the four cities perceive key aspects of prosperity.  This 
observation is important because it demonstrates that policies 
and programs aimed at increasing youth prosperity cannot 
be effective if they follow a standard, one-size-fits-all cookie-
cutter approach.  Policy makers must take into account the specific 
circumstances of each city, and adjust their intervention strategies 
accordingly. For example, youth in Cairo emphasized issues such 
as lack of adequate housing, gender inequality, and corruption, 
while youth in  São Paulo prioritized issues related to safety and 
transportation.

Secondly, youth clearly link prospects for greater prosperity 
to improved educational opportunities. However, they are also 
keenly aware that, in their current reality, factors other than 
educational attainment are equally or more important.  In this 
regard they point to observed advantages of having connections 
to influential politicians and benefits arising from being born 
into a wealthy family.  They realize that these inequalities are 
not overcome simply by better access to education alone, but also 
require eliminating corruption and improving the transparancy 
and accountability of government system. In other words, 
improvements at the individual level must be accompanied by 
improvements at the city level.

Thirdly, even with improvements as just mentioned, difficult 

challenges remain in the creation of jobs.  Findings from the 

State of the Urban YoUth report  2012/2013Figure 6.1

Which factor has enabled youth in your city to become more prosperous?

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

Accra

Bangalore

Cairo

São Paulo

All cities

A charismatic & committed leader

Presence of institutions that perform efficiently

Development of a corporate culture promoting change

Creation of a new policy or legislation

Presence of external support

Technological & industrial development

Other

None

Source:  UN-Habitat Youth Survey ( 2012).

four cities as well as  the wider literature show that educational 
improvements can lead to greater dissatisfaction, if they do not 
go hand-in-hand with enhanced employment opportunities.  
This observation is important because it points to the need for 
multi-pronged policies that are intersectoral (see Box on Liberia, 
below, for an example of a program that creates green jobs 
while impoving educational opportunities at the same time). 
There are programs galore that aim to provide young people 
with valuable skill sets, for example, construction techniques, 
information technology, sustainable resource operations and 
entrepreneurship. These training programs are necessary and 
important, but at the same time, more attention must be given 
to what young people need in order to be able to profit from the 
qualifications they acquire. For example, in addition to skills, 
young people also need access to credit to start a business, 
access to work space, access to land, and access to markets. 
They also need the removal of barriers related to discrimination 
based on age, gender, religion, race or tribal origin.

Fourth, greater prosperity for young people will require 

improved access for them to resources in the cities where they 
live.  Those resources include educational opportunities, jobs, 
transportation, housing,  medical care, among others. Access 
to these resources is essential for sustainable livelihoods and 
quality of life.  Such access must be based on a normative 
framework for policies and programs that recognize young 
people’s rights to the city.  However, rights-based approaches 

41

requires more than just access to available resources.  They 
are also about young people’s rights to help shape the future 
development of their cities.  Therefore, greater prosperity for 
urban youth simultaneously requires improved and equitable access 
to city resources as well as opportunities to participate meaningfully 
in the institutional processes and structures that determine the 
direction of urban development.

The challenges faced by city governments seeking to increase 

the prosperity of their young residents are great. Indeed, it 

Center for Women’s Empowerment

Youth Action international-Liberia developed a Women’s 
Empowerment curriculum in consultation with a group of top 
universities including Harvard University. The multi-disciplinary 
program combines counseling, life skills and vocational training for 
young women in post-conflict Liberia. Young women are trained to 
work in various professions, such as tailoring, cosmetology, jewelry 
making, interior decorating, and baking/pastry making. Twenty 
cooperatives comprising 10 women each have already been formed 
and each cooperative receives micro-credit loans to start their 
businesses.

Source: YEN & UNiDO (2011).   
The Youth to Youth Fund in West Africa (available: www.unido.org)

Youth in the ProsPeritY of Citiesmust be recognized that local authorities cannot, by themselves, 
undertake all that needs to be done. A recent review of best 
practices in reducing poverty and enhancing urban livability 
shows that the most effective approaches involve collaboration 
in broad-based partnerships with the private sector and civil 
society organizations.

  In these arrangements, the role of government is less of 

resource provider and more oriented to catalyzing, regulating 
and coordinating the work of all partners. 

Endnotes

1. 

See, for example, the urgent tone of recent reports such as Ortiz & Cummins 
(2012; Agbor et al. (2012); iLO (2012).

2.  Ortiz & Cummins (2012, pp. 25-6).

3. 

See Ortiz & Cummins (2012, p. 26).

4.  Notable recent publications include, among others: iLO. 2012. Giving Youth 

a New Start. World of Work, no. 74, May (special issue).; iLO. 2012. The 
Youth Employment Crisis: Time for Action. international Labour Conference, 
101st Session, report V; iLO. 2012. Promoting Green Entrepreneurship; 
First lessons from the youth entrepreneurship facility in Kenya 2010-2011, 
YEFAFRiCA.org.; iLO. 2012. Africa’s Response to the Youth Employment Crisis; 
Synthesis of key issues and outcomes from eleven national events on youth 
employment in the African region, March-May. Freedman, David H. 2005. 
Youth employment promotion: A review of iLO work and the lessons learned. 
YEN Paper. Geneva: iLO.

A recent review of community-based employment initiatives underscores 
the importance of this point with case studies and a discussion of common 
lessons. See Kenyon, Peter. 2009. Partnerships for Youth Employment. 
Geneva: Youth Employment Programme, Employment Working Paper No. 33.

 See background report on Accra, p. 13 and p. 16.

  See background report on Cairo, passim.

  See background report on Bangalore, p. 23.

 See UN-Habitat (2009b) See also Kenyon (2009)

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

BOX 6.1

Renewable Energy for Youth Entrepreneurs:  Liberian Initiative 
creates clean energy jobs while improving educational 
opportunities

Access to modern energy services enables social and 
economic development, offering opportunities for improved 
lives and a path to prosperity.  in Liberia, 97per cent of the 
population live without access to electricity, and the impact 
on the children is considerable.

The youth of Liberia represent tremendous untapped 
potential.  The majority of these young people have spent 
more time engaged in war than in school, yet they possess 
the innovative spirit necessary to foster and lead important 
socio –economical changes. For most, however, the sets 
every evening on their eagerness to learn.  in the dark of 
night, children study outside - in parking lots and roadside 
gas stations – clustered together under the light of a 
streetlamp.  Others read by the light of a kerosene flame, 
breathing in smoke and toxic fumes.  Many have no light at 
all. Through the Global Light to Learn Challenge, ChildFund 
international and Nokero international are bringing 
sustainable and nontoxic solar lights to the children of 
Liberia.  Students are able to study and read safely at 
home after dark, by checking out a light from school each 
night.  The lights are also being used in classrooms to teach 
students about renewable energy and the power of the sun.

in an emerging follow on initiative that holds much promise, 
ChildFund and Nokero are engaging Liberian youth in 
programs that improve livelihoods, and at the same time, 
promote renewable energy solutions.  Growing urbanization 
and a youth bulge mean increasing rates of young Liberians 
unemployed.  Through the Renewable Energy for Youth 
Entrepreneurs program, ChildFund will train under and 
unemployed Liberian youth in business and entrepreneurial 
skills, and then set them up in clean energy businesses.  
This program will not only promote the adoption of 
renewable energy sources in a country where less than 3per 
cent of households have access to electricity, it will bring 
lasting and positive health, economic, and environmental 
benefits to communities across Liberia.

42

State of the Urban YoUth report  2012/2013References

A

E

GUO – UN-Habitat. (2004).Urban Poverty and Slums, Intra-City 
Differential Study of Nairobi. The Urban Observer, 1 (3).

Erulkar, A.S. & Matheka, J.K. (2007). Adolescence in the Kibera 
Slums of Nairobi, Kenya. New York: Population Council.

H

European Charter. (2000) European Cities Conference on 
Human Rights. European Chater for the Safeguarding of Human 
Rights in the City. Retrieved from:  http://www.ville-ge.ch/fr/
media/pdf/Charte_english.pdf

F

Federal Office of Statistics. (2006). Population Census of 
Nigeria, 1952, 1963 and 2006. OFFICIAL GAZETTE, FGP 
71/52007/2,500 (OL24).

Figueroa, M. & Sives, A. (2003). Garrison Politics and Criminality 
in Jamaica: Does the 1997 Election Represent a Turning point? 
In A. Harriott (Ed.) Understanding Crime in Jamaica. Kingston: 
University of the West Indies Press, pp 63-88.

Agarwal, S., Srivastava, A., Choudhary, B., & Kaushik, S. (2007). 
State of Urban Health in Delhi. (Urban Health Resource Centre 
Report to Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Government of 
India.) Delhi: Government of India.

Agbor et al. (2012) Sub-Saharan Africa’s Youth Bulge: A 
Demographic Dividend or Disaster? Brookings Institution; 

Ahlman, J.S. (2012). A New Type of Citizen: Youth, Gender, and 
Generation in the Ghanaian Builders Brigade. Journal of African 
History, 53 (1), 87-105.

Armando, S. (2010). Partisan Publics: Communication and 
Contention Across Brazilian Youth Activist Networks. American 
Journal of Sociology, 115 (4), 1284-1286.

Arvizu, S. (2009). Creating Alternative Visions of Arab Society: 
Emerging Youth Publics in Cairo. Media Culture & Society, 31 
(3), 385-+.

B

G

Birdsall, N. (2006). The World is Not Flat: Inequality and Injustice 
in Our Global Economy. (WIDER Annual Lecture 9) Helsinki: 
UNU-WIDER.

Brown, N. A. & Jaspev. (2008). Forging a Partnership Between 
a Private Service Agency and an Impoverished but Empowered 
Inner City Community. In Jamaica 2015: National Progress 
Report 2004-2006 on Jamaica’s Social Policy Goals. Kingston: 
Office of the Cabinet.

Burton, G. (2010). Democracy, Citizenship and Youth: Towards 
Social and Political Participation in Brazil.  Journal of Latin 
American Studies, 42, 631-632.

Butler, D. (2011). Policy Egypt’s Youth ‘Key to Revival.’ Nature, 
470 (7333), 147-149.

C

Camfield, L. (2011). Young Lives in Transition: From School to 
Adulthood? European Journal of Development Research, 23 
(5), 669-678.

Charter for Women. (1997). City and Shelter: Charter for 
Women in the City. Retrieved from:

http://www.cityshelter.org/03.charte/charter_en/charter.htm

Cunha, B., Santos, A., Damasceno,C.C.M. (n.d.). The 
Occupational Situation of Young People in Low Income 
Communities in Rio De Janeiro. Rio De Janeiro: ENCE. 
Retrieved from:  http://www.iets.org.br

Cross, J. (2009). From Dreams to Discontent: Educated Young 
Men and the Politics of Work at a Special Economic Zone in 
Andhra Pradesh. Contributions to Indian Sociology, 43 (3), 
351-379.

D

De Barros, R.P., Ferreira, F.H.G., Vega, J.R.M., & Chanduvi, J.S. 
(2009). Measuring Inequality of Opportunities in Latin  America 
and the Caribbean. Washington, D.C.: World Bank.

Desai, M. (2011). Liberalization’s Children: Gender, Youth, and 
Consumer Citizenship in Globalizing India.  Gender & Society, 
25 (6), 797-798.

Dowdney, L. (2002). Children of the Drug Trade: A Case Study 
of Children in Organized Armed Violence in Rio de Janeiro. Rio 
de Janeiro: 7Letras, ISER & Viva Rio.

Gayle, H., Grant, A., Bryan, P., Shui, M.L., & Taylor, C. (2004). 
The Adolescents of Urban St. Catherine: A Study of their 
Reproductive Health and Survivability. Spanish Town: Children 
First and UNICEF.

Ghimire, K.B. (2002).  Social Movements and Marginalized 
Rural Youth in Brazil, Egypt and Nepal. Journal of Peasant 
Studies, 30 (1), 30-72.

Gough, K.V. (2010). Continuity and Adaptability of Home-Based 
Enterprises A longitudinal study from Accra, Ghana. International 
Development Planning Review, 32 (1), 45-70.

Gough, K.V., &  Yankson, P. (2011). A Neglected Aspect of the 
Housing Market: The Caretakers of Peri-Urban Accra, Ghana. 
Urban Studies, 48 (4), 793-810.

Government of India, Ministry of Urban Development. (2007). 
Documentation of Best Practices. New Delhi: Jawaharlal Nehru 
National Urban Renewal Mission.

Government of Jamaica. (2006). Draft Five Year Strategic 
Plan. Kingston: Board of Supervision. Government of Jamaica, 
Ministry of Water and Housing. (2009). The Minister of Water 
and Housing’s Budget Sectoral Debate Presentation. Retrieved 
from: http://www.jis.gov.jm.

Government of Jamaica, Ministry of Education and Youth. 
(2005). National Strategic Plan for Youth 2005-2010. Kingston: 
Author.

Government of Kenya. (2007). Kenya Vision 2030: The 
Popular Version. Retrieved from:  http://www.scribd.com/ 
doc/3480381/Vision-2030-Popular-Version.

Government of Kenya, Ministry of State for Youth Affairs. 
(2007b, March). Office of the Vice-President and Ministry of 
State for Youth Affairs: Strategic Plan 2007-2012. Nairobi: 
Ministry of State for Youth Affairs.

Government of Kenya, Ministry of Planning and National 
Development. (2007c). Kenya Integrated Household Budget 
Survey 2005/6. Nairobi: Central Bureau of Statistics and 
Ministry of Planning and National Development.

Government of Kenya, Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports. 
(2008). National Youth Policy. Nairobi: Ministry of State for 
Youth Affairs.

Grieco, M. Turner, J. and Kwakye, E. 1995: A tale of two 
cultures: Ethnicity and cycling behaviour in urban Ghana. 
Transport Research Record 1441, Washington, DC.  Cited on 
p. 175  in Transport planning in sub-Saharan Africa III: The 
challenges of meeting children and young people’s mobility and 
transport needs. Porter Gina.  Progress in Development Studies 
Volume: 10 Issue: 2 Pages: 169-180. 

43

Halewood, N. and Kenny, C. 2007. Young people and ICTs in 
developing countries. World Development Report: World Bank, 
Washington D.C.

Harvey, D. (2006). Spaces of Hope. Edinburgh: University of 
Edinburgh Press. Hausmann, R., Tyson, L. & Zahidi, S. (2009). 
Global Gender Gap Report 2009.Geneva: World Economic 
Forum.

Hirsjarvi, I., & Tayie, S. (2011). Children and New Media: 
Youth Media Participation. A Case Study of Egypt and Finland. 
Comunicar, 37, 99-107.

Holzmann, R. (2001). Risk and Vulnerability: The Forward 
Looking of Social Protection in a Globalizing World. Asia and 
Pacific Forum on Poverty: Reforming Policies and Institutions for 
Poverty Reduction, Asian Development Bank, Manila. Retrieved 
from:  http://www. adb.org/Poverty/forum/pdf/Holzmann.pdf.

Huculak, S., McLennan, J.D., & Bordin, I.A.S. (2011). Exposure 
to Violence in Incarcerated Youth from the City of  São Paulo. 
Revista Brasileira de Psiquiatri, 33 (3): 275-282.

I

ILO. (2005). Resolution Concerning Youth Employment. 
(Resolution at International Labour Conference, 93rd Session.) 
Geneva: International Labour Organisation. Retrieved from:  
http://www.ilo.org/public/english/employment/yett/ilc93.htm

ILO. (2006). Global Employment Trends for Youth. Geneva: 
International LabourOrganisation. 

ILO. (2008). Global Employment Trends for Youth. Geneva: 
International Labour Organisation. 

ILO. (2009 ). Global Employment Trends. Geneva: International 
Labour Organisation.

ILO (2012) The Youth Employment Crisis: Time for Action; and 
ILO (2012) Africa’s Response to the Youth Employment Crisis

Instituto Pereira Passos, 2008 [Retrieved from  http://www.
armazemdedados.rio.rj.gov.br]

ISER Assessoria e Observatório Jovem da Universidade 
Fluminense. (2006). Juventude Brasileira e Democracia: 
Participação, Esferas e Políticas Públicas, Relatório Regional Rio 
de Janeiro. Rio de Janeiro: Author.

International Telecommunications Union (2010). Global ICT 
developments. Retrieved July 29, 2012 from http://www.
itu.int/ITU-D/ict/statistics/ict/index.html.

J

Jacobi, P. (2006). Public and Private Responses to Social 
Exclusion Among Youth in  São Paulo. Annals of the American 
Academy of Political and Social Science, 606, 216-230.

Jeffrey, C. (2008).  ‘Generation Nowhere’: Rethinking Youth 
Through the Lens of Unemployed Young Men. Progress in 
Human Geography, 32 (6), 739-758.

Jeffrey, C. (2012). Geographies of Children and Youth II: Global 
Youth Agency. Progress in Human Geography, 36 (2), 245- 
253.

Jeffrey, C. (2010). Timepass: Youth, Class, and Time Among 
Unemployed Young Men in India. American Ethnologist, 37 (3), 
465-481.

Jeffrey, C., Jeffery, R. & Jeffery, P. (2004). Degrees without 
Freedom: The Impact of Formal Education on Dalit Young Men 
in North India.  Development and Change, 35 (5), 963-986.

Youth in the ProsPeritY of CitiesJimenz, E., Kiso, N., & Ridao-Cano, C. (2007, June). 
Educational Second Chances for Youth. Development Outreach, 
9(2), 20-21.

Jones, G.A. & Chant, S. (2009). Globalising Initiatives for 
Gender Equality and Poverty Reduction: Exploring ‘Failure’ with 
Reference to Education and Work Among Urban Youth in The 
Gambia and Ghana. Geoforum, 40(2), 184–96.

Jones, G.A., & Chant, S. (2009). Globalising Initiatives for 
Gender Equality and Poverty Reduction: Exploring ‘Failure’ with 
Reference to Education and Work Among Urban Youth in The 
Gambia and Ghana. Geoforum, 40 (2), 184-196.

Jones, G.A. (2011). Children and Development III: Making 
Space for Young People. Progress in Development Studies, 
11 (2), 145-149.

K

Kahlenberg, R.D. (2004). America’s Untapped Resource – 
Low-Income Students in Higher Education. New York: Century 
Foundation

Kallio, K.P., & Hakli, J. (2011). (Hakli, Jouni)1 Tracing Children’s 
Politics. Political Geography, 30 (2), 99-109.

Kenya National Bureau of Statistics. (2009). Economic Survey 
2009. Nairobi: Government Printer. Kerr, S., Bailey, A. & 
Knight, P. (2006). The Transition of Jamaican Youth to the 
World of Work. Kingston: Planning Institute of Jamaica and the 
International Labour Organisation.

Kenyon, Peter. 2009. Partnerships for Youth Employment. 
Geneva: Youth Employment Programme, Employment Working 
Paper No. 33.

Kucinskas, J. (2010). A Research Note on Islam and Gender 
Egalitarianism: An Examination of Egyptian and Saudi Arabian 
Youth Attitudes. Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion, 
49 (4), 761-770.

L

Lave, J. (1996). Teaching, as Learning, in Practice. Mind, 
Culture, and Activity, 3(3), 149-164.

Langevang, T., Gough, K.V., & Katherine, V. (2009). Surviving 
Through Movement: the Mobility of Urban Youth in Ghana. 
Social & Cultural Geography, 10 (7), 741-756.

Lockheed, M. (2008), The Double Disadvantage of Gender 
and Social Exclusion in Education. In M. Tembon & L. Fort 
(Eds.), Girls’ Education in the 21st century: Gender Equality, 
Empowerment, and Economic Growth (pp. 115-126), 
Washington, D.C.: The World Bank.

Luton, D. (2009, 6 May). ‘YEP, You Can’ – Golding Launches 
Lending Programme for School Leavers – Lowers Interest 
Rates for Small, Micro and Medium-Size Businesses. Jamaica 
Gleaner News. Retrieved from:  http://www.jamaica- gleaner.
com/gleaner/20090506/lead/lead1.html

M

Mahapa (2003)  Integrating gender into World Bank financed 
transport programmes. South Africa Shova Kalula Case Study. 
Report, September. Cited in Porter (2010, p. 175).

McLennan, J.D., Bordin, I., Bennett, K., Rigato, F., & Brinkerhoff, 
M. (2008). Trafficking Among Youth in Conflict with the 
Law in  São Paulo, Brazil. Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric 
Epidemiology, 43 (10), 816-823.

Meeks-Gardner, J., Powell, C., & Grantham-McGregor, S. (2000). 
A Case-Control Study of Family and School Determinants of 
Aggression in Jamaican Children. Kingston: Planning Institute 
of Jamaica.

Moser, C., A. Winton and A. Moser (2005) ‘Violence, fear 
and insecurity among the urban poor in Latin America’, in 
The Urban Poor in Latin America, M. Fay (ed), World Bank, 
Washington DC, pp 125-178.

N

National Housing Trust. (n.d.). Annual Report and Financial 
Statements 2006-2007. Kingston: Author. Retrieved from: 
http://www.nht.gov.jm

O

Olima, W.H.A. (2001, July). The Dynamics and Implications of 
Sustaining Urban Spatial Segregation in Kenya: Experiences 
from Nairobi Metropolis. (Lincoln Institute Product Code: 
CP01A16). Paper prepared for the International Seminar on 
Segregation in the City at Lincoln Institute of Land Policy, 
Cambridge, MA.

Ortiz & Cummins (2012). When the Global Crisis and the Youth 
Bulge Collide, UNICEF; 

P

Patel, Sheela and Diana Mitlin (2010) ‘Gender issues and slum/
shack dwellers federations’, in The International Handbook     of 
Gender and Poverty: Concepts, Research, Policy, Sylvia Chant 
(ed), Edward Elgar, Cheltenham, UK, pp 379-384.

Pathak, D.N. (2011). Timepass: Youth, Class, and the Politics of 
Waiting in India. Contemporary Sociology-A Journal of Reviews, 
40 (5), 597-599.

Planning Institute of Jamaica. (2008). Jamaica Survey of Living 
Conditions 2007 Kingston: 

Planning Institute of Jamaica. (2009).Economic and Social 
Survey  of Jamaica 2008. Kingston: 

Planning Institute of Jamaica. (2009). Mapping Poverty 
Indicators: Consumption and Basic Needs in Jamaica 
2001/2002. Kingston: 

Planning Institute of Jamaica & Ministry of Foreign Affairs and 
Foreign Trade. (2009, July). National report of Jamaica on 
Millennium Development Goals for the UN Economic and Social 
Council annual ministerial review July 2009. Kingston: 

Pollock, J. (2011). How Egyptian and Tunisian Youth Hacked the 
Arab Spring. Technology Review, 114 (5), 70-+. 

Population Reference Bureau. (2009). PRB World’s Youth 
2006 Data Sheet. Retrieved from: http://www.prb.org/
Datafinder/Geography/MultiCompare.aspx?variables=23per 
cent2c22&regions=104per cent2c140per cent2c93per 
cent2c39per cent2c2

Porter, G., Hampshire, K., Abane, A., Robson, E., Munthali, A., 
Mashiri, M., & Tanle, A. (2010). Moving Young Lives: Mobility, 
Immobility and Inter-Generational Tensions in Urban Africa. 
Geoforum, 41 (5), 796-804.

Porter, G., Hampshire, K., Abane, A., Munthali, A., Robson, E., 
Mashiri, M., & Tanle, A. (2012). Youth, Mobility and Mobile 
Phones in Africa: Findings from a Three-Country Study. 
Information Technology for Development, 18 (2), 145-162.

Power K., Varney, D., Ragan, D., & Koernig, K.. (2009, 
February). Youth in Urban Development: Bringing Ideas into 
Action. (Working Paper CYE-WP2- 2009). Boulder, CO: 
Children, Youth & Environment Center, University of Colorado.

Puerto, S (2007). Interventions to Support Young Workers in 
Latin America and the Caribbean: Regional Report for the Youth 
Employment Inventory. Accessible at: http://siteresources.
worldbank.org/INTLM/Resources/390041-1188243960961/
YEI_LAC_07-01.pdf

R

Rees, Alexandra (2011). A Look at the Mobile Youth. Retrieved 
July 29, 2012,  from http://www.gottaquirk.com/2011/08/10/
a-look-at-the-mobile-youth/

Rio Como Vamos. (2008). Indicadores da cidade. Retrieved 
from: http://www.riocomovamos.org.br

Roberts, F.O.N. & Oladeji, A. (2001,October). Resurgent Identity 
Crisis and Security Management in Lagos, Nigeria: Lessons for 

44

West African Cities. In Proceedings of International Conference 
on Security, Segregation and Social Networks in West African 
Cities, 19th- 20th Centuries’, Ibadan, Nigeria.

Roemer, E.J. (1998). Equality of opportunity. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press.

Roemer, E.J. (2006). Economic Development as Opportunity 
Equalization. Discussion Paper # 1583. Cowles Foundation for 
Research in Economics.New Haven: Yale University.

Rustogi, P. (2009). Paper presented at ILO meeting, July 2009.

S

Saldanha, A. (2002). Music, Space, Identity: Geographies of 
Youth Culture in Bangalore. Cultural Studies, 16 (3), 337-350.

Samms-Vaughan, M. (2004). The Jamaican Pre-School Child: 
The Status of Early Childhood  Development in Jamaica. 
Kingston: Planning Institute of Jamaica.

Satyanaryana, V. (2009). Dormitory Accomodation for Low 
Income Workers in India. Paper presented at the UN-Habitat 
Business Forum, New Delhi, India.

Sen, A. (1973). On Economic Inequality. Oxford: Clarendon 
Press.

Sen, A. (1999). Development as Freedom. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.

Singh, L.B., Singh, A.K. & Rani, A. (1996). Alienation: A 
Symptomatic Reaction of Educated Unemployed Youth in India. 
International Journal of Psychology, 31 (2), 101-110.

Skelton, T. (2010). Taking Young People as Political Actors 
Seriously: Opening the Borders of Political Geography. Area, 42 
(2), 145-151.

Spence, K. (2006, June). Social Development within the Inner 
City Housing Project. Paper presented at the Conference on 
Social Housing in the Caribbean, Kingston, Jamaica.

Spinks, C. (2002). Pentecostal Christianity and Young Africans. 
In A. de Waal & N.Argenti (Eds.) Young Africa: Realizing the 
Rights of Children and Youth. Trenton, NJ: Africa World Press.

Statistical Institute of Jamaica. (2003). Population Census: 
Jamaica 2001. Kingston: Author.

Statistical Institute of Jamaica. (2007).Multiple Indicator Cluster 
Survey 2005: Monitoring the Situation of Children and Women. 
Kingston: UNICEF and Statistical Institute of Jamaica.

Statistical Institute of Jamaica. (2009). The Labour Force 2008. 
Kingston: Author.

T

Tacoli, C. (2012). Urbanization, gender and urban poverty: 
paid work and unpaid carework in the city. Urbanization and 
Emerging Population Issues Working Paper 7. London/New 
York: International Institute for Environment and Development 
United Nations Population Fund.

Thapan, M. (2012). Liberalization’s Children: Gender, Youth, and 
Consumer Citizenship in Globalizing India. American Ethnologist, 
39 (1), 220-221.

U

Ulack, R. (1978). The Role of Urban Squatter Settlements. 
Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 4(68), 
535-550.

UN DESA (2004). World Youth Report 2003: The Global 
Situation of Young People. New York: United Nations. 

UN DESA. (2005a). World Youth Report 2005: Young People 
Today and in 2015. New York: United Nations. 

UN DESA (2005b). Growing Together: Youth and the Work 
of the United Nations. New York: United Nations. UN DESA. 
(2005c). World Population Prospects: The 2004 revision. New 
York: United Nations.

State of the Urban YoUth report  2012/2013UN DESA (2007). World Youth Report 2007: Young People’s 
Transition to Adulthood: Progress and Challenges. New York: 
United Nations.

UN DESA (2008). World Population Prospects: The 2008 
Revision. New York: United Nations. Retrieved from: http://esa. 
un.org/unpp

UNDP (2006). Society and Development in Crisis? Youth and 
Violent Conflict. New York: Author.

UNESCAP (2007) UN Economic and Social Commission for 
Asia and the Pacific - Economic and Social Survey of Asia 
and the Pacific 2007 – “Surging Ahead in Uncertain Times.” 
Bangkok: Retrieved from:  http://www.prlog.org/10015642-
asia-acific- region-needsbetter-exchange-management.pdf

UNESCO. (2004). Empowering Youth Through National Policies. 
Paris: Author. 

UNESCO. (2007). Education for All by 2015: Will We Make it 
? Paris: Author. 

UNESCO. (2009). Education for All – Global Monitoring Report. 
Paris: Author. 

UNFPA. (2007). State of the World’s Population Report. New 
York: UN.

UN-HABITAT. (2006a). State of the World’s Cities Report 
2006/2007. London:Earthscan. 

UN-Habitat. (2006b). Nairobi Urban Sector Profile. Nairobi: 
Author.

UN-Habitat. (2008a). Global Urban Observatory data. Retrieved 
from:http://www.devinfo.info/urbaninfo.

UN-Habitat. (2008b). State of the World’s Cities Report 
2008/2009: Harmonious cities. London: Earthscan. 

UN-Habitat. (2009). Urban  youth survey. Unpublished data 
collected for UNHABITAT.

UN- Habitat (2009) Broad-Based Partnerships as a Strategy 
for Urban Livability. Human Settlements Global Dialogue Series  
#2,  2009.

UN-Habitat. (2010a). State of the World’s Cities Report 
2010/2011: Bridging the Urban Divide. London: Earthscan. 

UN-Habitat. (2010b). Bridging the Urban Gender Divide. Nairobi: 
Author.

UN-Habitat. (2010c). Global Urban Indicator Database 2010. 
Nairobi: Author.

UNICEF. (2007). Progress for Children: A World Fit for Children 
– Statistical review. New York: Author. 

Wolff, E.N. (2001). Skills, Computerization, and Earnings in 
the Postwar U.S. Economy. Levy Economics Institute, The 
Economics Working Paper Archive # 331. Retrieved from:  
http://129.3.20.41/eps/mac/papers/0106/0106007.pdf

World Bank. (n.d.). World Bank staff estimates based on primary 
household survey data obtained from government statistical 
agencies and World Bank country departments. For more 
information and methodology, see PovcalNet (http://iresearch.
worldbank.org/PovcalNet/jsp/index.jsp).

United Nations. (2002a). “Gender Mainstreaming: An Overview” 
New York: Author.

World Bank. (2005). World Development Indicators (WDI) online 
database. Retrieved from:

United Nations. (2002b). General Assembly resolution on 
promoting youth employment, A/RES/57/165. Retrieved 
from: http://www.un.org/esa/socdev/unyin/library.
htm#otherdocuments.

United Nations. (2004, January). General Assembly resolution 
on policies and programmes involving youth, A/RES/58/133. 
Retrieved from:  http://www.un.org/esa/socdev/unyin/library.
htm#otherdocuments.

V

Van Vliet, W. 2002. Cities in a globalizing world: From engines 
of growth to agents of change. Environment & Urbanization 
14(1): 31-40

Viva Rio & Innovations in Civic Participation. (2005). Youth 
Service: A Policy for Preventing and Providing Alternatives to 

http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/DATASTATISTICS
/0,,contentMDK:20398986~menuPK:64133163~pagePK:6 
4133150~piPK:64133175~theSitePK:239419,00.html

World Bank. (2006). World Development Report 2007: 
Development and the Next Generation. Washington, D.C.: Author. 

World Bank. (2008). Kenya Poverty and Inequality Assessment. 
(Draft report,Volume I). Washington, D.C.: World Bank.

World Bank. (2009). World Development Indicators (WDI) online 
database. Retrieved from:

http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/DATASTATISTICS
/0,,contentMDK:20398986~menuPK:64133163~pagePK:6 
4133150~piPK:64133175~theSitePK:239419,00.html

World Charter. (2005). World Charter on the Right to the City. 
Retrieved from: http://portal.unesco.org/shs/en/ev.php- URL_
ID=8218&URL_DO=DO_TOPIC&URL_SECTION=201.HTML

Youth Involvement in Urban Violence in Brazil. Retrieved from:  
http://www.icicp.org/ht/a/GetDocumentAction/i/2726

Y

W

Wilkinson, Richard and Pickett, Kate (2009).  The Spirit Level: 
Why Greater Equality makes Societies Stronger. New York/
Berlin/London: Bloomsbury Press

Yonekura, Tatiana; Soares, Cassia Baldini; Minuci, 
Elaine Garcia; Sivalli Campos, Celia Maria; Trape, Carla 
Andrea(2010).Youth map of the city of Santo Andre, 
Southeastern Brazil: an instrument to read social 
inequalities.  REVISTA DE SAUDE PUBLICA Volume: 44 
Issue: 1 Pages: 45-52. FEB 2010.

45

Youth in the ProsPeritY of CitiesSTATE OF URBAN  
YOUTH REPORT

2012-2013

Youth in the Prosperity of Cities

The increasing prominence of the youth bulge in most urban areas presents a unique opportunity, as they 
represent the most dynamic human resource available. Their numbers today are larger than at any point in 
human history. Yet this group suffers the most from urban unemployment and often feels that they lack equal 

access to opportunities. This is especially acute in developing countries, which have a relatively youthful 

population that must be mobilised to realise greater economic and social development goals.   

Today, 90 million youth around the world are unemployed (or 47 per cent of the total number of unemployed) 
and an additional 300 million belong in the “working poor” category —they are in unskilled, insecure jobs and 
live in poor conditions. This Report takes a closer look at the condition of youth in major urban centres in four 

developing nations - Accra (Ghana), São Paulo (Brazil), Bangalore (India) and Cairo (Egypt).

The conditions of these cities, and the way they are perceived by young people, are seen as representative 
of those in their respective regions, and therefore provide a reasonable basis for policy recommendations 
focused on shared prosperity for urban youth. The four-city survey demonstrates that young people suffer 

disproportionately from poor prospects and  

low quality employment.

The developing world continues to feature the fastest growing numbers of youth unemployment  

and persistent rural-to-urban migration; if these young people are to realise their potential,  

they need innovative solutions that are anchored in local realities.

 Survey outcomes suggest that educational and training systems must be better  

aligned with the current and future needs of young people. In this regard,  

it would be helpful to share experiences and to investigate alternative  

educational arrangements for the provision of basic literacy, job skills training  

and lifelong education. This Report is a step in that direction.

Young people in the survey want equity for better shared prosperity both for their own and their cities’ benefit, 

and they regard education as the best way of bringing about a more equitable type of urban development. 

They point to other significant challenges like structural constraints and lack of a democratic culture in their 

respective cities. These are issues over which local authorities wield a degree of influence that puts them 
in the best possible position to take remedial action. Local authorities must also seek to mainstream youth 

issues into all aspects of their planning and operations policy areas.

The report recommends a better match between skills and labour markets through vocational training and 
with the participation of the private sector. ‘Soft’ skills matter more in service-oriented economies, young 

people in informal settlements need entrepreneurial abilities, and capacities must be better geared to 

knowledge-intensive business services. 

HS/089/12E 
ISBN(Series): 978-92-1-133400-5 
ISBN(Volume): 978-92-1-132504-1

United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat) 
P O Box 30030, Nairobi, 00100, Kenya 
Tel: +254 20 762 3025 
Fax: +254 20 762 3080

www.unhabitat.org/publications

I T Y

B I L

A

A I N

T

S

ENVIRONMENTAL  S U

EQUITY AND SOCIA

L IN

C

L

U

S
I

O

N

 
E
F
I
L
 
F

Y O
QUALIT

P
R
O

D

U

C

T

I

V

I

T

Y

PROSPERITY

INFRASTRUCT U R E

STATE OF URBAN  
YOUTH REPORT

2012-2013

YOUTH iN THE PROSPERiTY OF CiTiES

