Environmental 
  Health and
Child Survival

Epidemiology, Economics, Experiences

E N V I R O N M E N T   A N D   D E V E L O P M E N T

Environmental Health and Child Survival

E N V I R O N M E N T

A N D

D E V E L O P M E N T

A fundamental element of sustainable development is environmental sustain-
ability. Hence, this series was created in 2007 to cover current and emerging
issues in order to promote debate and broaden the understanding of environ-
mental challenges as integral to achieving equitable and sustained economic
growth. The series will draw on analysis and practical experience from across
the World Bank and from client countries. The manuscripts chosen for publi-
cation will be central to the implementation of the World Bank’s Environment
Strategy, and relevant to the development community, policy-makers, and
academia. Topics addressed in this series will include environmental health,
natural resources management, strategic environmental assessment, policy instru-
ments, and environmental institutions. 

Also in this series:
International Trade and Climate Change: Economic, Legal, and Institutional

Perspectives

Poverty and the Environment: Understanding Linkages at the Household Level
Strategic Environmental Assessment for Policies: An Instrument for Good Governance

Environmental Health

and 

Child Survival

Epidemiology, Economics,
Experiences 

© 2008 The International Bank for Reconstruction and 
Development/The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, DC 20433
Telephone 202-473-1000
Internet www.worldbank.org
E-mail feedback@worldbank.org

All rights reserved.

1 2 3 4 :: 11 10 09 08

This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank. The findings, inter-
pretations, and conclusions expressed in this volume do not  necessarily
reflect the views of the Executive Directors of The World Bank or the
governments they represent.

The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included

in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other informa-
tion shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgement on the
part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries. 

R I G H T S   A N D   P E R M I S S I O N S

The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmit-
ting portions or all of this work without permission may be a violation of
applicable law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development / The World Bank encourages dissemination of its work and
will normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the work promptly.
For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please
send a request with complete information to the Copyright Clearance Center
Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA; telephone: 978-750-
8400; fax: 978-750-4470; Internet: www.copyright.com.

All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights,
should be addressed to the Office of the Publisher, The World Bank, 
1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2422; 
e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org.

ISBN-13: 978-0-8213-7236-4
eISBN-13: 978-0-8213-7237-1
DOI: 10.1596/978-0-8213-7236-4

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Environmental health and child survival : epidemiology, economics, expe-
riences.

p. ; cm. —  (Environment and development)

Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-8213-7236-4
1.  Environmentally induced diseases in children--Developing countries. 2.
Malnutrition in children--Developing countries.  I. World Bank. II. Series:
Environment and development (Washington, D.C.) 
[DNLM: 1.  Child, Preschool. 2.  Environmental Health. 3.  Cost of Illness.
4.  Developing Countries. 5.  Disorders of Environmental Origin. 6.
Malnutrition.  WA 30.5 E605 2008]
RJ383.E583 2008
618.92'98--dc22

2008022136

Cover photo: 
World Bank Photo Library

Cover design:
Auras Design, Silver Spring, Maryland

C O N T E N T S

xi
xiii

Acknowledgments
Abbreviations and Acronyms

C H A P T E R   1

Introduction

1
4Objectives
5 Audience
5 A Primer on Environmental Health
6 A Primer on Malnutrition
7 Content and Organization

P A R T  
15

I

Epidemiology

C H A P T E R   2
17 Environmental Health, Malnutrition, and Child Health
18
Environmental Factors, Exposure, and Transmission Pathways
19 Vicious Cycle of Infections and Malnutrition
23
28
30 Key Messages
30 Note

Environmental Role in Early Childhood Health
Averting Cognition and Learning Impacts

C H A P T E R   3
31 How Environmental Health Supplements Other 

Child Survival Strategies
Adding Value to Health Systems
Adapting Environmental Management Programs
Adjusting Infrastructure Strategies

32
38
39
43 Key Messages
43 Notes

P A R T  
45 Economics

I I

C H A P T E R   4
47 How Large Is the Environmental Health Burden?
48
51
58

Burden of Disease
Environmental Health Burdens
Areas for Future Research

v

vi CONTENTS

59 Key Messages
59 Notes

C H A P T E R   5
61 Estimating the Environmental Health Burden and 

Costs at the Country Level
Existing Practice in Environmental Health Valuation
Building New Estimates for Environmental Health Costs

Results for Ghana and Pakistan

61
62
64 Case Studies of Ghana and Pakistan
66
77 Conclusion
79 Next Steps
81 Key Messages
81 Notes

P A R T  
83 Experiences

I I I

C H A P T E R   6
85 Approaches to Environmental Health
86 History of Environmental Health
88
90
97 Understanding the Enabling Environment
100 Governance and Institutional Implications
104

Agenda Falling through the Cracks
Environmental Health Experiences in Developing Countries

Institutional Requirements for Successful Environmental 
Health Governance
A Critical Moment

109
109 Key Messages
110 Note

C H A P T E R   7
111 Conclusion
111 Contributions of This Report
113 Next Steps

APPENDIX A: Technical Review of Cohort Studies
Background
Search Strategy and Selection Criteria
Findings and Discussion
Experimental Evidence from Deworming

Appendixes
117
117
118
118
122
123 Conclusions
125 Notes
141

APPENDIX B: Review of Studies on Nutritional 
Status and Education

145 Diarrhea and Education

CONTENTS  vii

145 Conclusions
146 Note
147

APPENDIX C: New Estimates for Burden of Disease from Water,
Sanitation, and Hygiene
APPENDIX D: Computing Country-Level Environmental Health 
Burden of Disease

151

151 Mortality
160
Education
170 Notes
173

APPENDIX E: Methodological Aspects of Assessing Environmental 
Health Burden of Disease
173
From Relative Risks to Attributable Fractions
176 Dealing with Biased Estimates of Relative Risk
177 Notes
179

APPENDIX F: Monetary Valuation of the Cost of Environmental 
Health Risks

181 Note

183
201

References
Index

Boxes

2
22

25
50

54
56
65
75

80
87
92
93
95
97
101
102

1.1 What Is Environmental Health?
2.1

Impact of Diarrhea on Child Malnutrition: 
Evidence from Research

2.2 Overweight Mothers Carrying Underweight Children 
4.1 Why 50 Percent? Supporting Evidence from 

Recent Cohort Studies

4.2 Revisiting the “Asian Enigma”
4.3 The Mills-Reincke Phenomenon
5.1 Basic Indicators for Ghana and Pakistan
5.2 Attributable Fractions and Burden of Disease 

When Multiple Risk Factors Are Present

5.3 How Policy-Makers Should Interpret These Results
6.1 Combating Disease through Improved Milk
6.2 Mexico: Multisectorality through a Diagonal Approach
6.3 Thailand’s National Nutrition Program
6.4 Ethiopia: The Toilet Revolution
6.5 Vietnam’s Dengue Program
6.6 Atrophy of Environmental Health Functions in India
6.7 Institutional Evolution of Environmental Health: 

The Case of Ethiopia

Figures
19
20

2.1 The F-Diagram: Transmission Routes for Infection 
2.2 Relationship between Nutrition and Infection 

viii CONTENTS

24

27
32
52
53

55
63
70
71

73

74
78
152
155
159

2.3 Environmental Health Inputs and Health Outcomes 

in the Child’s Life Cycle 

2.4 The Window of Opportunity for Addressing Undernutrition 
3.1 Range of Preventive Activities in Child Survival
4.1 The Health Effects of Environmental Risks Factors
4.2 Water-Related (WSH plus WRM) Burden of Disease in 

Children under Five Attributable to Environmental Risk Factors 
by WHO Region, 2002

4.3 Mills-Reincke Ratios for Subregions 
5.1 Cost of Environmental Health Risks
5.2 Weight-for-Age Distribution of Children in Ghana and Pakistan
5.3 Two-Week Diarrheal Prevalence Rate by Age and Underweight 

Status in Ghana and Pakistan

5.4 Underweight Malnutrition Rates in Children with and without

Diarrheal Infections in Ghana and Pakistan

5.5 Calculating Revised Estimates (Indirect and Direct Effects)
5.6 Final Results of Ghana and Pakistan Case Studies
D.1 Summary of the Methodology
D.2 Exposure Categories
D.3 Exposure Categories, Population Shares, and Relative Risks 

of ALRI in Ghana

Tables

3
10

18
21
33

49

67

67

68
70
74

76
79

1.1 Millennium Development Goals and Environmental Health
1.2 Annual Cost of Direct and Indirect Impact of Environmental 

Risk Factors in 2005

2.1 Water-Related Transmission Routes and Disease Outcome 
2.2 Impact of Infection on Nutritional Status 
3.1 Role of Environmental Health in Supplementing Health 

System Strategies

4.1 Environmental Risk Factors and Related Diseases Included in the

Comparative Risk Assessment

5.1 Environmentally Attributable Fractions of Child Mortality, 

Keeping Malnutrition Unchanged

5.2 Estimated Mortality in Under-Five Children from Environmental 

Risk Factors, 2005

5.3 Malnutrition Rates in Children under the Age of Five
5.4 Malnutrition-Attributable Fractions of Child Mortality
5.5 Environmentally Attributable Fractions and Child Mortality with

Malnutrition-Mediated Effects

5.6 Effects of Malnutrition on Education
5.7 Annual Cost of Direct and Indirect Effect of Environmental Risk

Factors in 2005

126

A.1 Cohort Follow-up Studies Relating Infectious Disease and 

Nutritional Status of Children in Developing Countries

142

B.1 Studies of the Effects of Malnutrition on Educational Outcomes

CONTENTS 

ix

C.1 Burden of Disease (in DALYs) in Children under Five Years

Attributable to Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene, by World Health
Organization Subregions, 2002

D.1 Causes of Death and Risk Factors Considered in this Study
D.2 Estimating the Cost of Environmental Health Risks: Information

Types and Sources

D.3 Relative Risks by Exposure Categories, Assuming Cox 

Hazard Model

D.4 Weight Gain Retardation Factors by Age and z-Score
D.5 Weight for Age in Children under Five: Current Rates and 

Estimated Rates in the Absence of Diarrheal Infections in Ghana
D.6 Estimated Mortality in Children under Five from Environmental 

Risk Factors, Ghana

D.7 Estimated Annual Cost of Education Outcomes from Stunting 

and Share from Environmental Factors in Ghana

D.8 Height Growth Retardation Factors by Age and z-Score
D.9 Height-for-Age Rates in Children under Five: Current Rates and
Estimated Rates in the Absence of Diarrheal Infections in Ghana

D.10 Parameter Values Applied in Estimation of Income Losses
D.11 Income Distribution across Malnutrition Categories and Wealth

Quintiles in Ghana

D.12 Annual Cost of Environmental Factors (Percentage of GDP in 2005),

Using 3 Percent Discount Rate

D.13 Annual Cost of Environmental Factors (Percentage of GDP in 2005),

Using 5 Percent Discount Rate

E.1 Environmental Risk Factors and Related Diseases Included 

in the WHO Comparative Risk Assessment

148

152
154

156

157
158

159

161

162
162

165
167

168

169

174

Acknowledgments

This book is a product of the Environmental Health Anchor Program in the
Environment Department of the World Bank. The book was prepared by a team led
by Anjali Acharya (Environmental Specialist, ENV/World Bank) and Mikko K. Paunio
(Sr. Environmental Specialist, ENV/World Bank) under the guidance of Kulsum
Ahmed (Lead Environmental Specialist and Team Leader, Environmental Health
Anchor Program, ENV/World Bank) and Laura Tlaiye (Sector Manager, ENV/World
Bank). The core writing team also included Maria Fernanda Garcia (Consultant,
ENV/World Bank), Monica Das Gupta (Sr. Social Scientist, DECRG/World Bank),
Peter Kolsky (Sr. Water Sanitation Specialist, ETWWA/World Bank), Bjorn Larsen
(Consultant, ENV/World Bank), and Giovanni Ruta (Economist, ENV/World Bank). 

Special thanks go to the peer reviewers for this study, who included Harold
Alderman (Advisor, AFTHD/World Bank), Enis Baris (Sr. Health Specialist,
MNSHD/World Bank), Sandy Cairncross (Professor of Environmental Health,
London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine), and Maureen Cropper
(Professor of Economics, University of Maryland). Sandy’s continuous and
passionate engagement on the content and tone of this book is highly appreci-
ated, while Maureen’s role in providing substantial inputs to the economic costing
methodology developed for part of this report is especially recognized.

Additional comments, inputs and guidance are gratefully acknowledged from
Douglas Barnes (Sr. Energy Specialist, ETWES/World Bank), Caroline van den Berg
(Sr. Economist, ETWWA/World Bank), Jan Bojö (Lead Environmental Economist,
ENV/World Bank), Sandra Cointreau (Solid Waste Management Adviser, FEU/World
Bank), James Listorti (Consultant, FEU/World Bank), Richard Seifman (Consultant,
AFTHV/World Bank), and Kate Tulenko (Public Health Specialist, WSP/World
Bank). The team would also like to thank Maria Neira (Director), Jamie Bartram,
Carlos Corvalán and Annette Prüss-Üstün, from the World Health Organization’s
Department of Public Health and Environment, for sharing data relating to their
new estimates of burden of disease from water, sanitation, and hygiene. 

The support of the Bank-Netherlands Partnership Program in the preparation of
this book is also gratefully acknowledged. 

xi

Abbreviations and Acronyms

attributable fraction
acquired immune deficiency syndrome
acute lower respiratory infection
acute respiratory infection
disability-adjusted life year
dichloro-diphenyl-trichloroethane 
Demographic and Health Survey
gross domestic product
height for age z-score
human immunodeficiency virus
indoor air pollution
Integrated Management of Childhood Illness (strategy)
insecticide-treated net
intrauterine growth restriction
Living Standards Measurement Survey
malnutrition
Millennium Development Goals
Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey
nongovernmental organization
National Improved Stove Program (China)
relative risk
standard deviation
United Nations Children’s Fund
weight for age z-score
World Health Organization
water resource management
water, sanitation, and hygiene
willingness to pay

AF
AIDS
ALRI
ARI
DALY
DDT
DHS
GDP
HAZ
HIV
IAP
IMCI
ITN
IUGR
LSMS
MAL
MDG
MICS
NGO
NISP
RR
SD
UNICEF
WAZ
WHO
WRM
WSH
WTP

xiii

C H A P T E R  

1

Introduction

INTEREST IN ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH has mounted in recent years,
spurred by concern that the most vulnerable groups—including children under five
years of age—are disproportionately exposed to and affected by health risks from
environmental hazards (see box 1.1). More than 40 percent of the global burden of
disease attributed to environmental factors falls on children below five years of age,
who account for only about 10 percent of the world’s population (WHO 2007b).
In large, populous areas in South Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa, where environmental
health problems are especially severe, malnutrition in young children is also rampant. 
Malnutrition is an important contributor to child mortality. Today, in low-
income countries, more than 147 million children under the age of five remain
chronically undernourished or stunted, and more than 126 million are under-
weight (Svedberg 2006; World Bank 2006c). Children in the developing world
continue to face an onslaught of disease and death from largely preventable factors.
These children are especially susceptible to these environmental factors, which
put them at risk of developing illness in early life. Acute respiratory infections
annually kill an estimated 2 million children under the age of five; 800,000 of
those deaths are from indoor air pollution (WHO 2007b). Diarrheal diseases
claim the lives of nearly 2 million children every year; most of those deaths are
attributed to contaminated water and inadequate sanitation and hygiene (WHO
2007b). Each year, approximately 300 million to 500 million malaria infections

1

2 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

BOX  1.1
What Is Environmental Health?
Environmental health is defined as those health outcomes that are a result of
environmental risk factors. The World Health Organization has defined
environmental health as “all the physical, chemical, and biological factors
external to a person, and all the related factors impacting behaviours. It
encompasses the assessment and control of those environmental factors
that can potentially affect health. It is targeted towards preventing disease
and creating health-supportive environments” (WHO 2008). This study
incorporates only those environmental health issues that relate to children—
primarily water, sanitation, and hygiene; indoor air pollution; and malaria.
These problems cause the top three diseases that affect children in
developing countries.

Sources: Breman, Alilio, and Mills 2004; Ezzati, Rodgers, and others 2004; WHO 2008.

lead to more than 1 million deaths, of which more than 75 percent occur in African
children under five years of age.

Malnutrition and environmental infections are inextricably linked; however,
over time, these links have been forgotten or neglected by policy-makers in their
formulation of strategies aimed at child survival and development. Persistent
malnutrition and rampant environmental health problems are contributing to
the widespread failure among developing countries to meet several of their commit-
ments toward the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), including not only
the goal to halve poverty and hunger (MDG 1), but also the potential to halve
maternal and child mortality (MDGs 4 and 5), to achieve universal primary educa-
tion (MDG 2), to promote gender equality (MDG 3), and to combat malaria and
confront the HIV/AIDS pandemic (MDG 6) by 2015 (see table 1.1). Research
indicates that globally under-five mortality has fallen from 100 per 1,000 live births
in 1980 to 72 per 1,000 in 2005. It is expected that the under-five death rate for
the world will fall by 37 percent from 1990 to 2015, substantially less than the
MDG 4 target of a 67 percent decrease (Murray and others 2007). Environmental
health can contribute to many of the MDGs, as is shown in table 1.1.

In many developing countries, programs to improve child health have focused
on improved feeding practices, micronutrient supplementation, national immu-
nization campaigns, and measures to strengthen health systems (such measures
include improving the availability of drugs, ensuring better treatment of cases,
and hiring more trained personnel). However, with continued exposure to contam-
inated water, inadequate sanitation, smoke and dust, and mosquitoes, children in
developing countries are still falling sick, a problem that imposes a sustained and
heavy burden on the health system. And with the recognition of the environment’s

INTRODUCTION  3

TABLE  1.1
Millennium Development Goals and Environmental Health

Millennium Development Goal

Environmental Health Determinants Relating to Child Health

1. To eradicate extreme poverty 

and hunger

2. To achieve universal primary 

education

• Expenses incurred for informal sector delivery of 
water and sanitation services, as well as costs of 
medical treatment, impose a burden on family 
budgets (including food budgets). Lack of 
adequate water and sanitation services leads to 
diarrhea. These problems affect children’s 
nutritional status adversely and indirectly add 
to a vicious cycle of poverty. 

• In urban areas, time spent fetching or queuing for

water limits earning capacity.
The environmental health burden has significant 
effects on school performance and attendance.

3. To promote gender equality 

• Women disproportionately suffer from

and empower women

4. To reduce child mortality

5. To improve maternal health

(a) exposure to smoke from use of biomass for 
cooking, (b) drudgery and inconvenience from 
poor access to water, and (c) privacy and dignity 
issues related to inadequate sanitation.

• Time spent collecting water and firewood 

impinges on time to care for sick children or to 
seek livelihood opportunities. 
Leading causes of child mortality include 
diarrhea, acute respiratory infections, and 
malaria. Indoor air pollution adversely affects 
young children (exposure to smoke from biomass 
use). Sickness and deaths result from inadequate 
hygiene, water supply, and sanitation.

• Inadequate hygiene and lack of availability of 
clean water results in poor health outcomes 
related to delivery and birthing.

• Malaria and helminths affect pregnant women 

and can lead to malnutrition of the fetus.

6. To combat HIV/AIDS, malaria, 

• HIV-infected children especially need clean 

and other diseases

7. To ensure environmental 

sustainability

8. To establish a global 

partnership for development

Source: Compiled by World Bank team.

environments. 

• Environmental conditions related to mosquito 

breeding (such as lack of irrigation, poor 
drainage, and stagnant water) point to the need 
for adequate water resource management 
practices.

• Access to water and sanitation is a goal in itself.
• Slum dwellers (including children) face dismal 
living conditions, congested settlements, and 
poor access to environmental services.
Multisectoral coordination on environmental 
health issues is lacking. Both horizontal and 
vertical links are needed.

4 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

contribution to malnutrition, there is an urgent need to broaden the spectrum
of interventions beyond the health sector. 

Objectives 

The World Bank (2006c) study titled Repositioning Nutrition as Central to
Development placed nutrition as a central issue to achieving the MDGs and estab-
lished that malnutrition is not only due to lack of food but also the result of
environmental risk factors. This report complements that study by looking at
environmental health issues that affect child health broadly, while also exploring
the links through malnutrition. This report argues that environmental health
interventions are preventive measures that are imperative to improve child
survival with sustainable results in the long term. Preventive measures—such as
improving environmental conditions—are effective in reducing a child’s expo-
sure to a disease agent and thereby averting infection (Murphy, Stanton, and
Galbraith 1997). 

The overall aim of this report is to provide information to decision-makers
on the optimal design of policies to help reduce premature deaths and illness in
children under five years of age. To protect the health, development, and well-
being of young children, decision-makers must identify and reduce environmental
risk factors by providing appropriate interventions that prevent and diminish
exposures. This study is intended to advance the understanding of what those
risk factors are, when and how to reduce children’s exposure to them, and how
to mitigate their consequent health impact. Accordingly, the study has the following
objectives: 
■ To provide an improved understanding of the links between environmental
health risks and malnutrition through a review of literature and research.
Moreover, the study discusses the role of environmental health inputs in a
child’s survival and growth.

■ To analyze new data for the environmental health burden of disease (at a subre-
gional level) that relates to children under five. These data, which are from a
World Health Organization (WHO) report (Fewtrell and others 2007), include
the total effects of environmental risk factors on health outcomes (including
those mediated through malnutrition). Using two country examples, the study
calculates the associated economic costs (including the costs of cognitive and
learning impacts and of future work productivity). 

■ To highlight—through illustrative examples—how environmental health inter-
ventions are being delivered in developing countries through a variety of health,
infrastructure, and environmental programs. The study also discusses the insti-
tutional and governance implications of delivering such multisectoral
interventions.

INTRODUCTION  5

Audience

The main audience for this report is senior policy-makers (and their technical
staffs) who work in the ministries of planning, finance, health, environment, rural
development, and infrastructure in developing countries and who are involved
in designing policies for and allocating resources to programs that contribute
toward improving child health. The study will also be useful to state- and local-
level governments, because the actual implementation of programs and initiatives
on child health is at the level of communities and households. Furthermore, donors
and other organizations financing child health improvement initiatives and proj-
ects will benefit from a discussion of how interventions addressing environmental
risks are important complements to health sector programs such as micronu-
trient supplementation and vaccination campaigns. Finally, health, environment,
and infrastructure specialists working in developing countries will also gain from
understanding the importance of working on children’s health from different
angles in a harmonized, constructive, and collaborative way. 

A Primer on Environmental Health

Environmental health relates to human activity or environmental factors that
have an impact on socioeconomic and environmental conditions with the poten-
tial to reduce human disease, injury, and death, especially among vulnerable
groups—mainly the poor, women, and children under five (Listorti and Doumani
2001; Lvovsky 2001). The top killers of children under five are acute respiratory
infections (from indoor air pollution); diarrheal diseases (mostly from poor
water, sanitation, and hygiene); and malaria (from inadequate environmental
management and vector control). This report concentrates on three specific envi-
ronmental risk factors that influence a child’s health: (a) poor water, sanitation, and
hygiene; (b) indoor air pollution; and (c) inadequate malaria vector control.

Poor Water and Sanitation Access

With 1.1 billion people lacking access to safe drinking water and 2.6 billion without
adequate sanitation, the magnitude of the water and sanitation problem remains
significant (WHO and UNICEF 2005). Each year contaminated water and poor
sanitation contribute to 5.4 billion cases of diarrhea worldwide and 1.6 million
deaths, mostly among children under the age of five (Hutton and Haller 2004).
Intestinal worms—which thrive in poor sanitary conditions—infect close to
90 percent of children in the developing world and, depending on the severity of
the infection, may lead to malnutrition, anemia, or retarded growth, which, in
turn, leads to diminished school performance (see Hotez and others 2006; UNICEF
2006). About 6 million people are blind from trachoma, a disease caused by the
lack of water combined with poor hygiene practices. 

6 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

Indoor Air Pollution 

Indoor air pollution—a much less publicized source of poor health—is respon-
sible for more than 1.6 million deaths per year and for 2.7 percent of global burden
of disease (Smith, Mehta, and Maeusezahl-Feuz 2004; WHO 2006). It is estimated
that half of the world’s population, mainly in developing countries, uses solid
fuels (biomass and coal) for household cooking and space heating (Rehfuess,
Mehta, and Prüss-Üstün 2006). Cooking and heating with such solid fuels on
open fires or stoves without chimneys lead to indoor air pollution, which, in turn,
results in respiratory infections. Exposure to these health-damaging pollutants is
particularly high among women and children in developing countries, who spend
the most time inside the household. As many as half of the deaths attributable to
indoor use of solid fuel are of children under the age of five (Smith, Mehta, and
Maeusezahl-Feuz 2004).

Malaria

Approximately 40 percent of the world’s people—mostly those living in the world’s
poorest countries—are at risk from malaria. Every year, more than 500 million
people become severely ill with malaria, with most cases and deaths found in Sub-
Saharan Africa. However, Asia, Latin America, the Middle East, and parts of Europe
are also affected. Pregnant women are especially at high risk of malaria. Nonimmune
pregnant women risk both acute and severe clinical disease, resulting in fetal loss
in up to 60 percent of such women and maternal deaths in more than 10 percent,
including a 50 percent mortality rate for those with severe disease. Semi-immune
pregnant women with malaria infection risk severe anemia and impaired fetal
growth, even if they show no signs of acute clinical disease. An estimated 10,000
women and 200,000 infants die annually as a result of malaria infection during
pregnancy (WHO 2007d).

A Primer on Malnutrition

Malnutrition remains an underlying cause of death in half of the 10.5 million
deaths globally in children under five (Bryce and others 2005). In low-income
countries, more than 147 million (or 27 percent) children under the age of five
remain chronically undernourished or stunted, and more than 126 million (or
23 percent) are underweight. South Asia, where about one-fifth of the world popu-
lation lives, still has both the highest rates and the largest numbers of malnourished
children in the world. In Afghanistan, Bangladesh, India, and Pakistan, the preva-
lence rate varies from 38 to 51 percent and is only gradually declining, whereas
in Sub-Saharan Africa, while the rate is lower at 26 percent, it is on the rise (Svedberg
2006; World Bank 2006c). 

Although lack of food is obviously an important reason for malnutrition, recent
reports and studies ever more consistently suggest that much of malnutrition is

INTRODUCTION  7

actually caused by bad sanitation and disease, especially in young children (WHO
2007e; World Bank 2006c). Thus, contrary to popular perception, in many coun-
tries where malnutrition is widespread, insufficient food production is often not
the determining factor of malnutrition (Prüss-Üstün and Corvalán 2006; World
Bank 2006c). A recent collective expert opinion stated that about 50 percent of
the consequences of malnutrition are in fact caused by inadequate water and sani-
tation provisions and poor hygienic practices (Prüss-Üstün and Corvalán 2006),
thus highlighting the need to mainstream environmental health into the devel-
opment agenda.

Nutrition in early childhood—starting from the womb—is critical for child
health and, consequently, for adult health. Maternal anemia in pregnant women—
caused from a combination of malaria and hookworm infections—leads to
malnourishment of the fetus, a condition called intrauterine growth restriction
(IUGR). Babies suffer from low birth weight in developing countries mostly
because of IUGR, whereas in developed countries, the condition is far more often
attributable to preterm birth. Repeated infections—especially diarrhea and
helminths—caused by poor environmental conditions lead to underweight (low
weight for age) and stunted (low height for age) children. These growth-faltering
effects, in turn, make individuals more predisposed to infections and even to
chronic diseases later in life. 

Commonly used indicators of malnutrition are underweight, stunting, and
wasting. Underweight is measured as the child’s weight for age relative to an inter-
national reference population. Stunting is measured as the child’s height for age,
and wasting is measured as the weight for height. Underweight is an indicator of
chronic or acute malnutrition or a combination of both. Stunting is an indicator
of chronic malnutrition, and wasting an indicator of acute malnutrition. How far
a child’s measure is from the mean of the reference population—measured in stan-
dard deviations (SDs) from the mean—determines the extent of malnutrition:
mild (–1 SD to –2 SD), moderate (–2 SD to –3SD), or severe (greater than –3SD).
Childhood malnutrition is associated with increased susceptibility to disease
and with poor mental development and learning ability. In the long term, those
outcomes are a significant cost to countries (Alderman and others 2006). Although
research and mainstream debate have revolved around how malnourished chil-
dren are more susceptible to infectious diseases (including diarrhea and acute
respiratory infections), the extent to which environmental risk factors contribute
to malnutrition is not widely acknowledged.

Content and Organization 

This report is organized into three main sections: the first looks at the epidemi-
ology (science and research evidence), the second presents the economics (costs of

8 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

the burden of disease and costs related to learning deficits and productivity losses),
and the third describes the experiences of environmental health actions in devel-
oping countries. Each section strives to present the latest information and data
and highlights the reasons environmental health is so critical in the context of
child survival and development. 

Epidemiology 

Chapter 2 argues that improvements in environmental health are very important
for child survival and development, especially considering its links through malnu-
trition. The epidemiological underpinnings of the infections-malnutrition cycle
are important because repeated infections cause a decrease in dietary intake, pro -
ducing, for example, malabsorption of nutrients, which in effect causes malnutrition,
thereby making children weak in resisting disease and likely to fall sick again. 

Until recently, the impact of diseases such as diarrhea and respiratory infec-
tions on malnutrition in children was relatively ignored. Over the past several
decades, dozens of studies—many of them long-term cohort studies—have inves-
tigated the causal relationship between disease and malnutrition. These cohort
studies have provided strong evidence of how almost all infections influence a
child’s nutritional status. A review of the studies was carried out for this report
and served to provide further corroboration of the impacts of environmental
infections on child growth, including through malnutrition. Evidence from several
of the studies demonstrates how exposure to environmental health risks in early
infancy leads to permanent growth faltering, lowered immunity, and increased
morbidity and mortality. 

Environmental health inputs—both at the household and the community
levels—play a critical role in a child’s survival and growth. In the life cycle of a
child, environmental health interventions are critical, especially in the period from
the womb to the age of about two years. This period is the so-called window of
opportunity. Pregnant women in developing countries are often exposed to envi-
ronmental risks such as malaria and hookworm infections, which contribute to
poor fetal growth and result in babies with low birth weights. Smoky kitchens
from use of biomass fuels have anecdotally revealed impacts on low birth weight
and perinatal mortality. In early infancy, improper feeding practices and poor
sanitation have a pernicious synergistic effect on the child’s nutritional status.
Many of these impacts on a child’s growth have also been seen to result in cogni-
tion and learning impacts as well as chronic diseases later in life.

Current child survival strategies in developing countries mostly adopt a more
treatment-oriented perspective, relying mainly on case management and focusing
primarily on reducing mortality. Most of these strategies, while intended to increase
the ability of the host to resist or reduce infection once exposure has occurred,
do not attempt to reduce the exposure to environmental determinants of ill health.

INTRODUCTION  9

Chapter 3 explores how appropriate environmental health actions can comple-
ment and supplement strategies that focus on child health by adding value to
health systems, by assisting in the adaptation of environmental management
programs, and by promoting adjustments to infrastructure strategies. 

Economics

Chapter 4 provides key information and data relating to the burden of disease
from environmental factors and to the associated economic costs. Measuring the
burden of disease and subsequent economic costs from environmental health
risks is important in helping policy-makers better integrate environmental health
into economic development and, specifically, into their decisions relating to the
allocation of resources among various programs and activities to improve child
health. Building on previous estimates and taking into consideration the links
between environmental health, malnutrition, and disease, WHO recently revised
the burden of disease estimates taking into account malnutrition-mediated health
impacts associated with inadequate water and sanitation coverage and improper
hygienic practices (Fewtrell and others 2007). 

The new WHO estimates reveal that the environmental health burden in chil-
dren under five years is substantially higher when all links through malnutrition
are incorporated. This finding is especially apparent in subregions such as Sub-
Saharan Africa and South Asia, where malnutrition and poor environmental
conditions coexist. In Sub-Saharan Africa, despite much poorer living standards,
fewer babies are born with low birth weight than in South Asia. This enigma may
in part be explained by the poor survival rate of both fetuses and children in Sub-
Saharan Africa as a result of unhealthy environmental conditions. Furthermore,
even when conservatively estimated, a multiplier effect exists for environmental
health interventions: investments addressing environmental risks (such as lack of
water and sanitation) not only reduce diarrheal mortality but also reduce mortality
from malnutrition-related diseases and its consequences on education attainment. 
Using case studies from Ghana and Pakistan, chapter 5 translates the burden
into economic costs at a country level. In doing so, it updates earlier estimates by
providing measures of the total effects of environmental risks, including those
through malnutrition. Also, the report for the first time attempts to estimate the
longer-term impacts of these environmental health risks on cognition and learning
and on future work productivity. These revised estimates show that when
malnutrition-mediated health effects attributed to environmental health risks
are included, the total costs for Ghana and Pakistan range from 4 to 6 percent of
a country’s gross domestic product (GDP) (see table 1.2). These costs are at least
40 percent higher than when malnutrition-mediated effects are not included. 

In the longer term, malnutrition (which is partly attributed to environment-
related infections) is found to affect a child’s cognitive function, school enrollment,

10 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

TABLE  1.2
Annual Cost of Direct and Indirect Impact of Environmental Risk Factors in
2005

Ghana

Pakistan

Annual
Deaths

Cost 
(US$ 
/C
( million) million)

Cost

Cost 
(% of 
GDP)

Annual 
Deaths

Cost 
Cost 
(PRs 
(US$ 
billion) million)

Cost 
(% of 
GDP)

412

3.84

24,712

Estimation Excluding Malnutrition-Mediated Effects
Mortality 
effects
Estimation Including Malnutrition-Mediated Effects
Mortality 
effects
Education 
effects
Total 
effects

35,702

595

5.55

407

3.79

367

904

1,002

9.34

371

537

131,611

195

3,250

2.90

187,429

278

4,633

4.13

317

5,281

4.71

595

9,914

8.84

Source: Compiled by World Bank team.
Note: ⫽ Ghanaian new cedi.

/C

grade repetition, school dropout rate, grade attainment, and future income-
earning potential. For Ghana and Pakistan, the annual cost of stunting attributable
to early childhood diarrheal infections is estimated to be 4 to 5 percent of the
country’s GDP. 

To estimate malnutrition-mediated costs, these analyses often rely on param-
eters from global and regional studies when corresponding country-level data are
unavailable. Overall, wherever assumptions are required, the parameters have been
conservatively chosen. Thus, when all effects through malnutrition are consid-
ered (including education costs), the total estimated annual costs may be as high
as 9 percent of a country’s GDP (see table 1.2). This social and economic burden
is not trivial. It highlights the urgent need for policy-makers to position environ-
mental health at the center of all child survival strategies. 

Experiences

Chapter 6 begins with a historical review of environmental health, outlining the
trends in the evolution of environmental health functions in developed countries
and highlighting how circumstances have led to the unfortunate neglect of envi-
ronmental health in the development agenda. Environmental health actions are the
earliest public health activities on record. Lessons from history have shown the enor-
mous benefits of multisectoral environmental health actions, with today’s developed
countries having undergone an evolution in environmental health functions. However,
both institutionally and conceptually, environmental health has fallen through the
cracks in the development agenda in the world’s poorest countries. 

INTRODUCTION  11

On the one hand, there has been a growing environmental movement, with
the creation of ministries of environment and accompanying policies and regu-
lations. On the other hand, health ministries and state health departments have
been engaged in scaling up vertical health sector programs, which focus mainly
on treatment. This artificial separation of environment from traditional public
health functions allows only limited multisectoral action that is needed to tackle
environmental risks facing children under five. 

Chapter 6 then presents illustrative examples of how different developing coun-
tries have incorporated environmental health activities within other health,
nutrition, and infrastructure programs. Developing countries vary considerably
in terms of institutional capacity, political will, and socioeconomic development.
Environmental health interventions therefore need to be customized to the specific
enabling environment in a developing country. Recognizing those differences,
rather than providing specific recommendations, the chapter presents some illus-
trative examples of ways in which some developing countries are beginning to
mainstream environmental health components and objectives within existing
child survival programs, nutrition initiatives, and infrastructure projects (water
and sanitation or rural energy projects). 

Some common elements for successful environmental health actions in devel-
oping countries have included garnering high-level political commitment, involving
and empowering communities, allocating responsibilities and resources at the
local level, and finding a balance between private and public sector roles.
Furthermore, successful environmental health governance requires strong insti-
tutional underpinnings, with clearly articulated roles at all levels of administration
within a country. The study provides a discussion of the roles that national and
local governments, as well as the international community, can play in delivering
and managing environmental health interventions. 

Now is a critical time for this agenda to take the forefront in developing countries,
with governments, donors, and civil society beginning to strengthen measures to
address environmental health, especially in the context of child survival. Chapter 7
highlights several key conclusions of this report: 
■ Diseases from environmental risk factors—diarrheal diseases, acute respira-
tory infections, and malaria—remain the top killers of children under five in
developing countries. Research evidence of the cycle of disease (infections) and
malnutrition implies a larger role for environmental health, because it also
indirectly contributes to other diseases by weakening the child’s immunity
(through malnutrition). Environmental health actions also improve the effec-
tiveness of other child health strategies. 

■ Specific subregions of the world—such as Sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia,
where poor environmental conditions and high malnutrition prevalence
coexist—should be especially targeted to fund and implement environmental

12 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

health interventions. The multiplier effect of such interventions points to the
potential of their significant health externalities. At a country level, the burden
of disease associated with environmental risk factors is as high as 9 percent of
a country’s GDP—significant enough for policy-makers to consider environ-
mental health programs in resource allocation decisions.

■ Developing countries can learn from the experience of developed countries in
addressing public health risks. More than 150 years ago, today’s developed
countries made deliberate attempts to improve environmental health condi-
tions by specifically addressing sanitation and air pollution issues with relatively
cost-effective interventions. Recent experience from, for example, the Ethiopian
sanitation revolution has shown that improvements in rural settings in devel-
oping countries can also be achieved with modest fiscal inputs (WSP 2007),
but such improvements need to be backed by political support and commu-
nity involvement. 
The child health agenda remains unfinished in the developing world, with
millions of children continuing to fall sick and die from preventable environ-
mental health causes. Although considerable progress has been made, the potential
of environmental health actions to complement existing health, infrastructure,
and environment management strategies remains largely untapped in the devel-
oping world. 

In many ways, this report represents a first step toward providing policy-makers
with the epidemiological, economic, and experiential evidence to incorporate
environmental health into the child survival agenda. However, additional research
and studies will help donors and governments in developing countries choose
appropriate environmental health interventions. Such research efforts should
include the following: 
■ Further research on environmental health impacts during pregnancy, on addi-
tional disease transmission pathways, and on better relative risk estimates will
help improve disease burden and costing estimates.

■ At a country level, cost-effectiveness and cost-benefit analyses are important
follow-up exercises that will help guide decision-makers to prioritize among
the various available interventions.

■ A more in-depth country-level institutional analysis is required of the coordi-
nation mechanisms between ministries and of the ways mandates and budgets
are assigned. Such analysis would help guide the roles and responsibilities of
different agencies for better environmental health governance.
In the longer term, environmental health concerns are expected to grow. As
the world’s climate changes, diseases such as diarrhea and malaria, among other
important health burdens that are the result of environmental risk factors, are
likely to worsen, particularly for the poor in developing countries (Campbell-
Lendrum, Corvalán, and Neira 2007; IPCC 2007). Thus, scaling up preventive

INTRODUCTION  13

environmental health interventions to reduce the current burden of disease is a
prudent investment (Campbell-Lendrum, Corvalán, and Neira 2007).

Given the multisectoral nature of environmental health issues, the advocacy
and regulatory roles of the health sector and the supporting roles of other sectors
(such as the environmental, infrastructure, agricultural, and education sectors)
in promoting and delivering environmental health actions need to be revitalized.
Ultimately, good environmental health governance will require policy-makers to
develop signaling mechanisms to identify environmental risks, to translate these
signals into appropriate interventions, to adjust their policies to better address
environmental health outcomes, and to set up institutional mechanisms to success-
fully implement interventions. 

A concerted and continuous effort is needed on behalf of both developed and
developing countries to ensure that environmental health is placed high on the
development agenda, and corresponding interventions must be financed and
undertaken to improve children’s survival and development potential.

P A R T  

I

Epidemiology

C H A P T E R   2

Environmental Health,

Malnutrition, and Child Health 

MALNUTRITION, POOR ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS, and infec-
tious diseases are highly associated geographically and take their heaviest tolls on
children under five years of age in Sub-Saharan Africa, South Asia, and certain
countries in the Eastern Mediterranean region (Ezzati, Vander Hoorn, and others
2004; Ezzati, Rodgers, and others 2004). Malnutrition is an underlying cause of
child mortality that contributes to between 34.5 percent and 52.5 percent of the
10.5 million deaths globally in children under five (Caulfield and others 2006;
Fishman and others 2004). In addition, childhood malnutrition is associated with
disease, poor mental development, and reduced learning ability (Alderman and
others 2006). Because research and mainstream debate have revolved around how
malnourished children are more susceptible to infectious diseases—including
diarrhea and acute respiratory infection (ARI)—the links between environmental
risk factors and malnutrition are less acknowledged. 

This chapter revisits the links between malnutrition and environment-related
infections and seeks to demonstrate the importance of environmental health in
child survival and growth. An overview of past and recent research that shows the
importance of repeated disease episodes (such as diarrhea and malaria) in the
development of malnutrition is presented (for a detailed analysis see appendix A). 

17

18 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

Environmental Factors, Exposure, 
and Transmission Pathways

Environmental health focuses on disease transmission routes rather than on how
people are treated when they are sick. The identification of transmission routes,
rather than the diseases themselves, is the important conceptual framework, and
because diseases can be transmitted by more than one route, environmental health
interventions often make more sense at a community level than at the level of
individuals (Yacoob and Kelly 1999). Table 2.1 gives examples of the different
transmission routes that various water-related diseases can take. Such transmis-
sion routes have largely been blocked in the developed world. In developing countries,
the poor continue to be exposed to many transmission routes at one time. 

Understanding how different transmission routes affect disease outcomes—
especially for diarrhea—is important because even when an intervention may
aim at blocking one transmission route, the effect on the disease may be limited
because the population is still exposed through another transmission route (see
figure 2.1). This concept is known as residual transmission (Briscoe 1987; Cairncross
1987; Eisenberg, Scott, and Porco 2007). As Cairncross and Valdmanis (2006: 775)
point out, “practically all potentially waterborne infections that are transmitted
by the feco-oral route can potentially be transmitted by other means (contami-
nation of fingers, food, fomites, field crops, other fluids, flies, and so on) all of
which are water-washed routes.”

The pervasive nature of fecal pollution in developing countries (see, for
example, Kimani-Murage and Ngindu 2007) makes effective prevention of disease
by blocking just one transmission route difficult (Eisenberg, Scott, and Porco

TABLE  2.1
Water-Related Transmission Routes and Disease Outcome

Disease Group

Examples

Feco-oral infections Diarrhea, dysentery,

typhoid fever
Diarrhea, dysentery,
typhoid fever, acute
lower respiratory
infections, scabies,
and trachoma
Schistosomiasis,
guinea worm

Dengue, malaria,
trypanosomiasis

Transmission 
Route

Description

Waterborne

Pathogen is ingested 
in drinking water
Water-washed Transmission by 

inadequate water for 
hygiene conditions  
and practices 

Most feco-oral,
oro-oral, acute
respiratory, skin
and eye infections

Water-based

Transmission by means 
of aquatic invertebrate 
host

Water-based
infections

Water-related  Transmission by insect
vector that breeds in 
insect vector
or near water 

Water-related
insect vector 
infections

Source: Adapted from Cairncross and Valdmanis 2006, table 41.1.

ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH, MALNUTRITION, AND CHILD HEALTH  19

FIGURE  2.1
The F-Diagram: Transmission Routes for Infection

sanitation

feces

fluids

fields

flies

water quality

food

new
host

fingers

water quantity

hand washing

Source: Hunt 2006.

2007). The provision of clean water (one transmission route) has often produced
less-than-anticipated outcomes because water may be scarce or hygiene practices
poor (thus exposure remains through another transmission route). The emphasis
on drinking water possibly occurs because those living in affluent conditions (with
substantial water quantity1 and proper sanitation in their homes) often ignore
the other water-washed transmission routes for diseases that poorer households
(with inadequate water for proper hygiene practices) face. This idea also has its
roots in the historical drama of single-source epidemics rather than in the long-
term tragedy of endemic diarrhea.

Vicious Cycle of Infections and Malnutrition

Infections and malnutrition operate in a vicious cycle to affect child health. Though
the effect of malnutrition on disease is generally recognized, the role of infections
in the worsening of nutritional status has been relatively neglected. 

Effect of Malnutrition on Disease

Poor nutritional status, especially in infants and young children, makes infections
worse and often more frequent. Data from a number of studies reviewed by
Scrimshaw, Taylor, and Gordon (1968) provide evidence that moderate and severe
undernutrition increases the seriousness of infections such as diarrhea and acute
lower respiratory infection. Increased mortality is an effect of malnutrition, which
makes individuals susceptible to infectious disease; when illness occurs, it is more
severe and prolonged and carries an increased risk of death (Scrimshaw, Taylor,
and Gordon 1968). As predicted in 1968, malnutrition was convincingly estab-
lished as a potentiator of mortality in young children, with the risk of death from all

20 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

infections increasing exponentially with decreasing nutritional status (Caulfield and
others 2004; Fishman and others 2004; Pelletier 1994; Pelletier and others 1994). 
Malnutrition can increase a child’s susceptibility to infection by negatively
affecting the barrier protection afforded by the skin and mucous membranes
and by inducing alterations that reduce the child’s immunity (Brown 2003)
(see figure 2.2). For example, in a malnourished child, diarrhea can quickly
result in life-threatening dehydration caused by loss of water and minerals
(Thapar and Sanderson 2004). Malnutrition also increases the duration of
many infections: the more severe the level of malnutrition, the longer the illness
lasts, and the longer the child takes to recover (Thapar and Sanderson 2004). 

Effect of Infections on Malnutrition

Up until the middle of the 20th century, nutrition textbooks hardly ever mentioned
the role of infections in the worsening of nutritional status, which, in turn, reduces
growth in children (Keusch 2003; Scrimshaw 2003). Even though, historically,
vitamin deficiencies were known to be aggravated by infections, the effect of
diseases such as diarrhea and respiratory infections on malnutrition in children
was not recognized, and poor diets were considered to be predominantly respon-
sible for poor growth in children (Scrimshaw 2003).

Over the past several decades, dozens of studies—many of them long-term
cohort studies—have investigated the causal relationship between disease and
malnutrition and have provided conclusive evidence of how almost all infections
influence a child’s nutritional status (see appendix A). Table 2.2 shows how infec-
tions adversely affect nutritional status in young children through reductions in
food intake caused by loss of appetite as well as changes in intestinal absorption,
changes in metabolism, and excretion of specific nutrients (Scrimshaw, Taylor,

FIGURE  2.2
Relationship between Nutrition and Infection

decreased
dietary intake

malabsorption

catabolism,
nutrient disposal

nutrient 
sequestration

infection

malnutrition

impaired 
immune
function

impaired  
barrier 
protection

Source: Brown 2003.

ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH, MALNUTRITION, AND CHILD HEALTH  21

TABLE  2.2
Impact of Infection on Nutritional Status

Infection

ARI, diarrhea, measles 
(especially)
Acute and chronic diarrhea 
(from bacteria, viruses, or 
intestinal helminths) 
Diarrhea

Hookworms
HIV infection or inflammation
(especially in smokers)
Many infections 

Effect

Anorexia

Malabsorption

Effusion of serous fluid to gut; 
traditionally “treated” by  
food withdrawal
Intestinal bleeding
Increased nutrient 
requirements
Several mechanisms among 
infected individuals leading  
to reduced serum retinol,
iron, and zinc concentrations 
(relevance remains uncertain)

Nutritional Impact

Decrease in food 
intake
Decrease in food 
intake

Direct nutrient loss,
mostly to gut or urine

Increase in resting 
energy expenditure
Diminished transport
of micronutrients
(vitamin A, iron, and
zinc)

Source: Based on Stephensen 1999. 
Note: For all the diseases, the stress, fever, or tissue damage caused by disease increases the food
requirement while also reducing the intake and absorption of nutrients, which leads to anorexia.

and Gordon 1968; Stephensen 1999). These nutrient losses have implications for
tissue synthesis and growth in young children—and lead to growth faltering
(Brown 2003). The effect of infections on the nutritional status of young children
appears to be directly proportional to the severity of the infection (Powanda and
Beisel 2003), which means that children with more serious infections, such as
dysentery, measles, or pneumonia, are more likely to become stunted than those
with acute diarrhea (see appendix A). 

Numerous cohort studies have researched the impact of infections (mostly
diarrheal disease) on weight and linear growth (see box 2.1). A recent Peruvian
study found that children ill with diarrhea 10 percent of the time during the first
24 months of life were 1.5 centimeters shorter than children who never had diar-
rhea (Checkley and others 2003). Another study from Brazil found that, on average,
9.1 diarrheal episodes before two years of age were associated with a 3.6 centimeter
growth shortfall at age seven years (Moore and others 2001). Similarly, Moore
and colleagues (2001) found that early childhood helminthiasis (infections caused
by parasitic worms such as hookworms) led to a further 4.6 centimeter growth
reduction by age seven. Because early childhood growth faltering is known to
predict height in adulthood (Martorell 1995), the effects of infections on linear
growth are considered irreversible (Checkley and others 2003). In general, effects
on weight have been easier to demonstrate than effects on linear growth, even in
shorter follow-up studies (Stephensen 1999).

22 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

BOX  2.1
Impact of Diarrhea on Child Malnutrition: 
Evidence from Research
Among the various infections, diarrhea is one of the most prevalent in
developing countries and is responsible for a high proportion of sickness
and death in children under five years of age (Scrimshaw 2003). Because
of its high occurrence and its involvement with the malabsorption of
nutrients, diarrhea has been a key issue in child malnutrition (Mata 1992;
Scrimshaw 2003). 

The effects of different types of malnutrition on diarrheal illness have

been studied over the past several decades (Guerrant and others 1992) (see
accompanying figure). Several studies in developing countries support the
argument that an increased risk of diarrheal mortality is associated with low
weight for age; however, the effect on diarrheal incidence has been less
clear. Evidence now supports the idea that incidence is increased (Fishman
and others 2004). 

Effects of Diarrhea and Malnutrition

diarrhea

incidence
duration, severity

malnutrition

weight gain (short term)
height gain (long term)

Source: Guerrant and others 1992.

Scrimshaw, Taylor, and Gordon (1959, 1968) summarized the evidence on

how infections have a deleterious, although often ignored, effect on
nutritional status. By 1968, the metabolic consequences of infections were
already well established (Powanda and Beisel 2003). A major problem in the
review was that long-term human follow-up information was lacking
(Scrimshaw 2003). After 1968, about 38 cohort follow-up studies have
produced information on this topic. 

Practically all the cohort studies (see appendix A) favor the idea that

not only diarrheal disease but also other infections (for example,
helminths, measles, and acute lower respiratory infections) cause growth
to falter. This view was strengthened because investigators could show
larger effects on nutritional status with increasing frequency and severity
of infections. Some inconsistencies and weak observed effects can be
explained by the mitigating effects of breastfeeding and other factors that
effectively mask effects of infections on growth faltering in these studies
(see appendix A). Experimental clinical trial information on deworming of

(continued)

ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH, MALNUTRITION, AND CHILD HEALTH  23

children further supports a causal inference between infection and poor
growth (Taylor-Robinson, Jones, and Garner 2007). 

The debate in the 1990s focused on whether these effects could be

reversed, although even those who suggested that subsequent catch-up
growth corrects much of the growth faltering recognize the failure in children
with persistent diarrhea (that is, those who have diarrhea more than 10
percent of the time) (Bairagi and others 1987; Briend and others 1989; Moy
and others 1994). Several studies during the past decade have shown that if
infection burden begins before six months of age, lagging linear growth effects
that are observed are likely to be irreversible (Adair and others 1993; Brush,
Harrison, and Waterlow 1997; Checkley and others 2003; Moore and others
2001), which diminishes the possibility that malnourishment, in the first place,
made the host more susceptible and that observed effects would result from
reverse causality rather than true causality (see appendix A). A WHO collective
expert opinion (Prüss-Üstün and Corvalán 2006) states that 50 percent of
consequences of maternal and childhood underweight is attributable to lack of
water, sanitation, and hygiene.

The idea that infections affect a child’s nutritional status has faced some
skepticism. Even while skeptics have agreed that, in the short term, the adverse
metabolic effects from infections do lead to growth faltering in children, they have
argued that subsequent “catch-up” growth fully compensates for these adverse
effects of infection in the majority of children (Bairagi and others 1987; Briend
and others 1989; Moy and others 1994; see also appendix A). Part of the reason
for this skepticism and controversy about the impact of infections on growth
faltering in children lay in the paucity of direct long-term human observations
indicating the irreversibility of these effects (Scrimshaw 2003). Compelling evidence
of this irreversibility was not gained until early 2000 (see appendix A). 

Environmental Role in Early Childhood Health

Environmental health inputs—at both the household and the community levels—
play a critical role in a child’s survival and growth (see figure 2.3 and appendix A
for further detail). In the life cycle of a child, from the womb to the age of about
two years, environmental health interventions—such as access to water and sani-
tation, proper hygiene practices, proper vector control, and the use of cleaner fuels
for cooking and heating—are especially critical for preventing growth faltering
in the fetus and infant, which has consequences for a child’s subsequent health.
These impacts on a child’s growth have also been seen to result in cognition and
learning problems as well as chronic diseases later in life, an issue discussed in
more detail later in this chapter.

24 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

FIGURE  2. 3
Environmental Health Inputs and Health Outcomes in the Child’s Life Cycle

pregnancy

early infancy
(0–2 years)

early childhood

(2–5 years)

birth and
perinatal

postneonatal
postweaning

acute

anemia, placental

insufficiency,

fetal loss,
stillbirths

peri- or postneonatal

deaths, number of
infectious disease

episodes,

underweight

infant and under-5

deaths;

incidence of
diarrhea, ARI,

malaria; malnutrition

chronic

restricted growth

stunting, cognitive and learning impairments

environ-
mental
health

vector control, safe

water, improved

sanitation,
indoor air

pollution mitigation

safe water, improved

sanitation, vector
control, indoor air
pollution mitigation,
hygiene promotion

safe water, improved

sanitation, vector
control, indoor air
pollution mitigation,
hygiene promotion

other

prenatal care

proper breastfeeding,

immunizations,

micronutrient supple-

mentation, better
case management

immunizations,
micronutrient

supplementation,

better case
management

school performance,
work productivity,
chronic diseases such
as coronary disease and
obesity

s
e
m
o
c
t
u
o
h
t
l
a
e
h

 

s
t
u
p
n

l

 

i
 
f
o
e
p
m
a
x
e

Source: Adapted from World Bank 2008a.

The following sections discuss the specific roles of environmental health actions
in the life cycle of a child from pregnancy and protection of the fetus; to early
infancy, when growth-faltering effects are irreversible; to early childhood, when
both household- and community-level actions can make a difference. Finally, the
longer-term effects, specifically in terms of cognition and learning, are discussed. 

Pregnancy: Protecting the Fetus

Nutrition plays a crucial role in the growth and the development of the fetus.
During pregnancy, the mother’s own nutritional status and exposure to infec-
tions have an important effect on the fetus (Fishman and others 2004). The impact
of infections on malnourishment of the fetus and subsequent growth faltering
has been inadequately studied (Breman, Alilio, and Mills 2004). Whereas some
infectious diseases (for example, rubella) can infect the fetus through the placenta,
other infections (for example, malaria and hookworm) can induce fetal death,
stillbirths, and perinatal deaths, as well as contribute to poor fetal growth, without
infecting the fetus (van Geertruyden and others 2004).

In addition to experiencing micronutrient deficiencies, pregnant women in
developing countries are exposed to numerous environmental risks. Malaria is

ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH, MALNUTRITION, AND CHILD HEALTH  25

endemic across the tropics and subtropics, and it thrives in areas with poor drainage
and stagnant water. Areas with bad sanitation provide prime conditions for hook-
worm infections (Hotez and others 2006). In many developing countries, and
especially among the poor, malaria and hookworm infections coexist—both syner-
gistically affecting the health of the pregnant woman and her unborn child
(Watson-Jones and others 2007). Anemia in pregnancy, which is associated with
increased risks of premature labor and low birth weight (Watson-Jones and others
2007), is a multifactoral condition and is often caused by a combination of malaria,
hookworm infections, and dietary deficiencies (Menendez, Fleming, and Alonso
2000; Watson-Jones and others 2007; see also box 2.2).

Malaria. Every year approximately 50 million pregnant women worldwide are
exposed to malaria; 30 million of these women live in the African region (Crawley
and others 2007). Malarial infection during pregnancy is an important, and
preventable, environmental cause of low birth weight (Allen and others 1998; van

BOX  2.2
Overweight Mothers Carrying Underweight Children
It is not uncommon in developing countries to see overweight mothers
carrying underweight babies. These images effectively convey the message
that not food security but repeated infections from poor environmental
health conditions often contribute to undernutrition among children (World
Bank 2006c). Moreover, food requirements during early childhood—the
“window of opportunity”—are small (World Bank 2006c). Even where food
scarcity is a concern, the lack of affordable environmental health services
such as clean water only aggravates the situation, diverting resources from
the family’s food budget and thus contributing indirectly to the child’s poor
nutritional status (Cairncross and Kinnear 1992).

A key feature in the “fetal-programming” or Barker hypothesis is that
being underweight in early infancy or even earlier, in the womb, makes the
child more susceptible to rebound growth if food becomes available in
abundance. Thus, those girls who were growth restricted in the womb or
became stunted in early infancy could be susceptible to overweight and
related chronic disease later in life (Eriksson 2005; Sachdev and others
2005). Environmental health conditions have either more distal effects (that
is, the mother’s own irreversibly developed underweight status during early
infancy or in womb) or more proximate effects (that is, malaria and
hookworms that effectively reduce birth weight). Although reduced birth
weight is a strong predictor of subsequent underweight status or stunting,
adverse effects of environmental health conditions on fetal growth cannot
be incorporated in cohort studies that have studied the effects of infections
on growth faltering (see box 2.1 and appendix A).

26 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

Geertruyden and others 2004). Malaria is thought to affect a child’s birth weight
in two ways: first, through placental infection, and second, through malaria-
induced maternal anemia (Menendez, Fleming, and Alonso 2000). Placental
infection appears to be associated with a significant reduction in birth weight and
with increased risk of “low” (that is, under 2 kilograms) birth weight (Menendez,
Fleming, and Alonso 2000). One review estimates that in areas where malaria is
endemic, one-fifth of babies with low birth weight are underweight because of
malarial infection of the placenta while the mother was pregnant (Menendez,
Fleming, and Alonso 2000). Malaria also clearly contributes to maternal anemia;
approximately 400,000 pregnant women develop moderate or severe anemia each
year in Sub-Saharan Africa because of malaria infection (Guyatt and Snow 2004). 

Hookworm infections. Hookworm infections are common worldwide but thrive
in poor communities in the tropics where poor water supply and poor sanitation
are common (Steketee 2003). Data from the early 1990s suggested that about a
third of the pregnant women in the developing world harbored hookworm infec-
tion (Steketee 2003). Few studies have looked at the impact of hookworm infections
on pregnant women (Steketee 2003). Some studies in Nepal, however, showed that
hookworm infection exacerbated iron deficiency and anemia in pregnant women. 

Indoor air pollution. Apart from parasitic infections such as malaria and hook-
worms, indoor air pollution adversely affects the health of pregnant women.
Biomass is often used for cooking and heating in developing countries, leading
to smoky kitchens and high levels of particulate matter. These conditions have
been shown to lead to various respiratory infections in women and young chil-
dren—who are the most exposed because of time spent near the stove (Bruce,
Perez-Padilla, and Albalak 2002). Two studies have implicated indoor air pollu-
tion in low birth weight and perinatal mortality. A study in rural Guatemala found
that birth weight was 63 grams lower for babies born in households using wood
than for those born in households using cleaner fuels, and a study in Zimbabwe
showed an association between perinatal mortality and exposure to indoor air
pollution (WHO 2000). The association of indoor air pollution with growth
faltering, however, is far less clear (Smith, Mehta, and Maeusezahl-Feuz 2004)
than the association with malaria (Watson-Jones and others 2007). 

Early Infancy: The “Window of Opportunity”

Several studies that looked at the impact of infections on child growth have shown
that exposure to environmental health risks in early infancy leads to permanent
growth faltering, lowered immunity, and increased mortality (figure 2.4; see also
appendix A). Averting repeated disease episodes, especially in the first two years
of life—the “window of opportunity”—prevents the more permanent and devas-
tating wasting and stunting, which have longer-term implications for a child’s
health and prognosis (World Bank 2006c). 

ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH, MALNUTRITION, AND CHILD HEALTH  27

FIGURE  2.4
The Window of Opportunity for Addressing Undernutrition

e
r
o
c
s
-
z
 
e
g
a
 
r
o
f
 
t
h
g
e
w

i

0.50

0.25

0.00

–0.25

–0.50

–0.75

–1.00

–1.25

–1.50

–1.75

–2.00

0 3 6 9 12 15 18 21 24 27 30

33 36 39 42 45 48 51 54 57 60

age months

Africa

Asia

Latin America and Caribbean

Source: Shrimpton and others 2001.

Neonates and infants up to about six to nine months of age acquire immunity
from their mothers, which often prevents ARIs (Sato and others 1979). The imma-
turity of the infants’ immune responses (Marodi 2006; Nair and others 2007;
Wilson 1986), however, helps explain why early exposure to diarrheal pathogens,
especially in early infancy, is so critical in the development of malnutrition. Thus,
the same infections that cause disease in the developed world only among those
with impaired immune systems (for example, AIDS patients) lead to diarrhea and
growth faltering in infants in developing countries (Checkley and others 1998;
Molbak and others 1997).

Breastfeeding is considered an effective means of protecting infants from diar-
rheal diseases (Dai and Walker 1999; VanDerslice, Popkin, and Briscoe 1994). The
stress and fever caused by disease increase the child’s food requirements while also
reducing the intake and absorption of nutrients. Proper feeding practices during
diarrheal episodes are critical for a child’s health and recovery. In most cultures,
the common practice is to restrict food from sick children, often for too long a
time (Brown 2003). Only in recent years has the medical profession emphasized
the need for continuous feeding during diarrheal episodes (Brown 2003). Reducing
the level of environmental contamination similarly reduces the risk of diarrhea
(VanDerslice, Popkin, and Briscoe 1994). Good sanitation practices protect infants
by creating barriers to keep pathogens out of their environment. These practices

28 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

include properly disposing of excreta to isolate human wastes, improving water
supplies to protect drinking water from fecal contamination, and hand washing
and personal hygiene to reduce the transmission of enteric pathogens in the home
(VanDerslice, Popkin, and Briscoe 1994). Analysis of data in Bangladesh, Malaysia,
and the Philippines has provided evidence that lack of breastfeeding and poor envi-
ronmental sanitation have a pernicious synergistic effect on infant mortality
(Habicht, DaVanzo, and Butz 1988; Pelletier 1994). The protective effect provided
by good-quality drinking water and improved community sanitation is greatest
for nonbreastfed infants and completely weaned infants (VanDerslice, Popkin, and
Briscoe 1994). For the latter, reducing exposures (especially foodborne exposures)
remains important. Strategies for reducing exposures include improvements in
choice of supplemental foods, better preparation practices and storage methods,
and better personal hygiene (VanDerslice, Popkin, and Briscoe 1994). 

Clean Environments, Healthy Children

In early childhood (two to five years of age), the growth-faltering effects of repeated
disease episodes are considered largely reversible, in contrast to the irreversibility
of such effects in early infancy. Still, the environmental risk factors associated with
poor access to water, improper sanitation, and bad household and community
hygiene remain a threat—especially given the child’s increased mobility (walking)
and associated ever-increasing peri-household activities. Action should be taken
at both the household level and the community level:
■ Household level. In the late infancy and toddler periods, hand-washing practices,
proper disposal of children’s feces, and safe storage of milk and weaning foods
are critical activities to cut diarrheal transmission. In addition, with increased
mobility of the child (from crawling on the floor, to walking and running),
addressing general household hygiene in terms of surfaces (including bedclothes
and floors) becomes crucial, as do cleaner yards outside (soil helminths or
parasites caused by lack of sanitation or animal wastes from domestic animals)
(Cairncross and others 1996). 

■ Community level. Community action and control of the public domain can be
seen as an important step to enable improved household and personal hygienic
practices (the private domain). Both are needed, but in some cases (for example,
with hookworms) collective sanitation efforts are key to success (Cairncross
and others 1996). In addition, young children will benefit from indoor residual
spraying or other personal-level protection against malaria even if the problem
is not addressed collectively.

Averting Cognition and Learning Impacts

Cognitive function in children—reflecting an ability to learn—is affected by
environmental and health-related factors (Berkman and others 2002). Risk factors

ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH, MALNUTRITION, AND CHILD HEALTH  29

that interfere with cognition are especially important in the first two years of a
child’s life, which marks a period of rapid growth and development (Berkman
and others 2002). In early childhood, diseases attributed to environmental factors,
such as diarrhea and helminth infections, also have the potential to affect a child’s
later cognitive functions. Over the past several years, studies have begun to inves-
tigate the impact of diarrheal illness and helminth infections during early childhood
on verbal fluency, cognitive function, and school performance. 

Several studies of children in Brazil and Peru have investigated the impact of
diarrheal illness in the first two years of life and subsequent deficits in cognitive
function as well as school performance. Among Brazilian children, the incidence
of diarrheal illnesses in infancy was found to be associated with impaired cogni-
tive performance 4 to 7 years later (Guerrant and others 1999; Niehaus and others
2002), as well as with disproportionate reduction in verbal fluency 5 to 10 years
later (Patrick and others 2005). However, one large study in Peru that controlled
for confounders saw no independent association with IQ at nine years of age
(Walker and others 2007). The number of overt episodes of diarrhea has also been
associated with indicators of school performance (Lorntz and others 2006). 

Helminth infections have the highest prevalence and intensity in school-age
children, and analyses of schoolchildren in Jamaica and Kenya have shown the
positive effects of treatment on cognition function (Guerrant and others 1999).
Only a few studies show the effect of helminths on development in children under
five years of age (Walker and others 2007). In rural Nicaragua, the presence of
intestinal parasites was associated with poor language performance among
children (see Walker and others 2007). 

In recent years, several new longitudinal studies, often enrolling close to 2,000
participants, have investigated the effect of early childhood malnutrition on
educational outcomes such as school grade attainment (Alderman and others
2006; Grantham-McGregor and others 2007; Maluccio, Hoddinott, and Behrman
2006); learning productivity (Behrman and others 2006); school dropout or
grade repetition (Lorntz and others 2006); and primary school enrollment
(Alderman and others 2006; Lorntz and others 2006). Earlier studies had already
consistently shown that an increasing level of stunting has negative effects on
the studied variables (Grantham-McGregor and others 2007). Alderman and
others (2006) have recently shown how one standard deviation drop in height
for age leads to a 0.68-year lower school grade attainment or a 0.4-year delayed
enrollment. (For a review of these studies, see appendix B.)

In addition to diarrheal illness and helminth infections, severe or cerebral malaria
in children under five years of age is associated with subsequent neurological and
cognitive impairments (Walker and others 2007). Data from a study of Kenyan
children suggest severe falciparum malaria may be the single most common cause
of acquired language disorder in the tropics (Carter and Mendis 2006). 

30 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

Key Messages

■ Malnutrition, poor environmental conditions, and infectious diseases are highly
associated geographically and take their heaviest tolls on children under five
years of age in Sub-Saharan Africa, South Asia, and certain countries in the
Eastern Mediterranean region.

■ Infections and malnutrition operate in a vicious cycle to affect child health.
Until recently, however, the role of infections in the worsening of nutritional
status, which, in turn, reduces growth in children, was not addressed. Over the
past several decades, several cohort studies have provided strong evidence of
how almost all infections influence a child’s nutritional status. 

■ The impact of infections on child growth has shown that exposure to environ-
mental health risks in early infancy leads to permanent growth faltering, lowered
immunity, and increased mortality. In the life cycle of a child, the period from
the womb to the age of about two years—the so-called window of opportunity—
is critical in terms of environmental health interventions. The infections that
adversely affect a child’s growth have also been seen to result in cognition and
learning impacts as well as chronic diseases later in life.

Note

1 The World Health Organization defines 100 liters per capita per day as the amount of water
required to meet all consumption and hygiene needs. Additional information on lower
service levels and potential effects on health are described in Howard and Bartram (2003).

C H A P T E R   3

How Environmental Health
Supplements Other Child

Survival Strategies 

THE BIGGEST EFFECTS ON MORTALITY can be achieved by simultaneously
improving health status and nutritional status of high-mortality populations
(Pelletier 1994). However, the current child survival strategies in developing coun-
tries focus mostly on case management and treatment. From the health sector’s
perspective, primary prevention comprises vaccinations, micronutrient supple-
mentation, promotion of breastfeeding, and measures to decrease low birth weight,
including birth spacing (Murphy, Stanton, and Galbraith 1997) (see figure 3.1).
These strategies all are intended to increase the ability of the host to resist or reduce
infection after exposure has occurred, but they do not attempt to reduce exposure
to the environmental determinants of ill health, which constitute another aspect
of primary prevention. 

Additional activities relating to environmental health (sanitation, clean water,
and vector control) are largely ignored because they fall outside of the current
health sector mandate (see figure 3.1) even though environmental health legis-
lation is often in place and such activities are known to be extremely effective.
Within the World Bank’s new Health, Nutrition, and Population strategy, the
Multisectoral Constraints Assessment attempts to address this issue by looking
at the multisectoral determinants of health outcomes, including those from the
environmental and infrastructure sectors. The new strategy’s focus on strength-
ening health systems—including disease surveillance systems—will also help

31

32 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

FIGURE  3.1
Range of Preventive Activities in Child Survival

prevention

traditional child

survival

sanitation
clean water
reduction of air
pollution
vector control
household and
community
hygiene

immunization
breastfeeding
food supplementation
micronutrients
birth spacing

diagnosis
treatment (case
management)

health

exposure

disease

death

Source: Adapted from Favin, Yacoob, and Bendahmane 1999, figure 1-1.

better track environment-related infections and exposures. Given the evidence
showing how environmental risks and subsequent infections affect child malnu-
trition, correcting the current neglect of environmental health in child survival
and child health strategies in developing countries becomes even more impera-
tive. This chapter highlights how appropriate environmental health actions can
be an important complement and supplement to other existing strategies
addressing child health. 

Adding Value to Health Systems

Health system frameworks are designed around improving case management of
childhood illnesses. Through broad frameworks such as Integrated Management of
Childhood Illness, efforts are being made to strengthen case management, to benefit
from synergies across vertical programs, and to capitalize on externalities in health
care delivery (Mason and others 2006). Nevertheless, several areas where case manage-
ment through health systems is not enough—in the case of childhood illnesses such
as diarrhea, acute respiratory infections, and helminth infections, for example—call
for better primary prevention of environmental risks (see table 3.1 for description
of how environmental health can supplement the activities of the health sector).

With the current case management strategies of child survival programs, several

issues limit the effectiveness of these interventions:
■ First is the safety of administering drugs for parasitic infections during preg-
nancy. Where possible, priority should be given to treating or preventing

TABLE  3.1
Role of Environmental Health in Supplementing Health System Strategies 

Health Systems

Cause of Death (%)

Main Strategies

Main Limitations

Role of Environmental Health

Neonatal causes (27%), omitting 
sepsis and diarrhea but including 
neonatal tetanus

Evidence-based prenatal care 
(tetanus toxoid important) 
Counseling and professional help 
during and after delivery

Lack of professional obstetric and
prenatal care capacity 

Acute lower respiratory infections
(ALRIs) (19%)

Improved case management

Antibiotic resistance

Diarrhea (18%), including 
neonatal diarrhea

• Oral and intravenous
rehydration therapy

• Appropriate breastfeeding 

practices

• Micronutrient supplementation

• Low compliance with oral

rehydration therapy

• Diarrhea incidence unaltered, but

chronic and bloody diarrhea 
emerge as problem in an 
increasing proportion of the
remaining deaths

• Inappropriate use of antibiotics 

and emerging anthelminth
resistance

3
3

• Because of malaria and 

hookworms, role is potentially 
very large in prenatal period, 
which could ease pressure on 
scarce obstetric capacity.

• Neonatal tetanus control policy 

may rely mainly on clean 
delivery (that is, on hygiene).

• Role is large through indoor air

pollution mitigation and 
becomes greater when the 
effects through malnutrition 
are considered.

• There is increasing reason to 

believe that hygiene may play a 
role in preventing ALRIs.

• Role in primary prevention of 
diarrhea is very large through 
improved water and sanitation 
facilities and improved hygienic 
practices.

(continued)

3
4

TABLE  3.1
Role of Environmental Health in Supplementing Health System Strategies (continued)

Health Systems

Cause of Death (%)

Main Strategies

Main Limitations

Role of Environmental Health

Neonatal sepsis (10%)

• Antibiotic therapy

Malaria (8%)

• Case finding and case 

management

• Bednets
• Indoor residual spraying

• Relatively low (about 20%) efficacy
of micronutrient supplementation 
(especially with rampant infections)

• Breastfeeding by HIV-positive 

mothers

• Antibiotic resistance and lack of 
access (especially in rural areas)
to hospitals

• Antimalarial resistance
• Low efficacy of bednets
• Compliance issues, leading to 

retreatment costs

• Clean delivery in household 

settings is augmented.

• Horizontal community
involvement is needed.

• Better environmental

management, especially in
urban areas, results.

Sources: Annual proportions for main under-five killer diseases: Bryce and others 2005; Jefferson and others 2007; Luby and others 2005; Rabie and Curtis 2006. 
Note: Neonatal causes include birth asphyxia, low birth weight, and neonatal tetanus.

HOW ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH SUPPLEMENTS OTHER CHILD SURVIVAL STRATEGIES  35

infections either before the first pregnancy or between pregnancies. For
conditions that are diagnosed during pregnancy or that must be treated or
prevented during pregnancy (for example, anemia, malaria, hookworm, or some
combination of these conditions), the safety of the treatment must be balanced
with the adverse consequences of the disease (Steketee 2003). Currently,
reproductive health programs encourage public health approaches during
pregnancy for anemia, malaria, and hookworm prevention and treatment
because the substantial adverse consequences outweigh any risk associated
with prevention and treatment (Steketee 2003). 

■ Second, there is growing drug resistance, as well as widespread misuse of antibi-
otics to treat children for infections such as diarrhea (Thapar and Sanderson
2004). In older children, the World Health Organization (WHO) is closely
monitoring resistance to the drugs for helminth treatment, while problems
relating to reinfection remain (Awasthi, Bundy, and Savioli 2003; Sur and others
2005). Antimalarial drug resistance is weakening the effect of chemotherapy
malaria control in Africa and constraining the drug options for the early treat-
ment strategy recommended by WHO. 

■ Third are problems related to compliance. For example, the uptake and use
of oral rehydration therapy has possibly led to significant reductions in diar-
rhea mortality; however, use of oral rehydration therapy remains very low, at
around 20 percent, in countries such as Bangladesh and India (Thapar and
Sanderson 2004).

Childbirth and Infant Care Programs

The components of safe motherhood strategy usually fall primarily under the
health promotion activities (care packages) organized and provided by health
ministries (Graham and others 2006). They consist of, for example, community
education, evidence-based prenatal care, and counseling, including primary preven-
tion of peri- or neonatal infections (tetanus and HIV). 

In many developing countries, unclean delivery practices, traditional umbil-
ical applications, and the use of unclean cloths to swaddle the baby can have
detrimental health effects on the newborn (Bennett and others 1996; Mullany
and others 2006; Quddus and others 2002). Additionally, in many developing
countries, the prevalence of multiresistant bacteria that cause neonatal infec-
tions (a major cause of neonatal deaths) is rapidly increasing, even while
broad-spectrum antibiotics are losing their effectiveness (Bang and others 1999;
Vergnano and others 2005). Also, difficulties remain in maintaining high coverage
of tetanus immunizations for pregnant women (to prevent neonatal sepsis). In
these areas, hygienic and clean delivery practices, supplemented by environmental
health interventions approaches, become even more important (Mullany and
others 2006; Quddus and others 2002).

36 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

By advocating hygienic practices for delivery and infant care, several health
sector programs in developing countries are already adopting environmental
health principles related to clean household hygiene. Additional environmental
health interventions, such as providing clean water and sanitation, play an
augmentive—yet important—role in these health promotion efforts. Only with
adequate quantities of water and proper sanitation facilities can households
with infants maintain clean surfaces, practice proper hand washing, and properly
dispose of feces.

Another important tenet of infant care programs is appropriate feeding prac-
tices. Established evidence shows that exclusive breastfeeding can prevent
malnutrition (Adair and others 1993; Alvarado and others 2005; Chisti and others
2007; Cohen and others 1995). Consequently, infant care programs through the
health sector are encouraging breastfeeding practices as well as the postpone-
ment of the weaning period among severely malnourished infants to prevent
death (Pelletier 1994). Additionally, as mentioned earlier, inadequate sanitation
compounds poor breastfeeding practices and synergistically affects child health.
This need for improved sanitation to reduce diarrheal transmission to infants is
seen even more starkly among countries with high rates of HIV prevalence. Medical
research has shown that for HIV-positive mothers, as many as 9.5 percent of their
infants can acquire HIV through breast milk over a three-year period (Bertozzi
and others 2006). These mothers are faced with a very difficult dilemma—whether
to breastfeed or not—because their children may face severe malnourishment
(caused by diarrhea from bad water and poor sanitation) or alternatively might
acquire HIV if breastfed. Exclusive breastfeeding, even though uncommon, might
be safer than mixed breastfeeding for reducing HIV transmission risk (Coovadia
and others 2007). Even in these circumstances, however, healthy environments
remain a high priority.

Immunization Programs

The global Expanded Program on Immunization has been very effective in reducing
mortality in children under five years of age (Brenzel and others 2006)—with
sustainable reductions especially through measles, whooping cough (pertussis),
and tetanus vaccines (Brenzel and others 2006). There is still potential to save an
additional 1.8 million children under the age of five annually by improving coverage
with current licensed vaccines in South Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa (Brenzel and
others 2006); however, economic costs as well as logistical considerations (for
example, the need to maintain a cold chain for live vaccines) constrain this possi-
bility. A very recent study from the WHO and United Nations Children’s Fund,
reporting a 91 percent drop in the number of measles deaths in Africa, has attrib-
uted the decrease largely to better coverage in routine immunization programs
and targeted campaigns (Zaracostas 2007). 

HOW ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH SUPPLEMENTS OTHER CHILD SURVIVAL STRATEGIES  37

In recent years, a number of new vaccines against rotavirus, pneumococcal
infections, hookworms, and malaria have been developed and tested. The rotavirus
vaccine has shown promise but still faces several technical hurdles before it can
be used widely against diarrheal disease in developing countries (Banerjee and
others 2006; Thapar and Sanderson 2004). Also important, rotavirus—unlike
other intestinal pathogens—apparently is not strongly related to the lack of clean
water, sanitation, and appropriate hygiene (Thapar and Sanderson 2004), perhaps
because a low number of viruses is needed to infect an individual and because
the virus tends to survive outside a host a long time—that is, it is difficult to “wash
away” (Eisenberg and others 2006).

Some progress has also been achieved in hookworm vaccines (Chu and others
2004), and several malaria vaccines are currently being tested in clinical trials, where
they have shown to provide some protection (Komisar 2007). Although progress
continues, with some setbacks (Cutts and others 2005; Singleton and others 2007),
in the field of new vaccines (for example, bacterial vaccines against neonatal sepsis
and meningitis or pneumococcal infections and diarrhea for children under five),
the improvement of environmental health conditions—especially water and sani-
tation—should continue to be emphasized (Thapar and Sanderson 2004).

Micronutrient Supplementation Programs

Along with underweight, micronutrient deficiencies—such as in vitamin A, iron,
and zinc—contribute to the global burden of disease in young children. Like
underweight, micronutrient deficiencies increase susceptibility to infections, which,
in turn, may further aggravate the deficient state (West 2003). 

A number of micronutrient supplementation programs are being undertaken
in developing countries. Several studies have shown that vitamin A and zinc play
key roles in determining the duration, frequency, and severity of infectious diseases
such as diarrhea (Guerrant, Lima, and Davidson 2000). However, evidence also
shows that the burden of infections, in turn, often constrains the effectiveness of
these supplementation programs. Likely, this effect is caused by malabsorption
of key antimicrobial drugs, resulting in the emergence of drug resistance in impov-
erished areas (Guerrant, Lima, and Davidson 2000).

Research has revealed that infectious diseases, such as diarrhea and respira-
tory infections, and intestinal worm burdens may modify the growth response to
vitamin A supplementation (Hadi and others 1999; West 2003). With a heavy
burden of respiratory infections, supplemental vitamin A may not be completely
absorbed and can be expected to be excreted in high quantity (Hadi, Dibley, and
West 2004). In a research trial of 1,405 Indonesian children, those who experi-
enced respiratory infections for more than 26 days during a four-month observation
period had a 74 percent reduction (0.17 centimeters in four months) in their
linear growth response to vitamin A supplementation compared with children

38 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

with no respiratory infection (Hadi and others 1999). Results from trials of iron
supplementation have not found significant growth effects, even in anemic chil-
dren (Iannotti and others 2006). Iron supplementation, in addition, may actually
lead to increased morbidity and consequently to reduced dietary intakes and poor
nutrient absorption (Iannotti and others 2006). Also, studies have found that the
degree of infectious disease treatment is an important factor in determining who
benefits and who is harmed in terms of serious infectious disease outcomes when
low-dose iron supplements are provided (Iannotti and others 2006). 

Interventions to prevent or decrease malnutrition and infectious disease are
expected to decrease child mortality, and interventions that accomplish both will
have the greatest effect (Pelletier 1994; Pelletier and Frongillo 2003). Environmental
health interventions have an important complementary as well as supplementary
role to play in addressing nutritional deficiencies. Water, sanitation, and hygiene
have the potential to reduce zinc deficiencies that occur from losses during diar-
rheal illnesses. Similarly, efforts to reduce or control respiratory infections will
help increase the effectiveness of vitamin A supplementation programs in improving
growth in children (Hadi, Dibley, and West 2004).

Adapting Environmental Management Programs

Recent evidence from verbal autopsy data provides concrete evidence that the
mortality rates of children under five years of age caused by malaria in Sub-Saharan
Africa remain very high (Adjuik and others 2006). Key strategies in the control
of malaria have relied on early diagnosis and treatment, on the use of insecticide-
treated nets (ITNs), and—to a lesser extent—on indoor residual spraying (Mabaso,
Sharp, and Lengeler 2004; WHO 2003). The gains in malaria control in Sub-
Saharan Africa achieved in the 1940s to 1970s from indoor residual spraying with
DDT (dichloro-diphenyl-trichloroethane) and other insecticides were eroded in
the mid-1980s—with malarial epidemics becoming frequent and more severe
(Mabaso, Sharp, and Lengeler 2004).

ITNs have been shown to reduce all-cause mortality by about 20 percent in
community-wide trials in several African settings (WHO 2003), although a recent
observational community-based intervention study suggests a substantially higher
efficacy of about 44 percent (Fegan and others 2007). Poor compliance with net
retreatment, combined with the additional cost of the insecticide and a lack of
understanding of its importance, however, pose difficult barriers to full imple-
mentation of ITNs in endemic countries (Biran and others 2007; National Center
for Infectious Diseases 2006; WHO 2003). In the case of communities with longer-
lasting nets, the problem of retreatment is more or less obsolete, but the problem
of adherence to best practices with use of these nets remains an issue. 

With few options for malaria, many rural households in Sub-Saharan Africa
continue to rely on smoke from indoor cooking as a mosquito repellent (Kristensen

HOW ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH SUPPLEMENTS OTHER CHILD SURVIVAL STRATEGIES  39

2005). A recent review of research evidence investigated the association between
indoor air pollution and malaria transmission (Biran and others 2007). The main
findings were that smoke from domestic fuel use probably does not have much
effect on mosquito feeding, while the presence of eaves spaces makes houses more
permeable to mosquitoes and has been associated with an increased risk of malaria
(Biran and others 2007). Soot from domestic fires may impair the effectiveness
of ITNs because the nets are perceived to be dirty, possibly resulting in an increase
in the frequency of washing them and a consequent loss of insecticide (Biran and
others 2007). Conversely, it can be concluded that a reduction in indoor air pollu-
tion might have beneficial effects on malaria control by allowing ITNs to remain
unwashed for longer periods.

Strong evidence indicates that environmental management has been effective
in controlling malaria, although mosquito ecology in many tropical areas often
makes this approach impractical (Fewtrell and others 2007; Keiser, Singer, and
Utzinger 2005).1 Malaria control methods that involve environmental manage-
ment—that is, a modification or manipulation of the environment to reduce
malaria transmission (for example, through the installation, cleaning, and main-
tenance  of  drains  or  the  systematic  elimination  of  standing  pools  of
water)—currently receive far less attention (Keiser, Singer, and Utzinger 2005). 

Adjusting Infrastructure Strategies

Infrastructure investments (such as in water supply, sanitation, and rural energy)
are typically designed with the primary objective of improving access or efficiency
rather than maximizing public health effects, although such interventions do
sometimes recognize the importance of public health. Yet with growing emphasis
on increasing access to water supply systems and sanitation facilities and on moving
poorer populations up the energy ladder, there remains a huge opportunity to
appropriately incorporate public health considerations into the design and delivery
of these interventions.

Improving Water Supply

More than 1.1 billion people still do not have access to safe drinking water. Service
is poor even in many countries that have water supply systems. For many
consumers, piped water is often intermittent, and when available, it is unsafe for
drinking. With growing demands for water, governments in developing countries
are making some progress in extending coverage to improved water supply2 with
large-scale water supply projects, especially in urban areas. 

From a health perspective, water quantity is generally more important than
water quality, because increased quantities of water promote good hygiene and
can prevent fecal-oral transmission by a number of different routes; increased
quantities of water also reduce skin and eye infections (Boeston, Kolsky, and Hunt

40 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

2007). Furthermore, household water connections are considered optimal because
consumption of water doubles or triples as households use it for improved hygiene
practices (Cairncross and Valdmanis 2006), and far greater health benefits result.
In both urban and rural areas in developing countries, people demand water
supplies to reduce the time and cost of fetching water. To meet demands for
water, governments have been increasing efforts to extend the coverage of piped
water systems. The major investments in urban water focus on network solu-
tions and thus reflect the needs of utilities, which are concentrated on providing
satisfactory service to their existing customers; managing large amounts of water
safely and efficiently; meeting environmental standards for their wastewater
discharges; and recovering costs to permit continued operation, maintenance,
replacement, and expansion. Accordingly, engineering, financial, and environ-
mental perspectives dominate the design of network interventions, and public
health is reflected only in technical standards to reduce the risk of common-
source outbreaks from the water supply (Boeston, Kolsky, and Hunt 2007). 

In rural areas, the time-saving benefits of water access are even more pronounced,
and the “most obvious benefit is that water is made available closer to where rural
households need it” (Cairncross and Valdmanis 2006: 773). Accordingly, govern-
ment investments in rural water supply aim at improving access; however, the
smaller size of rural communities means that piped systems, in general, and house
connections, in particular, tend to be more expensive per capita (Cairncross and
Valdmanis 2006).

Microbial contamination of drinking water in rural and urban areas can occur
either at the source, through seepage of contaminated runoff water, or within
the piped distribution system. Moreover, unhygienic handling of water during
transport or within the home can contaminate previously safe water (WHO
2007c). Household water treatment technologies (such as chlorination and solar
disinfection) and safe storage can be important interventions in situations where
access to water supplies is secure but household water quality is not assured
(WHO 2007c).

Improving Sanitation 

Roughly 2.6 billion people in the developing world are without adequate sanita-
tion,3 and facilities are often overloaded, in disrepair, or unused. Even though the
sanitation gap is twice as large as that of water supply, investments in sanitation
and hygiene have lagged far behind those in water and other “social” sectors, such
as health and education. 

The main costs of urban sanitation services are those of sewers and sewage
treatment. Whereas sewers contribute to public health through reducing everyday
contact with sewage (especially by children), wastewater treatment is designed
largely to meet ecological objectives and not those of public health (Boeston,

HOW ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH SUPPLEMENTS OTHER CHILD SURVIVAL STRATEGIES  41

Kolsky, and Hunt 2007). Urban utilities, by and large, are not well designed or
staffed to address off-network solutions for water supply or sanitation, yet those
solutions are likely to be the most important first steps of progress in environ-
mental health for many of the urban poor. Rural sanitation is frequently a low
priority relative to food, shelter, schooling, and employment. Families that invest
in rural sanitation usually do so for other reasons—for cleanliness, dignity, moder-
nity, comfort, and convenience—more than for public health. 

For a variety of historical, political, and institutional reasons, public health
plays little role in project design, despite a large role in project justification of both
water supply and sanitation investments in developing countries (Kolsky and
others 2005). The roles for the infrastructure sector have largely been related to
improving access (for example, increasing the number of tap connections), while
those of the health sector have traditionally focused on improved treatment strate-
gies. Opportunities remain for the health sector to take on a larger role in improving
the health outcomes of infrastructure investments through promotion (for example,
hygiene promotion or support to the marketing of sanitation) and advocacy (for
example, persuading utilities to lower their off-putting connection charges and
to recover the connection costs through the monthly tariff so that house connec-
tions are more affordable to the poor). Relatively easy improvements in public
health outcomes can be achieved in a number of ways: 
■ Relatively low-cost hygiene promotion programs that attempt behavior change
in household hygiene through a wide range of social-marketing tools can be
implemented. Neither network utilities nor rural water engineering staff members
are naturally inclined to assign high priority to hygiene promotion, although
it is highly cost-effective as a health intervention (Laxminarayan, Chow, and
Shahid-Salles 2006). 

■ Urban water and sewerage network expansions can often be sequenced in
different ways, and a relatively easy way to speed public health improvement
is to stress the need to extend services to new areas as quickly as possible. 

■ Trade-offs between ideal environmental objectives and the priorities of public
health can be explored. Wastewater treatment systems are, by and large, designed
to achieve ecological objectives, not public health ones. If strict environmental
standards are adopted in poor countries, the often high costs of such systems
means that wastewater treatment comes at the expense of depriving the poor
of basic access to sanitation. The costs and benefits of wastewater treatment
need to be balanced against the public health benefits and costs of basic access. 

Moving up the Energy Ladder

Worldwide, more than 3 billion people continue to rely on solid fuels, including
biomass and coal, to meet their most basic energy needs: cooking, boiling water,
and heating (WHO 2006). To address this issue, developing countries have made

42 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

various rural energy investments to move these people up the energy ladder toward
cleaner fuels. Nevertheless, progress since 1990 has been negligible because the
small gains made are lagging population growth (WHO 2006).

Recent decades have witnessed many household energy initiatives, ranging
from ambitious government-run improved cookstove programs to small-scale
community-led projects. Cleaner fuels and improved cookstove programs that
reduce indoor air pollution can mitigate diseases such as respiratory and other
illnesses (World Bank 2007d). Studies in India and Nepal have revealed that women
who were exposed to biomass smoke—but who did not smoke themselves—had
chronic respiratory disease death rates comparable to those of heavy male smokers
(Modi and others 2005; World Bank 2007d). 

Improved cookstove programs have an enormous potential to affect respira-
tory health. They can especially benefit women and young children, who are
disproportionately affected by respiratory disease. In the past, however, such
programs have more often focused on energy-efficiency criteria rather than on
health considerations. The first improved cookstove programs in India, for example,
were more concerned with the potential to burn biomass energy more cleanly
and efficiently than with health outcomes. Secondary benefits generally included
conserving fuel, reducing smoke emission in the cooking area, keeping kitchens
clean, reducing deforestation (Agarwal 1983, 1986; World Bank 2007d), lessening
the drudgery of women, reducing cooking time, and improving employment
opportunities for the rural poor. The most organized intervention of rural house-
hold stoves—China’s National Improved Stove Program (NISP)—focused primarily
on fuel efficiency. However, a major independent review of NISP, including a
3,500-household survey in three provinces at different levels of coverage, found
that the program improved air quality and health in rural households, but not
sufficiently to meet Chinese indoor air quality standards (Zhang and Smith 2005). 
Whereas the supply of technology is more concerned with energy efficiency
and costs, the demand for cookstoves has reflected limited awareness of the health
effect of improved cookstoves. In India, for example, perceived benefits cited by
users of improved cookstoves included reduction in time spent in cooking,
reduced fuel consumption, health benefits such as reduction of eye irritation,
and cleaner kitchens. Yet only 6 percent of the households cited “health bene-
fits” as a perceived benefit. This finding suggests that users over the years had
accepted the burning sensation in the eyes and coughing as daily facts of life and
considered only medical issues that required a visit to the rural doctor as “health”
issues (World Bank 2007d). In Guatemala, similarly, respondents from three
improved cookstove programs were found to value the benefits from lower fuel-
wood use, reduced cooking times, and less smoke. Significantly, the advantages
of reduced eye irritation and better respiratory health were perceived to be the
lowest benefits under the program (Ahmed and others 2005). This evidence of

HOW ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH SUPPLEMENTS OTHER CHILD SURVIVAL STRATEGIES  43

households undervaluing the health benefits associated with improved cookstoves
highlights opportunities for raising awareness through a variety of public media
or social-marketing approaches.

From a health perspective, behavior-change components are also important
supplements in clean stove programs. In Bangladesh, for example, pollution
exposure for children in a typical household can be halved by adopting two simple
measures: increasing children’s outdoor time from three to five or six hours a
day and concentrating outdoor time during peak cooking periods (Dasgupta
and others 2004b). Including such health promotion activities in rural energy
projects is important in raising awareness of health benefits associated with
improved indoor air and creating a demand for improvement of cookstoves and
changes in behavior.

Key Messages

■ Current child survival strategies in developing countries focus on case manage-
ment and treatment, to the neglect of primary prevention—especially relating
to reducing exposure to infections. These strategies typically intend to increase
the ability of the host to resist or reduce infection after exposure has occurred,
but they do not attempt to reduce the exposure to environmental determinants
of ill health.

■ Environmental health actions incorporated into existing child health strategies
can provide a bigger “bang for the buck” in terms of health improvements, and
they are an important complement and supplement to other existing strate-
gies addressing child health by adding value to health systems, adapting
environmental management programs, and adjusting infrastructure strategies. 

Notes

1 Conversely, a neglect of environmental health action through vector habitat control has
been responsible for the resurgence of dengue virus in almost all continents (Cattand and
others 2006; Kay and Nam 2005) and a forceful comeback of African trypanosomiasis spread
by tsetse flies in Central and East Africa in the past few decades (Remme and others 2006). 
2 Improved water supply is defined to encompass reasonable access to protected water
resources, which include rainwater collection, protected springs and dug wells, boreholes,
public standpipes, and household connections. In addition, it involves the application of
measures to protect the water source from contamination (Hutton and Haller 2004).
Reasonable access means at least 20 liters per person per day, accessible within 1 kilometer
of that person’s dwelling (WHO and UNICEF 2005).

3 Improved sanitation involves access to sanitation facilities that allow for safe disposal of
excreta, which may include connection to a sewer or septic tank system, pour-flush latrine,
simple pit, or ventilated improved pit latrine (WHO and UNICEF 2005). 

P A R T  

I

I

Economics

C H A P T E R   4

How Large Is the Environmental

Health Burden?

THE PREVIOUS CHAPTERS REVISITED THE RESEARCH evidence on
malnutrition-infection links to demonstrate the importance of environmental
health interventions for child survival and development and pointed toward the
complementary role of environmental health interventions in other child survival
strategies. Given this evidence, quantitatively measuring the importance of envi-
ronmental health issues for better child health becomes important. Furthermore,
to make decisions regarding investments in environmental health actions, policy-
makers need to get a sense of the averted health costs. Hence, this chapter seeks
to answer the following questions: 
■ How large is the environmental health burden for children under five, after

considering its links through malnutrition?

■ Which subregions have the highest environmental health burdens?
■ What are the economic costs associated with these burdens at a country level?
Answering these questions will help policy-makers appreciate the magnitude
of the environmental health burden and better integrate environmental health
into decision making for economic development. Furthermore, translating health
effects into economic costs—such as a percentage of a country’s gross domestic
product—has been a powerful means of raising awareness about environmental
health issues and facilitating progress toward sustainable development.

47

48 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

This chapter looks at the methodology used by the World Health Organization
(WHO) to estimate the “burden of disease” within and across various subre-
gions of the world, specifically in the context of environmental health risks. This
methodology—dynamic and evolving over the past decade—has been applied to
assess and compare the health status of populations in countries and subregions.
Results from the latest WHO analysis of environmental health burdens incorporate
the complex links between malnutrition and infections into the calculations and
provide a basis for comparisons across different subregions. The next chapter
extends this analysis to estimate the corresponding burden at the country level
and the consequent economic costs to society. 

Burden of Disease

In the field of health, a challenge one faces when trying to choose between different
health sector interventions is deciding how to compare different health outcomes
(or end points). For example, how does one compare environmental interven-
tions that differ in terms of how many lives of children are saved (mortality) and
how many days of various illnesses (morbidity) are avoided? How would one
choose between an intervention that saved 20 child lives and 200 cases of illness,
for example, and another that saved 15 lives and 1,000 cases of illness? Also, how
would one compare a case of diarrheal illness averted to a case of respiratory infec-
tion averted? The Global Burden of Disease Project, initiated by WHO in 1996,
aims at answering these questions and, in doing so, provides useful guidance for
policy making (WHO 2007a).

To assist governments in setting priority actions in health, WHO developed a
methodology to evaluate the burden of disease and to quantify the health status
of a population. One of the most commonly used summary measures of popu-
lation health is the disability-adjusted life year (DALY), which creates a common
metric to measure both the potential years of life lost to premature death and the
years of healthy life lost because of disability or illness. One DALY can be thought
of as one lost year of healthy life. 

Environmental Burden of Disease

A 1999 paper assessing the global environmental burden of disease reported that
about 43 percent of the total burden of disease attributable to environmental risks
falls on children under five years of age, even though they make up only 12 percent
of the population (Smith, Corvalán, and Kjellström 1999).1 Since then, impor-
tant reports on environmental health burden estimation were undertaken in the
framework of the Global Burden of Disease Project. In 2002, a section of the World
Health Report (WHO 2002: chapter 4) quantified the significance of environ-
mental health risks, which were revisited in depth in 2004 by the Comparative

HOW LARGE IS THE ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH BURDEN?  49

Risk Assessment project2 (Ezzati and others 2003; Ezzati, Lopez, and others 2004;
Ezzati, Rodgers, and others 2004; Ezzati, Vander Hoorn, and others 2004). 

The method used to calculate the environmental burden of disease is based
on an exposure approach, supported by a comprehensive analysis of evidence on
specific health risks. Exposure-response relationships for a given risk factor—such
as poor water, sanitation, and hygiene (WSH)—are obtained from epidemiolog-
ical studies, and the derived attributable fractions are then applied to disease
burden (in deaths or DALYs) associated with the same risk factor (see WHO n.d.).
WHO’s (2004) Comparative Risk Assessment considers the following six envi-
ronmental risk factors and examines them in relation to the diseases identified in
table 4.1 (Ezzati, Lopez, and others 2004). The risk-factor approach quantified
WSH and indoor air pollution as having the greatest effect on children under five
years of age (Ezzati, Vander Hoorn, and others 2004; Ezzati, Rodgers, and others
2004). This risk-factor approach to assessing health status is particularly useful
to Policy-makers because it enables them to think of specific interventions to
address specific environmental risks.

In 2006, WHO published Prüss-Üstün and Corvalán’s environmental health
report, Preventing Disease through Healthy Environments. Using a different approach
from earlier studies, the report elicited expert opinions on the fractions of different
diseases attributable to environmental factors. Apart from water, sanitation, and
indoor air pollution, malaria emerged as an important environmental health
problem among children under five—especially in Sub-Saharan Africa. The report
estimated that among children up to 14 years of age, the proportion of deaths
attributable to the environment was as high as 36 percent (Prüss-Üstün and
Corvalán 2006), which compares to an attributable disease burden of 24 percent

TABLE  4.1
Environmental Risk Factors and Related Diseases Included in the
Comparative Risk Assessment

Risk Factor

Related Diseases

Water, sanitation, hygiene

Indoor air pollution

Outdoor air pollution

Lead
Climate change

Selected occupational 
risk factors

Source: WHO 2002.

Diarrheal diseases, trachoma, schistosomiasis, 
ascariasis, trichuriasis, hookworm disease
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, lower 
respiratory infections, lung cancer
Respiratory infections, selected cardiopulmonary 
diseases, lung cancer
Mild mental retardation, cardiovascular diseases
Diarrheal diseases, malaria, unintentional injuries, 
protein-energy malnutrition
Unintentional injuries, hearing loss, cancers, 
asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease, lower back pain

50 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

for all age groups. A number of earlier studies had led the way toward these
important findings.

In the same report, expert opinion indicated that poor WSH contributed to
50 percent of the consequences of childhood and maternal underweight (see
box 4.1). For example, when environmentally attributable deaths from acute lower
respiratory infection (ALRI) were reported, they were caused by indoor air
pollution. Nevertheless, perhaps up to 50 percent of these deaths would not
have occurred if the child had not been malnourished (Ezzati, Vander Hoorn,
and others 2004). The implications of this link were mainly reported through
the consequences of different environmental risks as deaths in different disease
categories. Current literature on risk factors has internalized a significant portion
of these consequences of malnutrition, often without much discussion. Although
the WHO report (Prüss-Üstün and Corvalán 2006) did include a relatively
small category (measles and meningitis deaths) of child deaths associated with

BOX  4.1
Why 50 Percent? Supporting Evidence from Recent 
Cohort Studies
In Preventing Disease through Healthy Environments (Prüss-Üstün and
Corvalán 2006), expert opinion was cited as indicating that poor water,
sanitation, and hygiene and inadequate water resources management
contributed to 50 percent of the consequences of childhood and maternal
underweight. This expert opinion builds on evidence that emerged toward
the end of the 1950s on the impacts of environmental infections on a child’s
growth (Keusch 2003; Scrimshaw, Taylor, and Gordon 1959). 

In this report, a technical review of 38 recent cohort studies further

corroborates this 50 percent (confidence interval 39 to 61 percent) figure
used to estimate the consequences of malnutrition attributable to environ-
mental risk factors. Evidence from several of the studies demonstrates how
exposure to environmental health risks in early infancy leads to permanent
growth faltering, lowered immunity, and increased mortality. Using Bradford
Hill’s causality criteria as a framework, the results from the studies were
scrutinized to evaluate whether infections cause growth faltering and, if so,
to what extent (for details, see appendix A). 

For example, a recent relatively large study from Bangladesh reveals that

dysentery and watery diarrhea together could retard weight gain by 20 to
25 percent compared with those periods where no infections occurred
(Alam and others 2000). This weight gain retardation is likely to be signifi-
cantly higher when compared with international standards, and simulations
that reveal 35 percent weight gain retardation result in approximately
similar environmentally attributable health burden as the estimate in Prüss-
Üstün and Corvalán (2006). 

HOW LARGE IS THE ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH BURDEN?  51

malnutrition, it did not include other deaths that would have been avoided
had the child not been malnourished. 

Including the Malnutrition-Infection Link

As discussed in chapter 2, there is now substantial evidence that repeated infec-
tions in early childhood—mainly diarrheal disease from inadequate WSH—is a
significant contributor to child malnutrition (Prüss-Üstün and Corvalán 2006).
Moreover, the evidence indicates that malnutrition, in turn, increases the risk of
child mortality and the incidence of morbidity3 and impairs cognitive develop-
ment with consequences for educational attainment and performance (see Fishman
and others 2004). 

A WHO analysis in 2007 sought to incorporate this evidence of malnutrition-
infection links in its environmental burden of disease methodology (Fewtrell and
others 2007). For the first time, this methodology not only incorporated direct
health risks from environmental factors (such as diarrheal disease burden from
poor water and sanitation) but also sought to include indirect risks (concentrating
on WSH and its indirect effect on mortality through malnutrition). Thus, while
a traditional burden of disease calculation would associate WSH with only diar-
rheal diseases (see figure 4.1), the inclusion of the indirect path implies the need
to include all diseases attributable to malnutrition (because 50 percent of the
consequences of malnutrition are, in turn, attributed to poor WSH).4

These additional diseases include ALRIs, measles, malaria, protein-energy
malnutrition, and other infectious diseases that cannot be directly attributed to
environmental risk factors. Figure 4.1 illustrates these direct and indirect effects.
To quantify the health effects of malnutrition, Fewtrell and others (2007) adopted
the methodology of Blössner and de Onis (2005), who estimated fractions attrib-
utable to malnutrition for diarrheal diseases, low birth weight, lower respiratory
infections, malaria, measles, and protein-energy malnutrition. 

Note that to avoid possible double-counting, Fewtrell and others (2007) did
not include as an indirect effect diseases such as diarrhea that are a direct effect
of poor WSH, even though diarrhea is one of the consequences of malnutrition.
Therefore, the estimates in Fewtrell and others (2007) are conservative. 

Environmental Health Burdens

Results from the latest WHO analysis (Fewtrell and others 2007) show the water-
related (WSH and water resource management, or WRM) environmental health
burden for children under five years of age in various subregions (see figure 4.2).
From a point of view of child health, three subregions in Sub-Saharan Africa and
South Asia stand out in terms of the environmental health burden of disease. 

An interesting feature of figure 4.2 is that regions differ widely from each other
depending on whether one looks at DALYs per capita (panel a) or total DALYs

52 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

FIGURE  4.1
The Health Effects of Environmental Risks Factors

poor water

inadequate sanitation

improper personal and household hygiene

indoor air pollution (IAP)

inadequate water resource management (WRM)

direct

Diarrhea
diarrhea

Acute lower respiratory 
acute lower respiratory 

infections (ALRIs)

infections

Malaria
malaria

direct

malnutrition 

(50% from bad sanitation 

and repeated infections

50% from food availability)

indirect

diarrhea (food)
ALRI (non IAP)

infections not environmentally

related (excluding HIV)

diarrhea (WSH)

ALRI (IAP)

malaria (inadequate WRM)

tuberculosis (IAP)

protein-energy malnutrition

(WSH) 

Source: Compiled by World Bank team.

(panel b). Although the Southeast Asian subregion SEARD has a similar number of
DALYs as the African subregion AFRD, the two subregions differ quite substantially
in terms of DALYs per capita—with the latter having a value more than two times
higher. Incidentally, diarrheal disease in SEARD is, in relative terms, more impor-
tant as a percentage of total DALYs than diarrheal disease in AFRD. When compared
with the most developed subregion, EURA, which is in Europe, the environmental
health burden (in DALYs per 1,000 children under five) in the two subregions of
Africa (AFRB and AFRD) is about 150 to 175 times higher. For SEARD, this ratio
is about 70 times higher. Important risk factors such as indoor air pollution and
environmental-attributable perinatal mortality are not included in figure 4.2.

In the public’s imagination, the home of the malnourished child is Sub-
Saharan Africa. Nevertheless, some researchers showed evidence that the

HOW LARGE IS THE ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH BURDEN?  53

FIGURE  4.2
Water-Related (WSH plus WRM) Burden of Disease in Children under 
Five Attributable to Environmental Risk Factors by WHO Region, 2002 

a. DALYs per capita

i

n
o
g
e
r
 
O
H
W

i

n
o
g
e
r
 
O
H
W

WPRB

SEARD

SEARB

EMRD

EMRB

AMRD

AMRB

AFRE

AFRD

diarrheal diseases

malnutrition and its consequences

malaria

other

0.00

0.10

0.20

0.30

0.40

0.50

0.60

DALYs per 1000 children under 5

b. Total DALYs 

WPRB

SEARD

SEARB

EMRD

EMRB

AMRD

AMRB

AFRE

AFRD

diarrheal diseases

malnutrition and its consequences

malaria

other WSH

0

5,000

10,000

15,000
DALYs

20,000

25,000

30,000

Sources: Adapted from Fewtrell and others 2007; Prüss-Üstün and Corvalán 2006.
Note: Calculations are based on deaths attributable to perinatal conditions published in Graham and
others (2006: 507) and on estimating the regional aggregate number of live births using live birth per
1,000 data population data from the World Bank Development Data Platform and Live Database time
series for 2000. The WHO regions are defined as follows: WPRB (Western Pacific subregion with low
child and low adult mortality); SEARD (Southeast Asian subregion with high child and high adult
mortality); SEARB (Southeast Asian subregion with low child and low adult mortality); EMRD (Eastern
Mediterranean subregion with high child and high adult mortality); EMRB (Eastern Mediterranean
subregion with low child and low adult mortality); AMRD (subregion of the Americas with high child
and high adult mortality); AMRB (subregion of the Americas with low child and low adult mortality);
AFRE (African subregion with high child and very high adult mortality); AFRD (African subregion with
high child and high adult mortality). For a detailed list of the countries that belong to each subregion,
see http://www.who.int/choice/demography/regions/en/index.html. 

54 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

worst-affected region is not Africa but South Asia (Ramalingaswami, Jonsson,
and Rohde 1996). Over the past few decades, other explanations have been
suggested for these surprising results, which have been labeled the “Asian enigma”
(see box 4.2). 

BOX  4.2
Revisiting the “Asian Enigma”

As many as 30 percent of children in India are born with low birth weight, as
compared with only 16 percent in Sub-Saharan Africa. Furthermore, continuing
up to five years of age, underweight rates remain far lower in Sub-Saharan
Africa (approximately 30 percent) compared with those in South Asia (close to
50 percent). Although the depth of hunger is clearly greatest in Sub-Saharan
Africa (FAO 2006), and the gross domestic product and living standards are
higher in South Asian countries, this nutritional status difference is considered
to be somewhat of an enigma (Gragnolati and others 2006). 

Using multivariate analyses of household survey data, Ramalingaswami,
Jonsson, and Rohde (1996) suggested that this difference was explained by
the better decision-making power of women in Sub-Saharan Africa
compared with those in Asia, but they also stated that sanitation differences
(use of latrine) between the regions clearly contribute to the nutritional
status gap as well. 

Scientific inference from household surveys is often hampered by issues
of confounding (other related factors ultimately may be the culprit) as well
as by inconsistencies in definitions (what is meant by latrine in different
countries?) (Cairncross and Kolsky 1997). Also, for example, high latrine use
might significantly threaten the integrity of sources of drinking water—again
making inferences difficult (Kimani-Murage and Ngindu 2007). Often,
serious problems with data quality exist; for example, in a recent Kenya
National Census, the enumerators missed Kibera, the largest shantytown in
Africa, which led to overestimating latrine use in Kenya. Finally, mechanisms
of causality often remain obscure in studies relying on indicator data
(Cairncross and Kolsky 1997; Kolsky and Blumenthal 1995). If sanitation and
hygiene conditions were poorer in South Asia, one might logically expect
more diarrhea per child—which is not the case (see figure 4.2).

In attempting to explain this enigma, researchers have not adequately

considered the intergenerational dimensions of malnutrition—that is,
malnourished fetuses result in babies with low birth weight. These babies
become underweight mothers and, in turn, give birth to more babies with
low birth weight. The prevalence of fetal undernutrition (or restricted growth
in utero) is directly related to the duration and incidence of malnutrition
(which is increased by mother’s low weight before pregnancy and by
infections during pregnancy, such as hookworms and malaria). 

(continued)

HOW LARGE IS THE ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH BURDEN?  55

A number of miscarriages, stillbirths, and perinatal deaths (owed in large
part to rampant malaria) likely are preferentially harvesting the underweight
fetuses and children from the African population (Adjuik and others 2006;
van Geertruyden and others 2004). These early deaths, then, do not add to
the statistics of underweight children, and therefore the region appears to
have fewer underweight babies than does South Asia. 

The Multiplier Effect for Environmental Health Interventions

Results from these subregional data show the multiplier effect of environmental
health interventions on mortality—where investments addressing environmental
risks (for example, lack of water and sanitation) not only reduce diarrhea
mortality but also reduce mortality from malnutrition-related diseases and its
consequences on educational attainment. In these subregions, this multiplier
ranges from 1.5 to 1.9 (figure 4.3), which means for every direct death avoided

FIGURE  4. 3
Mills-Reincke Ratios for Subregions

o
i
t
a
r
 
e
k
c
n
e
R
-
s
l
l
i

i

M

2.0

1.9

1.8

1.7

1.6

1.5

1.4

1.3

1.2

1.1

1.0

SEARD

AFRD

EURC

WPRB

EURB

SEARB

AFRE

EMRD

AMRD

AMRB

EMRB

EURA

0.00

0.05

0.10

0.15

0.20

diarrheal mortality

Source: Compiled by World Bank team on the basis of Fewtrell and others 2007.
Note: The World Health Organization regions are defined as follows: WPRB (Western Pacific subregion
with low child and low adult mortality); SEARD (Southeast Asian subregion with high child and high
adult mortality); SEARB (Southeast Asian subregion with low child and low adult mortality); EMRD
(Eastern Mediterranean subregion with high child and high adult mortality); EMRB (Eastern
Mediterranean subregion with low child and low adult mortality); AMRD (subregion of the Americas
with high child and high adult mortality); AMRB (subregion of the Americas with low child and low
adult mortality); AFRE (African subregion with high child and very high adult mortality); AFRD (African
subregion with high child and high adult mortality); EURA (Europe subregion with very low child and
very low adult mortality); EURB (Europe subregion with low child and low adult mortality); EURC
(Europe with low child and high adult mortality).

56 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

from an environmental health intervention, at least half to almost one additional
death is averted from indirect links. A recent research paper using household
survey data for rural China similarly found evidence of a 2.0 multiplier, implying
that for every diarrheal death averted in children under five from household water
connections, an additional ALRI death was also averted (Jacoby and Wang 2004).
This multiplier effect is not new: it was first empirically observed in the late 19th
century and came to be known as the Mills-Reincke phenomenon (see box 4.3). 

BOX  4. 3
The Mills-Reincke Phenomenon

In the late 19th century, impressed by the beneficial effects of clean water
supply on mortality (especially child mortality), a German sanitary engineer
(Johann Julius Reincke) and an American sanitary engineer (Hiram F. Mills)
independently found that for every prevented death from waterborne
diseases, additional pulmonary tuberculosis, pneumonia, and infant deaths
were averted. This curiosity came to be called the Mills-Reincke
phenomenon (Sedgwick and Macnutt 1908).

A recent analysis of several U.S. cities for 1900 to 1936 has conserva-

tively estimated that, for one diarrhea death, three other deaths were
averted by clean water supply systems (Cutler and Miller 2005). Mortality
declined steeply without major advances in curative and individually
targeted preventive interventions (for example, vaccines) (Cutler and Miller
2005). Another important source of typhoid fever, killing especially children
under five years of age from unclean milk, was also eliminated in the early
decades of the 21st century (Rosen 1958). 

The explanations behind the Mills-Reincke phenomenon have remained

enigmatic (Cairncross 2003). Contemporaries (Sedgwick and Macnutt
1908) considered two alternatives: (a) that the “other” category would
ultimately also be waterborne or (b) that clean water supply somehow
enhanced vitality—it was known that after convalescence, typhoid fever
patients suffered greatly from secondary infections (Ferrie and Troesken
2004, as cited in Cutler and Miller 2005). Evidence to support the first
explanation still has not been found. The results derived from Fewtrell and
others (2007) are in line with the second explanation and bring together
current competing nutrition and infection-based models (Cutler and Miller
2005) for explaining the dramatically lowered mortality rates in the
developed countries over the past century. Recent research has revealed
that unintentional consequences of improved hygienic conditions include a
steep decline in stomach cancer (Kivi and Tindberg 2006; Parkin 2006)
and potential for decreased susceptibility to coronary heart disease
(Eriksson 2005).

HOW LARGE IS THE ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH BURDEN?  57

Conservative Estimates 

The Mills-Reincke ratios (the ratio of consequences of malnutrition-diarrhea
deaths in subregional WHO estimates) are plotted on a graph with decreasing
level of development (using increased risk of diarrheal deaths as a proxy), reflecting
the close correlation between diarrheal disease and malnutrition (see figure 4.3).
These ratios are small (ranging from 1.5 to 1.9) when compared to those conser-
vatively derived (3.0) for the United States during the early 20th century. One
explanation for the relatively more conservative ratios might be current child
survival interventions such as measles vaccinations. Although current methodo -
logies to estimate burdens attributable to environmental health use the best available
information, the impacts of environmental risk factors are considerably under-
estimated for several reasons.

The health impacts from environmental risk factors are potentially under-
estimated in several areas. The first is in the area of perinatal deaths. The 
11 percent of these deaths considered to be attributable to the environment (in
developing countries) is likely to be a substantial underestimate (Prüss-Üstün
and Corvalán 2006). Breman, Alilio, and Mills (2004) suggest that as many as
about 60 percent of perinatal deaths could be attributable to rampant malaria
in Sub-Saharan Africa.5 Second, growing evidence (Jefferson and others 2007) shows
that ALRIs can be prevented by improving personal and household practices,6
implying that the WSH-attributable health burden becomes substantially larger
(Cairncross and Valdmanis 2006). For example, a randomized clinical trial in
Karachi, Pakistan, showed that hand washing reduces ALRIs by 50 percent (Luby
and others 2005). Third, a substantial proportion of ALRI deaths associated
with indoor air pollution would not have occurred had the children not been
malnourished (Ezzati, Vander Hoorn, and others 2004).7 However, only some
of these deaths are included in the consequences of malnutrition. Finally, malaria
deaths that are attributable to inadequate mosquito habitat control (for example,
42 percent in Sub-Saharan Africa) do not include the fraction that can be effec-
tively prevented by other environmental management measures, such as indoor
residual spraying and bednets.

Similarly, there are several indications that the malnutrition-mediated effects
of environmental risk factors (“consequences of malnutrition”) are underesti-
mated. First, the consequences of malnutrition in Fewtrell and others (2007)
consider only attributable fractions of moderate and severe maternal and child-
hood underweight—less than or equal to 2 standard deviations (SD)—but do
not include the consequences of mild malnutrition (from –2SD to –1SD). Mild
malnutrition, the health burden of which is included in other estimates, is the
most prevalent form of malnutrition and increases death risk almost twofold
(Caulfield and others 2004; Fishman and others 2004). Second, 42 percent of
malaria deaths in Sub-Saharan Africa are caused by poor WRM. Of the remaining

58 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

58 percent of malaria deaths caused from other factors, however, at least a portion
should be attributable to environmental factors through the effect of diarrheal
infections on malnutrition and increased malaria fatality rates (see figure 4.1).
They are not included because some of these deaths would overlap with those
directly attributable to inadequate habitat control. Third, given the price and wage
inelasticity among the poorest, income spent on environmental health services
(such as water) often takes away from food budgets, thereby contributing to malnu-
trition. In Khartoum, Sudan, for example, residents of one squatter settlement
were found to pay as much as 55 percent of their income to purchase water
(Cairncross and Kinnear 1992)—sacrificed at the cost of their food budgets.

A final point on why these current estimates are conservative involves the
longer-term perspective. The Barker or fetal-programming hypothesis, mentioned
in box 2.2, postulates that malnourishment in utero or very early in infanthood
makes adults more susceptible to chronic diseases (like coronary heart disease)
later in life (Eriksson 2005). This hypothesis means that current poor environ-
mental health conditions in early childhood will result in higher future health
effects in terms of chronic diseases (Eriksson 2005).

Areas for Future Research

Given the importance of protecting the fetus from malnutrition and subsequent
growth faltering, researchers need to pay more attention to quantifying environ-
mental health problems during pregnancy. This research is particularly important
in Sub-Saharan Africa, where the malaria-hookworm association results in maternal
anemia and subsequent growth restrictions in utero. Understanding the role of
environmental factors during pregnancy also has important implications for
helping reduce the 4 million perinatal deaths that occur every year. 

More clinical trials are needed to test whether ALRIs are water washable, using
hand washing or more comprehensive household hygiene interventions (Ahmed
and others 1993). Additionally, clinical trials on indoor air pollution are also needed.
Studies using deaths as end points would be important when health effects of both
WSH and indoor air pollution are established, to overcome current methodo logical
issues that lead to underestimating effects of these factors.

Recognizing the links between infections and malnutrition, future studies
should properly account for correlated multiple risk factors. Current studies on
the effect of malnutrition on respiratory infections (for example, Fishman and
others 2004) do not control for indoor air pollution exposure. Similarly, studies
on the effect of indoor air pollution or poor water and sanitation rarely control
for malnutrition. In the absence of such controls, the burden from a specific disease
(for example, diarrheal infections) attributable to various risk factors (such as
WSH or malnutrition) may exceed 100 percent. 

HOW LARGE IS THE ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH BURDEN?  59

Key Messages

■ In terms of child health, the environmental health burden is substantially higher
than previously estimated if links through malnutrition are incorporated, espe-
cially in those subregions, such as Sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia, where
both malnutrition and poor environmental conditions coexist.

■ In Sub-Saharan Africa, environmental health conditions which cause poorer
fetus and child survival, may explain the counterintuitively lower malnutrition
rates (when compared with South Asia) from poorer fetus and child survival.
■ Even when the environmental health burden is conservatively estimated, a multi-
plier effect exists for environmental health interventions, where investments
addressing environmental risks (for example, lack of water and sanitation) not
only reduce diarrhea mortality but also reduce mortality from malnutrition-
related diseases and its consequences on educational attainment. 

■ Future research is needed on environmental health effects during pregnancy,
additional disease transmission pathways, and better relative risk estimates to
more accurately estimate the environmental health burden in children under
five years of age.

Notes

1 The authors’ definition was fairly broad and covered 22 conditions, including war, violence,

and alcohol.

2 For  more  details  on  Comparative  Risk  Assessment  project  publications,  see

http://www.who.int/healthinfo/boddocscra/en/index.html. 

3 Fishman and others (2004) cite a recent meta-analysis that shows diarrheal incidence is
23 percent higher (12 to 35 percent, with a 95 percent confidence interval) in children with
moderate to severe malnutrition.

4 The distinction between direct and indirect effects of environmental risk factors is concep-
tual. In practice, when calculating the burden of disease related to these risk factors, the
two effects may be difficult to separate. 

5 According to a recent meta-analysis of 117 studies by van Geertruyden and others (2004),

malaria deaths globally are underestimated by 2 million deaths.

6 This is an alternative complementary explanation to the Mills-Reincke phenomenon

(Cairncross 2003) in addition to those provided in box 4.3. 

7 All together, about 800,000 deaths annually are associated with indoor air pollution (Smith,

Mehta, and Maeusezahl-Feuz 2004).

C H A P T E R   5

Estimating the Environmental
Health Burden and Costs at the

Country Level

IN PART I, new results from the World Health Organization (WHO) on the
environmental health burden of disease were presented, and findings were discussed
(Fewtrell and others 2007). These new calculations take into account the effects of
environmental risk factors (including their effects on malnutrition). In this part,
the analysis is taken to the next stage: estimating and translating this burden into
economic costs at a country level. With the use of case studies from Ghana and
Pakistan, earlier estimates are updated by calculating the effects of environmental
risks (including the impacts through malnutrition) and by attempting to estimate
the impacts on cognition and learning and on future work productivity and
income (see appendix D for a detailed methodology).

Existing Practice in Environmental Health Valuation 

The World Bank has made extensive use of valuation techniques to measure the
costs of environmental degradation at the country level. Studies of the cost of
environmental health effects are mostly based on quantification and valuation of
disease-specific mortality and morbidity caused by environmental risk factors.
In developing countries, these studies have focused mainly on environmental
risks, such as inadequate supply of water, sanitation, and hygiene (WSH); indoor
air pollution from household solid fuels; urban (outdoor) air pollution; and
sometimes exposure to lead. To value health risks, these analyses have typically

61

62 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

looked at different health end points, such as deaths or years of life lost, years lived
with disability, incidence of diarrheal and respiratory illness, number of hospital
admissions, number of doctor visits, restricted-activity days, number of days of
caregiver, and so on.

In general, child mortality has been valued using the human capital approach—
that is, the present value of the average individual’s income stream—and adult
mortality has been valued using both the human capital approach and the value
of statistical life, reflecting individuals’ willingness to pay for a reduction in the
risk of death. Morbidity has been valued by the cost of illness, including the cost
of hospital admissions, doctor visits, restricted-activity days, time and income
losses from illness, and days of caregiving. A fraction of the average wage is usually
taken as the unit value of time lost to illness and caregiver’s time (see appendix E
for more details).

The cost of environmental health risks at the country level has ranged from
1.2 percent of gross domestic product (GDP) in Tunisia to more than 4.0 percent
of GDP in China (see figure 5.1). These costs have typically represented between
40 and 60 percent of total cost of environmental degradation (environmental health
and natural resources). Lack of access to water supply and sanitation and poor
hygiene often take the largest share of environmental health risks. In Bolivia, El
Salvador, Guatemala, and Nigeria, indoor air pollution is particularly important.
Results from these valuation studies—often quoted in various newspapers—
have been used to raise awareness on environmental issues in many countries, as
well as to attempt to catch the attention of policy-makers. In Algeria, for example,
the results were used at the highest political level and proved instrumental in
increasing the budget for environmental protection by US$450 million. The studies
have also sparked interest in additional work. For example, the governments of
Algeria, the Arab Republic of Egypt, and Morocco have commissioned in-depth
analyses of the costs of environmental degradation in the water sector. Tunisia is
in the process of setting up a unit of environmental economics and policy in the
Ministry of Environment to build capacity to undertake such analyses.

Building New Estimates for Environmental Health Costs

Research evidence discussed in chapter 2 highlights the importance of the vicious
cycle of malnutrition and infections. This new valuation exercise seeks to estimate
previously unaccounted costs associated with how environmental risk factors
affect mortality through their effects on malnutrition. In the short term, this calcu-
lation means including a portion of the deaths not usually attributed to
environmental factors (for example, measles) that would not have occurred if the
child had not been malnourished. In the longer term, it means assessing the impact
(and subsequent costs) associated with impaired cognition and learning caused
by malnutrition (which in turn was affected by environmental factors). 

ESTIMATING THE ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH BURDEN AND COSTS AT THE COUNTRY LEVEL  63

FIGURE  5.1
Cost of Environmental Health Risks

Tunisia

Lebanon

Colombia

Peru

Guatemala

Egypt, Arab
Rep. of

Nigeria

Iran, Islamic
Rep. of

Ghana

Pakistan

China

0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

2.5

3.0

3.5

4.0

4.5

percent

urban air pollution
water, sanitation, and hygiene

indoor air pollution

Source: China (World Bank 2007a); Colombia, Ghana, Guatemala, Nigeria, Pakistan, and Peru (Country
Environmental Analysis); Arab Republic of Egypt (World Bank 2002), Islamic Republic of Iran (World
Bank 2005); Lebanon and Tunisia (Sarraf, Larsen, and Owaygen 2004).
Notes: Economic burden includes the burden from mortality, morbidity, and cost of illness. Morbidity is
usually valued using the human capital value approach. Adult mortality is valued by averaging the
value of a statistical life approach and the human capital value approach. With the exception of China,
the Islamic Republic of Iran, and Nigeria, child mortality is valued using human capital value only. With
the exception of China, the value of a statistical life is obtained through benefit transfer of international
studies. Water, sanitation, and hygiene mortality is estimated only for children; in China, such mortality
excludes lack of sanitation and hygiene costs.

Estimating and Valuing Health Impacts Accounting for Malnutrition

Repeated infections in early childhood contribute to malnutrition. Malnutrition,
in turn, makes children more vulnerable to repeated infections. As discussed in
chapter 2, numerous studies have found that infections, especially diarrheal disease,
in the first few years of children’s life impair weight gains, often in the range of
20 to 50 percent (Adair and others 1993; Bairagi and others 1987; Black, Brown,
and Becker 1984; Checkley and others 1997; Condon-Paoloni and others 1977;
Molbak and others 1997; Rowland, Cole, and Whitehead 1977; Rowland, Rowland,
and Cole 1988; Zumrawi, Dimond, and Waterlow 1987). 

Valuing Education and Cognition Costs

Children exposed to poor environmental conditions often end up malnourished,
which, in turn, impairs their cognitive development and educational performance.

64 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

This impairment affects labor productivity, thus reducing individual earnings.
Furthermore, malnutrition can lead to delayed primary school enrollment and
grade repetition, which, in turn, may affect lifetime income in terms of delayed
labor-force entry. 

As discussed in chapter 2, a number of recent longitudinal studies (see
appendix B) have investigated the effect of early childhood malnutrition on
educational outcomes. These studies use data that follow children over time,
usually from birth to well into primary or secondary school level, and they contain
various anthropometric, schooling, and socioeconomic status indicators. The
studies analyzed show that the change in grade attainment ranges from 0.12 years
(mild stunting in the Philippines), to 0.91 years (moderate malnutrition in Brazil)
and 0.7 years (in Zimbabwe) for each z-score (one standard deviation from the
mean). The effect of malnutrition on learning productivity or achievement appears
to be even larger, ranging from 0.8 years of grade equivalent in Guatemala and
the Philippines for each z-score to 1.8 years for each z-score in severely malnour-
ished children. Delayed primary school entry may vary between two and four
months per z-score in the studies reviewed. 

Case Studies of Ghana and Pakistan

The previous subsections mention the progress in the methodology for estimating
costs associated with environmental health risks—that is, extending the analysis
to incorporate the malnutrition-mediated effects of WSH-related infections, as
well as estimating the longer-term costs of lower school performance and work
productivity from impaired cognitive development and learning capacity. In this
section, this adapted methodology is applied to two country case studies: Ghana
and Pakistan. These countries were chosen for two reasons: (a) because each
belongs to one of the two subregions that have the highest environmental health
burden of disease in children under five and (b) because in each country the
methodology estimating the effects of environmental factors had been applied
earlier, providing an opportunity to compare the “old” (excluding malnutrition)
and “new” (including malnutrition) estimates. 

In Ghana (see box 5.1)—a country of 22 million people—one in every nine
children dies before reaching age five. Under-five mortality in the rural areas is
118 per 1,000 live births as compared with 93 for the urban areas. The country
has an inadequate supply of piped water in terms of both population coverage
rates and quality of services. On average, access to improved sanitation is also very
low at 18 percent (World Bank 2006b), while in the largest cities about 30 percent
of the population has household latrines. About 95 percent of households use
solid fuels for cooking in Ghana (Ghana Statistical Service 2003). Results from
household surveys reveal that among children under five years of age, 10 percent

ESTIMATING THE ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH BURDEN AND COSTS AT THE COUNTRY LEVEL  65

BOX  5.1
Basic Indicators for Ghana and Pakistan

Ghana

Population: 22.1 million
Children under five years of age: 3.1 million
GDP: US$10.7 billion
Prevalence of malnutrition in children under five: 55 percenta
Percentage of population having access to an improved water source: 
75 percent
Percentage of population having access to improved sanitation: 18 percent
Energy from biomass products and waste (percentage of total): 69.1 percent
Under-five mortality (per 1,000 live births): 112
Acute respiratory infection prevalence in children under five: 10 percentb
Diarrhea prevalence in children under five: 17.9 percentb
Malaria incidence per 1,000 (2003): 169.81b

Pakistan

Population: 155.8 million
Children under five years of age: 19.0 million
GDP: US$110.7 billion
Prevalence of malnutrition in children under five: 70 percenta
Percentage of population having access to an improved water source: 
91 percent
Percentage of population having access to improved sanitation: 59 percent
Energy from biomass products and waste (percentage of total): 35.6 percent
Under-five mortality (per 1,000 live births): 99
Acute respiratory infection prevalence in children under five: 24 percentb
Diarrhea prevalence in children under five: 26 percentb
Malaria incidence per 1,000 (2003): 0.80b

Sources: Population figures for children under five are from UNICEF country data;  malaria
incidence figures are from RBM (2005); other information is from World Bank (2007h). 
a. Percentage of mildly, moderately, and severely underweight children under five years of age.
b. Two-week (14 days) prevalence.

were reported to have had symptoms of acute respiratory illness, and 18 percent
had diarrhea in the two weeks preceding the survey (Ghana Statistical Service
2003). Vectorborne or water-based diseases, such as malaria and schistosomiasis,
are rampant because of inadequate environmental management programs, although
some success has occurred in the increased use of bednets. Ghana is the only Sub-
Saharan country to have dramatically improved food security, according to its
international pledges (FAO 2006).

66 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

Pakistan is a country with 156 million inhabitants (see box 5.1). In Pakistan,
population growth is coupled with trends in industrialization and urbanization.
The under-five mortality rate for Pakistan is estimated to be 99 per 1,000 live
births. Both rural and urban areas suffer from underinvestment in water supply
and sanitation. Sewerage systems, where they exist, are usually poorly maintained
and often contribute to the cross-contamination of water systems and the ground-
water. In rural areas, more than 40 million people lack access to safe drinking
water, while 60 million lack adequate sanitation. Inadequate quantity and quality
of potable water and poor sanitation facilities and hygiene practices are associated
with a host of illnesses, such as diarrhea, typhoid, intestinal worms, and hepatitis.
About 70 percent of households use solid fuels for cooking in Pakistan (Federal
Bureau of Statistics 2005). Dehydration attributable to diarrhea is a major cause
of mortality among children in Pakistan. In 2001 to 2002, some 12 percent of
children under five were reported to have suffered from diarrhea in the previous
30 days (Krupnick, Larsen, and Strukova 2006). 

Results for Ghana and Pakistan

This part of the chapter presents and discusses the new estimates for the economic
costs attributed to environmental risk factors in Ghana and Pakistan. The first
subsection presents the results of the costs from environmental risk factors
(excluding malnutrition), alluding also to estimates provided in previous studies.
The next subsection presents the context and results for the total effects—including
malnutrition—of these environmental risk factors. The final subsection presents
estimates for the economic costs of poor school performance and lost work produc-
tivity that are attributed to impaired cognitive development and learning from
the infection-malnutrition links.1

The Burden of Environmental Risk Factors If No Change 
in Malnutrition

Earlier studies have reported the cost of environmental health effects in Ghana
(Larsen 2006) and the cost of environmental degradation in Pakistan (Krupnick,
Larsen, and Strukova 2006). In this study, the same methodology is applied to
recently published baseline data to estimate mortality from indoor air pollution
and inadequate water supply, sanitation, and hygiene. This report uses WHO
country estimates of cause-specific mortality for 2002, adjusted to reflect under-
five child mortality rates in 2005. Solid fuel use prevalence is also updated from
the Pakistan Social and Living Standards Measurement Survey 2004–05 (Federal
Bureau of Statistics 2005). 

Estimated environmentally attributable fractions of child mortality in Ghana
and Pakistan are presented in table 5.1. These fractions are estimated as follows.
The attributable fraction for acute lower respiratory infection (ALRI) is related

ESTIMATING THE ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH BURDEN AND COSTS AT THE COUNTRY LEVEL  67

TABLE  5.1
Environmentally Attributable Fractions of Child Mortality, Keeping
Malnutrition Unchanged

Disease

Pneumonia/ALRI
Diarrhea
Malaria

Ghana (%)

55.2
88.0
42.0a

Pakistan (%)

47.8
88.0
40.0

Sources: Compiled by World Bank team on the basis of Federal Bureau of Statistics 2005; Ghana
Statistical Service 2003; Prüss-Üstün and Corvalán 2006. 
a. In the case of Ghana, the subregional environmentally attributable fraction for malaria of 42 percent
may be an overestimate because of mosquito ecology, which demands that environmental manipu-
lation be supplemented by bednets and indoor residual spraying.

TABLE  5.2
Estimated Mortality in Under-Five Children from Environmental Risk Factors,
2005

Ghana

Pakistan

Disease

Pneumonia/ALRI
Diarrhea
Malaria
Total

Under-5

Child

Mortality

Mortality from 

Environmental Risk 
Factors (Excluding 

Malnutrition)

Under-5  

Child 

Mortality

Mortality from 

Environmental Risk 
Factors (Excluding 

Malnutrition)

11,800
9,900
22,600
75,800a

6,508
8,712
9,492
24,712

97,100
96,200
1,300
402,600a

46,435
84,656
520
131,611

Source: Compiled by World Bank team on the basis of WHO 2004.
a. Includes all under-five child mortality, not just mortality from ALRI, diarrhea, and malaria.

to indoor air pollution and is estimated from the share of households using solid
fuels and the relative risk of ALRI in children from such fuel use—that is, relative
risk equals 2.3—as reported by Desai, Mehta, and Smith (2004). About 95 percent
of households use solid fuels for cooking in Ghana (Ghana Statistical Service
2003), and 70 percent use such fuels in Pakistan (Federal Bureau of Statistics 2005).
The attributable fraction for diarrhea is related to WSH and is based on regional
estimates by WHO. The attributable fraction for malaria is related to water resource
management and is from Prüss-Üstün and Corvalán (2006). 

Under-five child mortality in 2005 was 112 and 99 per 1,000 live births in
Ghana and Pakistan, respectively (World Bank 2007h). Those figures imply about
76,000 annual deaths in Ghana and about 400,000 in Pakistan.2 Accordingly, the
mortality attributed to different diseases (cause-specific mortality) is estimated
from WHO (2004). The results show that when malnutrition is not fully accounted
for, environment-related mortality is estimated at about 25,000 children per year
in Ghana and 132,000 in Pakistan, or about one-third of all child mortality in
each country (table 5.2). 

68 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

The Burden of Environmental Risk Factors and Malnutrition

This subsection presents the revised estimates in a country context for assessing
the effect on mortality relating to environmental risk factors, such as poor WSH,
indoor air pollution, inadequate water resource management, and malnutrition.
First, the subsection presents child malnutrition status in the two countries to
provide a sense of the prevalence of stunting and underweight in children (see
table 5.3). Second, it examines the relationship between diarrheal infections and
malnutrition status and estimates the malnutrition rates in the absence of infections.
Third, the subsection estimates the impact of environmental factors—including
the effect of infections on malnutrition—on health outcomes in children under
five (mortality). Finally, a separate subsection addresses the effect of infection-
malnutrition links on cognition and learning, as well as the accompanying effects
on education and costs of lifetime income losses.

Malnutrition in Ghana and Pakistan. Malnutrition prevalence is high in many
developing countries. In Ghana, about 55 percent of children under the age of
five years were mildly, moderately, or severely underweight in 2003,3 which is
still 15 percentage points less than the average in Sub-Saharan Africa (Fishman
and others 2004). About 70 percent of children under five in Pakistan were
mildly, moderately, or severely underweight in 1991, with minimal change in
2001 to 2002.4

An important feature of malnutrition rates in developing countries such as
Ghana and Pakistan is that it tends to rise very quickly in the first stages of life
and then levels off or declines. More than 90 percent of the children in the Ghana
Demographic and Health Survey (Ghana Statistical Service 2003) were not under-
weight in their first three months of life; moderate and severe underweight was

TABLE  5. 3
Malnutrition Rates in Children under the Age of Five

Indicator

Underweight (weight-for-age)
Mild (−1 to −2 SD)
Moderate (−2 to −3 SD)
Severe (less than −3 SD)
Total (less than −1 SD)
Stunting (height-for-age) 
Mild (−1 to −2 SD)
Moderate (−2 to −3 SD)
Severe (less than −3 SD)
Total (less than −1 SD)

Malnutrition Rate (%)

Ghana 

33
17
5
55

28
19
11
58

Pakistan

29

27 (26)
14 (12)

70

22

20 (19)
30 (18)

72

Sources: Compiled by World Bank team on the basis of data from Ghana Statistical Service 2003;
National Institute of Population Studies 1992. Figures in parentheses are based on PIDE 2003.

ESTIMATING THE ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH BURDEN AND COSTS AT THE COUNTRY LEVEL  69

practically nonexistent in this age group. The prevalence of moderate and severe
underweight peaked at over 35 percent in children 10 to 13 months of age, however,
and then gradually declined to the age of five years. The prevalence of mild under-
weight reached about 40 percent in children age 18 to 21 months and then leveled
off to the age of five years. A similar evolution can be inferred from Pakistani data.
More than 97 percent of the children were not underweight in their first month
of life, but by 9 to 10 months of age, the prevalence of moderate and severe under-
weight rose rapidly to 40 percent, stabilizing to a mean of 45 percent for children
age 18 to 59 months. 

In global comparisons, too, children 1 to 3 months of age in Ghana and Pakistan
have similar weight-for-age scores (indicator for underweight) to the interna-
tional reference population, but the scores fall considerably below the international
reference during the first year of life (see figure 5.2). By the age of 10 to 15 months,
children from both countries are significantly underweight, with more than 
70 percent malnourished. 

Health effects of malnutrition. The malnutrition-attributable fractions for different
diseases are calculated for Ghana and Pakistan (see table 5.4) using estimates of
increased risk of cause-specific mortality and all-cause mortality in children under
five years of age with varying levels of malnutrition. The results indicate that, in
Ghana, 44 to 63 percent of under-five mortality from pneumonia-ALRI, diarrhea,
measles, malaria, and other causes is due to malnutrition. The corresponding attrib-
utable fractions for Pakistan are in the range of 50 to 68 percent because of higher
underweight malnutrition rates in Pakistan. In addition to these malnutrition-
related mortalities, Fishman and others (2004) include 100 percent of protein-energy
malnutrition mortality and morbidity and a share of mortality from perinatal
conditions (low birth weight) associated with mothers’ low pre-pregnancy body
mass index (less than 20 kilograms per square meter). About 16 percent of
infants had low birth weight (less than 2,500 grams) in Ghana in 2003, as did
about 19 percent of infants in Pakistan in the past decade (UNICEF 2005).

Infections and malnutrition. Household survey data from Ghana and Pakistan
provide some insights into the close links between diarrheal prevalence and under-
weight in children. In Ghana, the two-week diarrheal prevalence was 15 to 18 percent
in children under five years and 20 to 22 percent in children under three years,
according to the three most recent demographic and household surveys. This
diarrheal prevalence differs dramatically by degree of underweight in Ghanaian
children age 3 to 23 months (panel a of figure 5.3), with prevalence in severely
underweight children age 3 to 11 months reaching 3.5 times higher than that in
children who are not underweight. A similar pattern, although with less drastic
differences across malnutrition categories, exists in Pakistan. With a two-week
diarrheal prevalence of 15 percent in children under five years, the prevalence in

70 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

FIGURE  5.2
Weight-for-Age Distribution of Children in Ghana and Pakistan

a. Ghana 

−4.5

−3.5

−2.5
standard deviation from the mean weight of

−1.5

1.5

0

2.5

3.5

4.5

the international reference population
age 0−3 months

age 10−15 months

b. Pakistan 

−5.5

−4.5

−3.5

−2.5

−1.5

0

1.5

2.5

3.5

4.5

5.5

standard deviation from the mean weight of

the international reference population
age 0−3 months

age 10−15 months

Sources: Compiled by World Bank team on the basis of data from Ghana Statistical Service 2003;
National Institute of Population Studies 1992. 

TABLE  5.4
Malnutrition-Attributable Fractions of Child Mortality

Cause of death

Ghana (%)

Pakistan (%)

Pneumonia-ALRI
Diarrhea
Malaria
Measles
Protein-energy malnutrition 
Other causes (excluding perinatal conditions)

54.1
63.2
57.6
43.8
100.0
55.8

Source: Compiled by World Bank team on the basis of Fishman and others 2004. 

60.1
67.8
63.1
50.5
100.0
61.5

ESTIMATING THE ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH BURDEN AND COSTS AT THE COUNTRY LEVEL  71

FIGURE  5. 3
Two-Week Diarrheal Prevalence Rate by Age and Underweight Status in
Ghana and Pakistan

n
e
r
d
l
i

h
c
 
f
o
 
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
p

a
e
h
r
r
a
i
d
 
h
t
i
w

n
e
r
d
l
i

h
c
 
f
o
 
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
p

a
e
h
r
r
a
i
d
 
h
t
i
w

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

a. Ghana

age 3−11 months

age 12−23 months

not underweight
moderately underweight

mildly underweight
severely underweight

b. Pakistan

age 4−11
months

age 12−23
months

age 24−35
months

age 36−47
months

age 48−59

months

not underweight
moderately underweight

mildly underweight
severely underweight

Source: Compiled by World Bank team on the basis of data from Ghana Statistical Service 2003;
National Institute of Population Studies 1992. 

severely underweight children is 50 percent higher than in children who are not
underweight (panel b of figure 5.3). 

Because these data are cross-sectional (both indicators measured at the same
point in time), no causal relationship between underweight and diarrheal preva-
lence can be determined. However, the pattern is consistent with research findings
in other countries that show that diarrheal infections lead to weight gain retar-
dation in children under five years. This research literature finds that the weight
gain retardation often is in the range of 20 to 50 percent. Diarrheal infections are

72 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

most frequent during ages 6 to 11 months and 12 to 23 months, so weight gain
retardation from diarrheal infections can be expected to be greatest in this period;
in Ghana and Pakistan, it is particularly great up to the age of 12 months, during
which underweight malnutrition increases rapidly. 

Malnutrition in the absence of infections: the counterfactual. Results from the
research literature are used to estimate the retarding effect that diarrheal infections
have on weight gain. This information sheds light on an important question: what
would be the counterfactual level of malnutrition in children who were not exposed
to diarrheal infections? 

Current underweight malnutrition rates in children under five years from the
2003 demographic and health survey in Ghana (Ghana Statistical Service 2003)
and the 1991 survey in Pakistan (National Institute of Population Studies 1992),
as well as the estimated malnutrition rates in the absence of diarrheal infections
that retard weight gain are presented in figure 5.4. Basically, the figures for both
Ghana and Pakistan starkly show that in the absence of diarrheal infections, chil-
dren under five years in both countries would climb up the nutritional status
ladder—with practically no severely underweight children in either country and
with the number of moderately underweight also substantially reduced.5

Calculating the burden of environmental risk factors, including malnutrition-
mediated effects. Information from the previous subsections provides the necessary
building blocks for estimating the effects of environmental health risk factors. The
counterfactual population exposure rates estimated are used to compare the current
world with a world without environmental risk factors in order to compute the
environmental health risk—that is, the attributable fraction (table 5.5). Appendix D
(equation D.2) is used. In making these estimates, the study takes a conservative
approach. In fact, the parameters on which attributable fractions are based are
likely to be affected by omitted variable bias (see appendix E). To deal with this
problem, the study attempted to correct such parameters by using formulas from
econometrics literature. The methodology is graphically represented in figure 5.5.
The indirect effect of environmental health risks is equivalent to the difference in
mortality between the malnutrition-attributable fractions of different diseases
(right bar) and the consequences of malnutrition in the absence of diarrheal infec-
tions (center bar). Notice that the joint direct and indirect effects of environmental
health risks (left bar) are not necessarily equal to the sum of the two effects computed
separately. This problem is common in the presence of risk factors that interact
with each other (see box 5.2). Figure 5.5 shows that additional pneumonia-ALRI,
diarrhea, malaria, measles, protein-energy malnutrition, and other deaths repre-
sented in the light-gray area have not been accounted for previously.

The results (shown in table 5.5) demonstrate that when both direct and indi-
rect effects from diarrheal infections on malnutrition are included, the mortality

ESTIMATING THE ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH BURDEN AND COSTS AT THE COUNTRY LEVEL  73

FIGURE  5.4
Underweight Malnutrition Rates in Children with and without Diarrheal
Infections in Ghana and Pakistan

a. Ghana

)

%

(
 
e
t
a
r
 
n
o
i
t
i
r
t
u
n
l
a
m
 
t
h
g
i
e
w
r
e
d
n
u

)

%

(
 
e
t
a
r
 
n
o
i
t
i
r
t
u
n
l
a
m
 
t
h
g
i
e
w
r
e
d
n
u

120

100

80

60

40

20

0

120

100

80

60

40

20

0

5

17

33

45

0

2

30

68

with infections

without infections

severe

moderate

mild

not underweight

b. Pakistan

14

27

30

30

0

8

42

50

with infections

without infections

severe

moderate

mild

not underweight

Sources: Compiled by World Bank team on the basis of data from Ghana Statistical Service 2003;
National Institute of Population Studies 1992. 

74 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

TABLE  5.5
Environmentally Attributable Fractions and Child Mortality 
with Malnutrition-Mediated Effects

Ghana

Pakistan

Disease

Pneumonia-ALRI
Diarrhea
Malaria
Measles
Protein-energy malnutrition
Other causes (excluding 
perinatal conditions)
Total

Revised Effects

(Number of

Deaths)

Attributable
Fraction (%)

Revised Effects

(Number of Attributable

Deaths)

Fraction (%)

7,375
9,009
14,035
58
400

4,826
35,702

62.5
91.0
62.1
28.8
40.0

38.3
47.1

58,260
88,504
826
8,316
1,359

30,164
187,429

60.0
92.0
63.5
30.8
45.3

39.9
46.6

Source: Compiled by World Bank team.

FIGURE  5.5
Calculating Revised Estimates (Indirect and Direct Effects)

indirect effect

of environmental

health risks

direct effect

of environmental

health risks

disease or illness

caused by

environmental risks

consequences
of malnutrition

(actual)

consequences
of malnutrition
(counterfactual)

disease or illness

caused by malnutrition

Source: Compiled by World Bank team.

from environmental factors is estimated at 36,000 in Ghana and 187,000 in Pakistan
annually, or about 47 percent of all child mortality in both countries. 

Translating those deaths into economic costs will help quantify the magnitude
of environmental health risks in real terms. In this analysis, the human capital
approach (a conservative approach) is used to value this mortality. For Ghana,
the earlier estimates of costs of environmental factors add up to  370 million
(US$412 million), which is equivalent to 3.8 percent of the country’s GDP.6

/C

ESTIMATING THE ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH BURDEN AND COSTS AT THE COUNTRY LEVEL  75

BOX  5.2
Attributable Fractions and Burden of Disease When Multiple
Risk Factors Are Present
The concept of an attributable fraction (AF) is the essential building block of
the burden of disease methodology. An AF tells what proportion of a disease
is caused by any given risk factor or combination of risk factors. To take into
account the total effects of environmental risks on child health—including
those effects mediated through malnutrition—one needs to allow for the
simultaneous presence of multiple risk factors. Whether one or more risk
factors are being controlled should be clearly stated when one calculates AFs. 

Tables 5.1, 5.4, and 5.5 present the fraction of deaths that are in turn

attributed to (a) environmental health risks alone (table 5.1), (b) malnutrition
alone (table 5.4), and (c) all relevant environmental health risks, including
their effect through malnutrition (table 5.5). This calculation is made for
specific causes of death (for example, ALRI, diarrhea, malaria, measles, and
protein-energy malnutrition). AFs in tables 5.1 and 5.4 measure the cases of
death from a disease that would be eliminated by removing a risk factor from
the population while leaving the exposure to other risk factors unchanged. 
Take Ghana as an example. The fraction of ALRI attributable to indoor air

pollution is 55.2 percent (table 5.1), and the fraction of ALRI attributable to
malnutrition is 54.1 percent (table 5.4). One could also compute the fraction of
a disease that could be avoided if one eliminated both risk factors. In the case
of Ghana, eliminating both indoor air pollution and malnutrition would reduce
ALRI by nearly 80 percent. Notice that the sum of AFs calculated for individual
risk factors can be more than 100 percent and can differ considerably from the
AF calculated for the risk factors jointly. This result is common, as shown in
Chatterjee and Hartge (2003). 

This study controls for risk factors jointly (for example, environmental

health risks and malnutrition) but allows malnutrition to be reduced only to
the level that would be present without diarrheal infections. It answers this
question: by how much would a disease (for example, ALRI) be reduced if
there were no environmental health risk (for example, indoor air pollution)
and if the burden of ALRIs that was caused by lack of water, sanitation, and
hygiene and was not related to indoor air pollution were avoided? A problem
one faces is the difficulty in saying what fraction of the resulting AF is
attributable to each risk factor.

The “new” (including malnutrition) costs amount to  540 million (or US$595
million), which is equivalent to 5.6 percent of Ghana’s GDP—a 47 percent increase
over previous estimates.7 In Pakistan, the earlier estimated costs of environmental
factors amount to PRs 195 billion (US$3.2 billion), which is equivalent to 
2.9 percent of GDP. The “new” (including malnutrition) costs raise that figure to
4.1 percent of the country’s GDP—a 41 percent increase over previous estimates.

/C

76 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

The lower cost in Pakistan results from its lower child mortality rate and its lower
birth rate, which gives a lower share of children under five in the total population.

Impact on Education: Affecting School Performance and 
Future Work Productivity

Chapter 2 discussed another indirect effect of the link between repeated infections
in early childhood and malnutrition: the impairment of cognitive development,
resulting in poor school performance and, subsequently, in a loss of lifetime earn-
ings. Many studies have documented the effect of early childhood malnutrition
on cognitive function, school enrollment, grade repetition, school dropout rates,
grade attainment, and test scores among school-age children (see appendix B).
The majority of these studies use stunting (low height for age) as a measure of
malnutrition, which is considered an indicator of chronic nutritional deficit. Here,
for the first time, this study attempts to estimate the loss in lifetime earnings from
stunting in Ghana and Pakistan and the share of this loss that could be avoided
if children were not exposed to repeated diarrheal infections in early childhood.
Effects of malnutrition on education outcomes applied to Ghana and Pakistan
for estimation of the cost of malnutrition are presented in table 5.6, stratified
by height-for-age deficit. The magnitude of these effects is based on the review
of longitudinal studies. Effects analyzed include those on (a) grade attainment,
(b) school achievement (learning productivity) in terms of grade equivalents,
(c) delayed primary school enrollment, and (d) grade repetition. The latter two
effects result in delayed labor-force entry. 

Psacharopoulos and Patrinos (2004) provide a review of studies of returns to
investment in education. Private returns are estimated on the basis of private cost
of schooling and lifetime income. Social returns include social cost of providing

TABLE  5.6
Effects of Malnutrition on Education 

Effects of Stunting

Loss in grade attainment (school years)
Loss in school achievement (grade equivalents)
Total grade equivalent losses 
(grade attainment and achievement)
Delayed enrollment (years)
Grade repetition (percentage of students 
with one repetition)
Delayed labor-force entry (years) caused by 
delayed enrollment and grade repetition

Height-for-age z-Score 

−3 to −2

Lower than –3

1.5
3.6

5.10
1.2

9

−1 to −2

0.50
0.8

1.30
0.4

1.0
1.6

2.60
0.8

2

5

0.42

0.85

1.29

Sources: Compiled by World Bank team on the basis of review of longitudinal studies. For more details
see appendix B.
Note: Stunting is defined as height-for-age z-score lower than −1.

ESTIMATING THE ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH BURDEN AND COSTS AT THE COUNTRY LEVEL  77

schooling, which is most often significantly higher than private cost because of
subsidized provision of education. Social returns are therefore lower than private
returns to investment in education.8

Returns to one additional year of schooling are calculated estimates from
Psacharopoulos and Patrinos (2004). On average, the return to one additional
year of schooling is 9.7 percent. The rate of return is 11.7 percent in Sub-Saharan
Africa and 9.9 percent in Asia. These rates of return are applied to Ghana and
Pakistan, respectively, to estimate the cost of impacts of malnutrition on educa-
tion outcomes. 

To estimate the lifetime income for children in Ghana and Pakistan, the analysis
considered existing income differentials between children in different nutritional
status (from not malnourished to severely malnourished). This differentiation is
important because malnourished children live disproportionately in poorer house-
holds; given that poverty is correlated with lower socioeconomic status, such as
lower educational attainment of parents, it is, in turn, correlated with lower educa-
tional attainment of their children. Malnourished children are more likely to come
from lower-income households than are children who are not malnourished.
Therefore, the income potential of malnourished children is affected not only by
the action of malnutrition on educational performance but also by the socioeco-
nomic status of the household they grew up in (see appendix D for methodology
on calculations).9

About 630,000 children are born annually in Ghana.10 Thirty-five percent of
these children are moderately or severely stunted by the time they reach one to
two years of age, and an additional 30 percent are mildly stunted (height-for-age
z-score –1 to –2). On the basis of these prevalence rates, the effect of stunting on
educational outcomes, income losses from loss in education, and a labor-force
participation rate of 75 percent, the annual cost of stunting that is attributable to
early childhood diarrheal infections is estimated to be about 3.8 percent of GDP. 
About 3.66 million children are born annually in Pakistan.11 According to the
Pakistan National Nutrition Survey 2001–2002 (PIDE 2003), prevalence of moderate
and severe stunting in children under five years was 19 and 18 percent, respectively.
No prevalence rate is reported for mild stunting. A rate of 25 percent is therefore
assumed, in accordance with cross-country comparison. On the basis of these preva-
lence rates, the effect of stunting on educational outcomes, income losses from
educational losses, and a labor-force participation rate of 60 percent, the annual
cost of stunting attributable to early childhood diarrheal infections is estimated to
be about 4.7 percent of GDP (see appendix D for methodology on calculations).

Conclusion

Malnutrition-mediated effects of environmental risk factors are estimated to have
a considerable social and economic burden in Ghana and Pakistan (see figure 5.6

78 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

FIGURE  5.6
Final Results of Ghana and Pakistan Case Studies

9.3

8.8

5.6

4.1

3.8

2.9

P
D
G
 
f
o
 
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
p

10.0

9.0

8.0

7.0

6.0

5.0

4.0

3.0

2.0

1.0

0.0

direct effect only

direct effect + indirect
(malnutrition-mediated)

direct + indirect +

education

effect

Ghana

Pakistan

Source: Compiled by World Bank team.

/C

and table 5.7). For Ghana, the cost of total health effects (including malnutrition)
amounts to  537 million (US$595 million). When longer-term effects on educa-
tion and income are included, this figure may reach as high as  894 million (US$1
billion)—equivalent to 9.3 percent of GDP. Similarly, for Pakistan, the cost of total
health effects from environmental risk factors amounts to PRs 278 billion (US$4.6
billion). And with longer-term effects on education and income, this figure may
reach as high as PRs 595 billion (US$9.9 billion), or equivalent to 8.8 percent of
the country’s GDP. Put in perspective, the costs of these total effects are nearly
three times higher than the cost of the effect of environmental risk factors only
(excluding malnutrition).

/C

The issue of temporality is important to recognize while analyzing these results.
These figures indicate that the health benefits from reducing environmental risks
are high even if such benefits will accrue far into the future. With the focus on
children under five years of age, environmental health interventions implemented
today to avoid deaths and illness and to increase education attainment will generate
returns only a few years from now. Conventional decision making in developing
countries often lacks this longer-term perspective when policy-makers choose
appropriate interventions to benefit child health. By providing a better under-
standing of the links between environmental risks (the causes) and child health

ESTIMATING THE ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH BURDEN AND COSTS AT THE COUNTRY LEVEL  79

TABLE  5.7
Annual Cost of Direct and Indirect Impact of Environmental Risk Factors in
2005

Ghana

Pakistan

Annual
Deaths

Cost 
(US$ 
( million) million)

Cost

Cost 
(% of 
GDP)

Annual 
Deaths

Cost 
Cost 
(PRs 
(US$ 
billion) million)

Cost 
(% of 
GDP)

412

24,712

Estimation excluding malnutrition-mediated effects
Mortality 
effects
3.84
Estimation including malnutrition-mediated effects
Mortality 
effects
Education 
effects
Total 
effects

35,702

595

5.55

407

3.79

904

1,002

9.34

371

537

367

131,611

195

3,250

2.90

187,429

278

4,633

4.13

317

5,281

4.71

595

9,914

8.84

Source: Compiled by World Bank team.
Note: ⫽ Ghanaian new cedi.

(the effect), as well as the timing of these effects, this study hopes to influence the
way that governments choose between short-term and long-term interventions. 
Given the importance of time in these results, the methodology relating to
discounting becomes very relevant. In this report, the calculations used a 3 percent
discount rate, which is consistent with the rate used in WHO burden of disease
calculations. The purpose of discounting is to recognize a general preference for
benefits that happen earlier. Different discount rates are used in different situa-
tions. When one looks at public sector decisions, a social discount rate is preferred
to a private one (that is, the rate a commercial bank would apply on a loan). Pearce
and Ulph (1999) report an estimated social rate of return on investments for
industrial countries between 2 and 4 percent. In appendix D, a sensitivity analysis
applied to Ghana varies the discount rate from 3 percent to 5 percent (a more
conservative discount rate) to show how the results would vary. In the case of
Ghana, a 5 percent discount rate would reduce the total cost estimates from
9.2 percent to 4.6 percent of GDP, and in Pakistan it would reduce them from
8.6 percent to 4.3 percent of GDP. The considerable difference is explained by the
fact that a large part of the benefits from interventions (for example, higher
incomes owing to education) will happen several years from now. Box 5.3 provides
guidelines for policy-makers in interpreting the results. 

Next Steps

For policy-makers to prioritize among various environmental health interven-
tions, further analyses and studies are required to guide their decisions along two

80 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

BOX  5. 3
How Policy-makers Should Interpret These Results
Using Ghana and Pakistan as examples, this study estimates the annual
costs associated with environmental risks for children under five years of
age. These estimations, carried out at a national level, provide a sense of the
magnitude of these costs (about 9 percent of a country’s GDP) to policy-
makers and highlight the urgent need to position environmental health at
the center of all child survival strategies. These figures help carry the
message that environmental risks to child health are considerable and that
such risks impose a significant economic burden.

That being said, these figures do not help policy-makers prioritize (in

terms of costs and capacity to implement) among the various types of
environmental health interventions that are available to them. For example, if
policy-makers in Pakistan choose to address diarrhea in children, should they
invest in sanitation, in hygiene promotion, in increased water availability, or in
some combination of these interventions? These choices, as well as the
underlying framework that helps determine their priority, are important
because they help policy-makers translate the environmental health “agenda”
into concrete programs and actions addressing environmental health.

major paths: one relating to costs and benefits of specific interventions, which has
implications for budgetary and resource allocation decisions, and the second
relating to institutional capacity, which helps ascertain the required roles and
responsibilities of various agencies in implementing these interventions. These
analyses and studies need to be carried out separately for specific countries because
the priorities may differ according to the country’s current level of development,
its population health profile and the relative exposures to different disease, and
its capacity to implement specific interventions. 

In terms of economic approaches, two main methods are typically used: cost-
effectiveness analysis and cost-benefit analysis. Cost-effectiveness analysis allows
researchers to compare policy options that provide outcomes measurable with a
common metric (for example, per child life saved). An example would be an assess-
ment of how costs of providing latrines to a village compare with costs of providing
access to safe drinking water per child life saved. Cost-benefit analysis, in contrast,
can be applied to compare options that do not necessarily provide outcomes meas-
ured using the same metric by reducing the benefits of each option to a common
numeraire (that is, by assigning a monetary value for the various policy options). 
The choice of method used to carry out an economic analysis at a country
level must be made after examining the availability of relevant data. For Ghana
and Pakistan, for example, this choice means looking at specific environmental
risks, identifying possible interventions that would address them, and then assessing

ESTIMATING THE ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH BURDEN AND COSTS AT THE COUNTRY LEVEL  81

how much data on the costs and benefits of these interventions are available. In
other country-level studies, cost-benefit analyses have helped governments prior-
itize among available interventions. In Peru, for example, the World Bank’s country
environmental analysis reported that drinking-water disinfection and hand-
washing programs had the highest cost-benefit ratio for addressing water- and
sanitation-related risks, while shifting households from unimproved to improved
cookstoves was the best recommendation for interventions to address indoor air
pollution (World Bank 2007g).

Policy-makers in developing countries also need to choose programs to address
environmental risks in accordance with their country’s institutional capacity to
implement these interventions. The next chapter provides some discussion of the
generic roles that national and local governments can play in delivering and
managing environmental health interventions. A more in-depth country-level
institutional analysis is required about what coordination mechanisms exist
between ministries and how mandates and budgets are assigned. Such an insti-
tutional analysis would provide guidance on how to better define the roles and
responsibilities of different agencies related to addressing public environmental
health services and how to correct incentive structures to raise the profile of the
environmental health agenda.

Key Messages

■ When malnutrition-mediated health effects attributed to environmental risk
factors are included, the total costs of the environmental health burden are at
least 40 percent higher for both Ghana and Pakistan. When longer-term effects
of malnutrition (partly attributed to environment-related infections) on educa-
tion and income are considered, the estimated annual cost may be as high as
9 percent of a country’s GDP. This social and economic burden is not trivial,
and it highlights the urgent need for policy-makers to position environmental
health at the center of all child survival strategies. 

■ Next steps to translate these messages into concrete actions include carrying out
cost-effectiveness and cost-benefit analyses at a country level to guide decision-
makers in prioritizing among the various available interventions. An in-depth
country-level institutional analysis would also be needed to assess the capacity
of the country to implement these interventions.

Notes

1 Details on the steps in the methodology to calculate these costs for Ghana can be found

in appendix D.

2 These estimates of mortality are based on crude birth rates and population in 2005.

82 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

3 The Ghana Demographic and Health Survey 2003 (Ghana Statistical Service 2003) does
not provide figures for mild underweight (–1 to –2 standard deviation). This figure was
therefore calculated from the survey’s household data.

4 Underweight malnutrition rates in Pakistan were practically the same in 1991 (National
Institute of Population Studies 1992) and 2001 to 2002 (PIDE 2003). The original survey
data from the nutrition survey (PIDE 2003) were not readily available for this study, so data
from the Pakistan Demographic and Health Survey 1990/91 (National Institute of
Population Studies 1992) were used instead. The survey for 2006 was being compiled at
the time of this study. The 2006 survey may show malnutrition rates and diarrheal disease
that differ from some of the patterns found in the earlier survey.

5 This finding is based on the fact that 35 percent of children’s weight deficit, relative to the
international reference population, is from infections, which is well within the range found
in research studies.

6 Ghanaian currency is denominated in new cedi (

). The Ghanaian new cedi—U.S. dollar

/C

exchange rate is from 2007 (US$1 =  9,375).

/C

7 A working life from 15 to 65 years is applied. Annual income is approximated by GDP per

capita. Income is discounted at 3 percent. Real income growth is 2 percent per year.

8 Social returns do not (in almost all studies) include possible external benefits of education.
9 Income is discounted at a social rate of time preference of 3 percent per year. Social cost
of providing a year of schooling is assumed to be 25 percent to 50 percent of average
annual income per person. 

10 By the time the children turn five years old, 11 percent of them will have died. Under-
five child mortality rate in Ghana is 112 per 1,000 live births in 2005 according to World
Bank (2007h). 

11 By the time the children turn five years old, 10 percent of them will have died. Under-five
child mortality rate in Pakistan is 99 per 1,000 live births in 2005 according to World
Bank (2007h). 

P A R T  

I

I

I

Experiences

C H A P T E R   6

Approaches to Environmental

Health

THE PRECEDING CHAPTERS PROVIDE EVIDENCE of the importance
of environmental health interventions in addressing child health. Chapter 2
explained the science and the epidemiological underpinnings of the malnutrition-
infection cycle and its implications for a child’s health both in utero and in early
childhood. Chapter 3 illustrated how environmental health interventions can
appropriately complement and supplement other health and environmental
programs that address child health. Chapter 4 then went on to demonstrate the
scale of the environmental health burden in children under five and how that
burden is especially important in some subregions with high levels of malnutri-
tion and poor environmental conditions. Using two country examples—Ghana
and Pakistan—chapter 5 then analyzed the consequent economic burden that
these environmental health risks pose.

Clearly, the issue of environmental health is critical for child health—with the
“why,” “to what extent,” and “where” explained in earlier chapters. What remains
is the “how”: how can these environmental health issues be addressed success-
fully in developing countries? This chapter begins with a historical review of
environmental health, outlining the trends in the evolution of environmental
health functions in developed countries and highlighting how circumstances have
led to the relative neglect of environmental health in the development agenda.
The chapter provides illustrative examples of how different developing countries

85

86 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

have incorporated environmental health activities within other health, nutrition,
and infrastructure programs. Identifying some common elements from these
examples, the chapter then discusses—through an institutional lens—the roles
that national and local governments can play in delivering and managing envi-
ronmental health interventions.

History of Environmental Health

Environmental health is among the earliest public health activities on record.
Through the ages, today’s developed countries have invested in environmental
health interventions, focusing on sanitation, cleanliness, and hygiene. The history
of environmental health can be loosely divided into four generations—with shifts
in the nature and focus of interventions. Looking at the evolution of environ-
mental health functions over the past few centuries helps to understand the context
behind today’s environmental health agenda in developing countries.

First Generation: Origins of “Miasma” Theory

In Classical Greece, the source of disease was attributed to bad air or “miasmatic
odors,” and interventions sought to fight disease through cleanliness and hygiene
(Rosen 1958). Subsequently, as the Roman Empire conquered the Mediterranean
world, it incorporated the ideas of cleanliness and hygiene into infrastructure
projects, which included the great sewerage system (the cloaca maxima), baths,
fresh water supplies, health facilities, suitable latrines, proper ventilation, and the
organization of the health sector (Rosen 1958). 

For the English sanitary reformers of the mid-19th century, miasma continued
to prevail in explanations of disease transmission. In 1854, however, John Snow
traced an outbreak of cholera in London to a common drinking-water source,
refuting the miasma hypothesis. The 1871 Report of the Royal Sanitary Commission
listed 11 essential health services, mostly environmental in nature, that covered
access to improved water and sanitation, provision of a sewerage system, health-
iness of dwellings, and inspection of food (Kotchian 1997; WHO 2007e).

Second Generation: Sanitation, Vaccinations, 
Multisectoral Interventions

Refuting the dominant theory of miasma, Louis Pasteur, by the late 19th century,
had developed the germ theory that proposes that microorganisms are the cause
of many diseases. This theory paved the way for more targeted and cost-efficient
environmental and public health interventions, such as chlorination of water
supplies, pasteurization of milk (see box 6.1), vaccinations, improvements in
food safety and vector control, and introduction of a more effective sewerage
system (Berg 2005). Many of the newly adopted health protection policies were

APPROACHES TO ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH  87

BOX  6.1
Combating Disease through Improved Milk
In the early 20th century, one avenue of attack on preventable deaths of
children was through improvements in milk. In New York, cross-sectoral
collaboration between different government and nongovernmental agencies
began as they worked together to combat disease. Nurses visited mothers
of newborn babies and promoted hygiene and breastfeeding of babies
(Moser Jones 2005). Organized milk stations were set up to provide clean
and preheated milk to inner-city inhabitants. Inspectors began to scrutinize
milk production facilities, farms, and associated workers to ensure hygienic
conditions for milk (Moser Jones 2005). Railway companies were advised to
have their milk cars properly refrigerated. The city authority began to
supervise the distribution and sale of milk. 

The New York City Health Department took the lead in coordinating the
efforts of its mandate to secure a safe and hygienic food chain, from farm
to child. In many cases, it worked closely with the courts to enforce
regulations. Today, different mandates in the legal framework perform the
same task in the different stages of the production process (Rosen 1958).

based on field evidence and the result of multisectoral collaboration. After local
health protection activities had proved successful and enough local level expe-
rience had been accumulated, the state played a key role in scaling up the
interventions (Rosen 1958). 

Third Generation: Hands-on Scaling Up

In the beginning of the 20th century, much of environmental health work focused
on providing rural sanitation (Berg 2005). This period was characterized by a
community-based approach in which public health nurses made visits to homes
and then informed sanitarians, who would address issues related to food safety,
garbage collection, sanitation, vector control, and access to drinking water (Berg
2005). In the United States, the result was the most rapid reduction in morbidity
and mortality (especially among children) in history (Berg 2005; Cutler and Miller
2005). With time, scientific knowledge evolved, containment measures became more
sophisticated, and some infectious disease outbreaks were gradually brought under
control with improved sanitation and the discovery of new vaccines (WHO 2007e). 

Fourth Generation: The Invisible Regulator

By the middle of the 20th century, the institutional framework that regulates envi-
ronmental health issues had become well established in the developed world (Berg
2005). Mandates and responsibilities for the different agencies involved in envi-
ronmental health had been established. With dramatic improvements in

88 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

environmental health conditions after World War II, the work of sanitarians
evolved from more visible hands-on type of work to less visible regulation-based
functions as health inspectors (Berg 2005). 

Agenda Falling through the Cracks 

The middle of the 20th century saw a rise in ecological awareness in the devel-
oped world, heralded by the publication and widespread reading of Rachel Carson’s
(1962) Silent Spring and the subsequent occurrence of numerous industrially
related public health outbreaks. Growing concern about environmental exposures
to industrial emissions led to the passage of numerous environmental laws and
the creation of the independent environmental agencies. Increased emphasis on
environmental laws and compliance ensued, and environmental health staff
members were moved into these new environmental agencies. Over time, these
staff members identified more with environmentalists, often forgetting their public
health roots as they morphed into their new roles relating to environmental regu-
lation (Kotchian 1997). 

Their counterparts in state-level health agencies—epidemiologists and other
health personnel—also began to lose their public health roles as budgets and
agendas began to emphasize treatment over prevention. With a growing atten-
tion to health care delivery and hospital regulation, public health programs lost
visibility and influence in the agenda of state health agencies (Kotchian 1997). 
Decades later, the same pattern has been followed in developing countries. At
one end is a growing environmental movement with the creation of ministries
of environment and accompanying policies and regulations, while at the other
end are health ministries and state health departments engaged in strengthening
health systems and scaling up health sector programs that focus mainly on patient
care. Environmental and infrastructure investments are not usually considered
to be key determinants of human health by governments and health ministries—
the latter tend to think of health investments in terms of number of hospital
beds and doctors per person (Lvovsky 2001). In the process, the environmental
health agenda has fallen between the cracks. It has become an institutional
orphan as it is increasingly neglected in the programs of both the health and
environment ministries. 

Numerous other factors compound this relative neglect of the environmental
health agenda in developing countries. High-level political commitment is a crit-
ical issue that is often lacking or, if it exists, does not get translated into effective
policy discussions and actions. Additionally, both donor agencies and govern-
ment investments work in isolated silos where investments in agriculture, nutrition,
infrastructure, education, the environment, and health are often not well linked.
Providing water and sanitation in urban areas, for example, has never enjoyed

APPROACHES TO ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH  89

high priority for donors (Satterthwaite 2007), and funding for child health programs
often includes only actions that lie within the health systems framework of the
country. Country financing is usually allocated by sectors or ministries, so unless
one sector takes the lead, no large-scale action can follow (Shekar and others
2006). Part of the problem stems from the fact that health ministries tend to focus
on interventions in the health care system itself, rather than on primary preven-
tion of environmental risks through infrastructural and behavioral interventions.
Institutional coordination at both the national and local levels is often weak.
At the national level, poor intersectoral coordination across ministries means that
environmental health issues—which are inherently cross-sectoral in nature—are
not sufficiently addressed, and efforts remain ad hoc and often uncoordinated.
Many of the environmental health interventions important for child health should
be carried out at both the household and the community levels. In many devel-
oping countries, local government authorities—who are the best positioned to
deliver environmental services and proper hygiene awareness—fall short in their
efforts because of inadequate funding, weak revenue bases, and lack of staff
members with expertise in environmental health. Local governments are also
impoverished, powerless, and suffering from weak management capacity. In part,
this state can be explained by the colonial legacy of imported codes and regula-
tions for planning, land-use management, and buildings that were applied only
to areas of the colonial city inhabited by “nonnatives.” Also, however, the inade-
quacies of service provision can be attributed to a very rapid growth experienced
around the time of independence (Satterthwaite 2007). 

Finally, in many developing countries, the crumbling or inadequate infrastruc-
ture, underfinancing, and lack of personnel have eroded health systems even as the
burden of disease has increased. Governments in developing countries find imple-
menting and rehabilitating water infrastructure without donor support difficult.
For example, in Central Asia, government budgets for operation and maintenance
dropped from US$60 per hectare to less than US$8 per hectare. The result is that
infrastructure is rapidly deteriorating (World Water Forum 2006). In the case of
sanitation, more work needs to be done because 2.6 billion people lack adequate
sanitation. Rapid urbanization and uncontrolled growth of urban slums are now
creating a double environmental health burden for the urban poor. Poor urban
people are exposed to health risks associated with dirty cooking fuels, traditional
stoves, crowding, and poor access to water and sanitation (Satterthwaite 2007).

This neglect of environmental health within the national and local agendas of
developing countries is critical—especially because the major environmental health
concerns (poor water and sanitation access, inappropriate hygienic practices, lack
of vector control, and continued indoor air pollution) are the same ones that devel-
oped countries faced about a century ago (Rosen 1958). Whatever the root causes
for the poor environmental conditions and neglect of the environmental health

90 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

arm of the primary prevention agenda by the health sector, the current reality in
developing countries demands a revitalized approach to implementing environ-
mental health interventions, given its importance for child survival. 

Many governments in developing countries have increasingly begun to recog-
nize the importance of environmental health in child survival, poverty reduction,
and economic growth, and they are beginning to incorporate environmental health
activities into existing integrated child development and nutrition programs.
Additionally, successful community-level initiatives, such as the Total Sanitation
Campaign in Bangladesh, are beginning to take root and to spread to other coun-
tries and regions (WSP 2005). In the following section, this chapter provides an
illustrative list of different projects that have either recognized the need or incor-
porated environmental health into current policies, programs, and projects, such
as child survival, nutrition, and water and sanitation. 

Environmental Health Experiences in
Developing Countries

Developing countries themselves vary considerably in terms of institutional
capacity, political will, and socioeconomic development. Environmental health
interventions therefore need to be customized to the specific enabling environ-
ment in a developing country. Recognizing these differences, rather than providing
specific recommendations, this section presents examples of how some devel-
oping countries are beginning to mainstream environmental health components
and objectives within existing child survival programs, nutrition initiatives, and
infrastructure projects (water and sanitation, rural energy). As countries develop
and their institutional capacity strengthens, they move toward more truly multi-
sectoral programs that seek to address environmental health. 

Integrated Child Survival Programs

In developing countries, several child survival strategies, such as immunization
campaigns and improved case management of specific diseases, have proven to
be effective. Nevertheless, accumulating evidence has suggested that child health
programs need to move beyond addressing single diseases to addressing the overall
health and well-being of the child. In response, during the mid-1990s, the World
Health Organization (WHO), in collaboration with the United Nations Children’s
Fund (UNICEF) and many other agencies, institutions, and individuals, devel-
oped a strategy known as Integrated Management of Childhood Illness (IMCI). 
Although the IMCI strategy mostly focuses on better treatment practices (in
terms of diagnosis, medicine administration, and the like), elements of hygiene
are already found within its key practices. Innovative projects in Cuzco, Peru, and
Chinandega, Nicaragua, that have promoted key hygiene behaviors within the

APPROACHES TO ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH  91

programmatic framework of their community-level IMCI strategies have resulted
in significant improvements in health outcomes (Favin 2004). In another example,
the Honduras Integrated Community-Based Child Care Program included a
specific component on hygiene education, in addition to advice for improving
home care, feeding practices, and related health behaviors (Griffiths and McGuire
2005). Similarly, the Integrated Child Development Services in India has included
hygiene awareness (such as hand-washing practices for children) within a multi-
sectoral approach that incorporates health, education, and nutrition interventions
(Gragnolati and others 2006). 

A few integrated child survival programs have been even more comprehensive—
including components that traditionally lie outside the health sector but that have
important health effects. For example, a subcomponent of the Eritrea Integrated
Early Childhood Development Project included environmental health interven-
tions to control childhood illnesses through promotion, maintenance, and use of
safe latrines; improved food safety and hygiene; water source protection and
handling; prevention of acute respiratory infections through indoor air pollution
reduction interventions (for example, promotion of improved kitchen and house-
hold ventilation); and improved collaboration in the prevention of malaria and
other vectorborne diseases (see World Bank 2000). Other child survival programs
in low-income countries, such as Bangladesh, Benin, Brazil, Cambodia, Eritrea,
Haiti, Malawi, Nepal, and Nicaragua, have included vector-control measures (use
of insecticide-treated mosquito nets) as part of their preventive interventions
(Victora and others 2005). 

Some middle-income countries have begun to address child mortality more
systematically by moving beyond health system interventions to a more integrated
multisectoral program with strong political commitment from the government.
Costa Rica, for example, added 15 to 20 years of life expectancy and significantly
reduced child mortality in over two decades through a number of multisectoral
policy actions, including a targeted program to control infectious diseases through
improved sanitation, immunization, and the extension of primary health care to
a wider population (World Resources Institute and others 1998). In Mexico, the
government brought about significant improvements in under-five mortality by
systematically rolling out programs on vaccinations, clean water, and health reform
(see box 6.2).

Nutrition Programs

Improving the nutritional status of young children requires not only health sector
interventions but also appropriate actions in agriculture, rural development, water
supply and sanitation, social protection, education, gender programs, and 
community-driven development (Shekar and others 2006). Reviews of different
nutrition programs in Central America, Ecuador, Thailand, Ghana, and India

92 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

BOX  6.2
Mexico: Multisectorality through a Diagonal Approach
Mexico is one of seven countries on track to achieve the goal of reducing child
mortality by 2015 (Sepúlveda and others 2006). Improvement in children’s
health is attributed to two programs that worked together: the Clean Water
Program and the Universal Vaccination Program. The Clean Water Program
focused on appropriate water chlorination and regulations that, for example,
banned the use of sewage for crop irrigation. Important steps in the program
were to improve sewage-treatment plants, to provide adequate disposal of
waste, and to monitor the maintenance of drainage systems. 

The Universal Vaccination Program was created as a result of the measles

epidemic in 1989 and 1990 (see the accompanying figure). The outbreak
caused more than 70,000 cases and 6,000 deaths in mostly malnourished
children under five years of age. Within three years of the project,
immunization coverage exceeded 92 percent. By introducing national health
weeks and improving the health monitoring system, the authorities focused
on immunization, vitamin A supplementation, oral rehydration salts, and
deworming—reaching sustained high population coverage. Evidence suggests
that high levels of coverage of public health interventions as well as
investments in women’s education, social protection, water, and sanitation all
contributed to the success (Frenk 2006; Sepúlveda and others 2006). This
recent Mexican health reform included an unprecedented effort to strengthen
environmental health services, regulatory actions to protect the public, and,
more generally, a set of intersectoral interventions that define a health policy
capable of modifying the broader determinants of disease (Frenk 2006).

Mortality in Children under Five Years, under One Year, and Neonates, Mexico,
1980–2005

s
h
t
r
i
b
 
e
v

i
l
 

0
0
0
,
1
 
r
e
p
 
e
t
a
r
 
y
t
i
l
a
t
r
o
m

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

oral rehydration salts

64.3

national vaccination days

51

28.8

51.2

41.2

25.6

measles vaccination campaigns

Universal Vaccination Program
Clean Water Program

national health weeks

44.2

36.2

21.9

Progresa

33.7

Arranque Parejo
en la Vida

27.6

19.3

23.3

17.0

23

18.8

12.9

0
19 8 0

19 81

19 8 2

19 8 3

19 8 4

19 8 5

19 8 6

19 87

19 8 8

19 8 9

199 0

1991

1992

1995

1996

1997

199 8

1994
1993
year

1999

20 0 0

20 02
20 01

20 03

20 0 4

20 0 5

20 0 6

under 5 years

under 1 year

neonatal

Sources: Data from the Mexican Ministry of Health Epidemiological and Statistical Mortality
System and the Mexican National Council on Population.

APPROACHES TO ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH  93

illustrate the opportunities that exist to include or supplement environmental
health activities and hygiene promotion in these programs. 

Nutrition projects in developing countries also require complementary invest-
ments in water and sanitation; without these, children may lose the benefits of
additional food intake to parasite infestation and diarrhea (Horton 1999). A
review of health reforms in Central America found that programs addressing
malnutrition should focus on preventive measures such as (a) ensuring access
to safe water and sanitation; (b) educating mothers about nutrition, hygiene,
and health practices; (c) using growth monitoring to ensure early detection of
malnutrition; and (d) establishing links with health care specialists for at-risk
populations, including the rural indigenous (World Bank 2007e). An analysis of
India’s main child survival program concluded that even with improvements in
the Integrated Child Development Services, the country will not meet the
Millennium Development Goals in nutrition without investing more in indirect
interventions, such as water and sanitation infrastructure and women’s educa-
tion (Gragnolati and others 2006). 

In the late 1980s, Thailand’s nutrition program was able to effectively address
malnutrition by adopting a more integrated approach (see box 6.3). In Ghana,
the Community-Based Poverty Reduction Project (1999–2005, US$5.0 million)
used an integrated community-based approach for basic health and nutrition
service delivery. In addition to monitoring child growth, promoting pre- and

BOX  6. 3
Thailand’s National Nutrition Program
Thailand’s National Nutrition Program successfully reduced moderate
malnutrition from about 25 percent in the under-five population in 1986 to
about 15 percent in 1995. Although the health sector led the nutrition
program’s outreach into villages, the fundamental assumption was that
malnutrition was a symptom of poverty and, therefore, that a multisectoral
attack on poverty was needed to deal with malnutrition. Accordingly, the
Rural Development Plan and the Poverty Alleviation Program supple-
mented the nutrition program by funding a wide range of programs,
including the following:
• Basic primary health and nutrition services
• Latrines and clean water
• A literacy program
• Agricultural production projects
• Village development projects, such as creation of fishponds or
development of water sources
• Employment schemes during the dry season in disadvantaged, nonirrigated
areas

Source: Heaver and Kachondam 2002. 

94 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

postnatal care and family planning, and immunizing children, community workers
advised on environmental sanitation and hygiene (World Bank 2007b). 

An evaluation of programs in Ecuador (Sistema Integral de Alimentación y
Nutrición) suggested that nutritional programs in rural areas be complemented
with improved water and sanitation, community-based growth promotion,
improved health service access, and nutritional supplements for pregnant mothers
and young children, among other interventions. The study recommended that,
at the national level, programs should include behavior change communications
programs and work closely with the authorities responsible for water and sani-
tation (World Bank 2007f). 

Infrastructure Programs 

Development is often seen as synonymous with improvements in infrastructure,
and accordingly, donor funding and government investments have been geared
toward improving access to water supply, expanding coverage for sanitation and
sewerage, and extending rural electrification. The result has been improvements
in the access and coverage indicators for these environmental services. Despite
these improvements in infrastructure, however, the trends in the incidence of
diarrhea have not fallen correspondingly in developing countries (Kosek, Bern,
and Guerrant 2003).

Over the years, donor agencies and country governments have increasingly
realized that simply providing new infrastructure—be it latrines, piped water
systems, or improved cookstoves—is not the “magic bullet” for achieving improved
health. Elements of behavior change—the so-called software—are a critical part
of the equation. For example, Peru’s national government expressed interest in
piloting a hand-washing campaign after US$2 billion of investments in water
supply infrastructure failed to significantly reduce the prevalence of water-related
diseases (Public-Private Partnership for Handwashing with Soap 2005). These
behaviors—ranging from hand-washing practices to proper feces disposal to venti-
lation practices—are what make the difference between simply “having access”
and actually “improving health.”

One program that has brought together elements of infrastructure and
behavior change has been the Total Sanitation Campaign in rural Bangladesh.
This comprehensive program has been successful in eradicating the practice of
open defecation by promoting behavior change and sanitation facilities in rural
areas. Going beyond providing affordable sanitation options (in terms of tech-
nologies and costs), this program—as well as some similar programs—has been
effective in ensuring high toilet use through a combination of participatory
processes; hygiene promotion; institutional incentives, such as financial rewards
for achieving universal toilet coverage; and community bans on practices such
as open defecation (WSP 2005). The Total Sanitation Campaign has seen more

APPROACHES TO ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH  95

than 400 villages achieve 100 percent sanitation coverage without a household
subsidy for infrastructure (WSP 2005). 

With the widely regaled success of the Bangladesh story, Total Sanitation
Campaigns began to spread to Ethiopia, India, Nigeria, and Pakistan. The Ethiopian
story was an equally successful one, with a strong multisectoral approach at the
local level that emphasized education and community participation (see box 6.4).
The effectiveness of the campaign varied across different states in India. Although
these programs were meant to be based on the same principles of community
involvement and attention to hygiene and social intermediation, a review showed
that excessive attention to coverage targets overshadowed the goals of improved
community health. Surveys of some villages showed that although they had
100 percent latrine coverage, several households were, in fact, using the latrines
to store rice (WSP 2005).

With rural populations still largely dependent on biomass fuels for cooking
and heating (and the consequent health impacts from indoor air pollution),
country governments, donor agencies, and nongovernmental organizations
(NGOs) have been working to help rural populations move up the energy ladder
toward improved cookstoves and cleaner fuels (for example, liquefied petroleum
gas). Although considerations of energy efficiency and costs have dominated
rural energy technology choices, recent studies have pointed out the need to pay
attention to changes in behavior. A research study in Bangladesh, for example,
suggested changes in cooking arrangements and location, construction materials,

BOX  6.4
Ethiopia: The Toilet Revolution
Another example that drew from the Total Sanitation Campaign is in the
Southern Nations Region of Ethiopia. The Regional Health Bureau, with
support from the regional cabinet, shifted from a broad primary health care
model to a focus on preventable diseases through a limited number of high-
impact, broad-reach, low-cost public health interventions in rural areas. This
change was facilitated by a strong regionwide commitment to empower
households, resulting in a wave of household latrine building. At the village
level, after consultation meetings highlighted the need to build latrines,
community health promoters visited each household to persuade it to join
the community in building latrines. Within less than two years, pit latrine
ownership rose from 13 percent to 78 percent (WSP 2007), although it may
not necessarily have resulted in a corresponding increase in use. The long-
term success will depend on many factors, including durability, technical
standards, design, and behavior (with regard to toilet use, and especially
children’s compliance with latrine use). 

96 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

and ventilation practices that may help improve indoor air. The analysis also
suggests that poor families may not have to wait for clean fuels or clean stoves
to enjoy significantly cleaner air when basic modifications in cooking behaviors
may produce cleaner conditions even when “dirty” biomass fuels are used
(Dasgupta and others 2004a).

Vector-Control Programs

Malaria continues to be a major public health challenge, especially in Sub-Saharan
Africa, where it is responsible for at least 700,000 deaths among children under
five years of age (Snow and others 2003). Although key strategies in the control
of malaria have often focused on early diagnosis and treatment, indoor residual
spraying, and the use of insecticide-treated nets, environmental management
interventions can play a major role within integrated vector management by
adding resilience to the results of individual control strategies and by reducing
costs as well as the likelihood of development and spread of drug and insecticide
resistance (Keiser, Singer, and Utzinger 2005). 

A review of 40 studies on malaria interventions that emphasized environ-
mental management interventions reported very high protective efficacies.
Often, a package of multiple interventions is used, guided by a multisectoral
staff with expertise in malaria epidemiology and entomology, vector ecology,
and land and water engineering (Keiser, Singer, and Utzinger 2005). In Malaysia,
for example, the incidence of malaria was radically reduced by environmental
management methods devised by interdisciplinary teams of medically quali-
fied personnel across many different departments, such as agriculture, health,
transportation, urban planning, and the army (Flemming and others 2004).
Although environmental vector-control measures may work in Asia, they are
much less likely to succeed in rural Africa. The African vectors are far more
efficient, so their numbers must be reduced to much lower levels to reduce
transmission significantly. For this reason, mosquito ecology demands that
environmental manipulation be supplemented by bednets and indoor residual
spraying (Touré 2001).

Lessons learned from successful vector-control programs show the need for
interdisciplinary collaborations among the health, agricultural, water, and infra-
structure development sectors in the design of integrated intervention packages.
Collaboration, in this context, means that the higher expenses of environmental
management are not borne by the health sector and that vector control per se is
not the driving force (Keiser, Singer, and Utzinger 2005). 

Effective vector-control programs should encourage community participation
(Keiser, Singer, and Utzinger 2005). In the case of dengue control, a novel effort
carried out in several communes in Vietnam demonstrates how a community-
based approach can be highly effective against this mosquito (see box 6.5). 

APPROACHES TO ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH  97

BOX  6.5
Vietnam’s Dengue Program
The dengue-control case in Vietnam shows that a community-based
approach can be highly effective against this disease. The approach involves
a smooth interface among technical experts, health workers, and
communities.

Dengue control was driven by the chair of each commune and by other

leaders from the women’s union and youth union; it was implemented by
communal health personnel, health collaborators, schoolteachers, and their
pupils. Health collaborators were each responsible for monthly inspection of
water-storage containers in about 100 houses, delivery of health education
messages to make sure that the householder knew how to manage the
mesocyclops (a tiny one-eyed shrimplike creature used for biological control
of larvae to combat mosquitoes successfully) that inhabited those
containers, and reporting of any suspected dengue cases to the communal
health center. 

The program was not simply a matter of the health volunteers

eliminating the mosquitoes for the householders—the success of the
mosquito-control efforts depended on the close involvement of the house-
holders. Schoolchildren participated by cleaning up discarded containers;
supporting the aged and infirm in mosquito-control measures; and dissemi-
nating information about mosquito control through plays, songs, quiz nights,
and—in one district—a Meso football cup. 

This control strategy has already been implemented in 46 communes in
Vietnam. Mosquitoes have been eliminated in 40 of those communes, and
the remaining 6 communes show very low densities of mosquitoes. 

Sources: Das Gupta and others 2006; Ha and Huan 1997; Kay and Nam 2005; Vu and others
2005.

Understanding the Enabling Environment 

As the preceding section shows, developing countries have used a range of ways
to mainstream environmental health actions into existing child survival and nutri-
tion programs, infrastructure projects, and vector-control strategies. Given the
varying socioeconomic, institutional, and developmental contexts of developing
countries, knowing what combination of factors contributed to the successful
inclusion of environmental health considerations within these programs is often
difficult. Looking at the big picture, however, can help identify some common
elements that provided the appropriate enabling environment. Some of these
common elements have included obtaining high-level political commitment,
involving and empowering communities, allocating responsibilities and resources
at the local level, and finding a balance between private and public sector roles. 

98 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

Political Will and Effective Consensus

The existence of a positive policy environment is a central principle for successful
interventions. High-level political commitment is critical to successful child survival
and environmental health programs. The Ethiopian example shows the need for
a well-connected leadership that is well informed and willing to take risks and
challenge conventional primary health care approaches. The right context is
required to implement interventions. In the case of Ethiopia, the intervention was
driven by population expansion and deforestation, which reduced the private
open defecation option. The success of the story came from the willingness of
senior management to listen to the people and put their needs first (WSP 2007). 
An important first step in the program was facilitating consensus around the
need for community ownership of health behavior—especially with respect to
vaccination, family planning, and hygiene and sanitation. Consultation and advo-
cacy meetings at all levels and covering the whole region were conducted to bring
sustained massive response (Knapp 2006). As Shiferaw Teklemariam, state health
minister in Ethiopia, points out, “[N]one of these achievements would have been
possible without close inter-sectoral collaboration and strong leadership, committed
to universal water supply and sanitation access” (WSP 2007: 2). 

China’s improved cookstoves programs have been found to be broadly successful
in delivering better stoves to a majority of households in targeted counties, and
the success was based on strong administrative, technical, and outreach compe-
tence and resources situated at the local level, motivated by sustained national-level
attention (Sinton and others 2004). In Brazil, similarly, favoring a democratic and
continuous process in education on health and disease processes has been found
necessary in stimulating the participation of the population in health promotion
programs (Mahendradhata and Moerman 2004). 

Involving and Empowering Communities

Participatory governance mechanisms that encourage the involvement of poorer
groups are an important factor for improving environmental health (Satterthwaite
2007). Several programs that have been successful in achieving child health
outcomes through environmental health actions have included community partic-
ipation as an integral component. In Ethiopia, community health promoters
visited households, promoting simple and action-based health messages to under-
take actions at individual, household, and community levels that would lead to
behavioral change in practices (Knapp 2006). 

Lessons learned from many programs highlight the need to cultivate a sense
of local ownership. Community groups are potentially quite influential for behavior
change and for maintaining infrastructure, as the Bangladesh sanitation story
demonstrates (WSP 2005). In Thailand, effective consensus and commitment
building in the multisectoral nutrition program was instrumental in reducing

APPROACHES TO ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH  99

malnutrition among children (Heaver and Kachondam 2002). In Vietnam, the
success of the dengue-control program also lay in the extensive community involve-
ment (Das Gupta and others 2006).

Another example is the large program of toilet blocks in urban slums in India
that were designed, built, and managed by the communities. The National Slum
Dwellers Federation develops and promotes these blocks through a women’s saving
group (Mahila Milan) that is supported by local authorities, thus improving sani-
tation for millions of slum dwellers (Burra, Patel, and Kerr 2003). A key feature
in Mumbai was the involvement of the slum community in project implementa-
tion at the planning stage. Their involvement facilitated collaboration between
the NGO, contractors, and community-based organizations (WSP 2006).

Balancing Private and Public Sector Roles 

The nature and complexity of environmental health issues require intersectoral
actions not only across various levels of government but also through partner-
ships between the public and private sectors. While the public sector retains its
power over setting regulations and standards, the private sector is increasingly
getting involved in the delivery of environmental services such as water, sanita-
tion, and energy. However, the question of who provides and pays for an
intervention is important. Improved stoves are an example of private gains to
public health measures. To be sure, the absence of credit is a possible constraint
for individuals to obtain these stoves, but if the stoves save more on fuel than they
cost, one would expect widespread adoption. In contrast, if the benefits are more
general than individual, the scope for subsidies is clearer. An evaluation of costs
and benefits is necessary to determine the role of the private and public sectors. 
In the water sector, the privatization of water companies not only can lead to
efficiency gains but also can have beneficial health effects. In Argentina, for
example, the privatization of public water companies resulted in both increases
in connections and improvements in quality (financed from user fees and connec-
tion charges). These improvements included the speed of repairs of water leaks
and sewer blockages and the percentage of clients with appropriate water pres-
sure. Child mortality fell by 8 percent in the areas that privatized their water
services, and that effect was largest (26 percent) in the poorest areas, especially
in poorer municipalities (Galiani, Gertler, and Schargrodsky 2005; Wagstaff and
Claeson 2004). 

In the field of sanitation, concepts of “sanitation marketing” are proving to be
extremely effective. In a bid to harness market power for rural sanitation, IDE—
an international NGO—developed a range of low-cost sanitation options and
stimulated a network of local masons to market and deliver them to the rural
population in two Vietnamese provinces. As a result, the sanitation access rate
increased markedly in the area, even among the poor (Frias and Mukherjee 2005). 

100 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

In hygiene behavior, the private sector has begun to play an important role in
advocating for and supporting hand-washing campaigns through the Global
Public-Private Partnership for Handwashing with Soap. In campaigns such as
those in Ghana, Peru, and Senegal, the private sector has engaged in hand-washing
promotion and educational activities mainly by contributing its marketing expertise
to publicly funded generic campaigns not tied to any specific soap brands. 

In providing rural energy technologies, too, the private sector is beginning to
play an important role in collaboration with the public sector. In Nepal, for
example, the Alternative Energy Promotion Center, a quasi-governmental body,
is working closely with private sector contractors who deliver improved cook-
stove technologies to rural households (World Bank 2008b). 

This section has provided examples of interventions in different sectors that
have provided some key lessons; however, contexts, actors, and situations are
different, which makes comparison difficult. 

Governance and Institutional Implications

A final key issue is that environmental health efforts will not be sustainable unless
explicit attention is paid to institutional issues. Therefore, the ultimate design
and delivery of environmental health interventions must depend on the institu-
tional and governance structure of each country, an issue that is elaborated on
in this section.

Unraveling the Environmental Health Agenda in 
the Developed World

Earlier, this report discussed how, across the developed world, countries sought
to establish strong and coherent systems for ensuring environmental sanitation
to protect the public’s health. As a result of those efforts, mechanisms to ensure
environmental sanitation became well established, the burdens of associated disease
dropped, and importantly, the public’s expectations regarding the acceptability
of poor sanitation and disease altered so that providing poor services has become
politically very difficult. As mentioned earlier, recent decades have seen some
significant unraveling of the coherence of the systems put in place over the previous
decades. Environmental health has become disconnected from the mainstream
agendas of the health agencies (which now focus more on a case management
perspective) and the newly formed environmental protection agencies (which
focus more on environmental regulation and compliance) (Kotchian 1997). 

Correspondingly, donor initiatives related to environmental health issues
have also become highly compartmentalized. With donor funding being chan-
neled through separate sector silos (of environment, water and sanitation, and
health), the possibility of generating the intersectoral coordination that is so

APPROACHES TO ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH  101

crucial for environmental health initiatives was more or less preempted. This
development is also evidenced in the way that international goals and develop-
ment initiatives addressing health give very little attention to the role of
environmental sanitation. Sanitation was excluded from the list of the original
Millennium Development Goals and was only subsequently introduced
(Satterthwaite 2007; von Schirnding 2005).

Developing Countries Follow Suit

As the world’s poorer countries have moved along the development path with
increasing investments in infrastructure, education, health, and other growth-
oriented sectors, a similar trend has been seen, with government investments and
donor funding increasingly programmed along sectoral lines. The role for the
health sector is primarily that of regulation (for example, urban drinking-water
quality); promotion (for example, hygiene promotion); and advocacy (for example,
persuading utilities to lower their connection charges to the poor). In some cases,
as in India (see box 6.6), attention by the health department to environmental
health functions has atrophied over the years, as increased emphasis on treatment
and delivery of health services led to a dwindling role for public health issues

BOX  6.6
Atrophy of Environmental Health Functions in India
The role of health departments in the stewardship of sanitation and public
health activities has atrophied in India since the 1950s. Before
independence, sanitary departments existed at national and provincial
levels, with sanitary inspectors and other staff members on the ground in
each district. In the districts, sanitary inspectors worked with the village
officials and village panchayats, which had been set up to extend the bare
bones of government to rural areas. The municipal areas also had extensive
machinery for environmental sanitation and public health activities,
including the management of water, solid waste, and liquid waste. Sanitary
departments were accountable directly to the government and were admin-
istratively separate from the Indian Medical Service, which provided medical
services. 

In the 1950s, public health services were merged with the medical

services into a unified health department. Interest in specializing in public
health dwindled as specialty curative skills became far better rewarded. This
atrophy was further fueled by strong electoral demand for services to cure
the sick, while by contrast, public health services remained low profile
because their success depended on ensuring no outbreaks. 

Source: Das Gupta and others 2006.

102 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

(Das Gupta and others 2006). One cause for atrophy is the lack of demand for
environmental health services. The public demands curative care over preventive
care, and environmental health is the most invisible type of preventive care. 

The consequences of such compartmentalization are much more severe than
in the developed world, where intensive environmental sanitation measures had
become fundamental to public administration by the middle of the 20th century.
This subsequent compartmentalization may create inefficiencies and the reemer-
gence of some threats, but the fundamental protections for public health remain
firmly in place. By contrast, the era of compartmentalization arrived for many
developing countries at a time when levels of exposure to environment-related
infections were still very high and before a public health consciousness was intrin-
sically found in communities. Box 6.7 illustrates the evolution of environmental
health institutions in Ethiopia, an example of such compartmentalization. 

BOX  6.7
Institutional Evolution of Environmental Health: 
The Case of Ethiopia

Traditional Organization (1908–46)

The development of environmental health interventions in Ethiopia dates
back to 1908, when it was organized under the Ministry of Interior. The
Ministry of Interior consolidated decision-making power over health matters
by proclaiming a series of legal notices following its mandate in sanitation.
During this period, environmental health activities had an urban bias, the
institutionalized aspect did not reach the grassroots level to address
environmental health, and interventions were not significant because of
limited human resources and unclear vision. 

New Organization, New Tasks (1947–74)

In 1947, the Ministry of Public Health was established with a clear
mandate, and rural service provision began to promote medical and
sanitation services. The ministry set up a hygiene and environmental
health unit for the control and prevention of communicable diseases,
with a senior sanitarian guiding sanitation activities. A series of
sanitation regulations was enacted, and a training center was set up to
train sanitarians, who were largely involved in urban inspections
pursuant to sanitation regulations. They were key actors in the
eradication of smallpox in Ethiopia. 

(continued)

APPROACHES TO ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH  103

Primary Health Care Emerges (Late 1970s–Late 1980s)

By the late 1970s, a socialist regime set up primary health care, which
included drinking water and sanitation as formal components. A 10-year plan
was made, with rural and urban programs used as entry points for sanitation
efforts. Organized committees at various levels coordinated and ran environ-
mental health interventions. The Ministry of Public Health was renamed the
Ministry of Health, and in 1983, its Department of Hygiene and
Environmental Health was organized into four divisions responsible for
major sanitation activities: water and sanitation, food hygiene, industrial
hygiene, and quarantine hygiene services. 

Restructuring of Health Policy and Shift in Strategy
(1990–Present)

The beginning of the 1990s brought a decentralization of powers down to
the grassroots level and expansion of the private sector in environmental
health services. Although the Department of Hygiene and Environmental
Health maintained its status, regional states developed teams of environ-
mental health professionals organized under the Department of Disease
Prevention and Control or Department of Health Programs. Environmental
health personnel worked in administrative units that coordinated and guided
socioeconomic development at the grassroots levels. Health extension
packages targeted households with a strong focus on community-based
approaches and sustained preventive and promotional health care.

Ethiopia is a clear case of how an environmental health institutional

framework has evolved over the years. In the most recent past, success has
been largely due to the use of local government as a platform for environ-
mental health, including hygiene promotion. 

Source: Kumie and Ahmed 2005.

Compartmentalization at the national level means that the basic institutional
mechanisms for successful governance of environmental sanitation are lacking at
local levels. The consequences can be devastating. In Ghana, a government program
for expanding irrigation through the construction of dams and canals, supported
by the U.S. Agency for International Development, started as a well-designed effort
to make water available for use by humans and livestock, as well as for agricul-
ture and fishing (Hunter 1992, 2003). However, no measures were in place to
protect against the spread of water-related diseases. Poor maintenance and absence
of community extension services to encourage dredging, repairs, and vector control
resulted in an increase in cases not only of schistosomiasis in children but also of
filariasis among adults. The water supply project is described as a “classic example

104 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

of un-coordinated unisectoral intervention by the Ministry of Agriculture and its
international collaborators” (Hunter 2003: 231).

Institutional Requirements for Successful
Environmental Health Governance

Successful environmental health governance requires strong institutional under-
pinnings, with clearly articulated roles at all levels of administration within a
country. Because developing countries differ in their level of institutional
complexity, this section talks in more general terms about the typical roles and
responsibilities that should exist in countries for effective governance, but it caters
to the more specific case of environmental health governance.1

Roles of National Governments 

Successful environmental health governance is not possible without strong
involvement at the national level.

Provide the regulatory framework. An appropriate legal and regulatory frame-
work should underpin effective environmental health action. Many countries have
such regulations, but many do not have adequate implementation mechanisms.
In several African countries, for example, an examination of their legislation reveals
an encouraging picture, with many countries having environmental health poli-
cies and sanitation codes (WHO Regional Office for Africa 2006), but problems
with implementation remain. For example, in Ethiopia, issues with competing
mandates (but also other institutional weaknesses) hinder implementation of
reasonable policies. These regulations need to be backed by at least a rudimen-
tary implementation framework, including mechanisms for building stakeholder
compliance, monitoring mechanisms, and transparent enforcement mechanisms
that minimize reliance on the overburdened judiciary. 

These implementation frameworks, such as frameworks for ensuring the
quality of public and private sources of drinking water, will serve to guide local
governments to engage in appropriate environmental health actions. When
necessary, local governments can amend model bylaws framed by the national
governments, which can provide a regulatory basis for local environmental
health activities, such as the maintenance and cleaning of drains and other
civic amenities. 

Provide the necessary platforms for intersectoral coordination. Environmental
health is intrinsically multisectoral and requires intersectoral coordination across
health, environment, infrastructure, and other sectors. In an era of sectoral ministries
and silo mentality, intersectoral coordination mechanisms (such as intersectoral
committees) need to be established at each level of the administrative hierarchy
down to local governments. These mechanisms must be set up to work on a

APPROACHES TO ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH  105

routine basis rather than in response to an emergency. They must involve all key
departments whose actions pertain to environmental sanitation and public health
outcomes. In the Philippines, for example, the Interagency Committee on
Environmental Health was established in mid-1980s; the Department of Health
serves as the chair, and the Department of Environment and Natural Resources
is the vice chair. The committee has addressed priority environmental health
problems in the country, such as water quality and sanitation, among other issues
(Blössner and de Onis 2005).

Ensure interjurisdictional coordination. Environmental health exposures have
significant public health externalities—so inadequate attention to clean water and
proper sanitation, for example, results in infections such as diarrhea, which can
cross jurisdictional boundaries. Interjurisdictional coordination therefore becomes
essential, because local governments’ efforts to reduce environmental exposures
to infections can be seriously undermined if neighboring local authorities do not
take similar action. Thus if a peri-urban area is poorly serviced, it can be a recur-
ring source of disease outbreaks that can spread to the nearby metropolis.

Another set of issues arises because urban and rural local bodies have different
regulatory, organizational, and implementation structures, and they typically have
very low levels of coordination with each other. This situation greatly increases
the probability of differential public health performance in neighboring locali-
ties and resultant externalities. Even within urban areas, ignoring the growing
slum settlements with dismal environmental conditions and almost negligent
access to environmental services can derail attempts by city governments to provide
healthy environments. 

Clarify mandates and appropriate devolution of authority and finances.
Inappropriate devolution of authority is a perennial issue in any country, devel-
oped or developing, and becomes an issue in the implementation of environmental
health interventions. For example, Dandoy (1997: 83) quotes a former U.S. state
health officer as saying, “The federal government has most of the money, the state
government has most of the legal authority, and the local government has most
of the responsibility for protecting the health of the people.”

Various institutional problems typically hamper effective environmental service
delivery and reduce the scope for serious accountability. Problems relating to the
decentralization of functions can result in delegation of environmental health
functions to local governments without adequate administrative, financial, and
technical support from line agencies or higher levels of government. In addition,
insufficient clarity and differentiation of mandates and functions between the
different layers of the government hierarchy and line agencies creates confusion,
undermines accountability, and leads to duplication of efforts and waste of
resources. Given the multisectoral nature of environmental health interventions,

106 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

clear mapping of the specific roles of environmental, health, and infrastructural
actors at each administrative level becomes even more critical. Finally, in many
countries, funds may reside in higher levels of government than the one respon-
sible for service delivery—creating shortfalls in financing.

Provide technical and policy inputs. Agencies at the national level play an impor-
tant role in providing technical and policy inputs related to environmental health
actions. Local governments typically lack the sectoral expertise on the wide range
of issues they need to address to ensure environmental health, and they can benefit
from technical advice and guidance from national-level agencies. One set of issues
relates to providing the performance standards, norms, guidelines, training modules,
and technical support for environmental health services. These require inputs
primarily from the department of health, but also from other departments concerned
with environmental management for health, such as the department of environ-
ment. In addition, national-level health agencies can provide critical information
gathered from disease surveillance, assessment of health threats, and research to
help local governments respond appropriately to environmental health risks. 

Foster communication, advocacy, and promotion. Health ministries in devel-
oping countries have an important role to play in health promotion (Cairncross
and Valdmanis 2006) to raise awareness among the public as well as in advocacy
to raise the profile among policy-makers. Although nationwide campaigns on the
need for immunizations (polio drives, for example) and public health messages
relating to treatment of diseases (use of oral dehydration salts to treat diarrhea,
for example) are commonplace, in only a few instances do national-level agen-
cies play a role in promoting behavior change. Some examples of national hand-washing
campaigns—such as Peru’s “Lávate las manos con jabón” (“Wash your hands with
soap”)—have met with mass popularity and success in the adoption of better
hygiene. Other examples include national hand-washing campaigns in Ghana,
Nepal, and Senegal (for more information, see http://www.globalhandwashing.org).
The health ministry can also play an advocacy role in raising the awareness of
these issues within local and national governments. At ministerial meetings, it
could link health outcomes with infrastructure projects, thus raising awareness
of environmental health issues.

Roles of Local Governments 

With guidance from national-level legal and regulatory frameworks, accompanied
by devolution of functions and funding, local governments can play an important
role in environmental health at the community and household levels. 

Promote an integrated approach to local level health. Given the nature of envi-
ronmental risks and transmission mechanisms, the most appropriate levels for
carrying out actions are the household and community levels. Local governments

APPROACHES TO ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH  107

are therefore best placed to ensure the intersectoral and interjurisdictional coordi-
nation needed to ensure public health, because they are the convergent point at the
appropriate level of all the departments whose actions affect environmental health. 
The benefits of intersectoral coordination at the local level are illustrated by a
successful malaria-control program in Kheda district in Gujarat, India. Conducted
with the active participation of local communities, it involved intensified case
detection and treatment to reduce the number of mosquitoes carrying malaria
parasites, coupled with eliminating vector breeding habitats in homes and in
irrigation canals and the use of larvivorous fish. The active participation of the
district and local governments and the high level of intersectoral coordination,
including those responsible for the health, fisheries, and irrigation sectors,
contributed to the success of this effort in reducing the number of mosquito
breeding places (Malaviya and others 2006). 

Provide civic amenities related to environmental health. A core task of any local
government is to provide basic civic amenities, and local governments have at
their disposal a range of funds and other resources that they can use for these
tasks, including locally generated revenues. These basic amenities include the
construction, maintenance, and cleaning of public resources, such as roads, drains,
water supply systems, sewers, and waste disposal sites; measures to improve the
sanitary condition of the locality, such as solid waste removal; and monitoring
activities, such as the protection of water sources. 

Mobilize citizens and support health activities. With their strong grassroots pres-
ence, local governments can do a great deal to enhance the effectiveness of services
and programs aimed at improving health. For example, they can help collect
disease surveillance information by reporting easily identifiable conditions, such
as an episode of severe vomiting and diarrhea. They can disseminate public health
messages and mobilize citizens to improve their own health behaviors and envi-
ronmental hygiene and to pressure others around them to help maintain better
sanitary conditions in their neighborhoods.

Additionally, local governments can mobilize community-based groups to help
improve environmental services. The total sanitation program in West Bengal
illustrates how successful local governments can be in inducing widespread adop-
tion of personal latrines and in using NGOs to set up for-profit “sanitary marts,”
where latrines are produced to given standards and retailed for an agreed price
(Majumder 2004; also see discussion in Mavalankar and Manjunath 2004). Under
the leadership of local governments, citizens’ groups such as self-help groups are
active in the rural areas of West Bengal and have proved to be a powerful force in
the spread of pit latrines. These successful efforts to mobilize citizens can be
extended to a larger range of environmental health issues, such as solid waste
management, vector control, and drainage. 

108 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

Strengthen roles in communication and advocacy. A critical component of envi-
ronmental health programs is to raise citizen awareness of the benefits of clean
water, proper sanitation, and good hygiene behavior, as well as to stimulate their
demand for these services. Although national-level campaigns play an important
role in raising awareness, more community-specific and customized messages
relating to behavior change for better environmental health should be advocated
by local health units and schools. Local governments can reach citizens more effec-
tively by engaging communities and individuals in a host of face-to-face forms
of communication. 

Reorient the role of an environmental health workforce. Whether under the aegis
of the health department or the local governments, a minimum complement of
public health personnel is needed at each administrative level to implement and
ensure good environmental health. Unlike a century ago, the all-encompassing
role of the environmental health officer may no longer be realistic. The role will
have to be reoriented through in-service training at the local level to address the
changing priorities in environmental health. In South Africa, for example, envi-
ronmental health officers form the backbone of environmental health services and
are employed at the local and state levels. Because of the need for multiple skills
in response to the crosscutting nature of environmental health interventions,
training of environmental health officers has changed fundamentally, with the
focus moving beyond law enforcement to community participation and develop-
ment (Mathee, Swanepoel, and Swart 1999; Thomas, Seager, and Mathee 2002).

Establish and enforce regulations. Local government can play an important role
in establishing, monitoring, and enforcing regulation. This activity involves building
codes, land tenure bylaws, and tenancy regulation. Regulations can require that
no house be occupied without prior construction of a latrine, can prevent land-
lords from raising rent if the tenant has a latrine built, and can even show the
mason how to build it. Local government is usually responsible for outbreak inves-
tigation and the ensuing environmental health measures, with the cooperation
and technical knowledge of experts in the national governments. Environmental
health regulations are necessary but not sufficient, because many environmental
health issues are the result of informal settlements or slums, where regulations
are not enforced. 

The roles and responsibilities at the local and national levels discussed here
are generic and broadly represent the key institutional requirements for better
environmental health governance. An important next step would be to carry out
an in-depth institutional analysis at country level to better understand the coor-
dination mechanisms between ministries and how mandates and budgets are
assigned. Such an understanding is critical for environmental health, an issue that
is inherently multisectoral, requiring collaborations across health, environment,

APPROACHES TO ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH  109

and infrastructure ministries. For a specific country, this type of analysis would
help governments better define the roles and responsibilities of different agen-
cies, correct the incentive structures, and improve the implementation of
environmental health programs and actions.

A Critical Moment 

A critical moment has arrived for this neglected story to take the forefront. As
this chapter shows, governments in several developing countries are beginning to
incorporate environmental health actions in their sectoral strategies. Similar
changes are occurring in the donor community, with a growing recognition of
the crucial role of environmental health. Multilateral development banks such as
the World Bank—acknowledging the need for multisectoral collaborations to
improve health outcomes—are revisiting the role of the health sector, while
acknowledging the multisectoral nature of such outcomes. The Bank’s newly
released Health Sector Strategy states: 

One of the clearest cases for strong government intervention in the [health,
nutrition, and population] sector can be made when there are large exter-
nalities (the benefits to society are greater than the sum of benefits to
individuals). This is true in the case of clean water, sanitation services, vector
control, food safety measures. . . . (World Bank 2007c: 5)

Additionally, other international organizations such as WHO are strength-
ening measures to evaluate the disease burden from environmental risks in
developing countries. Recognizing the effect of environmental health on malnu-
trition,  new  WHO  burden  of  disease  estimates  are  now  including  the
consequences of malnutrition that are due to poor sanitation in developing
countries (Fewtrell and others 2007). The Pan-American Health Organization
stresses that a multisectoral community health approach is vital to reduce many
of the “neglected” diseases in Latin America, which are often preventable through
improved environmental health (Holveck and others 2007). UNICEF, with its
focus on child survival and development, has been consistent in its approach
emphasizing water and sanitation measures alongside nutritional and health
system strategies.

Key Messages

■ Lessons from history have shown the enormous benefits of multisectoral envi-
ronmental health actions. Today’s developed countries have undergone an
evolution in environmental health functions. Both institutionally and concep-
tually, however, environmental health has fallen through the cracks in the
development agenda in the world’s poorest countries. 

110 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

■ Several governments in developing countries are beginning to mainstream
environmental health components and objectives within existing child survival
programs, nutrition initiatives, and infrastructure projects (water and sanita-
tion, rural energy).

■ Some common elements for successful environmental health actions in devel-
oping countries have included obtaining high-level political commitment,
involving and empowering communities, allocating responsibilities and resources
at the local level, and finding a balance between private and public sector roles.
Furthermore, successful environmental health governance requires strong insti-
tutional underpinnings, with clearly articulated roles at all levels of administration
within a country.

■ Now is a critical moment for this agenda to take the forefront in developing coun-
tries, with governments, donors, and civil society beginning to strengthen measures
to address environmental health, especially in the context of child survival.

Note

1 The framework provided in this section is based on Das Gupta and others’ (2006) analysis
of environmental sanitation and public health in India and was adapted to discuss the
broader issue of environmental health.

C H A P T E R   7

Conclusion

THE CHILD HEALTH AGENDA REMAINS UNFINISHED in the developing
world, with millions of children continuing to fall sick and die from preventable
environmental health causes. Malnutrition, poor environmental conditions, and
infectious diseases are highly associated geographically and take their heaviest tolls
on children under five years of age in South Asia, Sub-Saharan Africa, and certain
countries in the Eastern Mediterranean region (Fewtrell and others 2007). 

The contribution of repeated infections, especially diarrheal episodes, to a
child’s nutritional status and subsequent mortality has only recently been incor-
porated in assessments of the environmental burden of disease (Fewtrell and
others 2007). A recent collective expert opinion stated that about 50 percent of
the consequences of malnutrition are in fact caused by inadequate water and sani-
tation provisions and poor hygienic practices (Prüss-Üstün and Corvalán 2006).
Evidence from a review of recent cohort studies undertaken for this report further
corroborates this link between environmental infections and malnutrition. 

Contributions of This Report

This report reemphasizes the window of opportunity highlighted in the World
Bank’s 2006 nutrition report—pointing to a critical period in the life cycle of a
child, from the womb to the age of about two years (World Bank 2006c). With

111

112 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

research evidence from various studies, this report demonstrates how exposures
to environmental health risks jeopardize the health and nutritional status of young
children. Poor environmental management and bad sanitation expose pregnant
women to both malaria and hookworm infections. Left untreated, these infec-
tions lead to permanent growth faltering, lowered immunity, and increased
mortality for these women’s children. In early infancy, improper feeding practices
and poor sanitation have a pernicious synergistic effect on the child’s nutritional
status. Many of these impacts on a child’s growth also result in negative cogni-
tion and learning impacts as well as chronic diseases later in life.

Although considerable progress has been made, this report calls attention to
the potential of untapped environmental health actions to complement existing
health, infrastructure, and environmental management strategies in the devel-
oping world. Current child survival strategies in developing countries focus on
case management and treatment, neglecting primary prevention, especially as it
relates to reducing exposure to infections. The evidence of the impacts of envi-
ronmental risks and subsequent infections on child malnutrition makes correcting
the current neglect of environmental health in child survival and child health
strategies even more imperative in developing countries.

Environmental health actions supplement existing strategies addressing child
health. An analysis of results from Fewtrell and others (2007) shows that envi-
ronmental health interventions have a multiplier effect on mortality: investments
addressing environmental risks (for example, lack of water and sanitation) pay
off with more than just their direct effect on disease (for example, reducing diar-
rhea). This finding has important consequences for developing countries seeking
to invest in environmental health interventions; their budgets will stretch further
because of the nature of the externalities associated with such interventions.
Therefore, governments in developing countries have an enormous opportunity
to incorporate environmental health interventions in existing strategies that affect
child health and to provide a bigger “bang for the buck” in terms of health improve-
ments. As has been discussed in this report, environmental health actions add
value to existing programs for child care, micronutrient supplementation, and
immunization. They can also be used to adapt environmental management
programs in developing countries, such as those relating to vector control, as well
as to form the basis of adjustments to strategies in the water sanitation and rural
energy sectors to enhance health outcomes.

Revised country-level estimates show that when malnutrition-mediated health
effects attributed to environmental health risks are included, the total costs are at
least 40 percent higher for both Ghana and Pakistan. The longer-term effects of
malnutrition (partly attributed to environment-related infections) on education
and income are estimated to add another 3 to 4 percent in terms of annual costs.
The total annual cost attributed to environmental health risks, including all

CONCLUSION  113

 malnutrition effects (such as higher education costs), are estimated to be as high
as 9 percent of Ghana’s or Pakistan’s gross domestic product. Given this consid-
erable social and economic burden, policy-makers in developing countries where
malnutrition and poor environmental conditions coexist should place environ-
mental health interventions high on the policy agenda. Furthermore, as developing
countries strive to meet several of their commitments for the Millennium
Development Goals, these interventions will remain critical for addressing poverty
reduction and child mortality.

Growing evidence indicates the need to mainstream environmental health
interventions in developing countries’ child survival strategies. With environ-
mental health having fallen through the cracks in the development agenda, however,
policy-makers in those countries will have to make a renewed effort to revitalize
the environmental health content within existing child survival programs, nutri-
tion initiatives, and infrastructure projects. Anecdotal evidence of such efforts is
beginning to emerge in developing countries. Common criteria for successful
implementation include obtaining high-level political commitment, involving
and empowering communities, allocating responsibilities and resources at the
local level, and finding a balance between private and public sector roles. Finally,
successful environmental health governance requires strong institutional under-
pinnings. This report discusses—through an institutional lens—the roles that
national and local governments can play in delivering and managing environ-
mental health interventions. 

Next Steps

In many ways, this report represents a first step toward providing policy-makers
with the epidemiological, economic, and experiential evidence to incorporate
environmental health in the child survival agenda. However, in each of the three
main sections of the report, additional research and studies will help donors and
governments in developing countries choose to invest in appropriate environ-
mental health interventions. 

The epidemiological evidence presented in this report reaffirms the importance
of environmental health for child survival, especially when considering the links
through malnutrition. Further research on the environmental health impacts during
pregnancy, additional disease transmission pathways, and better relative risk esti-
mates will help improve disease burden and costing estimates while informing
governments about appropriate programs. For example, in Sub-Saharan Africa,
malaria and hookworm infections coexist to cause anemia and subsequent growth
retardation of the fetus in pregnant women. Communitywide investments to improve
water resources management, use of insecticide-treated nets and indoor residual
spraying, and improved sanitation facilities would help improve birth weight. 

114 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

This report demonstrates the substantial burden and consequent economic
costs associated with environmental health risks, but important questions remain:
How should governments prioritize among the different environmental health,
infrastructure, nutrition, and child survival interventions to improve child health?
What are the cost-benefit ratios and the levels of cost-effectiveness of individual
interventions? Some research on this subject has provided answers at the global
level—with hygiene promotion measures emerging as the most cost-effective
intervention (Laxminarayan, Chow, and Shahid-Salles 2006). Carrying out such
cost-effectiveness and cost-benefit analyses at a country level is the next step in
guiding decision-makers in specific countries in prioritizing among the various
available interventions. Some recent analyses in Colombia and Peru have begun
to explore the ranking environmental health interventions through cost-benefit
analyses (World Bank 2006a, 2007g). 

In addition to conducting economic analyses, governments in developing coun-
tries need to look toward implementing specific environmental health actions. The
effectiveness of such interventions ultimately depends on the enabling environment
in the country, which highlights the need to assess (a) institutional mandates and
capacities for addressing environmental health issues, (b) regulations on environ-
mental health, and (c) availability of budgets (Poverty Environment Partnership
2008). However, a one-size-fits-all solution will not work, and policy-makers will
need to look beyond the generic roles and responsibilities for better environmental
health governance discussed in this report. An important next step would be to
carry out an in-depth institutional analysis at a country level to better understand
the coordination mechanisms between ministries and the ways mandates and
budgets are assigned. Such an understanding is critical for environmental health—
an issue that is inherently multisectoral and that requires collaborations across
health, environment, and infrastructure ministries. 

Temporality is also an important consideration in how governments choose
between various interventions that address child survival, because the costs of
programs are often incurred in the short term and are front-loaded, whereas the
benefits—especially those relating to cognition and learning—are spread over the
long term. In the absence of appropriate economic analysis at the country level,
governments may be tempted to choose interventions that are cheaper in the short
term, such as oral rehydration programs, rather than the more expensive water
and sanitation programs, even though the latter may have greater benefits over
the long term. 

Additionally, over the longer term, environmental health concerns are expected
to grow. As the world’s climate changes, diseases such as diarrhea and malaria,
among other important health burdens that are the result of environmental
risk factors, are likely to worsen, particularly for the poor and in developing
countries (Campbell-Lendrum, Corvalán, and Neira 2007; IPCC 2007). Changing

CONCLUSION  115

temperature and precipitation will also affect agricultural production and threaten
food security, thus having implications for malnutrition. Therefore, scaling up
preventive environmental health interventions (such as clean water and 
sanitation) to reduce the current burden of disease is a prudent investment
(Campbell-Lendrum, Corvalán, and Neira 2007). 

Given the multisectoral nature of environmental health issues, the advocacy
and regulatory role of the health sector and the supporting roles of other sectors
(for example, environment, infrastructure, agriculture, and education) in promoting
and delivering environmental health actions need to be revitalized. Without focused
and targeted attention to improving environmental health, governments and
donors are losing out on the significant opportunities to make dramatic changes
in the child health scenario in the world’s poorest countries. 

Ultimately, good environmental health governance is about how policy-makers
in the poorest countries develop mechanisms to pick up signals on environ-
mental risks and then find ways to translate these findings into appropriate and
well-targeted actions. These governments will also need to adjust their policies
to address environmental health outcomes and set up institutional mechanisms
to successfully implement interventions. Finally, the creation of long-term
constituencies within a country will help to continually raise attention to issues
related to the environment, health, and poverty and to promote social account-
ability among public officials for effective action on these issues (Poverty
Environment Partnership 2008). 

A concerted and continuous effort is needed on behalf of both developed and
developing countries to ensure that environmental health is placed high on the
development agenda and that corresponding interventions are financed and under-
taken to improve children’s survival and development potential.

A P P E N D I X   A

Technical Review of 

Cohort Studies

Background

The World Health Organization (WHO) monograph by Scrimshaw, Taylor, and
Gordon (1968) initiated a lengthy discussion on whether repeated infections in
childhood resulted in permanent growth faltering and stunting in adulthood.
Results from observational cohort follow-up studies on effects of infections over
time—and ultimately over generations—have provided evidence to stimulate
the debate. 

By the time the WHO monograph was published, extensive microbiological,
immunological, and physiological studies—partly based on human experiments—
favored the idea that all infections contribute to growth faltering, but the
long-term effects of infections on nutritional status were still lacking (Scrimshaw
2003). Diarrheal diseases are very common from infancy up to early childhood.
Unlike upper respiratory infections, which are relatively uncommon in early
infancy because of maternal antibodies (Nair and others 2007; Sato and others
1979), diarrheal diseases affect the gastrointestinal tract of the child from birth
onward, causing malabsorption. For this reason, diarrheal diseases have been
particularly studied to investigate their impact on growth faltering (Scrimshaw
2003; Stephensen 1999). 

117

118 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

Search Strategy and Selection Criteria

For this study, an initial review of cohort studies published on Pubmed that linked
infections and malnutrition (underweight, wasting, and stunting) was under-
taken. In all, 38 cohort studies conducted in developing countries (table A.1) were
identified; one recent and very large case-control study in Bangladesh (Chisti
and others 2007) was also included. Studies that reported the effects of infec-
tions on underweight status (weight for age) only—that is, those that lacked
information on stunting (measured by height for age)—were also included. One
cohort study that was included described only the natural growth history of
patients with persistent diarrhea (Valentiner-Branth and others 2001) and had
no control group. One study merely descriptively associated diarrhea episodes
and development of underweight (Schorling and others 1990). These studies
were included whether or not associations of diarrheal and other diseases with
malnutrition were separated.

Published experimental studies (and their systematic reviews) that report results
from deworming trials undertaken after a recent meta-analysis (Dickson and
others 2000) were separately included to allow inferences to be drawn about
whether the elimination of soil-transmitted helminths that cause loss of appetite,
malabsorption, or nutrient losses affect the nutritional status of individuals (Taylor-
Robinson, Jones, and Garner 2007). 

Findings and Discussion

Epidemiological studies typically examine associations between an exposure vari-
able and a health outcome. Austin Bradford Hill recognized the importance of
moving from association to causation as a necessary step for taking preventive
action against environmental causes of disease (Lucas and McMichael 2005). Hill
set out nine viewpoints, or guidelines, against which an epidemiological associ-
ation might be assessed when attempting to reach an appropriate conclusion on
causation: strength of association, consistency of results, specificity (dose-response),
temporality, biological gradient, plausibility, coherence, experiment, and analogy.
In this review of the literature, some of the more important of these criteria are
used as a framework for evaluating whether infections cause growth faltering. 

Strength of Association

The cohort studies use heterogeneous analyses and different parameters to study
infection-attributable growth faltering. One often finds somewhat weak associ-
ations in these studies. One should bear in mind the following issues, which lead
to difficulties in establishing an infection-attributable fraction of poor growth:
1. The internal comparison group—or merely a diarrhea-free period—in the
reviewed studies is often not infection free. Thus, asymptomatic children may

TECHNICAL REVIEW OF COHORT STUDIES  119

have endemic diarrheagenic bacteria (12 to 37 percent, according to Nguyen
and others 2005). Schorling and others 1990; Steiner and others 1998), as
well as carry parasites and protozoa (Checkley and others 1997; Prado and
others 2005). These children have been shown to present with pathological
damage in the gut, which results in subsequent growth faltering (Checkley
and others 1997; Steiner and others 1998). A cohort follow-up study of 71
Gambian infants has provided evidence that such damage—which results
from a malabsorption disease likely caused by unhygienic conditions (Lim
2001)—causes 55 percent of the loss in weight gain in developing countries,
even if infants were breastfed (Campbell, Elia, and Lunn 2003). In an earlier
study in rural Gambia, infants between the ages of 3 and 15 months were
found to have this malabsorption in the gut for 75 percent of the time but
showed diarrheal symptoms only 7.3 percent of the time (Lunn, Northrop-
Clewes, and Downes 1991). 

2. In earlier studies in Guatemala and Nigeria (Martorell, Yarbrough, and others
1975; Morley, Bicknell, and Woodland 1968) and in a more recent study in Malawi
(Maleta and others 2003), the comparison group was also exposed to a relatively
high morbidity burden, which obviously diminishes the association between
growth faltering and infections.

3. In most studies, the children being studied are subject to nutritional inter-
ventions (especially breastfeeding promotion) or receive appropriate medical
case management. These interventions and treatments are also likely to 
mask the effects of diarrhea on growth because it becomes difficult to observe
the natural history of growth faltering attributable to infections under these
circumstances.

4. Another reason for difficulties in attributing growth faltering to infections lies
in the methodology for research studies. Many studies (for example, Briend and
others 1989) do not start follow-up from early infancy. This lessens the ability
of investigators to find the effects of infections on growth faltering (Checkley
and others 2003; see also the discussion of early infancy in chapter 2).

5. Furthermore, the environmental effects in the fetal period are not adequately
considered in these cohort studies. Many infections can cause intrauterine
growth restriction (Graham and others 2006), but recent robust ecological (van
Geertruyden and others 2004) and analytic (Watson-Jones and others 2007)
evidence reveals that malaria during pregnancy has dramatic adverse effects
on fetal and newborn survival and related nutritional status at birth, especially
in Sub-Saharan Africa.

Consistency

Infections contribute to growth faltering. This proposition is supported by 35 of
the reviewed cohort studies. In the three studies in which the effects were largely

120 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

not found (Alvarado and others 2005; Cohen and others 1995; Kolsteren, Kusin,
and Kardjati 1997), the results can be explained by the well-established masking
effects of breastfeeding (Brown 2003).1

Studies by Briend and others (1989) and later by Moy and others (1994) paid
attention to the timing of infections within the follow-up periods. (Growth
periods were analyzed as statistical units rather than by individual children.)
The results demonstrated that the effect on growth faltering was observed to be
corrected by catch-up growth among children experiencing watery nonchronic
diarrhea if enough time had elapsed since diarrhea episodes. However, even those
studies have agreed that chronic diarrhea (that is, diarrhea that persists for greater
than 10 percent of time) has irreversible effects. The study by Briend and others
(1989) also suggested that dysentery adversely affected linear growth after a three-
month lag. 

Studies that started follow-up from birth (see also the specificity and tempo-
rality arguments later) have shown with increasing consistency that diarrheal
episodes lead to irreversible growth faltering. The Gambia study (Campbell,
Elia, and Lunn 2003: 1337) concluded that “the lack of association between
diarrheal disease and long-term growth as described by Briend et al. (1989) does
not preclude the possibility of the presence of a growth retarding gastrointestinal
enteropathy.” Hence, when the gut of young infants is damaged from malab-
sorption disease, growth faltering will result even in the absence of diarrheal
symptoms (and may not be attributed to the diarrheal episodes). Investigators
have already questioned how children in the Bangladesh study (Briend and
others 1989) could have caught up in growth despite the extra nutritional require-
ments generated by this common malabsorption disease (Lunn, Northrop-Clewes,
and Downes 1991).

There are few follow-up data concerning helminths. One study from a north-
eastern Brazilian shantytown, where subjects were followed from birth to seven
years of age, showed that helminths, independently and additively, caused 
4.6 centimeters of growth faltering, on average. This result was on top of the
effects of diarrhea (Moore and others 2001) and is consistent with an early
quasi-experimental study from rural St. Lucia, West Indies. That study revealed
that the introduction of household connections and latrines resulted in lower
levels of Ascaris and Trichuris, lower diarrhea prevalence rates, and improved
growth in infanthood (Henry 1981).

Specificity (Dose-Response)

Researchers have shown dose-response relationships between infections and growth
faltering in several ways that closely relate to the specificity criteria: 
1. Four studies (Adair and others 1993; Brush, Harrison, and Waterlow 1997; Checkley
and others 2003; Moore and others 2001) have demonstrated that diarrheal

TECHNICAL REVIEW OF COHORT STUDIES  121

episodes (the dose), with increasing period prevalence, show lagged or lasting
effects in terms of growth faltering (the response). This finding is consistent with
many older studies that performed regression analyses for effects that did not lag
(Baumgartner and Pollitt 1983; Black, Brown, and Becker 1984; Lutter and others
1989; Martorell, Yarbrough, and others 1975; Rowland, Cole, and Whitehead 1977;
Zumrawi, Dimond, and Waterlow 1987). 

2. Several studies have demonstrated dose-response effects relating the nature of
infection bouts to growth faltering: the more severe the infection bouts, the
more significant the growth-faltering effects in children. Especially in the case
of invasive infections (such as enterotoxigenic E. coli, Shigella, measles, and acute
lower respiratory infection), significant metabolic (or merely dose-response)
effects have been observed (Alam and others 2000; Black, Brown, and Becker
1984; Briend and others 1989; Chisti and others 2007; Henry and others 1987;
Victora and others 1990; Villamor and others 2004), as expected by Powanda
and Beisel (2003) and Scrimshaw, Taylor, and Gordon (1968). Even the study
that has most strongly challenged the irreversible effects of infections on growth
makes an exemption with respect to dysentery (Briend and others 1989).2 Also,
infections (for example, protozoa) pose special immunological challenges in
early, preweaning infancy (Marodi 2006; Wilson 1986) appear to contribute to
permanent growth faltering (Checkley and others 1997, 1998; Molbak and
others 1997). 

3. Prado and others (2005) show that among Giardia-infected children, the more
time the child remained untreated during the follow-up period, the more he
or she experienced lagged linear growth faltering.

Temporality

The proposition that the associations between infections and growth faltering are
merely transitory has been given importance in several relatively new studies,
which emphasize that there are lagged or lasting effects that continue until two
to seven years of age if the burden of infection began in early infancy (Adair and
others 1993; Checkley and others 2003; Maleta and others 2003; Moore and others
2001; Prado and others 2005). This interpretation is supported by many earlier
as well as more contemporary studies (Baumgartner and Pollitt 1983; Brush,
Harrison, and Waterlow 1997; Checkley and others 1997; Chisti and others 2007;
Fikree, Rahbar, and Berendes 2000; Martorell, Habicht, and others 1975; Martorell,
Yarbrough, and others 1975; Molbak and others 1997; Morley, Bicknell, and
Woodland 1968; Rowland, Cole, and Whitehead 1977; Victora and others 1990). 
As follow-up data from Central America indicate, the growth status of chil-
dren at two years of age strongly predicts their height in adulthood (Martorell
1995). The observed lagged or lasting effects are considered irreversible (Checkley
and others 2003). These lagged effects are also important because they reduce the

122 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

possibility of reverse causality (that is, that malnutrition increased the risk of
infection in the first place) (Prado and others 2005). 

Biological Plausibility

The proposition that infections cause undernutrition is biologically plausible.
There are many mechanisms, both proven (anorexia, malabsorption, loss of nutri-
ents) and still hypothetical (decreased nutrient transport to periphery), that interact
with the host’s immune responses (table 2.2; see also Keusch 2003; Scrimshaw
2003; Scrimshaw, Taylor, and Gordon 1959, 1968). 

An important but surprisingly little-studied mechanism is the acute phase
response to infection in children. The withholding of food (because of anorexia)
in the acute phase of an infection such as diarrhea appears initially to have some
beneficial effects. However, long-lasting anorexia delays recovery and is ultimately
deleterious to a child’s health (Langhans 2000). This mechanism probably under-
lies widespread traditional cultural practices relating to the deliberate restriction
of food intake in children during disease episodes. It was only in 1997 that continued
feeding during diarrhea was included as an important component of diarrheal
patient management in the American Academy of Pediatrics’ Pediatric Nutrition
Handbook (Brown 2003). 

Experimental Evidence from Deworming

Deworming with anthelminthics is often safe and highly effective in reducing or
eliminating such soil-transmitted helminths as roundworm (Ascaris lumbricoides),
hookworm (Necator americanus or Ancylostoma duodenale), or whipworm (Trichuris
trichiuria) (Awasthi and Bundy 2007; Dickson and others 2000). WHO recom-
mends3 the widespread use of anthelminthics among children, in an effort to cut
transmission that occurs in tropical countries (Awasthi and Bundy 2007). More
and  more,  in  large  areas  of  developing  countries,  almost  all  children—
especially after weaning—are being infected (Awasthi, Bundy, and Savioli 2003).

Trials carried out in the late 20th century that tried to establish the effective-
ness of anthelminthics in improving nutritional status were conducted largely on
schoolchildren infected with roundworm. The trials showed that, despite method-
ological problems, a single anthelminthic dose may lead to a significant weight
gain of 0.24 kilograms (95 percent confidence interval, 0.15 to 0.32 kilograms;
fixed-effect model) to 0.38 kilograms (95 percent confidence interval, 0.01 to
0.70 kilograms; random-effect model) over a period of one year or more (Dickson
and others 2000). Subsequent rapid reinfection often masks the beneficial effects
of deworming on weight gain.

A recent comprehensive meta-analysis of randomized trials supports the idea
that a single dose of a deworming drug has a significant effect on the mean change

TECHNICAL REVIEW OF COHORT STUDIES  123

in weight in children who have an initial high worm prevalence or intensity,
compared with no effect in a group with low worm prevalence or intensity (Taylor-
Robinson, Jones, and Garner 2007). 

Conclusions

Consistent and biologically plausible results from the reviewed cohort studies,
coupled with evidence of specificity, reveal how increments in infection load—
number, severity, and duration of episodes—are associated with stronger effects
on nutrition, which appear after a time lag in terms of stunting. The results
support the idea that infections—especially if acquired in early infancy—cause
irreversible and often highly prevalent undernutrition among children under
five years of age in developing countries.4 Experimental anthelminthic trials on
humans also support the idea that soil-transmitted helminths and other pathogens
associated with similar pathophysiological effects (malabsorption and loss of
nutrients) cause undernutrition.

In summary, several strong masking elements are important in estimating how

much of undernutrition is attributable to infections: 
1. Enteric infections cause growth faltering in children in developing countries,
even in the absence of diarrhea. These infections make children with diarrhea
and without diarrhea appear to be more alike with respect to growth.

2. In some studies, there is a relatively high disease burden in the control group,

which again makes children with and without infections more alike.

3. The active case management and supporting nutritional therapies (including
breastfeeding) that are often targeted at study participants mitigate the effects
of infections on nutritional status.

4. Not enough infants are enrolled in many of these cohort studies; therefore,
the studies miss the long-lasting effects in the most vulnerable period (0 to
6 months) on nutritional status.

5. Environmentally attributable growth faltering (especially malaria and hook-
worms) during the fetal period that manifests itself in intrauterine growth
retardation is not adequately captured in these studies. 
Independent of this review, a group of experts chosen by WHO (Prüss-Üstün
and Corvalán 2006) estimated on the basis of converging expert opinion (using
the Delphi method) that 50 percent (with a confidence interval of 39 to 61 percent)
of the consequences of maternal and childhood underweight are attributable to
environmental issues, especially to poor water, sanitation, and hygiene. Fewtrell
and others (2007) use this attributable fraction in estimating the regional burden
of disease from poor water resources management (including lack of water, sani-
tation, and hygiene). The regional estimates of disease burden presented in chapter
4 are based on those two studies. 

124 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

For reasons such as heterogeneous inclusion criteria and analysis techniques
and differing follow-up times, masking effects, and the like, it is virtually impos-
sible to assess the literature systematically to find out how much (what percentage)
of growth faltering is attributable to diarrheal episodes. Furthermore, not all
studies present their results; hence, the variance of growth faltering that is explain-
able by infections is not readily available. 

It is important to note that because the prevention of infections more than
proportionately moves children from a severe to a moderate and mild malnutri-
tion state (see table D.5), far less than 50 percent of weight gain attributed to
environmental infections explains 50 percent of the consequences of maternal
and childhood underweight. The idea that a substantial proportion of children
with severe undernutrition can be lifted to the moderate and mild categories is
also supported by experimental data on humans (Ahmed and others 1993). 

Findings from this review of 38 cohort studies support the 50 percent figure
used by WHO in its reports. Examples of cohort studies from this review provide
some idea of how experts have come up with this figure. For example, a recent
relatively large study in Bangladesh reveals that dysentery and watery diarrhea
together could retard weight gain by 20 to 25 percent compared with the results
in periods when no infections occurred (Alam and others 2000). The weight gain
retardation is likely to be significantly higher when compared with international
standards. Simulations that use a weight gain retardation of 35 percent result in
environmentally attributable health burdens that are approximately similar to the
point estimate from WHO experts. 

Choice of Parameters

The results of the review informed the choice of parameters used in this study
to estimate the revised costs of environmental infections through malnutri-
tion. The literature reviewed shows that diarrhea and other infections cause a
weight gain retardation of 20 to 50 percent. Limited research studies how the
retardation factor may vary with z-score and age. This study assumes an average
loss of 35 percent in terms of weight gain (see table D.4 and step 4 in appendix
D) as attributable to infections in early childhood in developing countries. This
percentage is used in studies in Ghana and Pakistan to compute counterfac-
tual underweight z-scores and prevalence rates in order to estimate deaths in
children under five years of age attributable to infections and malnutrition
(presented in chapter 5). 

For estimating the effect of stunting on educational performance, this study
assumes an average loss of 25 percent in height gain from diarrheal infections
in early childhood. The literature reviewed in this appendix suggests that the
effect on stunting is somewhat less than on weight gain (see table D.11 and step
10 in appendix D).

TECHNICAL REVIEW OF COHORT STUDIES  125

Notes

1 Breastfeeding not only diminishes transmission by various mechanisms but also substan-

tially supports energy balance during disease bouts (Brown 2003).

2 Briend and others (1989) observed that the effects of dysentery did not become visible

until three months had elapsed.

3 World Health Assembly resolution 54.19, passed in May 2001.
4 Recent expert opinion (Prüss-Üstün and Corvalán 2006) suggests that 50 percent of the
health burden attributable to maternal and childhood underweight results from rampant
diarrheal disease.

1
2
6

TABLE  A.1
Cohort Follow-up Studies Relating Infectious Disease and Nutritional Status of Children in Developing Countries

Country 
(study)

Setting

Number of
Children

Age at
Entry

Follow-up

Period

Exposure Data

Collection

Anthropometric
Data Collection

Analysis 
Strategy

Rural

104

6–12 months Up to 

4 years

Monthly 
weights

Symptom of diarrhea
accepted only when a
clinical examination
confirmed diagnosis and
illness was considered of
sufficient severity to
warrant specific
treatment

Rural

716

0–7 
months

23 
months

Retrospective 
disease reporting 
every 2 weeks

Every 
6 months

A child whose weight
fell below the 10%
percentile at 6, 9, or 12
months) was selected
to group A (the under-
nourished group); a
child who remained
between the 50th and
75th percentile (at 9 or
12 months) was
selected to group B.

Used low versus high
diarrhea groups; Used
linear regression.

Rural

152

3 months to
less than 3
years

On 
average, 
80 weeks

Self-reported period
prevalence (percentage
of sick days) of disease
between clinic visits
(3–10 weeks); diarrhea
period prevalence 14%

During clinic
visits (3- to 
10-week 
intervals)

Period prevalence 
was regressed with
height and weight
gain.

Age, season

Treatment was
encouraged and
facilitated.

Nigeria 
(Morley, 
Bicknell, and
Woodland 
1968)

Guatemala 
(Martorell,
Habicht, and
others 1975;
Martorell,
Yarbrough,
and others
1975)

Gambia
(Rowland, 
Cole, and
Whitehead
1977)

Control
Variables 
(ok if blank)

Age

Notes 

(ok if blank)

Effect of Disease on

Malnutrition

In groups A and B, 
8 and 3 children died,
respectively.

Group A was characterized by
lower birthweights, diarrheal
bouts before 6 months, and
measles and pertussis bouts at
6–12 months; marked distinction
between the groups in weight
remained until children were 
5 years old.

Age, sex, dietary
supplement

Children were 
subject to 
supplemental 
nutrition.

Found on average 6.3% 
(3.5 centimeter) length and 11.0%
(1.5 kilogram) weight relative
difference; Martorell, Yarbrough,
and others’ (1975) regression
techniques revealed dose-
response and 10% of growth
deficits would be explainable by
diarrhea.

Mean difference between 100%
and 0% period prevalence of
diarrhea in height and weight gain
was –4.2 millimeters and –746
grams per month; regression
techniques revealed dose-
response.

Country 
(study)

Setting

Number of
Children

Age at
Entry

Follow-up

Period

Exposure Data

Collection

Anthropometric
Data Collection

Analysis 
Strategy

Rural

276

0 months

3 years

Mexico 
(Condon-
Paoloni 
and others
1977)

Retrospective probing of
disease by a health
worker every second
week to establish period
prevalence

Monthly, but
weight 
measured 
every 2 weeks

Mean growth in
upper and lower
diarrhea quartiles
were compared in a
factorial design.

Control
Variables 
(ok if blank)

Age, sex,
“growth failure”

Rural

229

St. Lucia, West
Indies (Henry
1981)

Less than 6
months

up to 18
months 

Monthly

Examination of stools
every 6 months for
Ascaris and Trichuris;
mothers instructed to fill
out diarrhea cards

Quasi-
experimental
community trial;
testing took place in
a factorial design of
the effectiveness of
household water
connections and
water-seal latrines to
prevent helminths.

Comparability by
design for
confounders:
food intake,
socioeconomic
conditions,
general
household
conditions

Rural

118

0 months

More than 
6 years

Daily collection by nurses
to record frequency,
duration, and total days
per symptom

Monthly or
bimonthly

Twelve disease
categories were
regressed with
growth.

Nutritional
treatment,
treatment
timing, sex

Notes 

(ok if blank)

Effect of Disease on

Malnutrition

19 children who
developed clinical
protein calorie malnu-
trition were excluded

Ascaris infected
children were actively
treated with
piperazine phosphate.

Diarrhea was the only infection
associated with decreased
weight gain, and high-diarrhea
group attained 95% of the
weight of the low-diarrhea
group; height was not affected
by diarrhea.

In the nonintervention village,
children remained shorter and
weighed less and had
helminths, diarrhea, and other
water-washed disease more
often than in the village, where
both household connection and
sanitation were provided; when
interventions were introduced
they led to catch-up growth. 

Nutritional supple -
mentation (800
kilocalories) was
provided in a placebo-
controlled 
trial.

Negative effect of diarrhea on
growth rate was the most
important finding, though it
explained only 3% of variance;
regression techniques revealed
dose-response.

Taiwan, China
(Baumgartner
and Pollitt 
1983)

Northeastern
Brazil (Guerrant 
and others
1983)

1
2
7

0–6 years

3 months

Small 
town 
plus 
rural
adjacent
areas 
with
varying 

297 study
participants, 
of which 
53 subjects
were used 
to study
effects on
nutrition

Daily diary by mother or
legal guardian plus 
weekly visits by a 
surveillance team
recording clinical
symptoms to 
establish period
prevalence; 

Quarterly 
(height); 
weekly (weight)

Regression 
analysis of 482 
child-periods of 
3 months were
regressed against 
the number of
diarrhea episodes

Age, breast-
feeding, growth
status before the
period

Antidiarrheal
treatments
(iodochlorhydroxyquin
and kaolin pectin) 
were given.

Multiple different 
pathogens were found in 
50% of episodes, and height
faltering attributable to 
episodes was especially
pronounced (41%) during 
the second year of life;
Breastfeeding found to be highly 

(continued)

TABLE  A.1
Cohort Follow-up Studies Relating Infectious Disease and Nutritional Status of Children in Developing Countries (continued)

1
2
8

Number of
Children

Age at
Entry

Follow-up

Period

Exposure Data

Collection

Anthropometric
Data Collection

Analysis 
Strategy

Control
Variables 
(ok if blank)

Notes 

(ok if blank)

Effect of Disease on

Malnutrition

Setting

levels of
environ-
mental
health
services

Country 
(study)

Bangladesh 
(Black, Brown,
and Becker 
1984)

Rural

157

6–48
months

12 months

collection of stool
specimens by health
worker

Monthly

Period prevalence 
of diarrhea within 
60-day periods as 
actively established 
by a health worker who
visited homes every 
2 days

Growth in zero-
period prevalence
periods was 
compared with 
growth in nonzero
periods.

Age, 
weight and
length at 
base-line

All cases of 
diarrhea 
were medically 
treated.

protective, especially in first 
6 weeks. Regression techniques
revealed dose-response.

Children with no diarrhea gain on
average 0.42 centimeter more in
length per year compared with
children suffering from diarrhea;
diarrhea also adversely affected
weight gain; invasive Shigella
and enterotoxigenic E. coli might
especially cause irreversible
growth faltering; regression
techniques revealed dose-
response.

No association of watery
diarrhea with growth faltering
was noted, but stunting was
associated with dysentery.

Bangladesh 
(Henry and
others 1987)

Rural 
villages

On 
average, 
300 children

5–24
months

6–19 
months

Bangladesh
(Bairagi and
others 1987)

12 rural
villages in
Matlab

Approxi – 
mately 1,000

1–4 years

9 months

Five 
anthropometric 
surveys every 
6 months

Bimonthly

Mean duration of
watery diarrhea and
dysentery in different 
anthropometric
categories were
tabulated.

Multiple regression
analysis was used to
investigate diarrhea-
nutrition relationship.

Period (60-day)
prevalence and 
attack rates based 
on weekly visits by 
health assistants

Weekly visits by field
workers to probe 
(7-day recall) diarrhea
episodes and duration; 
no distinction between
watery diarrhea and
dysentery

Age

Age, dwelling
floor space
(proxy for
socioeconomic
status),
mother’s
education

Several 
observational 
epidemiological 
studies led by
International Centre 
for Diarrhoeal Disease
Research  were 
carried out in 
Matlab region.

Those with greater  than  10%
diarrhea period prevalence had
71% (weight) and 75% (height)
growth velocity throughout the
follow-up period, compared with
those who did not have diarrhea;
catch-up growth among those
who had less than 10% diarrhea
period prevalence prevented
growth faltering. 

Setting

Urban

Country 
(study)

Sudan
(Zumrawi,
Dimond, and
Waterlow
1987)

Number of
Children

Age at
Entry

Follow-up

Period

Exposure Data

Collection

Anthropometric
Data Collection

Analysis 
Strategy

0 months

1 year

439, but
falling  to 
262 due to
drop-outs and
families
moving away

Every 2 weeks

Morbidity probed 
at visits every 
2 weeks visits on the
basis of 14-day recall; 
period prevalence 6%

Number of days ill
were regressed with
weight gain; weight
loss due to infections
were externally (WHO
reference) and
internally between
quartiles assessed

Control
Variables 
(ok if blank)

Age

Notes 

(ok if blank)

Effect of Disease on

Malnutrition

Urban

126

0 months

24 months

Gambia
(Rowland,
Rowland, and
Cole 1988)

Bangladesh
(Briend and
others 1989)

Rural

On average
230a

6–35 months 42 months

‘fourteen
quarterly
rounds’ 

1
2
9

Number of illness 
days (10 categories)
probed 1 month 
retrospectively 
during every clinic 
visit to establish 
period prevalence

Height and weight
measured quarterly;
diarrhea morbidity
collected by means of
weekly recall by the
children’s mothers

Monthly

Age, season

Illness growth
periods were
compared with no-
illness periods.

Study infants had
ready access to a
pediatrician whenever 
they were ill.

Quarterly (varying) Growth rates of

diarrhea-free periods
were compared with
growth rates of
periods with varying
prevalence of diarrhea,
with attention to
timing of disease
within studied periods.

Effective case
management with oral
rehydration therapy
was organized within 
the study. 40.7% 
of periods excluded
because of missing
data

Weight gain deficits from 1 day of
diarrhea and cough or cold was
32 and 16 grams, respectively;
External comparison revealed
that almost all weight gain deficit
was due to infections, though
internal comparison revealed
little weight gain deficit 
attributable to infections;
regression techniques 
revealed dose-response. 

Combined effect of acute lower
respiratory infection (–320) and
diarrhea (–610) was 930 grams,
but there was no effect on
height; acute lower respiratory
infection impact varied by
season; effects were
exclusively found among non-
breastfed babies; regression
techniques revealed dose-
response.

Only transient changes in
growth were observed, and were
caught-up later, though
dysenteric patients were
observed to experience stunting
with a 3-month lag.

(continued)

1
3
0

TABLE  A.1
Cohort Follow-up Studies Relating Infectious Disease and Nutritional Status of Children in Developing Countries (continued)

Country 
(study)

Colombia (Lutter
and others 1989)

Brazil 
(Schorling 
and others 
1990)

Setting

Urban 
setting 
with 
at least 
half of
siblings
under 5 who
were less
than  85%
weight for
age.

Urban 
slum in
northeastern
Brazil, where
an excep-
tionally high
rate of
endemic
diarrhea
persists

Number of
Children

Age at
Entry

Follow-up

Period

Exposure Data

Collection

Anthropometric
Data Collection

Analysis 
Strategy

0 
months

36 
months

148 
(control), 
140
(supplement)

Semimonthly

Semimonthly visits 
to establish incidence 
and duration of diarrhea,
vomiting, 
and respiratory 
and skin infections 
to establish 
period prevalence;
diarrhea prevalence
4.5–12.2% according 
to age

Linear 
regression and 
2-way analysis of
variance were 
used to model either
increment 
of weight and height
since birth or
absolute height and
weight until 
36 months.

Control
Variables 
(ok if blank)

Age,
treatment
group, 
size at 
birth

175

0–5 
years

28 
months

Monthly

Descriptive 
time-series analysis
was made.

Age

Three times a week;
during third year,
extensive stool
specimens collected
from acute, persistent,
and control children;
specimens subject to
intensive microbiological
testing

Notes 

(ok if blank)

Effect of Disease on

Malnutrition

Throughout 
the study, families
received free obstetric
and pediatric care,
including medicine; the
supplement group
received 600
kilocalories and 
30 grams of protein.

Each day ill with diarrhea is
associated with a reduction 0.03
cm (p < 0.001) in attained length
at age 36 mo;  food supplements
effectively mitigated growth
faltering (4.9 centimeters by age
36 months), especially among
children who experienced greater
than 10% diarrhea period
prevalence; the difference
between this group and the WHO
(World Health Organization)
standard was 13 centimeters at
36 months (that is, the treatment
group experienced growth
faltering of about 8 centimeters);
regression techniques revealed
dose-response.

Authors noted that the greatest
contribution to the declines came
from a 50% increase in the
prevalence of persistent diarrhea
and that this decline closely
followed a decrease in the
prevalence of severe malnutrition
(weight for age) (p = 0.01);
control children also had high
rates (37%) of diarrheagenic
agents.

Country 
(study)

Setting

Number of
Children

Age at
Entry

Follow-up

Period

Exposure Data

Collection

Anthropometric
Data Collection

Analysis 
Strategy

Bangladesh 
(Becker, Black,
and Brown
1991)

Rural
villages in
Matlab
area

66

5–18 months Up to 14
months

Monthly

Home visits every 
second day by health
worker, who recorded
diarrhea, vomiting, nasal
discharge, cough,
anorexia, and fever

Three different
random effects
models were used,
with morbidity period
prevalence fitted as
independent
variables.

Control
Variables 
(ok if blank)

Energy 
intake, age

Notes 

(ok if blank)

Effect of Disease on

Malnutrition

If diarrhea and fever were
reduced to the level of a U.S.
study children would gain 226
grams per month more;
regression techniques revealed
dose-response.

Matlab is a special
observation region,
where many 
observational
epidemiological
studies are carried out
by the International
Centre for Diarrhoeal
Disease Research.

Brazil (Victora
and others
1990)

Rela tively
wealthy
urban
setting

5,914

0 months

36–52 
months

Every second 
year

During two surveys 
every second year,
mothers probed about
hospitalizations caused by,
for example, pneumonia
and diarrhea; validation
done by reviewing records
of 120 hospitalizations

Comparisons were
made of mean
standard z-scores
among 
hospitalized and
nonhospitalized
children.

Age, sex, income
level, birthweight

Effect of early infancy hospital-
izations strongly predicted
growth faltering (at 36–52
months), though pneumonia—
unlike diarrhea—was statistically
significantly linked with stunting
(for example, early infanthood
diarrhea and pneumonia hospi-
talizations decreased mean
height-for-age z-score by about
50% and 33%, respectively).

204

0–12 months 22 months

Weekly maternal 
recall  to establish 
period prevalence

Monthly 

Zimbabwe
(Moy and 
others 1994)

Rural
impover-
ished
setting
where
caloric
intake was 
65% of
recom -
mended

1
3
1

Comparisons of
growth rates between
diarrhea-free periods
and periods with
varying period
prevalence of diarrhea,
with attention paid to
timing of disease
within studied

Children were
exclusively breastfed
until 3 months; all 
children were fully
immunized, and were
mothers trained to
treat children with
oral rehydration 

Authors found very little
difference in growth rates with
the most diarrhea and with
least; study showed that a
diarrheal episode led to 51
grams and 0.18 centimeters of
growth loss, which could not
explain the significant growth
faltering in the in the cohort;

(continued)

1
3
2

TABLE  A.1
Cohort Follow-up Studies Relating Infectious Disease and Nutritional Status of Children in Developing Countries  (continued)

Country 
(study)

Setting

Number of
Children

Age at
Entry

Follow-up

Period

Exposure Data

Collection

Anthropometric
Data Collection

Analysis 
Strategy

Control
Variables 
(ok if blank)

Notes 

(ok if blank)

Effect of Disease on

Malnutrition

periods; in addition,
growth rates were
compared between

supplements. high
(more than 9) 
and low (fewer 
than 4) occurrence 
of diarrhea in 
22 months.

timing of diarrhea within the 3-
month periods suggested that
growth faltering was transient,
though with respect to linear
growth it was not clear cut. 

Philippines
(Adair and
others 1993)

2,186 
(+375) 
infants

Urban 
and 
rural 
areas
around
and within
Cebu

0 months

24 months

Bimonthly

Bimonthly maternal 
recall (prior week) of 
acute respiratory infection
and diarrhea episodes

Lagged weight 
gain was 
regressed against
morbidity; an instru-
mental variables 
technique was 
used as explanatory
variables were
correlated.

Breast-feeding
and energy intake
from other
sources,
preventive health
care, maternal
weight, season of
measurement

Sudan
(Harrison,
Brush, and
Zumrawi 1993)

Poor 
peri-
urban
Khartoum

120 
mother-infant
pairs

0 months

12 months

Biweekly recall 

Monthly

Comparison was made
of mean duration of
illness and growth of
children born to
housewives and
nonhousewives

Recent diarrhea had a substantial
significant negative effect on
weight of children after 6 months
of life, whereas acute respiratory
infections significantly negatively
affected growth up to 6 months
of life. Regression coefficients:
approximately 250–400 grams
lagged or immediate effects of
diarrhea or acute respiratory
infections in either 0–6-month or
6–24-month period; results are
suggestive of lasting irreversible
effects; breastfeeding was
strongly protective.

Housewives’ children were on
average 3.8 centimeters longer
at 12 months although they were
shorter at birth; on average
illness duration at 2–12 months
was up to 5 times onger among
children born to  working
mothers despite the fact that
such children tended l to have

Country 
(study)

Setting

Number of
Children

Age at
Entry

Follow-up

Period

Exposure Data

Collection

Anthropometric
Data Collection

Analysis 
Strategy

Control
Variables 
(ok if blank)

Notes 

(ok if blank)

Effect of Disease on

Malnutrition

0 months

12 months

Honduras
(Cohen and
others 1995)

141 mother-
child pairs
participating in
a randomized
trial of 3
treatment
groups

Low-
income
com-
munities 
in San
Pedro
Sula,
where
environ-
mental
sani tation
was poor

Monthly 
between 
7 and 12 
months; before
that, either weekly
or more irregularly
at less than 
16 weeks

Comparison was
made of growth
velocities 
between 
treatment groups
and U.S. 
standards at 
0–4 months, 
4–6 months, 
6–12 months. 

Morbidity data (upper
respiratory infection,
fever, diarrhea) collected
at less than 4 months
during weekly visits 
(7-day recall); mothers
kept stool frequency and
consistency records 
to establish period
prevalence (about 3.2%
for diarrhea); 
at greater than 
6 months, monthly visits
probed 30-day recall.

Peri-urban
Khar-toum

167

0 months

12 months

Biweekly mother’s 
recall of the duration of
illness

Monthly

Sudan 
(Brush,
Harrison, 
and 
Waterlow 1997)

Infancy was 
divided into 
periods of greater
than 6 months 
and less than 
6 months, and
biweekly period
prevalence was
regressed with 
growth parameters.

less access to water supply,
sewage systems, and general
conditions of hygiene.

Willingness to
breastfeed for 26
weeks was an
inclusion criterion,
and during weekly
visits this habit 
was encouraged;
hygienic food was
provided during post-
weaning 
period for those 
(2 arms) who  discon-
tinued exclusive
breastfeeding,
according to the inter-
vention protocol.

There was an initial rapid catch-
up compared with the U.S. data
at less than 3 months; after 6
months and especially at greater
than 9 months, rapid growth-
faltering; intrauterine growth
restriction was a strong
predictor of stunting; fever, but
not diarrhea, predicted growth
faltering between 6 and 12
months; the low morbidity rates
and lack of association of
diarrhea with growth may be
attributable to the study’s
emphasis on 
breastfeeding.

Duration of illness in the first 6
months was strongly inversely
related to length and weight
growth at 12 months.

Sex; birth-
weight; 
maternal height,
age, and
education;
group, income,
potable water;,
intervention
group, breast
milk energy 
at 4 months,
income,
maternal BMI at
4 months

Mother’s socioe-
conomic status
and income, age
of weaning, and
disease duration
at under 6
months

1
3
3

(continued)

1
3
4

TABLE  A.1
Cohort Follow-up Studies Relating Infectious Disease and Nutritional Status of Children in Developing Countries  (continued)

Country 
(study)

Guinea-
Bissau 
(Molbak 
and others
1997)

Setting

Number of
Children

Age at
Entry

Follow-up

Period

Exposure Data

Collection

Anthropometric
Data Collection

Analysis 
Strategy

Peri-
urban
district of
Bandim II

1,064 
followed 
for 1,441 
child-years

0–? 
months 
(462
recruited 
at birth)

36 months

Biweekly visits by 
field workers; stool
specimens collected the
same day if child was sick

Approximately 
3 months

Growth faltering was
studied in different
age groups (less 
than 1 year, 1–2 years)
with three different
lag periods and a
common estimate.

Control
Variables 
(ok if blank)

Preinfection
weight, sex, age,
season, and age
at infection

Notes 

(ok if blank)

Effect of Disease on

Malnutrition

141

0–24 months 36 months

Indonesia
(Kolsteren,
Kusin, and
Kardjati 
1997)

Rural
Indonesia,
where
child hood
infections
are relati -
vely rare

Monthly

Weekly visits by 
health worker; ill children
revisited after 3 days to
establish period
prevalence of acute
respiratory infection,
diarrhea, and fever

Period 
prevalence of 
acute respiratory
infections and 
diarrhea was
associated with
growth velocity 
in 4-week periods.

Duration of a
specific disease
episode, sex, 
age

Sick children were
referred to the 
project clinic; 
virtually all were
breastfed 
until 12 months.

Peru 
(Checkley 
and others
1997)

Peri-
urban
shanty -
town

207

0–3 
months

23 
months

Monthly

Stool specimens 
collected weekly
irrespective of 
symptoms; diarrhea
symptoms probed
biweekly by a health
worker

Comparison was 
made of growth
velocity in 
1-month growth
periods among 
those infected by
Cryptosporidium
(first time  infected 

Sex, weight, and
stunting indicator
at the start of
period; interaction
of C. parvum and
diarrhea; presence
of G. lamblia;
seasonality

Long-lasting growth-faltering
effect was observed in both
weight and height velocities,
effects being most pronounced
at under 1 year. At less than 1
year, cryptosporidiosis lowered
weight by 392 and 294 grams,
among boys and girls  respec-
tively; respective results for 
height were –4.7 and 
–8.3 millimeters.

Weight indexes were signifi-
cantly affected, especially by
acute respiratory infections after
6 months of age, but no effect
on linear growth was observed;
duration of diarrhea, acute
respiratory infections, and fever
did not contribute to length
velocity, but weight velocity was
adversely affected by acute
respiratory infection duration. 

On average, symptomatic and
asymptomatic children gained
342 and 162 grams less after the
first Cryptosporidium infection;
because asymptomatic infections
are twice as common, they might
have a bigger public health effect
through malnutrition. 

Country 
(study)

Setting

Number of
Children

Age at
Entry

Follow-up

Period

Exposure Data

Collection

Anthropometric
Data Collection

Analysis 
Strategy

Control
Variables 
(ok if blank)

Notes 

(ok if blank)

Effect of Disease on

Malnutrition

Brazil (Steiner 
and others
1998)

Shanty-
t own in
north-
eastern
Brazil

186

0 months 

5 years

Quarterly

Stool samples collected
periodically from healthy
children and during each
episode of diarrhea 

included and first
month after
infection covered)
and those not
infected.

Growth of E. coli
(EAggEC) positive
children with
persistent and 
acute diarrhea 
and children without
diarrhea were
compared with growth
of children who were
not carrying enteric
pathogens.

Presence of
pathogens 
other than E coli
EAggEC

Cohort was well 
described.

Peru
(Checkley 
and others
1998)

185

Peri-
urban
Lima

0–3 
months

24 months

Monthly measure-
ments by health
workers

Weekly collection of
stool specimens to
diagnose C. parvum
and biweekly 
diagnosis of diarrhea to
establish period
prevalence

Natural cubic-
B-spline was 
used to model
growth, with special
attention paid to 
63 children who
became infected
with C. parvum
during the study.

Age prior
stunting, food
expenses,
number of
diarrheal
episodes,
persistent
diarrhea, water
source and
quality

1
3
5

Regardless of presence of
diarrhea, EAggEC positive
children showed significantly
increased growth faltering (more
than1.5 drop in Z-score) 3
months after infection. EAggEC
children without diarrhea (n = 6)
showed intestinal inflammation
and also had growth faltering
(–0.64 in z-score; p = 0.064);
EAggEC remains dramatically
underreported because showing
its presence requires special
techniques. 15–31% of asympto-
matic children in Brazil and
6.5–9.9% in India are carriers. 

C. parvum when acquired very
early after birth—and
especially if child is stunted
prior to infection—likely leads
to irreversible stunting; C.
parvum contributes to about 1
centimeter height loss after 1
year of infection.

(continued)

1
3
6

TABLE  A.1
Cohort Follow-up Studies Relating Infectious Disease and Nutritional Status of Children in Developing Countries  (continued)

Country 
(study)

Setting

Number of
Children

Age at
Entry

Follow-up

Period

Exposure Data

Collection

Anthropometric
Data Collection

Analysis 
Strategy

Brazil (Lima 
and others
2000)

Shanty-
t own in
north-
eastern
Brazil 

39–42 
(first-ever
persistent
diarrheas
found among
179 children)

0 months

Up to 
48 months

Quarterly

Examination 3 
times weekly by a nurse;
extensive sampling of
diarrheal pathogens from
those who developed
persistent diarrhea and
matched controls

Growth at 
3 months before and
after first-ever
persistent diarrhea
episode was compared
with that of children
who did not develop
persistent diarrhea.

Control
Variables 
(ok if blank)

Age, sex, feeding
practices

Notes 

(ok if blank)

Effect of Disease on

Malnutrition

Statistically significant short-
term growth faltering (weight for
age and height) was found, but
there was no effect on height for
age; Cryptosporidium, Giardia,
enteric adenoviruses, and
enterotoxigenic E. coli were
significantly associated with
persistent diarrhea; even partial
breastfeeding was found to be
protective against diarrheal
disease; persistent diarrhea was
strongly associated with lack of
toilet (pit or flush).

Bangladesh
(Alam
and others
2000)

412

Rural
Matlab
region

Monthly

6–48 months 6–48 months Home visits by 
trained health 
workers every 
4 days; and watery
diarrhea and 
dysentery episodes
recorded to establish
period prevalence (approxi-
mately 10%)

Weight and 
height gains 
in no infection, 
watery diarrhea,
and dysentery 
groups were 
compared by 
using 3-month 
or 1-year periods.

Age, sex, 
parental
education,
household
income, land
ownership,
baseline
nutritional 
status, 
diarrhea 
period 
prevalence

Matlab is a special
observation region,
where many 
observational 
epidemiological 
studies are carried 
out by the 
International 
Centre for 
Diarrhoeal 
Disease Research.

Strong evidence was found that
watery diarrhea, but especially
dysentery, causes growth
faltering in the short and long
terms. Watery diarrhea and
dysentery resulted in  300
grams (0.68 centimeters) and
516 grams (1.34 centimeters) of
statistically significant growth
faltering,  respectively, in a 
1-year period.

Country 
(study)

Setting

Number of
Children

Age at
Entry

Follow-up

Period

Exposure Data

Collection

Anthropometric
Data Collection

Analysis 
Strategy

Pakistan
(Fikree,
Rahbar, and
Berendes
2000)

Urban
squatter
settle-
ments 
of
Karachi

n.a.

994 pregnant
women
initially
recruited;
738
newborns
recruited for
follow-up

Children
visited at one,
three, six,
nine, twelve,
eighteen 
and twenty-
four months

Previous month 
recall (acute lower
respiratory infection) or 2
weeks (diarrhea) during
visits; for child to be
classified as having
diarrhea he or she had to
have diarrhea in at least
2 of 3 contact times (that
is, exposure relied on the
number of episodes)

1-, 3-, 6-, 9-, 12-,
and 24-month
visits

Logistic 
regression technique
used to estimate
relative risk of
becoming malnour-
ished 
when child was
exposed to infections

Control
Variables 
(ok if blank)

Socioeconomic
indicators
(income, house,
water supply);
maternal
indicators
(education,
weight, parity,
first child);
feeding practice
(breast or
nonhuman milk)

Notes 

(ok if blank)

Effect of Disease on

Malnutrition

119

0 months

3 years, 
9 months

Brazil (Moore
and others
2001)

Shanty-
town in
north-
eastern
Brazil

Quarterly

Home visits 2 or 3 times
weekly to establish
clinical period prevalence
of diarrhea and stool
samples to establish
enteric pathogens, ova,
and parasites

Repeat measure
modeling was 
used to explain
growth faltering
caused by early
childhood diarrhea
and intestinal
helminths.

Nutritional
status in infancy,
other parasitic
infections,
diarrhea in later
childhood,
socioeconomic
status

Results represent a
best-case scenario as
this shantytown has
been subject to
substantial nutritional
interventions; Ascaris
infections were
treated.

Guinea-Bissau
(Valentiner-
Branth and
others 2001)

Peri-
urban
setting

107

0–2 years

6.6 months
(median)

Morbidity recorded 
during weekly visits; 
period prevalence 10.3%

Monthly (knee-to-
heel length) and
weight, total 
length quarterly

Natural growth history
of children with
persistent diarrhea
was studied.

1
3
7

Children were examined
by a physician and
offered fluid therapy 
and antibiotics, 
accor ding to WHO
guidelines; breast 
feeding was en cour aged;
half of children received
nutritional interventions.

Intrauterine growth restriction
was the strongest predictor of
stunting and wasting; water
supply and diarrheal episodes
predicted stunting, but risk
factors for wasting were limited
only to socio economic status.
Stunting rose from 27.5% at 3
months to 67.9% at 18 months,
which the authors noted could
be due to feeding practices and
exposure to a more contami-
nated environment than found
in Western countries; breast-
feeding was protective.

Study found early childhood
diarrhea and intestinal helminths
were independently associated
with profound and lasting linear
growth faltering. By age 7, an
average child experiencing 9.1
diarrhea episodes before age 2
had a 3.6-centimeter growth
deficit; early helminth infection
added 4.6 centimeters to this
deficit.
Authors found that the negative
effect of persistent diarrhea on
linear growth was sustained
during the follow-up period, but
some catch-up in weight gain
occurred in the treatment group.

(continued)

1
3
8

TABLE  A.1
Cohort Follow-up Studies Relating Infectious Disease and Nutritional Status of Children in Developing Countries  (continued)

Setting

Number of
Children

Age at
Entry

Follow-up

Period

Exposure Data

Collection

Anthropometric
Data Collection

Analysis 
Strategy

Notes 

(ok if blank)

Effect of Disease on

Malnutrition

Country 
(study)

Egypt 
(Wierzba 
and others
2001)

143

0–24

12–22 months Twice-weekly home visits

to establish number of
diarrhea episodes

Approximately
quarterly

Peri-
urban
Alex -
andria,
where
malnu-
trition
rates
remain
below
20% 

Control
Variables 
(ok if blank)

Age, socioeco-
nomic status,
mother’s
education, days
of exclusive
breastfeeding,
presence of
sanitary latrine 

Oral rehydration
therapy was provided,
and referrals for
hospital care were
made when needed;
exclusive breast-
feeding was
ascertained during
visits.

Peru 
(Checkley 
and others
2003)

Peri-
urban
Lima

224

0 months

35 months

Monthly

Active surveillance of
diarrhea to establish
clinical period prevalence
and stool samples to
establish pathogens

Age, sex, breast-
feeding, water
supply and
sanitation
maternal stature

Study does not 
specifically mention,
but as children were
attended daily, case
management must
have been included.

Study analyzed odds
ratio to fall below –2
standard deviations
greater than or equal
to 1 episode versus
none during interval;
additional special
emphasis was placed
on 6-month periods
where diarrhea
occurs in the first
half, to study catch-
up growth in a
disease-free
environment.

CAR1 error term
modeling was used
based on 156,436
child-days with 3,335
days of diarrhea
(2.1%).

There was a –0.16 (p < 0.05)
reduction of the standard z-
score; when periods extended to 
6 months and diarrhea occurred
during the first half of the
period, the association remained
negative in models but was not
statistically significant; authors
noted that catch-up may
compensate growth faltering,
but those with diarrhea in the
first half when compared to
nondiseased individuals had
slower growth velocity 
(p > 0.05).

Diarrheal period prevalence in the
cohort explained 2–27 % of the
growth retardation, and the
average child was 2.5
centimeters shorter than interna-
tional peers; diarrhea, especially
before age 6 months, predisposes
children to irreversible stunting;
with extensive resolution of
collected data and elaborate
modeling, this study showed
decelerations on linear growth
later in life as a result of early
infancy exposure to diarrhea; a 10
cm difference in maternal stature
corresponded to a 1.5 cm height
deficit at 24 months 

Number of
Children

Age at
Entry

Follow-up

Period

Exposure Data

Collection

Anthropometric
Data Collection

Analysis 
Strategy

Control
Variables 
(ok if blank)

Notes 

(ok if blank)

Effect of Disease on

Malnutrition

Country 
(study)

Malawi (Maleta
and others 
2003)

Setting

Rural
(covered
95% of
deliveries
in the
catchmen
t area)

767

0 months 

36 months

Data on infant 
feeding and morbidity
collected monthly 
until 18 months; no
morbidity data collected
thereafter

Monthly until 18
months; thereafter
quarterly until 
36 months

Average size 
at 1–3 months,
distance to
health center,
gestation less
than 37 weeks,
maternal HIV,
delivery by
trained assistant
or not, sex

High attendance rates
(128 died and only 62
dropped) were a
feature throughout 
the study; during the
first prenatal visit
mothers were offered 
medical examinations
and laboratory
measurements. 

Age, index
episodes, HIV,
maternal
education,
treatment arm,
anemia

Odds ratio of 
falling below 
severe 
(– 3 standard
deviations)
underweight and
stunting and
moderate (?2
standard deviations) 
wasting during
follow-up, using
greater than or equal
to 2.4 versus less 
than 2.4 disease
episodes per month
in infancy as the
explanatory variable.

Mixed-effect models
were estimated to 
see how much HIV
infection causes
growth faltering;
adjusted various
morbidity effects on
growth faltering were
also estimated. 

Infancy disease episodes were
strongest determinants of
growth faltering, followed by
intrauterine growth restriction
(using a proxy measure);
disease episodes remained
strong predictors of
underweight and wasting, but
adjustment with intrauterine
growth restriction (which
remained a highly significant
predictor of stunting) dropped
infancy disease episodes from
3.4 to 1.1 (adjustment with
itself).

HIV was strongly associated—
especially in the 6- to 11-month
period with growth faltering (1.3
centimeters and 1.3 kilograms),
whereas diarrhea, though it
decreased length in the 6–11-
month period by 1.4–2
centimeters, did not show linear
dose-response; dysentery
appeared to be related to lower
weight gain (0.32 kilograms) in
children in the 12–23-month
group. 

(continued)

524

6–60 
months

12 
months

Tanzania
(Villamor 
and others
2004)

Urban Dar
es Salaam
hospital
(children
admitted
recruited
to receive
a series of
A-vitamin
shots)

Monthly 

Morbidity episodes
(diarrhea, on average 
3.4 episodes per child
per year) established
during monthly visits
using pictorial diary;
blood samples from all
children at hospital;
blood collected from
subsamples later

1
3
9

1
4
0

TABLE  A.1
Cohort Follow-up Studies Relating Infectious Disease and Nutritional Status of Children in Developing Countries  (continued)

Country 
(study)

Setting

Number of
Children

Age at
Entry

Follow-up

Period

Exposure Data

Collection

Anthropometric
Data Collection

Analysis 
Strategy

Urban 

597

6–45 months 16 months

Brazil (Prado
and others
2005)

Every 6 months

Variance and
covariance were
analyzed.

Stool samples collected
once during the first year,
but diarrhea symptoms
probed twice a week to
establish period
prevalence

Colombia
(Alvarado 
and others
2005)

133

Remote
rural 
Afro-
Colombian
village
(Guapi)

5–7 
months

12 
months

Approximate 3-
month intervals

Morbidity recorded 
by mothers recorded daily
(diarrhea, cough, fever, or
other nonspecific
symptoms); data collected
by a health worker weekly

Hierarchical linear
model was used to
model time-varying 
and fixed variables on
weight and height
gain.

Source: Compiled by World Bank team.
a. Not a fixed cohort, because surveys were made in an “open cohort.”

Control
Variables 
(ok if blank)

Sex, age, house
floods during 
rain, presence of
rubbish near
house, duration 
of interval
between
measurements,
prevalence of
diarrhea during
that interval and
intensity of
infection, Ascaris
lumbricoides and
Trichuris
trichiura baseline
anthropometry

Initial status,
gender, preterm
or term delivery,
maternal height,
mother’s
education, child’s
age, breast-
feeding 

Notes 

(ok if blank)

Effect of Disease on

Malnutrition

All children were
treated to eradicate
Giardia lamblia,
Ascaris lumbricoides,
and Trichuris trichiura
during the 
first year of study.

Both symptomatic and asympto-
matic Giardia infections had a
lasting effect on linear growth;
investigators were able to
exclude reverse causality (that
is, the mere susceptibility of the
malnourished 
to Giardia infection as the
explanation for the short stature
of those infected) by showing
the effect on stunting with a lag. 

Continued breast-
feeding (more than 6
months) was
widespread at 15
months; women in-
creased breastfeeding
during disease
episodes, unlike in
many other cultures.

Study showed the substantial
protective effect of breast-
feeding, which diminished with
increasing socioeconomic status
and which probably mitigated
growth faltering caused by
diarrhea morbidity; respiratory
infections were associated with
growth faltering.

A P P E N D I X   B

Review of Studies on Nutritional

Status and Education

THIS APPENDIX REVIEWS RECENT LITERATURE on the effects of low
height for age in childhood on subsequent educational outcomes.1 One group of
studies investigates the effects of malnutrition on cognitive function, measured
in terms of IQ scores or performance on cognitive tests (Fishman and others
2004). A second group assesses the effect on educational outcomes. This appendix
concentrates on the latter.

Several longitudinal studies have recently become available that investigate the
effect of early childhood malnutrition on educational outcomes (table B.1). The
majority of longitudinal studies use stunting (low height-for-age z-score, or HAZ)
as a measure of nutritional status, because HAZ is considered an indicator of
chronic nutritional deficit. These studies use data that follow children over time,
usually from birth well into primary or secondary schooling, and contain various
anthropometric, schooling, and socioeconomic status indicators. Such longitu-
dinal data have important advantages in terms of investigating causal relationships
between malnutrition and educational outcomes compared with the cross-sectional
data often used in earlier studies. 

Grantham-McGregor and others (2007) present an analysis of longitudinal data
of more than 2,000 male youths in Brazil. They find that stunting (HAZ < –2) in
early childhood is associated with a loss of 0.9 years of grade attainment by age 18.
Using the stratified data in their study, Grantham-McGregor and others (2007)

141

1
4
2

TABLE  B.1
Studies of the Effects of Malnutrition on Educational Outcomes

Source

Country

Data

Children

Indicator

Impact on Education

School grade attainment
Grantham-McGregor  Brazil
and others 2007

Maluccio, Hoddinott, 
and Behrman 2006
Daniels and Adair 
2004

Guatemala (rural)

Philippines (Cebu)

Longitudinal, 
1982–2001

Longitudinal, 
1969–2004
Longitudinal, 
1983–2002

2,041 males

HAZ < –2; HAZ –2 to –1 versus > –1

1,469

1,970

Nutrition supplement

HAZ < –3; HAZ –3 to –2; HAZ –2

Alderman and others Uganda (rural) 
2006
Learning productivity (grade equivalents)
Behrman and others
Guatemala (rural)
2006
Glewwe, Jacoby, and
King 2001

Philippines (Cebu) 

Longitudinal,
1983–2000

570

Longitudinal, 
1969–2004
Longitudinal, 
1983–95

1,448

1,016

HAZ 

HAZ

HAZ; HAZ < –2.5

School dropout and grade repetition
Maluccio, Hoddinott, 
and Behrman 2006
Walker and others 
2005

Guatemala (rural)

Longitudinal, 
1969–2004

1,469

Nutrition supplement

Jamaica (Kingston) Longitudinal, 

167

HAZ < –2 versus HAZ > –1

1986–2003

0.91 lower grade 
attainment; 0.44 lower
grade attainmenta
1.0 higher grade 
attainment (women)
0.80 lower grade attainment;  
0.33 lower grade attainment;
0.12 to –1 versus > –1
lower grade attainment
0.68 lower grade attainment  
per 1 HAZ decline

0.84 school year equivalent 
per 1 HAZ
0.8 school year equivalent  
per 1 HAZ; 1.8 school year 
equivalent per 1 HAZ

0.1 grade per year faster  
school progression (women)
100% higher school dropout 
rate by age 17–18

Daniels and Adair 
2004

Philippines (Cebu) 

Longitudinal, 
1983–2002

1,970

HAZ < –3; HAZ –3 to –2; HAZ –2 to –1

Primary school enrollment
Glewwe and Jacoby 
1995

Ghana

Cross-sectional  1,757
1988–89

HAZ

Alderman and others  Pakistan (rural)
2001

Longitudinal, 
1986–91

534

0.5 HAZ increase

Glewwe, Jacoby, and  Philippines (Cebu) 
King 2001
Alderman and others  Uganda (rural)
2006
Effect of diarrhea
Lorntz and others 
2006

Brazil 
(shantytown)

Longitudinal 
1983–95
Longitudinal, 
1983–2000

1,016

570

HAZ

HAZ 

Longitudinal 
1993–2001

77

Number of diarrheal episodes
(0–2 years)

18% grade repetition; 11%
grade repetition; 5% grade
repetitionb

0.34 year delayed school  
enrollment per 1-unit 
decrease in HAZ
18% increase in girls’
enrollment; 4% increase in 
boys’ enrollment
2 months delayed enrollment 
per 1-unit HAZ decline
0.4 year delayed enrollment 
per 1-unit HAZ decline

0.7 month delayed school 
enrollment per episode
of diarrhea

Source: Compiled by World Bank team.
a. Estimated here from table 5 in Grantham-McGregor and others (2007). 
b. Repetition rates are relative to less than –1 standard deviation; estimated here from odds ratios and data presented in Daniels and Adair (2004). 

1
4
3

144 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

estimate that mild stunting (HAZ –1 to –2) is associated with a loss of 0.4 years
of schooling.

Alderman and others (2001), using longitudinal data relating to 560 chil-
dren in rural Zimbabwe, find that a decline in HAZ of 1 is associated with a
loss of 0.68 years of grade attainment and 0.4 years of delayed primary school
enrollment. Grade attainment is defined as completed grades in primary and
secondary school.

Behrman and others (2006), using longitudinal data of 1,448 children followed
into adulthood in rural Guatemala, assess the effect of preschool, schooling,
and postschooling experiences on adult cognitive skills (reading comprehension
and nonverbal skills). They find that preschool nonstunting (HAZ ≥ –2) increases
reading comprehension test scores by the same amount as 4.2 additional years of
schooling attainment. Using sample and subsample mean values of HAZ reported
in the study, an improvement in HAZ of 1 has an effect on reading comprehen-
sion equivalent to nearly one additional year of schooling attainment. Stunting
is also found to have a profound negative effect on nonverbal test scores. To the
extent that nonverbal cognitive skills may affect learning productivity per year of
schooling, this estimated effect of a change in HAZ of 1 on schooling attainment
is conservative.

Maluccio, Hoddinott, and Behrman (2006) use the same data set to evaluate
the effect of early childhood nutrition supplementation in Guatemala. The supple-
ment was found to decrease the prevalence of severe stunting by 50 percent,
increase the height of three-year-old children by 2.5 centimeters, and increase
school grade attainment by one full year for women. No significant effect on
schooling was found for men. The effect for women comes through a reduction
in women who never attended school and an increase in women who progressed
into secondary school. Women who received supplementation progressed faster
through school than women who did not receive supplementation, at a rate of
0.1 grade per year in school.

Walker and others (2005), using longitudinal data of 167 children in Kingston,
Jamaica, find that 17- to 18-year-olds, stunted by the age of two (HAZ < –2), had
a school dropout rate twice as high as children who were not stunted (HAZ > –1).
Daniels and Adair (2004) use longitudinal data of 1,970 children in the Cebu
metropolitan area (urban and rural households) in the Philippines. They estimate
odds ratios for completing high school, delayed enrollment, and grade repetition
in relation to early childhood stunting. Using the odds ratios and data presented
in their article, one can infer that severe stunting in early childhood (HAZ < –3)
is associated with 0.80 years of lower grade attainment, that moderate stunting
(HAZ –2 to –3) is associated with 0.33 years of lower attainment, and that mild
stunting (HAZ –1 to –2) is associated with 0.12 years of lower attainment. Daniels
and Adair (2004) also find that severe stunting is associated with repeating a grade

REVIEW OF STUDIES ON NUTRITIONAL STATUS AND EDUCATION  145

at least once (18 percent of severely stunted children) and that 5 percent of mildly
stunted children repeat a grade at least once as a result of stunting.

Glewwe, Jacoby, and King (2001), using longitudinal data relating to more than
1,000 children in the Cebu metropolitan area, investigate the effect of stunting
on learning productivity per year of schooling through primary school using
achievement test scores (sum of math and English). They then convert the effect
of stunting on test scores into the extra months of schooling it takes to compen-
sate for the difference in test scores. They find that the effect on test scores of a
change in HAZ of 1 is equivalent to 0.8 year of school attendance, and for the
more severely stunted children (HAZ < –2.5), it is equivalent to 1.8 years of
schooling. Glewwe, Jacoby, and King (2001) also find that a decline in HAZ of 1
delays primary school enrollment by two months and increases the probability
of first-grade repetition by 9 percent. Using the baseline data in Daniels and Adair
(2004) on frequency of grade repetition by stunting status, they find that a grade
repetition of 9 percent is equivalent to a 0.5-month delay in labor force entry for
a severely stunted child and a 0.4-month delay for a mildly stunted child.

Alderman and others (2001), using longitudinal data on more than 500 chil-
dren in rural Pakistan, find that a 0.5 increase in HAZ is associated with an 
18 percent increase in girls’ school enrollment and a 4 percent increase in boys’
school enrollment.

Glewwe and Jacoby (1995) find in a study of children in Ghana, albeit using
cross-sectional data, that a decline in HAZ of 1 is associated with a 0.34-month
delay in primary school enrollment.

Diarrhea and Education

Lorntz and others (2006), using longitudinal data on children in a shantytown in
northern Brazil, estimate the effect of early childhood diarrheal episodes on subse-
quent timing of primary school enrollment. They find a 0.7-month delay in
enrollment per diarrheal episode in the first two years of life. The median number
of episodes in the first two years of life was 4.5 per year. On average, this finding
corresponds to a two-week prevalence rate of nearly 22 percent, which is the same
as reported in the 2003 Ghana Demographic and Health Survey for children under
two years of age. Reducing this prevalence rate by half (that is, to 11 percent)
would suggest a reduction in delayed enrollment by about three months.

Conclusions

The literature reviewed and presented in table B.1 provides substantial evidence
of a significant effect of malnutrition on children’s educational performance. The
single most important effect is reduced learning productivity during schooling,
followed by reduced grade attainment. Delayed primary school enrollment and

146 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

grade repetition, while important in their own rights, have a much lesser conse-
quence for lifetime income (see appendix D and chapter 5). 

The effects of malnutrition on educational performance, as applied to Ghana
and Pakistan to estimate the impact on lifetime income, are presented in table 5.6
(see also table D.7 in appendix D). The attributable fraction of malnutrition
(stunting) from diarrheal infections associated with water, sanitation, and hygiene
is discussed in appendixes A and D. The relation between educational perform-
ance and future income is discussed in chapter 5.

Note

1 This appendix is based on a review of several recent longitudinal studies that looked at the
effect of low height for age in childhood on educational outcomes. This review was carried
out by Bjørn Larsen (consultant) specifically for this report.

A P P E N D I X   C

New Estimates for Burden of
Disease from Water, Sanitation,

and Hygiene

THE ESTIMATES IN TABLE C.1 ARE FROM the new study by the World
Health Organization (Fewtrell and others 2007). The study incorporates the
effects (through malnutrition) of water, sanitation, and hygiene on mortality
and disease burden.

147

148 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

TABLE  C.1
Burden of Disease (in DALYs) in Children under Five Years Attributable 
to Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene, by World Health Organization 
Subregions, 2002

Mortality stratum (thousands)

Africa

Americas

DALYs

Attributable

to WSH-

High
Child,
High 
(thousands) (thousands) Adult

Developed Developing
Countries

High
Child, Very Low
Very
High  Very Low
Adult

Child,

Adult

Low
Child,
Low
Adult

High
Child,
High
Adult

Number Related Risk  Countries

(thousands)

(%)d

616,908

433,832

81,206

535,702

51,925 60,004 22,986 45,433 9,509

13,004

420,828

82,044 85,893

2,299 15,358 5,063

107,881

786

107,095

26,568 26,178

39

1,397

990

25

6

25

32

30

1.7

9.1 19.5

47,520

44.0

432

47,088

9,283

9,390

22

901

565

531 

0.5

1

530 

117 

58

7,104

6.6

70

7,034

1,239

1,412

28,475

26.4

166

28,309

6,853

5,744

Population
of children
under 5 years

Total DALYs

Total WSH-
related
DALYs

Percentage of
total DALYs

Diarrheal
diseasesa

Intestinal
nematode 
infectionsb

Malnutrition
(only protein-
energy
malnutrition)

Consequences
of malnutritiona

Trachomab

Schistosomiasisb

Lymphatic
filariasis

Onchocerciasis

Dengue

Japanese
encephalitis

Subtotal, water
resources
management

Drownings

Subtotal, 
safety of
water 
environments

Other infectious
diseasesc

Subtotal, WSH 

83,794

Malaria

17,482 

4

14

146

5

137

0.0

0.0

0.1

77.7

16.2

0.0

0.1

247

0.2

17,871 

16.6 

1,473 

1.4

1,473

4,743

1.4

4.4

0

0

0

0

0

0

15

38

244

104

95

177

1

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

1

4

14

0

5

1

6

146

17

18

669

83,125  17,516 16,629

22

1,256

884

2

0

0

0

2

62

62

52

17,480 

7,736

8,011

5 

137

247

3

0

0

2

1

0

17,868

7,739

8,014

1,411

141

125

1,411

141

125

4,690

1,172

1,411

0

0

0

0

0

13

13

5

24

10

0 

6

0

30

53

53

59

0

7

0

17

13

13

76

Source: Data based on literature review/expert survey. Not a formal WHO estimate but based on 
Prüss-Üstün and Corvalán 2006.
Notes: DALY = disability-affected life year; WSH = water, sanitation, and hygiene. Subtotals may not 
add because of rounding.
a. Data further validated by Comparative Risk Assessment methods. 
b. Included in the Comparative Risk Assessment study. 
c. Not attributable to one group alone.
d. Percentage of all DALYs attributable to WSH-related risks.

NEW ESTIMATES FOR BURDEN OF DISEASE FROM WATER, SANITATION, AND HYGIENE  149

Mortality stratum (thousands)

Eastern 

Mediterranean

Low
Child,
Low
Adult

High
Child,
High
Adult

Very Low

Child,

Very Low

Adult

Europe

Low
Child,
Low
Adult

Southeast Asia

Western Pacific

Low
Child,
High
Adult

Low
Child,
Low
Adult

High
Child,
High
Adult

Very low

Child,

Very Low

Adult

Low
Child,
Low
Adult

15,213

53,234

21,974

17,576

10,859

28,449

150,232

7,812

121,704

5,086

53,622

1,719

5,717

2,670

10,738

117,012

599

45,507

600

88

2,038

28,390 

22

8,010

21

554

64

1,794

26,810

10.5

3.3

19

24

342

39

1,120

14,896

0

0

21

108

48

163

0

0

1

22

316

1,938

3

0

0

0

333

9,774

0

0

5

0

0

96

2

0

0

0

2

24

24

21

0

0

0

0

0

17

17

7

158

715

0

17

7

182

35

35

26

0

53

51

819

246

246

514

4

8

0

0

0

0

0

0

9

0

0

0

0

0

4

4

9

18

4,020

134

853

1,784

0

0

9

6,800

142

0

48

139

329

652

652

229

614

12,911

12.1

24

412

6,500

0

40

81

52

0

0

0

834

3,482

1

2

2

546

18

10,861

665

0

3

50

719

123

123

0

2

0

20

24

24

24

37

2

21

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

5

5

1,208

11

A P P E N D I X   D

Computing Country-Level

Environmental Health Burden of

Disease

THIS APPENDIX PROVIDES A DESCRIPTION OF THE METHODS used
to estimate the environmental health burden of disease, including effects on educa-
tion, and relative monetary costs.1 An overview of the results for Ghana and Pakistan
has been provided in chapter 5. The methodology (summarized graphically in figure
D.1) has two main components. The first involves the valuation of mortality for
each cause of death (left side of figure D.1), and the second relates to the estima-
tion of educational costs of disease (right side of figure D.1).

Mortality

This section details the steps used to estimate mortality from environmental health
risks (figure D.1, steps 1 to 6). The environmentally attributable disease in Ghana
is estimated in reference to diarrhea, acute lower respiratory infections (ALRI),
malaria, measles, protein-energy malnutrition, and a residual group of other causes
of mortality (table D.1).

It is important to note that diarrhea constitutes both a cause of death and a
risk factor through its effect on malnutrition and consequent mortality. Deaths
related to urban air pollution are not included because of the small effects on
child mortality that can be calculated from current estimation methods.

151

152 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

FIGURE  D.1
Summary of the Methodology

Mortality 

Education 

Step 1: 
Data collection 

Step 2: 
Creation of exposure
categories; assessment of
population at risk 

Step 3: 
Assessment of relative risk in
each exposure category  

Step 4: 
Assessment of
counterfactual
population at risk if
no diarrheal
infections and no
other environmental
health risk exposure     

Step 5: 
Estimation of mortality attributable
to environmental health risks
(direct + indirect effect)   

Step 6: 
Valuation

Source: Compiled by World Bank team.

Step 7: 
Data collection on
current child
population,
prevalence of
malnutrition
(stunting) 

Step 8: 
Assessment of
counterfactual child
population,
prevalence of
malnutrition
(stunting)   

Step 9: 
Assessment of attributable loss in school
performance from malnutrition  

Step 10: 
Valuation

• Estimation of current and

counterfactual lifetime income of
children   

• Calculation of difference between
current and counterfactual lifetime
income for the whole population  

TABLE  D.1
Causes of Death and Risk Factors Considered in this Study

Cause of Death

Direct Environmental Risk Factor

Indirect Risk Factor

Diarrhea

Acute lower respiratory 
infection
Malaria

Measles

Protein-energy 
malnutrition
Other causes of 
mortality (excluding 
perinatal conditions)

Inadequate water, sanitation,  Malnutrition through diarrheal
and hygiene
Indoor air pollution

Poor management of water 
resources 
Nonea

Nonea

Nonea

infections
Malnutrition through diarrheal
infections
Malnutrition through diarrheal
infections
Malnutrition through diarrheal
infections
Malnutrition through diarrheal
infections
Malnutrition through diarrheal 
infections

Source: Compiled by World Bank team.
a. This report focuses on water, sanitation, and hygiene; indoor air pollution; and water resource
management. None of these environmental health risks are considered to contribute significantly to
these causes of death.

COMPUTING COUNTRY-LEVEL ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH BURDEN OF DISEASE  153

Total observed mortality—denoted as M0—in any given population is the
result of exposure to different risk factors. If the fraction of mortality caused by
environmental risk factors is denoted as FEH, then mortality attributable to envi-
ronmental health risks, MEH, is given by the formula

EH

M

=

j m

=∑ 0

EH
F M
j

j

=
1

j

,

(D.1)

0 is current annual cases of cause-specific mortality; j is ALRI, diarrhea,
where Mj
EH is the fraction of cause-specific
malaria, measles, and “other causes” of deaths; Fj
deaths j attributable to environmental health risks; and MEH is the annual cases
of mortality caused by environmental health risk factors.

The methodology for estimating MEH relies on the estimation of the impact
EH for each cause of death j. A general formula for the fraction of deaths

fraction Fj
attributable to a set of risk factors is

n

P RR
i
i

∑
∑1

=

n

=

F

i

−

n

∑

=
1

i

'
P RR
i
i

,

P RR
i
i

(D.2)

=
1

i

where the subscript i denotes exposure category, Pi is the population’s current
exposure distribution, P'i is the population’s counterfactual exposure distribution
(that is, exposure distribution in the absence of environmental risks), and RRi is
the risk of mortality in each exposure category.2

Step 1: Data Collection

The estimation of the environmental health burden of disease and its subsequent
monetary valuation uses data from a variety of sources. Typical sources of informa-
tion are listed in table D.2. The more data are available from country sources, the
better. As an alternative, one can use information from international sources, making
the necessary assumptions to adapt the parameters to the country in question.

Step 2: Assessment of the Population at Risk

To compute the health burden of each cause of death or disease from environmental
risk factors, one needs estimates of the population exposed to the relevant risk
factors. Multiple environmental risk factors may contribute to a particular disease
and mortality from this disease, and an environmental risk factor is often associ-
ated with several levels of risk. It is therefore desirable to create exposure categories,
allowing for as many combinations of risk factors and levels of risk as is practically

154 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

TABLE  D.2
Estimating the Cost of Environmental Health Risks: Information 
Types and Sources

Type of Information

Source

Baseline health end 
points (for example, 
crude mortality rate, 
disease-specific 
mortality, disease 
prevalence)
Relative risks of illness 
and mortality: 
epidemiology literature

Exposure to risk factors  Demographic and Health Surveys
(DHSs), Multiple Indicator Cluster
(for example, access to 
water, malnutrition, 
Surveys (MICSs), national nutrition 
surveys, national censuses, Living 
indoor air pollution) 
Standards Measurement Surveys 
(LSMSs) 
Vital records, health information
systems, and statistical
estimates of cause-specific
mortality; DHSs and MICSs; 
WHO national estimates of
cause-specific mortality
Example: the relative risk of
dying from different levels of
malnutrition is summarized in 
Fishman and others (2004)
Example: the effect of diarrheal
diseases on weight gain in
children is analyzed in
Checkley and others (1997) and 
Molbak and others (1997)
For the human capital approach:
national accounts statistics (for
example, gross domestic 
product), economic indicators 
(for example, wage rate)
For willingness-to-pay approach: 
value of a statistical life studies 
(benefit transfer approach)

Links between 
malnutrition and 
infections: epidemiology 
literature

Value of mortality and 
morbidity

Cost of illness

Economic indicators, public 
health statistics, interviews 
with hospitals and 
practitioners; DHSs and 
MICSs (treatment rates and 
type of treatment)

Source: Compiled by World Bank team.

Source Level

Country-specific
sources

Country-specific
sources

Typically international 
studies and
meta-analyses

International studies and
meta-analyses

For the human capital 
approach: country-
specific sources

For the willingness-to-pay 
approach: international 
studies and 
meta-analyses
Country-specific sources

feasible, and to compute the population shares that fall in each category. Figure D.2
presents a simplified illustration for ALRI mortality from indoor air pollution and
malnutrition (see table D.1). In the case of diarrheal mortality, relevant risk factors
include (a) lack of access to water, sanitation, or both and (b) malnutrition. 

Exposure data can often be obtained from the Demographic and Health Surveys
(DHSs). Ghana’s 2003 DHS reports malnutrition levels for each child, and this
information can be overlaid with household characteristics to obtain exposure to
indoor air pollution and lack of water and sanitation.

COMPUTING COUNTRY-LEVEL ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH BURDEN OF DISEASE  155

FIGURE  D.2
Exposure Categories

Indoor air pollution 

No indoor air pollution

Malnutrition

No malnutrition 

Exposure category 1 

Exposure category 2 

Exposure category 3 

Exposure category 4 

Source: Compiled by World Bank team.

Step 3: Assessment of Relative Risks

Relative risks express the probability of an event (for example, developing a disease
or dying from a disease) occurring in the exposed group versus the probability
of the same event occurring in the group that was not exposed. Relative risks typi-
cally are available from the epidemiology literature. However, current research
literature does not contain estimates of the combined relative risk of multiple
environmental risk factors, such as the risk of death from exposure to indoor air
pollution and from malnourishment, with the latter partially caused by diarrheal
infections from inadequate water, sanitation, and hygiene. In this analysis, the
problem is overcome by assuming a Cox proportional hazard model in the calcu-
lation of relative risks.3 If that model is used, the relative risk is calculated as

RRi = exp(g1ENV + g2MAL),

(D.3)

where RR is relative risk; ENV is a binary variable (that is, one that takes a value
of either 1 or 0) indicating the presence of an environmental risk; MAL is a binary
variable indicating the presence of malnutrition; and g1 and g2 are the parameters
linking the presence of risk factors to the relative risk of a disease. It is easy to
see that equation D.3 implies that the relative risk for exposure category 1 in figure
D.2 is equal to the product of the relative risks for exposure categories 2 and 3
(that is, RR1 = RR2 * RR3). The relative risks for exposure categories 2 and 3 are
revealed in the epidemiology literature, which has been adjusted for potential
biases.4 Table D.3 summarizes.5

The relative risks discussed in literature could, overestimate the mortality from
environmental risk factors if the effects of underweight on mortality in Fishman and
others (2004) did not control for environmental factors or if the relative risks of
mortality from environmental factors did not control for underweight status. An
alternative approach used to obtain the results in chapter 5 is therefore applied to
assess the potential magnitude of overestimation.6 The approach uses relationships
between least-squares coefficients when a variable is omitted from an equation. In
the case of Ghana, the following two equations are estimated by using the 2003 DHS:
(D.4)

MAL = b0 + b1 ENV

ENV = a0 + a1 MAL

(D.5)

156 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

TABLE  D. 3
Relative Risks by Exposure Categories, Assuming Cox Hazard Model

Environmental Health 

Exposure

No Environmental Health 

Exposure

Malnourished

RR1 = RR2 * RR3

Not malnourished

RR3 from literature, 
adjusted

Source: Compiled by World Bank team.

RR2 from literature, adjusted (for 
example, Fishman and others
2004)
RR4 = 1

The estimated coefficients b1 and a1 are then used in the following equations

to solve for gi, where bi represents the biased estimators in equation D.3: 

b2 = g 2 + g 1 * a1

b1 = g 1 + g 2 * b1

(D.6)

(D.7)

Step 4: Calculation of Counterfactual Exposure Categories 

The next step is to estimate the population in each exposure category in the
absence of environmental risk factors. This step is important because child malnu-
trition depends not only on environmental health risks, but also on various
nutritional factors such as maternal malnutrition and low protein-energy intake.
Therefore, one needs to separate out the effects of nonenvironmental factors on
malnutrition. Because the main environmental health risk influencing malnu-
trition acts through diarrheal infections, this analysis estimates malnutrition
prevalence in a counterfactual child population that has not suffered from repeated
diarrheal infections.

Estimation of the effect of diarrheal infections on nutritional status and conse-

quent disease burden involves the following steps:
1. A weight gain retardation factor, b t

i, is specified for each child i at age t and is

a function of diarrheal infection dose from initial age.

2. The counterfactual weight, Wt

Ni of child i at age t is estimated (that is, the weight
of the child if the child had not suffered weight gain retardation from repeated
diarrheal infections).

3. The weight-for-age z-score (WAZ) for Wt

Ni and corresponding underweight

malnutrition rates are calculated.

4. Mortality from environmental factors is then estimated.

The relationship between a child’s observed weight, the weight gain retarda-

tion factor, and the counterfactual weight is

−

Di

i
W W
0

t

=

−(
1 β

i
t

)

x

(
i
W W
0

−

N

t

i

)

,

(D.8)

COMPUTING COUNTRY-LEVEL ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH BURDEN OF DISEASE  157

which gives

=

Ni

W
t

1
−(
β
i
1
t

)

−

D
i

W
t

β
i
−(
t
β 0 ,
W
1

)

i

i
t

(D.9)

Di is the observed weight of child i at age t who has suffered weight gain

where Wt
retardation from diarrheal infections, and W0

i is the initial weight of the child.

Table D.4 presents the weight gain retardation factors (for a subset of age
groups) used in this study.7 This factor is the reduction in weight gain from
repeated infections over a period of a child’s life in his or her first five years. For
instance, if a child’s initial weight was 5 kilograms at the age of 3 months and was
10 kilograms at the age of 40 months, and if the child had suffered a weight gain
retardation of 25 percent (bt
i = 0.25) during that period, then the child’s weight
would have been 11.67 kilograms in the absence of the weight gain retardation.
In contrast, the median child at 40 months of age in the international reference
population has a weight of 14.6 kilograms. The share of the weight retardation
from repeated infections is therefore 36 percent.8 The remaining weight retarda-
tion (64 percent) is from other factors.

The factors in table D.4 are used to calculate Wt

Ni for each child in the DHS
data set in Ghana, along with a new weight-for-age z-score for each child. The
results imply that weight gain retardation from diarrheal infections is about
35 percent of total weight retardation relative to the median child in the interna-
tional reference population (WAZ = 0) (see appendix A). This result is equivalent
to approximately a 40 percent change in the standard deviation. This change in
standard deviation is applied to each of the children in the Ghana DHS (for
example, the new z-score is –1.8 for an old z-score of –3.0).9

TABLE  D.4
Weight Gain Retardation Factors by Age and z-Score

Age 
(Months) 

WAZ = —1

WAZ = —2

WAZ = —3

WAZ = —4

12
18
24
30
36
42
48
54
60

0.15
0.11
0.09
0.09
0.08
0.08
0.08
0.08
0.08

0.37
0.27
0.22
0.19
0.18
0.18
0.17
0.17
0.17

0.45
0.34
0.29
0.26
0.25
0.24
0.24
0.23
0.23

0.55
0.43
0.37
0.34
0.33
0.32
0.32
0.31
0.31

Source: Compiled by World Bank team.
Note: WAZ = weight-for-age z-score.

158 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

TABLE  D.5
Weight for Age in Children under Five: Current Rates and Estimated Rates in
the Absence of Diarrheal Infections in Ghana

Weight for Age Score 

Prevalence

of Weight Gain Retardation 

Prevalence Rates in the Absence  

Rates in 2003 (%)

from Diarrheal Infections (%)

> —1 WAZ (not underweight)
—1 to —2 WAZ (mild underweight)
—2 to —3 WAZ (moderate underweight)
< —3 WAZ (severe underweight)

45.3
32.9
17.3
4.6

Source: Compiled by World Bank team.
Note: WAZ = weight-for-age z-score.

67.70
30.00
2.30
0.04

Table D.5 presents current underweight prevalence rates in children under five
from the 2003 DHS and estimated rates in the absence of weight gain retardation
from diarrheal infections. In the absence of retardation from diarrheal infections,
the estimates indicate that there would be practically no severely underweight
children in Ghana. The prevalence of moderate underweight would also be substan-
tially reduced, while mild underweight would be about the same as reported in
the 2003 DHS.

Step 5: Estimation of Deaths Attributable to Environmental 
Health Risk Factors

The fraction of cause-specific deaths attributable to environmental risk factors
(for example, the fraction of ALRI mortality attributable to indoor air pollution
and diarrhea-related malnutrition) are obtained by combining in equation D.2
the parameters obtained in steps 2 and 3. This procedure is undertaken for
each cause of death for which environmental risks are a contributing factor.
Figure D.3 explains, using ALRI as an example. The left side of the figure 
presents child population shares and relative risks for the current situation, and
the right side presents the counterfactual situation (that is, no environmental health
risks). Combining this information in equation D.2 gives the impact fraction at
the bottom of the figure. 

Table D.6 presents the cause-specific mortality, values of impact fraction F,
and mortality attributable to environmental risk factors for each cause of death
in Ghana.

Step 6: Valuation of Attributable Health End Points

The last step consists of multiplying each end point by its unit cost. Mortality can
be valued by first estimating a stream of income that the individual would have
generated if he or she had been alive and then discounting the stream to obtain

COMPUTING COUNTRY-LEVEL ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH BURDEN OF DISEASE  159

FIGURE  D. 3
Exposure Categories, Population Shares, and Relative Risks of ALRI in Ghana

Current Situation 

Situation with no Environmental Health Risks 

Population

Exposed to

environmental

health risk

Not

exposed to

environmental

health risk

Population 

Exposed to

environmental

health risk

Not

exposed to

environmental

health risk

Malnourished  

53.0% 

Not malnourished

41.6% 

1.7% 

3.7% 

Malnourished

Not malnourished

0.0% 

0.0% 

32.3% 

67.7% 

Relative risks 

Exposed to

environmental

health risk

Not

exposed to

environmental

health risk

Relative risks 

Exposed to

environmental

health risk

Not

exposed to

environmental

health risk

Malnourished  

Not malnourished

5.30 

1.72 

3.07 

1.00 

Yes 

No 

n.a. 

n.a. 

2.10 

1.00 

Impact fraction

0.625

Source: Compiled by World Bank team.

TABLE  D.6
Estimated Mortality in Children under Five from Environmental 
Risk Factors, Ghana

Cause of Mortality

Pneumonia-ALRI
Diarrhea
Malaria
Measles
Protein-energy 
malnutrition
Other malnutrition-related 
causes of mortality (excluding
perinatal conditions)
Total

Mortality
(2005)

11,800
9,900
22,600
200
1,000

12,600

58,100

Impact Fraction

(%)

62.5
91.0
62.1
28.8
40.0

38.3

Mortality Attributable

to Environmental 

Health Risks

7,375
9,009
14,035
58
400

4,826

35,703

Source: Compiled by World Bank team.
Note: Not including perinatal conditions. ALRI = acute lower respiratory infection.

a measure of lost productivity. This method—the human capital approach—is
often considered to provide a lower-bound estimate of the value of avoiding
mortality (see appendix F). Applying the human capital approach to valuation of
mortality suggests a cost in Ghana equivalent to 5.55 percent of gross domestic
product (GDP) for the effect of environmental factors.10

160 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

Education

The health links between malnutrition and the environment provide further
insight into the issue of costing environmental health risks.11 Repeated infections
in early childhood contribute to child malnutrition, which, in turn, impairs cogni-
tive development and educational performance. This effect has an impact on labor
productivity, reducing individual earnings. Malnutrition can also lead to delayed
primary school enrollment and grade repetition, which, in turn, may have an
impact on lifetime income in terms of delayed labor-force entry.

To value the impacts of malnutrition through education, one needs to esti-
mate the loss in education performance attributable to malnutrition, estimate the
relationship between education and lifetime income, and combine this informa-
tion to obtain the loss in lifetime income attributable to malnutrition. The
discussion here begins with the data collection issues.

Step 7: Data Collection

Stunting, an indicator of chronic malnutrition, is often used when measuring the
effects of malnutrition on education. Stunting is expressed as deviations from the
median height for age z-score (HAZ) in an international reference population.
Mild stunting means an HAZ between –1 and –2 standard deviations from the
median child in the reference population (–2 < HAZ < –1). Moderate stunting is
defined as –3 < HAZ < –2 and severe stunting as HAZ < –3. The current stunting
prevalence rate in Ghana is presented in table D.7, row 1. 

Step 8: Assessment of Counterfactual Malnutrition-Attributable 
Loss in School Performance

To assess the loss in school performance attributable to malnutrition, one first
needs to establish the counterfactual situation. Table D.7 provides the counter-
factual prevalence rates achievable by controlling for diarrheal infections. The
share of severely malnourished children would go down from 10.5 percent (current
situation) to 2.9 percent (situation without infections). Changes in prevalence
rates are estimated by assuming a 25 percent change in standard deviation (consis-
tent with the literature analyzed in appendix B and somewhat more conservative
than the change used for underweight rates in table D.5). 

The 25 percent change in standard deviation is arrived at in a way similar to
that described in step 4. The effect of nonenvironmental factors on malnutrition
first needs to be separated—through computations of the malnutrition prevalence
of a counterfactual child population that has not suffered from repeated diarrheal
infections. The estimation of the effect of diarrheal infections on stunting involves
the actions described in step 4. A smaller retardation factor is used for height for
age than for weight for age because it appears from the research literature 

COMPUTING COUNTRY-LEVEL ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH BURDEN OF DISEASE  161

TABLE  D.7
Estimated Annual Cost of Education Outcomes from Stunting and Share from
Environmental Factors in Ghana

> –1

Standard Deviations
-1 to –2

–3 to –2

< –3

Nutritional status (prevalence rate)
1. Percentage of children (<5 years)

stunted (height for age –1 standard 
deviation), current situation

2. Percentage of children (<5 years) 

stunted (height for age <–1 standard 
deviation), counterfactual situation
3. Standard deviation of median child

in each nutrition bracket

42.4

28.20

19.00

10.50

51.90

32.30

12.90

2.90

n.a.

–1.50

–2.40

–3.50

Effects of malnutrition on education outcomes (years per malnourished child)
4. Loss in grade attainment
5. Loss in learning productivity 

0.50

1.00

(grade equivalents)

0

0
0

0.80
0.42

1.50

3.60
1.29

6.5
8.4

1.60
0.85

12.6
13.8

6. Delayed labor-force participation a
Present value of lifetime income (US$ thousands per child) b
7. Income at current malnutrition rates
8. Counterfactual income
Present value of lifetime income for birth cohort (US$ million) b
9. Labor-force participation 

42.3
42.3

21.6
23.0

(% of population age 15–65)

75

75

75

75

10. Present value of lifetime income 

for birth cohort (US$ million), 
current malnutrition rates

11. Present value of lifetime income 

for birth cohort (US$ million), 
counterfactual income

12. Present value of lifetime income 

for birth cohort (US$ million),
current malnutrition rates

13. Present value of lifetime income 

for birth cohort (US$ million), 
counterfactual income

14. Total cost of environmental 

factors (US$ million)

15. Total cost of environmental 

factors (% of gross domestic 
product in 2005)

6,985

2,999

1,207

373

6,985

3,183

1,325

479

11,564

11,972

407

3.79

Source: Compiled by World Bank team.
Note: n.a. = not applicable. 
a. From delayed primary school enrollment and grade repetition. 
b. Present value of lifetime income losses of an annual national birth cohort, adjusted for child
mortality (discounted to childhood age = 1 year).

162 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

(see appendix B) that height growth retardation from infections is somewhat less
than weight gain retardation (table D.8).

Using the factors in table D.8, one can calculate the counterfactual height (in the
absence of growth retardation from infections) for each child in the DHS data sets
in Ghana, along with a new height-for-age z-score for each child. The results imply
that height growth retardation from diarrheal infections is 25 percent of total height
retardation relative to the median child in the international reference population
(HAZ = 0) (see appendix A). The new z-scores are 25 percent higher than observed
z-scores (for example, the new z-score is –2.25 for an old z-score of –3.0).

Table D.9 presents current height-for-age prevalence rates in children under
five from the 2003 DHS and estimated rates in the absence of height growth retar-
dation from diarrheal infections. In the absence of height retardation from diarrheal
infections, the estimates indicate a more than 70 percent reduction in the number

TABLE  D.8
Height Growth Retardation Factors by Age and z-Score

Age (Months)

HAZ = —1

HAZ = —2

HAZ = —3

HAZ = —4

12
18
24
30
36
42
48
54
60

0.05
0.04
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03

0.13
0.09
0.07
0.07
0.06
0.06
0.06
0.06
0.06

0.19
0.13
0.11
0.10
0.10
0.09
0.09
0.09
0.09

0.24
0.18
0.15
0.14
0.13
0.13
0.12
0.12
0.12

Source: Compiled by World Bank team.
Note: HAZ = height-for-age z-score.

TABLE  D.9
Height-for-Age Rates in Children under Five: Current Rates and Estimated
Rates in the Absence of Diarrheal Infections in Ghana

Height-for-Age (Malnutrition)

> –1 standard deviation 
(not stunted)
–1 to –2 standard deviation 
(mild stunting)
–2 to –3 standard deviation 
(moderate stunting)
< –3 standard deviation 
(severe stunting)

Source: Compiled by World Bank team.

Prevalence

Rates in 2003 (%)

42.4

28.2

19.0

10.5

Prevalence Rates in the Absence 

of Height Growth Retardation 

from Diarrheal Infections (%)

51.9

32.3

12.9

2.9

COMPUTING COUNTRY-LEVEL ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH BURDEN OF DISEASE  163

of severely stunted children and a more than 30 percent reduction in the number
of moderately stunted children. The prevalence of mild stunting would be about
the same as reported in the 2003 DHS.

Step 9: Assessment of Malnutrition-Attributable Loss in 
School Performance

A number of recent longitudinal studies (see appendix B) have investigated the
effect of early childhood malnutrition on educational outcomes. These studies
use data that follow children over time, usually from birth well into primary
or secondary schooling, containing various anthropometric, schooling, and
socioeconomic status indicators. The educational and cognitive impacts of
malnutrition are expressed as changes in
■ Final grade attainment
■ Learning productivity or school achievements (often measured by cognitive

and math and reading achievement tests)

■ School grade repetition
■ Years of delayed primary school entry

The studies reviewed show that the change in grade attainment ranges between
0.12 years (mild stunting in the Philippines) and 0.91 years (moderate malnutrition
in Brazil) and 0.7 years (for each z-score in Zimbabwe). The effect of malnutrition
on learning productivity or achievement appears to be even larger, ranging from
0.8 years of grade equivalent in Guatemala and the Philippines for each z-score to
1.8 years for each z-score in severely malnourished children in those countries. Delayed
primary school entry varies between two to four months per one z-score in the studies
reviewed. The parameters used for Ghana are summarized in table D.7.

The magnitude of the effect of a child’s nutritional status on grade attainment
applied to Ghana (row 4, table D.7) is somewhat lower than that in the study of
Zimbabwe, about the same as that in the study of Brazil, but significantly higher
than that in the study in the Philippines. The rationale for applying a magnitude
higher than that found in the Philippines is the substantially higher primary school
completion rate there. One important reason for that higher rate is the higher
emphasis on school completion in the Philippines, which likely reduces losses in
grade attainment of children with lower nutritional status.12 Primary school
competition and years of children’s school life expectancy in Zimbabwe are also
higher than in Ghana. Choosing a lower effect on grade attainment in Ghana than
that found in Zimbabwe may therefore be considered conservative and possibly
an underestimate of actual effect.

The magnitude of effect of nutritional status on school achievement or learning
productivity applied to Ghana (row 5, table D.7), measured in grade equivalents,
is about the same as found in Guatemala and the Philippines for children with
mild and moderate height-for-age deficit or stunting. For children with severe

164 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

stunting, the magnitude applied is about the midpoint of that found in the
Philippines and Guatemala.

Delayed primary school enrollment is derived from the study in Zimbabwe.
Grade repetition is half of that found by Daniels and Adair (2004) in the Philippines.
The combined effect of delayed enrollment and grade repetition is reported in
row 6, table D.7.

The cost of delayed enrollment and grade repetition in terms of delayed labor-
force participation is, however, very minimal compared with the cost of lower
grade attainment and learning productivity. So variations in the magnitude of
effects, within the range found in studies, have minimal influence on the esti-
mated total cost of nutritional status.

Step 10: Valuation

To arrive at costs related to educational and cognitive impacts, one has to value
the impact of lower grade attainment, learning productivity, and delay in primary
school entry on lifetime income. To do this, one has to
1. Estimate private marginal returns to schooling—that is, a measure of the incre-
ment in returns that one extra year of schooling allows. This measure helps to
estimate the lost returns for one less year of schooling (owing to lower educa-
tional attainment, for example).

2. Estimate the social cost of providing a year of schooling.
3. Using these estimates, calculate the marginal increase in income that schooling

allows.

4. Estimate the lifetime income in the current situation and in the absence of

infections (shown in rows 7 and 8, table D.7).
The present value of lifetime income of a child in the current situation is

PV I
( )

=

t

65

=∑ 1

[(

I

0

=
15

t

+

g

)/(
1

+

r t
)] ,

(D.10)

where I0 is initial annual income of adults at the time the child is one year old, 
g is annual rate of growth in real per capita income, and r is a constant annual
discount rate. It is assumed that an individual has a productive working life starting
at the age of 15 (t = 15) and ending at the age of 65 (t = 65) (see the Ghana DHS).
The present value of counterfactual lifetime income of a child in the absence

of infections is

(
PV I

C

)

=

( )
PV I

j

3

⎡
=∑1
+
⎢
⎢
⎣

δ
Z

=
1

j

δ
E
j

i

j

⎤
⎥
⎥
⎦

,

(D.11)

where dZ is the counterfactual change in height-for-age z-score; ij is the percentage
change in present value of lifetime income from an additional year of schooling

COMPUTING COUNTRY-LEVEL ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH BURDEN OF DISEASE  165

(j = 1), improved learning productivity equivalent to a year of schooling 
(j = 2), and an additional year of labor force participation (j = 3); and dEj is the
change in education outcome and labor-force participation, for j = 1, . . . ,3, per
one z-score.

Specifically, dZ is the absolute value of 25 percent of the current z-score of
each child. The percentage change in present value of lifetime income from an
additional year of schooling and from improved learning productivity equivalent
to a year of schooling is estimated from table D.10. For change in lifetime income
from an additional year of school (j = 1)—that is, increased grade attainment—
the cost of this additional year of schooling (C) is subtracted from income at age
15.13 The percentage change in lifetime income from the change in entry into the
labor force is estimated on the basis of lifetime income flows. 

Change in educational outcome and labor-force participation for one z-score

is as follows (see table D.7):
■ 0.5 years of grade attainment (row 4, table D.7)
■ 0.8 years of grade equivalent from learning productivity (school achievement)

for children with mild and moderate stunting (row 5, table D.7)

TABLE  D.10
Parameter Values Applied in Estimation of Income Losses

Parameters

Ghana

Pakistan

Remarks

Average annual 
income per 
income earner, 
2005

4,370,000

PRs 57,800

Ghana: GDP per capita in 2005
(a proxy for per capita income);
Pakistan: income in 2001/02
(Household Integrated Economic

r

g

Ct

i1

i2

3%

2%

Survey 2001/02), adjusted 
to 2005

3%

2%

Same as used by WHO for health

outcomes

Assumed per capita annual real 

income growth over the next 
65 years

0.37 I0 (1 + g)t–1 0.37 I0 (1 + g)t–1

Assumption that cost of a year 

of schooling is 37% of per capita
income at time = t

9.5%

7.2%

Calculated from rate of return to

a year of schooling; that is, 11.7%
in Sub-Saharan Africa and 9.9% 
in Asia (see Psacharopoulos and 
Patrinos 2004), less the cost of 
an additional year of schooling

13.2%

10.9%

Calculated from rate of return to

a year of schooling; that is, 11.7%
in Sub-Saharan Africa and 9.9% 
in Asia (Psacharopoulos and 
Patrinos 2004)

Source: Compiled by World Bank team.

166 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

■ 2 years of grade equivalent from learning productivity (school achievement)
for children with severe stunting, for the first one-unit improvement in z-score
(row 5, table D.7)

■ 0.42 to 0.44 years’ change in entry into the labor force (row 6, table D.7)

Additional parameter values are presented in table D.10. Psacharopoulos and
Patrinos (2004) reviewed studies of returns to investment in education. Returns
to one additional year of schooling are given by the coefficient on years of schooling.
On average, the return to one additional year of schooling is 9.7 percent. The
return is 11 to 12 percent in Sub-Saharan Africa and the group of low-income
countries. This figure is used to estimate the percentage change in the present
value of lifetime income from improved educational performance in the absence
of early childhood diarrheal infections.

Four educational outcomes are considered:

1. A one-year lower grade attainment caused by poor nutritional status (stunting)
results in an additional year of income (leaving school early) at t = 15, loss of
income in all years of working life (lower income per year) for each t ≥ 16, and
a saving in cost of a year of schooling at t = 15.14 Ct = 0 for t ≠ 15.

2. Lower learning productivity equivalent to one year of schooling results in a
loss of income in all years of working life for each t ≥ 15. Ct = 0 for all years.15
3. Delayed primary school enrollment results in delayed labor-force entry. A one-

year delay results in lost income at t = 15. Ct = 0 for all years.16

4. Grade repetition has the same effect as delayed enrollment.17

The cost of these educational outcomes is implicit in the difference between
current and counterfactual lifetime incomes in rows 7 and 8, table D.7.18 In fact,
counterfactual lifetime income in each malnutrition category rises as a conse-
quence of reducing infections and subsequent higher educational outcomes.

In estimations of current and counterfactual lifetime income for children of
different nutritional status (from not malnourished to severely malnourished),
assumptions about baseline income (I0 in equation D.10) are important.
Malnourished children live in disproportionately poorer households, and poverty
is correlated with lower socioeconomic status, such as lower educational attain-
ment of parents. This factor, in turn, is correlated with lower educational attainment
of children as they grow up. Malnourished children are therefore likely to have
lower income than children who are not malnourished, not only because of the
effect of malnutrition on educational performance and income but also because
of the socioeconomic status of the household they grew up in. 

Therefore, instead of using GDP per capita as a proxy for per capita income
for all children, this analysis attempts to develop a matrix of income differentials
in Ghana across the range of nutritional status, from not malnourished to severely
malnourished. These figures represent a more accurate estimate of lifetime income
of children as they move across nutritional categories. Table D.11, panel a, shows
the distribution of children by nutritional status and household wealth in Ghana.

COMPUTING COUNTRY-LEVEL ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH BURDEN OF DISEASE  167

TABLE  D.11
Income Distribution across Malnutrition Categories and Wealth 
Quintiles in Ghana

Wealth
Quintile

Not

Malnourished 
(Height-for-
Age > −1)

Mild

(Height-for-
Age −1 to −2 

Standard
Deviation)

Moderate
(Height-for-
Age −2 to −3

Standard
Deviation)

(Height- for- 

Severe 
Age < −3

Standard 

Deviation)

30.04
37.68
40.77
49.49
65.24
42.42

29.1
30.85
29.27
28.12
20.96
28.15

a. Height-for-age prevalence rates (Ghana 2003 DHS)
Poorest
Poorer
Middle
Richer
Richest
Total
b. Per capita income (expenditure) shares (%)a
Poorest
Poorer
Middle
Richer
Richest
Total
c. Per household income (expenditure) shares (%)a
Poorest
Poorer
Middle
Richer
Richest
Total

1.6
3.1
4.4
6.4
9.8
25.3

2.7
5.2
5.6
7.2
6.1
26.8

1.7
3.8
6.1
11.3
30.4
53.3

2.8
6.4
7.8
12.7
18.9
48.6

25.47
19.12
20.45
15.84
8.9
18.95

1.4
1.9
3.0
3.6
4.1
14.2

2.4
3.2
3.9
4.0
2.6
16.2

15.39
12.36
9.51
6.55
4.9
10.49

0.9
1.2
1.4
1.5
2.3
7.3

1.4
2.1
1.8
1.7
1.4
8.5

Total b
100
100
100
100
100
100
Total b
5.6
10.1
14.9
22.9
46.6
100.1
Total b
9.4
16.9
19.2
25.6
28.9
100.0

Source: Compiled by World Bank team.
a. Estimated from the height-for-age prevalence rates and total income (expenditure) shares. 
b. Total income (expenditure) shares by quintile in Ghana in 1998/99 from the Ghana Living Standard
Survey (World Bank 2007h; Trades Union Congress 2004).

Panels b and c show the income (expenditure) shares in relation to household
wealth quintile and children’s nutritional status. Total income (expenditure) shares
for each group of children (not malnourished and mild, moderate, and severely
malnourished) are then used to estimate baseline annual income (I0) for each of
these four groups, which is applied in equations D.10 and D.11 to estimate life-
time income (rows 7 and 8, table D.7).

By combining the information on current stunting prevalence (row 1, table D.7),
lifetime income (rows 7 and 8), and labor-force participation (row 9), one can obtain
total current and counterfactual lifetime income per malnutrition category (rows
10 and 11) and for the whole population birth cohort (rows 12 and 13).

The difference between current and counterfactual lifetime income for an
annual population birth cohort as a whole represents the educational and cognitive

1
6
8

TABLE  D.12
Annual Cost of Environmental Factors (Percentage of GDP in 2005), Using 3 Percent Discount Rate

Annual Deaths

Cost

( million)

Cost 

(US$ million)

Cost 

(% of GDP in 2005)

Annual Deaths

Cost

(PRs billion)

Cost 

(US$ million)

Cost

(% of GDP)

Ghana

Pakistan

24,712

371

Estimates excluding malnutrition-mediated effects
Mortality effects
Estimates including malnutrition-mediated effects
Mortality effects
Education effects
Total annual costs

537
367
904

35,702

Source: Compiled by World Bank team.
Note:

= Ghanaian new cedi.

412

595
407
1,002

131,611

187,429

3.84

5.55
3.79
9.34

195

278
317
595

3,250

4,633
5,281
9,914

2.90

4.13
4.71
8.84

TABLE  D.13
Annual Cost of Environmental Factors (Percentage of GDP in 2005), Using 5 Percent Discount Rate

Cost

Annual Deaths

( million)
Estimates excluding malnutrition-mediated effects
Mortality effects
Estimates including malnutrition-mediated effects
Mortality effects
Education effects
Total annual cost 

271
180
451

24,712

188

35,702

Ghana

Pakistan

Cost 

(US$ million)

Cost 

(% of GDP in 2005)

Annual Deaths

Cost

(PRs billion)

Cost 

(US$ million)

Cost

(% of GDP)

208

300
199
499

1.94

2.80
1.86
4.66

131,611

187,429

99

140
156
296

1,650

2,333
2,592
4,925

1.46

2.09
2.31
4.40

Source: Compiled by World Bank team.
Note:

= Ghanaian new cedi.

1
6
9

170 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

cost of malnutrition from diarrheal infections. This cost is estimated at 3.8 percent
of GDP in 2005. The cost attributable to environmental factors (that is, diarrheal
infections from inadequate water supply, sanitation, and hygiene) is about one-
third of the total cost of stunting on lifetime income.

Summary of Results for Ghana and Pakistan

The methodology described in this appendix has also been applied to Pakistan.
The results, summarized in chapter 5, are reported here for convenience (table
D.12.). In total, the cost of malnutrition-mediated effects (mortality and educa-
tion effects) of environmental risk factors on children in Ghana and Pakistan is
estimated at an equivalent of 9.2 percent and 8.6 percent, respectively, of GDP
per year. This finding is in stark contrast to a cost of 3.8 percent and 2.9 percent,
arrived at when considering only the estimates excluding malnutrition-mediated
effects of environmental risks.

The annualized monetary cost of mortality and impaired education is sensi-
tive to the discount rate of income losses. Annual costs are presented in tables
D.12 and D.13 using discount rates of 3 and 5 percent. In both Ghana and Pakistan,
at an annual discount rate of 5 percent, the annual cost is half of the cost at a 
3 percent discount rate. Total costs in Ghana and Pakistan are, however, nearly
two and one-half and nearly three times higher, respectively, than the cost that
does not include malnutrition effects, regardless of the discount rate used.

Notes

1 This appendix is based on the analysis of country-specific data and surveys for Ghana.
Results are arrived at using a methodology developed specifically for this report by Björn
Larsen (consultant). Useful input was provided by Maureen Cropper. The analysis esti-
mates costs that are attributable to environmental risks in children under five years of age
for Ghana and Pakistan and for the first time includes the malnutrition-mediated effects,
as well as the longer-term impacts on cognition, school performance, and future work
productivity.

2 See appendix E for more detail on impact fractions or attributable fractions.
3 The use of the Cox hazard model has a drawback if one wants to calculate the attribut-
able fractions of individual risks (as opposed to calculating joint attributable fractions, as
is done here). In fact, in such model specifications, the effect of each risk factor is
augmented by the multiplicative interaction with other risk factors. The result is that the
fractions attributable to individual risks may add to more than 1. If one imposes additive
relative risks (so that the sum of the attributable fraction equals 1), the results do not differ
much from those presented here.

4 The estimate of the impact of a single risk factor on a disease (for example, the impact of
malnutrition on deaths caused by ALRI) is often biased because other risk factors were
not controlled for in the epidemiological study. So if the relative risk of ALRI death attrib-
utable to malnutrition is estimated ignoring indoor air pollution, MAL will pick up its
effects, because malnutrition and exposure to indoor air pollution are correlated in most
populations. Appendix E describes a method to deal with biased relative risks.

COMPUTING COUNTRY-LEVEL ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH BURDEN OF DISEASE  171

5 This framework for calculating relative risks can be expanded to a larger set of exposure
categories that reflect different risk levels associated with ENV and MAL. For instance,
indoor air pollution exposure categories can be households using fuelwood, charcoal,
unimproved rather than improved stoves, and liquefied petroleum gas. Malnutrition can
be mild, moderate, and severe.

6 For the alternative approaches, please see appendix E. 
7 Although the research literature finds that the retardation factor often is in the range of
0.2 to 0.5, there is limited research on how the retardation factor may vary with z-score
and age. It is postulated here that the factor declines with age and is greater the more
underweight the children are. Diarrheal infections are most frequent during the ages of 6
to 11months and 12 to 23 months. It may therefore be expected that weight gain retarda-
tion from diarrheal infections is greatest in this period and, at least in Ghana and Pakistan,
is particularly great up to the age of 12 months, during which underweight increases
rapidly. The retardation factors in table D.4 for WAZ = –2 to –4 are within the bounds
often found in the research literature.

8 The calculation is as follows: (11.67 – 10)/(14.6 – 10) = 36%.
9 The calculation is as follows: –3 + (3 * 0.4) = –1.8. 
10 A working life from 15 to 65 years is applied. Annual income is approximated by GDP per

capita. Income is discounted at 3 percent. Real income growth is 2 percent per year.

11 The methodology for this part of the analysis, which estimates effects of stunting (partly
attributed to repeated infections) on cognition and learning, has benefited from comments
by Harold Alderman (senior adviser, Africa Region Human Development Department,
World Bank).

12 On-time enrollment, grade attainment, and high school completion rates in Cebu are rela-
tively high: 94 percent on-time (less than 8 years) enrollment, 9.5 years of schooling, and
55 percent high school completion rate.

13 An average child in Ghana starts school at the age of about seven and has seven to eight
years of schooling (World Bank 2007h). The average age of leaving school is therefore
around 15 years. 

14 Cost of schooling is the private and public costs of schooling.
15 Notice that there is a possibility of underestimation of damages linked to impaired cogni-
tive development. In fact, income earners with impaired cognitive development are more
likely to have lower income than others with the same educational achievement. The nega-
tive wage effect for income earners with impaired cognitive development as a consequence
of early childhood malnutrition may therefore be larger than that reflected in the studies
reviewed by Psacharopoulos and Patrinos (2004), if those studies did not control for cogni-
tive functioning.

16 Delayed school enrollment may affect grade attainment and thus schooling cost. However,
including such an effect here would involve double counting because grade attainment is
dealt with separately.

17 Increased grade repetition as a consequence of poor nutrition status is equivalent to an
average of one month of a school year per child with severe stunting status and one week
per child with mild stunting status. The additional schooling cost of grade repetition is there-
fore ignored here because it is minimal compared with the costs related to grade attainment.

18 These amounts are estimated from the Ghana 2003 DHS.

A P P E N D I X   E

Methodological Aspects of
Assessing Environmental
Health Burden of Disease

THIS APPENDIX CONSISTS OF TWO SECTIONS that provide details on
certain methodological aspects of the analysis to estimate the environmental health
burden of disease.1 The first section relates to how one gets from relative risks
(RRs) to attributable fractions (AFs). Environmental risk factor AFs for Ghana
and Pakistan are discussed in chapter 5, and a detailed methodology is described
in appendix D. The second section discusses a possible way to get around the
biased estimates of RRs. Unbiased estimates of RRs are used to calculate the AFs
in table 5.5.

From Relative Risks to Attributable Fractions

The burden of disease methodology aims at estimating the effects of selected risk
factors on mortality and disease. It applies disability weights to combine deaths
and illness into a single metric: disability-adjusted life years (DALYs). The envi-
ronmental burden of disease is obtained by limiting the analysis to environmental
risk factors.2 The World Health Organization’s Comparative Risk Assessment
(WHO 2002) considers six environmental risk factors and puts them in relation
to the diseases identified in the table E.1.

For each pair of risk factors and diseases, the Comparative Risk Assessment
defines a relative risk—that is, the probability of a disease or death from that
disease (for example, diarrhea) occurring in a group exposed to a risk factor

173

174 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

TABLE  E.1 
Environmental Risk Factors and Related Diseases Included in the WHO
Comparative Risk Assessment

Risk Factor

Related Diseases

Outdoor air pollution

Indoor air pollution

Lead
Water, sanitation, 
and hygiene
Climate change

Respiratory infections, selected cardiopulmonary 
diseases, lung cancer
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, lower respiratory
infections, lung cancer
Mild mental retardation, cardiovascular diseases
Diarrheal diseases, trachoma, schistosomiasis, ascariasis,
trichuriasis, hookworm disease
Diarrheal diseases, malaria, selected unintentional 
injuries, protein-energy malnutrition

Selected occupational risk factors:
Injuries
Noise
Carcinogens
Airborne particulates
Ergonomic stressors

Unintentional injuries
Hearing loss
Cancers
Asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
Lower back pain

Source: WHO 2002.

(for example, inadequate water, sanitation, and hygiene) versus the probability
of the same event occurring in a group that was not exposed. 

=

RR

(

)
Pr Disease Nonexposed

Pr Disease Exposed
(

)

(E.1)

So, for example, a relative risk of 2.3 of mortality from ALRI from indoor air
pollution (IAP) means that the probability of a person contracting ALRI after
being exposed is 2.3 times higher than the probability of the same person
contracting ALRI if not exposed. RRs, which are typically obtained from epidemi-
ology studies and expert forums, are reported for both mortality and morbidity
and constitute the basic building block of the estimation of burden of disease.

Information on exposure to a risk factor (for example, the number of children
under five years of age exposed to IAP) is combined with the RRs to estimate the
risk AF of death or illness. For example, suppose one wants to attribute deaths
from acute respiratory infections (ARI) in children under five to exposure to IAP.
The standard definition of the fraction of ARI deaths attributable to IAP is

AF = (Excess deaths attributable to IAP)/(Total ARI deaths)

(E.2)

Excess deaths attributable to IAP

= (Deaths in exposed population based on RR)

– (Deaths in exposed population if no exposure)

(E.3)

METHODOLOGICAL ASPECTS OF ASSESSING ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH BURDEN OF DISEASE 175

The fraction of deaths attributable to IAP is the ratio of excess deaths caused by
that pollution to total ARI deaths. Excess deaths attributable to IAP is the difference
between deaths in the exposed population based on estimated RR, minus deaths in
the exposed population if there were no exposure—that is, if the RR were 1.

The AF defined in equations E.2 and E.3 can be written as follows. Let N equal
the population of interest (for example, children under five in Ghana) and P be
the proportion of the population exposed to the risk factor (for example, IAP).
Let m be the death rate from ARI in the unexposed population; RR*m is the death
rate from ARI in the exposed population. Then, from equation E.3,

Excess deaths attributable to IAP = NP(RR*m) – NPm

= NP(RR – 1)m

(E.4)

Total deaths attributable to ARI = NP(RR*m) + N(1 – P)*m

= NP(RR – 1)m + Nm

Dividing the right-hand side of equation E.4 by total deaths gives
AF from IAP = [NP(RR – 1)m]/ [NP(RR – 1)m + Nm]

(E.5)

Canceling N and m from the numerator and denominator yields the standard

formula:

AF from IAP = P(RR – 1)/[P(RR – 1) + 1]

(E.6)

Equation E.6 generalizes when there is more than one exposure category (for
example, exposure to indoor smoke in an unventilated kitchen and exposure to
indoor smoke in ventilated kitchen) to

P RR
i
i

−

1

,

=

AF

i

n

∑
∑

=
1
n

=
1

i

P RR
i
i

(E.7)

where Pi is the population exposed to level i of the risk factor and RRi is the rela-
tive risk of dying from the selected disease by being exposed to level i of the risk
factor. It is important to note that equation E.7 also applies when there are multiple
risk factors and when exposure categories represent different combinations of
exposure to risk factors.

A generalized version of equation E.7 is

n

∑

=
1

i

=

AF

−

P RR
i
i

n

∑

=
1

i

′

P RR
i
i

,

(E.8)

n

∑

=
1

i

P RR
i
i

176 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

where the subindex i denotes exposure category; Pi is the population’s current expo-
sure distribution; P′i is the population’s exposure distribution after controlling one
or more risk factors (that is, exposure distribution in the absence of environ-
mental risks); and RRi is the risk of mortality in each exposure category. A major
advantage of equation E.8 is that it allows estimation of the AF of a target risk
factor (such as IAP) while leaving other risk factors (such as malnutrition that is
not environmentally attributable) unchanged. This advantage is exploited in esti-
mating the burden of disease for Ghana and Pakistan in this report.

Dealing with Biased Estimates of Relative Risk

There is a second problem relating to this study in estimating both the direct and
indirect effects of environmental risk factors. The RRs of mortality from expo-
sure to IAP and from malnutrition are usually calculated in separate epidemiological
studies, in which the other risk factor is not controlled for. For example, most of
the studies of ALRI that is caused by IAP that are reviewed in Desai, Mehta, and
Smith (2004) do not control for nutritional status. In the study by Fishman and
others (2004) of the impact of malnutrition on ALRI, there is no control for IAP.
In econometric jargon, this problem is referred to as the omitted variable bias problem. 
If there is positive correlation between malnutrition and exposure to IAP, the
RR in each of the studies is likely to overstate the impact of the risk factor studied,
relative to a study in which both risk factors are included. This problem is diffi-
cult to correct; a second-best approach is suggested here, which is based on the
properties of least-squares estimators in the presence of omitted variables.

The estimates in Fishman and others (2004) of the effect of malnutrition on
mortality from various diseases are very likely biased because they fail to control
for other risk factors.3 If the estimate of the relative risk of death from ALRI attrib-
utable to malnutrition ignores IAP, malnutrition will pick up its effects, because
malnutrition and exposure to IAP are correlated in most populations. For policy
purposes, there are at least four risk factors whose impact on ALRI deaths might
need to be estimated: exposure to IAP,4 malnutrition, crowding, and poor medical
treatment received when ill.

These factors are all important, and all have policy significance. Because poor
children are likely to be at risk for all four factors, omitting three of them makes
it likely that malnutrition will pick up their effects, thus overstating the impact
of malnutrition. In most studies, one could reduce this bias by using family income
(or assets) or mother’s education as a proxy for the omitted factors, even if the
factors could not be estimated directly. The only way to solve this omitted vari-
able bias problem is to find studies that have controlled for other risk factors (or
have proxied for them) in addition to malnutrition.

METHODOLOGICAL ASPECTS OF ASSESSING ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH BURDEN OF DISEASE 177

To understand the nature of the bias, suppose that in the correct model

y = g 0 + g 1IAP + g 2MAL,

(E.9)

where y = death rate attributable to ALRI or the logarithm of the death rate. 

It is well known that if malnutrition (MAL) is dropped from this equation and 

(E.10)
is estimated instead, that the least-squares estimator of b1 —that is,  —is related
to the least-squares estimators of the coefficients in equation E.9 as follows:

ˆβ
1

y = b0 + b1IAP 

=

+

β γ γ
ˆ
,δ
ˆ ˆ
2
1

ˆ
1

(E.11)

where 

ˆδ

is the coefficient of IAP in a regression of MAL on IAP. 

γ
ˆ
2>0

ˆδ> 0

ˆβ
1

This equation implies that if 

,  will be biased upward: indoor
air pollution will capture the effects of malnutrition. This situation is likely in
practice, since indoor air pollution and malnutrition are positively correlated in
most populations.

and 

A similar argument can be made for a model in which IAP is dropped from
equation E.9. In such a case, the coefficient for MAL will be biased as it captures
the effect of IAP. In the calculation of the total cost of environmental health risk
in chapter 5, relative risks are corrected by using these econometric results. Although
this solution is second best, it is done in order to provide conservative estimates.

Notes

1 This appendix is based on detailed comments and guidance from Maureen Cropper.
2 To distinguish environmental risk factors from nonenvironmental risk factors, one has to
define environment. This report follows Prüss-Üstün and Corvalán (2006: 22) by defining
environment as “all the physical, chemical, and biological factors external to a person, and
all the related behaviors.” 

3 Pelletier (1994) has demonstrated that estimates are robust when a wide array of variables

is controlled for.

4 Notice that IAP could also contribute to malnutrition through repeated respiratory infec-
tions. Multicollinearity will cause the estimated effect to be less robust (although unbiased). 

A P P E N D I X   F

Monetary Valuation of 

the Cost of Environmental

Health Risks

CHAPTER 5 PROVIDES MONETARY ESTIMATES of the environmentally
attributable burden of disease in Ghana and Pakistan. The World Health
Organization’s methodology for estimating burden of disease is a powerful tool
for decision-makers. Knowing the burden of disease makes it possible to compare
policy options that act on different causes of death and have different mortality
and morbidity impacts. A major advantage of using burden of disease is that it
requires no monetary valuation of the benefits of an intervention (for example,
there is no need to know the value of a life).

The main limitation of burden of disease is that it cannot be applied when one
compares policies with outcomes measured in different metrics (for example, a
case in which one policy reduces diarrhea mortality while another policy increases
children’s cognition and, thus, future income). In such cases, the monetary
valuation of burden of disease can be very useful. Monetary valuation has also
been used extensively to express burden of disease in a metric that is easy for
policy-makers with no background in public health to understand.

Several approaches are available to value the impact of health risks. Traditionally,
valuation of health damages has been based on the calculation of the observed
costs caused by death or illness.
■ Death, incapacity, or illness is typically valued using the human capital approach,
which calculates the present value of forgone earnings.1 For the sake of simplicity,

179

180 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

many studies of the costs of environmental degradation have valued a lost year
of healthy life using gross domestic product per capita as a proxy of the forgone
annual earnings.

■ Illness also results in expenses other than lost wages. The cost-of-illness approach
measures such costs by estimating the change in costs incurred as a result of a
change in the incidence of a particular illness. Both direct costs (such as cost
of doctor visits and treatment) and indirect costs (such as loss of wages) are
included in the estimation. In cases where some of the costs are borne by medical
insurance, cost-of-illness measures will not be limited to a patient’s out-of-
pocket expenses but should include the additional costs borne by the insurance
company or treatment facility, to capture the social benefits of the reduced risk.
It is important to keep in mind that unit values should be expressed net of
taxes and subsidies. Taxes and subsidies are transfers within the economy and
should not be taken as a component of the true economic value of an item. So,
for example, admissions in public hospitals that are free (or subsidized) can be
valued by using a comparable estimate from the private sector. Likewise, meas-
ures of wage are taken net of labor taxes.
More recently, economists have started adopting estimates of willingness to
pay (WTP) or willingness to accept compensation to value health damages. The
human capital and cost-of-illness approaches take into account only the out-of-
pocket expenses paid as a consequence of illness or death. They are based on the
notion that individuals should at least be willing to pay those out-of-pocket
expenses to avoid illness. But individuals’ willingness to pay to avoid illness or
death may be higher than their out-of-pocket expenses. The WTP approach, when
correctly applied, can capture people’s preferences to avoid pain and discomfort.
It does so by looking at how they respond to risk of illness or death. Typically,
valuation is determined either by observing behavior or by eliciting responses
from a questionnaire. Responses are then analyzed using econometric techniques
to estimate willingness to pay. 

Despite its advantages, the WTP approach produces a much higher uncer-
tainty regarding values and requires much closer scrutiny. The WTP approach is
also data intensive: proper estimates require large and costly surveys and careful
application of econometric methods. For this reason, studies in developing coun-
tries have commonly transferred WTP estimates from U.S. and European studies
by accounting for differences in purchasing power and, occasionally, the income
elasticity of consumption.

An important limit to the application of the WTP approach is with regard to
children’s life. It is conceptually and practically very difficult to observe or measure
monetarily children’s preferences. For this reason, in this study, valuation relies
solely on the human capital approach. For simplicity, the study does not look at
cost of illness and it concentrates on the valuation of mortality. Deaths in Ghana

MONETARY VALUATION OF THE COST OF ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH RISKS  181

are valued using a per capita income of US$485 (2005 dollars). In Pakistan, a per
capita income of US$714 (2005 dollars) is used. Per capita income values are also
used to estimate the present value of income losses from lower education attain-
ment, together with an assumed real rate of income growth of 2 percent.

Note

1 Some have argued that there is a conceptual problem with the human capital approach,
in that most people value safety not out of concern for preserving current and future
income levels but primarily because they have an aversion to pain, suffering, and death.

References

Adair, L., B. Popkin, J. VanDerslice, J. Akin, D. Guilkey, R. Black, J. Briscoe, and W. Flieger. 1993.
“Growth Dynamics during the First Two Years of Life: A Prospective Study in the
Philippines.” European Journal of Clinical Nutrition 47 (1): 42–51.

Adjuik, M., T. Smith, S. Clark, J. Todd, A. Garrib, Y. Kinfu, K. Kahn, M. Mola, A. Ashraf, 
H. Masanja, U. Adazu, J. Sacarlal, N. Alam, A. Marra, A. Gbangou, E. Mwageni, and 
F. Binka. 2006. “Cause-Specific Mortality Rates in Sub-Saharan Africa and Bangladesh.”
Bulletin of the World Health Organization 84 (3): 181–88.

Agarwal, B. 1983. “Diffusion of Rural Innovations: Some Analytical Issues and Case Study of

Improved Woodburning Stoves.” World Development 11: 359–76.

———. 1986. Cold Hearths and Barren Slopes: Woodfuel Crisis in the Third World. New Delhi:

Allied Press.

Ahmed, K., Y. A. Awe, D. F. Barnes, M. L. Cropper, and M. Kojima. 2005. Environmental Health

and Traditional Fuel Use in Guatemala. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Ahmed, N., M. Zeitlin, A. Beiser, C. Super, and S. Gershoff. 1993. “A Longitudinal Study of the
Impact of Behavioural Change Intervention on Cleanliness, Diarrhoeal Morbidity, and
Growth of Children in Rural Bangladesh.” Social Science and Medicine 37 (2): 159–71.

Alam, D., G. Marks, A. Baqui, M. Yunus, and G. Fuchs. 2000. “Association between Clinical
Type of Diarrhoea and Growth of Children under 5 Years in Rural Bangladesh.” International
Journal of Epidemiology 29 (5): 916–21.

Alderman, H., J. Behrman, V. Lavy, and R. Menon. 2001. “Child Health and School Enrollment:

A Longitudinal Analysis.” Journal of Human Resources 36 (1): 185–205.

183

184 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

Alderman, H., J. Konde-Lule, I. Sebuliba, D. Bundy, and A. Hall. 2006. “Effect on Weight Gain
of Routinely Giving Albendazole to Preschool Children during Child Health Days in
Uganda: Cluster Randomised Controlled Trial.” British Medical Journal 333 (7559): 122.
Allen, S. J., A. Raiko, A. O’Donnell, N. D. E. Alexander, and J. B. Clegg. 1998. “Causes of Preterm
Delivery and Intrauterine Growth Retardation in a Malaria Endemic Region of Papua New
Guinea.” Archive of Disease in Childhood 79 (2): F135–40.

Alvarado, B.-E., M. V. Zunzunegui, H. Delisle, and J. Osorno. 2005. “Growth Trajectories Are
Influenced by Breast-Feeding and Infant Health in an Afro-Colombian Community.”
Journal of Nutrition 135 (9): 2171–78.

Awasthi, S., and D. Bundy. 2007. “Intestinal Nematode Infection and Anaemia in Developing

Countries.” British Medical Journal 334 (7603): 1065–66.

Awasthi, S., D. Bundy, and L. Savioli. 2003. “Helminthic Infections.” British Medical Journal

327 (7412): 431–33.

Bairagi, R., M. K. Chowdhury, Y. J. Kim, G. T. Curlin, and R. H. Gray. 1987. “The Association
between Malnutrition and Diarrhoea in Rural Bangladesh.” International Journal of
Epidemiology 16 (3): 477–81.

Banerjee, I., S. Ramani, B. Primrose, P. Moses, M. Iturriza-Gomara, J. J. Gray, S. Jaffar, 
M. Bindhu, J. P. Muliyil, D. W. Brown, M. K. Estes, and G. Kang. 2006. “Comparative Study
of the Epidemiology of Rotavirus in Children from a Community-Based Birth Cohort
and a Hospital in South India.” Journal of Clinical Microbiology 44 (7): 2468–74.

Bang, A. T., R. A. Bang, S. B. Baitule, M. H. Reddy, and M. D. Deshmukh. 1999. “Effect of
Home-Based Neonatal Care and Management of Sepsis on Neonatal Mortality: Field Trial
in Rural India.” Lancet 354 (9194): 1955–61.

Baumgartner, R., and E. Pollitt. 1983. “The Bacon Chow Study: Analyses of the Effects of

Infectious Illness on Growth of Infants.” Nutrition Research 3: 9–21.

Becker, S., R. E. Black, and K. H. Brown. 1991. “Relative Effects of Diarrhea, Fever, and Dietary
Energy Intake on Weight Gain in Rural Bangladeshi Children.” American Journal of Clinical
Nutrition 53 (6): 1499–503.

Behrman, J., J. Hoddinott, J. Maluccio, E. Soler-Hampejsek, E. L. Behrman, R. Martorell, 
M. Ramirez-Zea, and A D. Stein. 2006. “What Determines Adult Cognitive Skills? Impacts
of Pre-school, Schooling, and Post-schooling Experiences in Guatemala.” PSC Working
Paper, Population Studies Center, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia.

Bennett, J., M. Schooley, H. Traverso, S. B. Agha, and J. Boring. 1996. “Bundling, a Newly
Identified Risk Factor for Neonatal Tetanus: Implications for Global Control.” International
Journal of Epidemiology 25 (4): 879–84.

Berg, R. 2005. “Bridging the Great Divide: Environmental Health and the Environmental

Movement.” Journal of Environmental Health 67 (6): 39–52.

Berkman, D. S., A. G. Lescano, R. H. Gilman, S. L. Lopez, and M. M. Black. 2002. “Effects of
Stunting, Diarrhoeal Disease, and Parasitic Infection during Infancy on Cognition in Late
Childhood: A Follow-up Study.” Lancet 359 (9306): 564–71.

Bertozzi, S., N. Padian, J. Wegbreit, L. DeMaria, B. Feldman, H. Gayle, J. Gold, R. Grant, and
M. Isbell. 2006. “HIV/AIDS Prevention and Treatment.” In Disease Control Priorities in
Developing Countries, 2nd ed., ed. D. T. Jamison, J. G. Breman, A. R. Measham, G. Alleyne,
M. Claeson, D. B. Evans, P. Jha, A. Mills, and P. Musgrove, 331–69. Washington, DC: World
Bank; New York: Oxford University Press.

Biran, A., L. Smith, J. Lines, J. Ensink, and M. Cameron. 2007. “Smoke and Malaria: Are
Interventions to Reduce Exposure to Indoor Air Pollution Likely to Increase Exposure

REFERENCES  185

to Mosquitoes?” Transactions of the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 101
(11): 1065–71.

Black, R. E., K. H. Brown, and S. Becker. 1984. “Effects of Diarrhea Associated with Specific
Enteropathogens on the Growth of Children in Rural Bangladesh.” Pediatrics 73 (6): 799–805.

Blössner, M., and M. de Onis. 2005. Malnutrition: Quantifying the Health Impact at National
and Local Levels. WHO Environmental Burden of Disease 12. Geneva: World Health
Organization. 

Boeston, K., P. Kolsky, and C. Hunt. 2007. “Improving Urban Water and Sanitation Services:
Health, Access, and Boundaries.” In Scaling Urban Environmental Challenges: From Local
to Global and Back, ed. P. Marcotullio and G. McGranahan, 106–31. London: Earthscan.

Breman, J. G., M. S. Alilio, and A. Mills. 2004. “Conquering the Intolerable Burden of Malaria:
What’s New, What’s Needed—A Summary.” American Journal of Tropical Medical Hygiene
71 (2 Suppl.): 1–15.

Brenzel, L., L. J. Wolfson, J. Fox-Rushby, M. Miller, and N. A. Halsey. 2006. “Vaccine-Preventable
Diseases.” In Disease Control Priorities in Developing Countries, 2nd ed., ed. D. T. Jamison,
J. G. Breman, A. R. Measham, G. Alleyne, M. Claeson, D. B. Evans, P. Jha, A. Mills, and 
P. Musgrove, 389–411. Washington, DC: World Bank; New York: Oxford University Press.

Briend, A., K. Hasan, K. Aziz, and B. Hoque. 1989. “Are Diarrhoea Control Programmes Likely
to Reduce Childhood Malnutrition? Observations from Rural Bangladesh.” Lancet 2 (8658):
319–22.

Briscoe, J. 1987. “The Author Replies.” American Journal of Epidemiology 125 (5): 922–25.

Brown, K. H. 2003. “Symposium: Nutrition and Infection, Prologue and Progress since 1968—

Diarrhea and Malnutrition.” Journal of Nutrition 133 (1): 328S–32S.

Bruce, N., R. Perez-Padilla, and R. Albalak. 2002. “The Health Effects of Indoor Air Pollution
Exposure in Developing Countries.” WHO/SDE/OEH/02.05. World Health Organization,
Geneva. http://whqlibdoc.who.int/hq/2002/WHO_SDE_OEH_02.05.pdf.

Brush, G., G. Harrison, and J. Waterlow. 1997. “Effects of Early Disease on Later Growth, and Early

Growth on Later Disease, in Khartoum Infants.” Annals of Human Biology 24 (3): 187–95.

Bryce, J., C. Boschi-Pinto, K. Shibuya, and R. Black. 2005. “WHO Estimates of the Causes of

Death in Children.” Lancet 365 (9465): 1147–52.

Burra, S., S. Patel, and T. Kerr. 2003. “Community Designed, Built and Managed Toilet Blocks

in Indian Cities.” Environment and Urbanization 15 (2): 11–32.

Cairncross, S. 1987. “Ingested Dose and Diarrhea Transmission Routes.” American Journal of

Epidemiology 125 (5): 921–22.

———. 2003. “Handwashing with Soap: A New Way to Prevent ARIs.” Tropical Medicine and

International Health 8 (8): 677–79.

Cairncross, S., U. Blumenthal, P. Kolsky, L. Moraes, and A. T. Tayeh. 1996. “The Public and
Domestic Domains in the Transmission of Disease.” Tropical Medicine and International
Health 1 (1): 27–34.

Cairncross, S., and J. Kinnear. 1992. “Elasticity of Demand for Water in Khartoum, Sudan.”

Social Science and Medicine 34 (2): 183–89.

Cairncross, S., and P. Kolsky. 1997. “Water, Waste, and Well-Being: A Multicountry Study.”

American Journal of Epidemiology 146 (4): 359–61.

Cairncross, S., and V. Valdmanis. 2006. “Water Supply, Sanitation, and Hygiene Promotion.” In
Disease Control Priorities in Developing Countries, 2nd. ed., ed. D. T. Jamison, J. G. Breman,

186 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

A. R. Measham, G. Alleyne, M. Claeson, D. B. Evans, P. Jha, A. Mills, and P. Musgrove,
771–92. Washington, DC: World Bank; New York: Oxford University Press.

Campbell, D., M. Elia, and G. Lunn. 2003. “Growth Faltering in Rural Gambian Infants Is
Associated with Impaired Small Intestinal Barrier Function, Leading to Endotoxemia and
Systemic Infection.” Journal of Nutrition 133 (5): 1332–38.

Campbell-Lendrum, D., C. Corvalán, and M. Neira. 2007. “Global Climate Change: Implications
for International Public Health Policy.” Bulletin of the World Health Organization 85 (3):
235–37.

Carson, Rachel. 1962. Silent Spring. New York: Houghton Mifflin.

Carter, R., and K. Mendis. 2006. “Measuring Malaria.” American Journal of Tropical Medical

Hygiene 74 (2): 187–88.

Cattand, P., P. Desjeux, M. Guzman, J. Jannin, A. Kroeger, A. Medici, P. Musgrove, M. B. Nathan,
A. Shaw, and C. Schofield. 2006. “Tropical Diseases Lacking Adequate Control Measures:
Dengue, Leishmaniasis, and African Trypanosomiasis.” In Disease Control Priorities in
Developing Countries, 2nd ed., ed. D. T. Jamison, J. G. Breman, A. R. Measham, G. Alleyne,
M. Claeson, D. B. Evans, P. Jha, A. Mills, and P. Musgrove, 451–66. Washington, DC: World
Bank; New York: Oxford University Press.

Caulfield, L. E., M. de Onis, M. Blössner, and R. E. Black. 2004. “Undernutrition as an
Underlying Cause of Child Deaths Associated with Diarrhea, Pneumonia, Malaria, and
Measles.” American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 80 (1): 193–98.

Caulfield, L. E., S. A. Richard, J. A. Rivera, P. Musgrove, and R. E. Black. 2006. “Stunting, Wasting,
and Micronutrient Deficiency Disorders.” In Disease Control Priorities in Developing
Countries, 2nd ed., ed. D. T. Jamison, J. G. Breman, A. R. Measham, G. Alleyne, M. Claeson,
D. B. Evans, P. Jha, A. Mills, and P. Musgrove, 551–68. Washington, DC: World Bank; New
York: Oxford University Press.

Chatterjee, N., and P. Hartge. 2003. “Apportioning Causes, Targeting Populations, and Predicting
Risks: Population Attributable Fractions.” European Journal of Epidemiology 18 (10): 933–35.

Checkley, W., L. D. Epstein, R. H. Gilman, R. E. Black, L. Cabrera, and C. R. Sterling. 1998.
“Effects of Cryptosporidium parvum Infection in Peruvian Children: Growth Faltering and
Subsequent Catch-up Growth.” American Journal of Epidemiology 148 (5): 497–506.

Checkley, W., L. D. Epstein, R. H. Gilman, L. Cabrera, and R. E. Black. 2003. “Effects of Acute
Diarrhea on Linear Growth in Peruvian Children.” American Journal of Epidemiology
157 (2): 166–75.

Checkley, W., R. H. Gilman, L. D. Epstein, M. Suarez, J. F. Diaz, L. Cabrera, R. E. Black, and
C. R. Sterling. 1997. “Asymptomatic and Symptomatic Cryptosporidiosis: Their Acute Effect
on Weight Gain in Peruvian Children.” American Journal of Epidemiology 145 (2): 156–63.

Chisti, M. J., M. I. Hossain, M. A. Malek, A. S. Faruque, T. Ahmed, and M. A. Salam. 2007.
“Characteristics of Severely Malnourished Under-Five Children Hospitalized with Diarrhoea
and Their Policy Implications.” Acta Paediatrica 96 (5): 693–96.

Chu, D., R. D. Bungiro, M. Ibanez, L. M. Harrison, E. Campodonico, B. F. Jones, J. Mieszczanek,
P. Kuzmic, and M. Cappello. 2004. “Molecular Characterization of Ancylostoma ceylan-
icum Kunitz-Type Serine Protease Inhibitor: Evidence for a Role in Hookworm-Associated
Growth Delay.” Infection and Immunity 72 (4): 2214–21.

Cohen, R. J., K. H. Brown, J. Canahuati, L. L. Rivera, and K. G. Dewey. 1995. “Determinants of
Growth from Birth to 12 Months among Breast-Fed Honduran Infants in Relation to Age
of Introduction of Complementary Foods.” Pediatrics 96 (3): 504–10.

REFERENCES  187

Condon-Paoloni, D., J. Cravioto, F. Johnston, E. De Licardie, and T. Scholl. 1977. “Morbidity
and Growth of Infants and Young Children in a Rural Mexican Village.” American Journal
of Public Health 67 (7): 651–56.

Coovadia, H. M., N. C. Rollins, R. M. Bland, K. Little, A. Coutsoudis, M. L. Bennish, and
M.-L. Newell. 2007. “Mother-to-Child Transmission of HIV-1 Infection during Exclusive
Breastfeeding in the First 6 Months of Life: An Intervention Cohort Study.” Lancet 369
(9567): 1107–16. 

Crawley, J., J. Hill, J. Yartey, M. Robalo, A. Serufilira, A. Ba-Nguz, E. Roman, A. Palmer, 
K. Asamoa, and R. Steketee. 2007. “From Evidence to Action? Challenges to Policy Change
and Programme Delivery for Malaria in Pregnancy.” Lancet Infectious Diseases 7 (2): 145–55.

Cutler, D. M., and G. Miller. 2005. “The Role of Public Health Improvements in Health

Advances: The Twentieth-Century United States.” Demography 42 (1): 1–22.

Cutts, F., S. Zaman, G. Enwere, S. Jaffar, O. Levine, J. Okoko, C. Oluwalana, A. Vaughan, 
S. Obaro, A. Leach, K. McAdam, E. Biney, M. Saaka, U. Onwuchekwa, F. Yallop, N. Pierce,
B. Greenwood, R. Adegbola, and the Gambian Pneumococcal Vaccine Trial Group. 2005.
“Efficacy of Nine-Valent Pneumococcal Conjugate Vaccine against Pneumonia and Invasive
Pneumococcal Disease in The Gambia: Randomised, Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled
Trial.” Lancet 365 (9465): 1139–46.

Dai, D., and W. Walker. 1999. “Protective Nutrients and Bacterial Colonization in the Immature

Human Gut.” Advances in Pediatrics 46: 353–82.

Dandoy, S. 1997. “The State Public Health Department.” In Principles of Public Health Practice,

ed. F. D. Scutchfield and C. W. Keck, 83. Albany: Delmar.

Daniels, M. C., and L. S. Adair. 2004. “Growth in Young Filipino Children Predicts Schooling

Trajectories through High School.” Journal of Nutrition 134 (6): 1439–46.

Das Gupta, M., D. Ghosh, K. Datta, and S. Chakrabarti. 2006. “Harnessing Local Governments
and Communities to Improve Environmental Sanitation and Public Health in India.” Paper
presented at the Workshop on Fiscal Decentralization and Local Governance in India,
organized by the Indian Institute of Public Administration in partnership with the govern-
ment of Japan and the World Bank, Goa, India, December 11–15, 2006.

Dasgupta, S., M. Huq, M. Khaliquzzaman, K. Pandey, and D. Wheeler. 2004a. Indoor Air Quality

for Poor Families: New Evidence from Bangladesh. Washington, DC: World Bank.

———. 2004b. Who Suffers from Indoor Air Pollution? Evidence from Bangladesh. Washington,

DC: World Bank.

Desai, M., S. Mehta, and K. Smith. 2004. Indoor Smoke from Solid Fuels: Assessing the
Environmental Burden of Disease at National and Local Levels. Environmental Burden of
Disease Series 4. Geneva: World Health Organization.

Dickson, R., S. Awasthi, P. Williamson, C. Demellweek, and P. Garner. 2000. “Effects of Treatment
for Intestinal Helminth Infection on Growth and Cognitive Performance in Children:
Systematic Review of Randomised Trials.” British Medical Journal 320 (7251): 1697–701.

Eisenberg, J. N. S., W. Cevallos, K. Ponce, K. Levy, S. J. Bates, J. C. Scott, A. Hubbard, N. Vieira,
P. Endara, M. Espinel, G. Trueba, L. W. Riley, and J. Trostle. 2006. “Environmental Change
and Infectious Disease: How New Roads Affect the Transmission of Diarrheal Pathogens
in Rural Ecuador.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 103 (51): 19460–65.

Eisenberg, J. N. S., J. C. Scott, and T. Porco. 2007. “Integrating Disease Control Strategies:
Balancing Water Sanitation and Hygiene Interventions to Reduce Diarrheal Disease
Burden.” American Journal of Public Health 97 (5): 846–52.

188 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

Eriksson, J. 2005. “The Fetal Origins Hypothesis: 10 Years On.” British Medical Journal 330: 1096–97.
Ezzati, M., A. D. Lopez, A. Rodgers, and C. J. L. Murray, ed. 2004. Comparative Quantification
of Health Risks: Global and Regional Burden of Disease Attributable to Selected Major Risk
Factors. Geneva: World Health Organization.

Ezzati, M., A. Rodgers, A. D. Lopez, S. Vander Hoorn, and C. J. L. Murray. 2004. “Mortality and
Burden of Disease Attributable to Individual Risk Factors.” In Comparative Quantification
of Health Risks: Global and Regional Burden of Disease Attributable to Selected Major Risk
Factors, vol. 2, ed. M. Ezzati, A. D. Lopez, A. Rodgers, and C. J. L. Murray, 2141–65. Geneva:
World Health Organization.

Ezzati, M., S. Vander Hoorn, A. Rodgers, A. D. Lopez, C. D. Mathers, and C. J. L. Murray. 2004.
“Potential Health Gains from Reducing Multiple Risk Factors.” In Comparative Quantification
of Health Risks: Global and Regional Burden of Disease Attributable to Selected Major Risk
Factors, vol. 2, ed. M. Ezzati, A. D. Lopez, A. Rodgers, and C. J. L. Murray, 2167–90. Geneva:
World Health Organization. 

Ezzati, M., S. Vander Hoorn, A. Rodgers, A. D. Lopez, C. D. Mathers, C. J. L. Murray, and the
Comparative Risk Assessment Collaborating Group. 2003. “Estimates of Global and
Regional Potential Health Gains from Reducing Multiple Major Risk Factors.” Lancet 362
(9380): 271–80.

FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization). 2006. The State of Food Insecurity in the World 2006:
Eradicating World Hunger—Taking Stock Ten Years after the World Food Summit. Rome:
FAO.

Favin, M. 2004. “Promoting Hygiene Behavior Change within C-IMCI: The Peru and Nicaragua
Experience.” Activity Report 143, Environmental Health Project, Office of Health, Infectious
Diseases, and Nutrition, Bureau for Global Health, U.S. Agency for International Development,
Washington, DC. http://www.ehproject.org/PDF/Activity_Reports/AR-143CIMCI%20-
format.pdf.

Favin, M., M. Yacoob, and D. Bendahmane. 1999. “Behavior First: A Minimum Package of
Environmental  Health  Behaviors  to  Improve  Child  Health.”  Applied  Study  10,
Environmental Health Project, Office of Health, Infectious Diseases, and Nutrition, Bureau
for Global Programs, U.S. Agency for International Development, Washington, DC.
http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PNACF961.pdf.

Federal Bureau of Statistics. 2005. Pakistan Social and Living Standards Measurement Survey

2004–05. Islamabad: Federal Bureau of Statistics, Government of Pakistan. 

Fegan, G. W., A. M. Noor, W. S. Akhwale, S. Cousens, and R. W. Snow. 2007. “Effect of Expanded
Insecticide-Treated Bednet Coverage on Child Survival in Rural Kenya: A Longitudinal
Study.” Lancet 370 (9592): 1035–39.

Ferrie, J., and W. Troesken. 2004. “Death in the City: Mortality and Access to Public Water and

Sewer in Chicago, 1880.” Northwestern University, Evanston, IL.

Fewtrell, L., A. Prüss-Üstün, R. Bos, F. Gore, and J. Bartram. 2007. Water, Sanitation, and
Hygiene: Quantifying the Health Impact at National and Local Levels in Countries with
Incomplete Water Supply and Sanitation Coverage. Environmental Burden of Disease Series
15. Geneva: World Health Organization.

Fikree, F., M. Rahbar, and H. Berendes. 2000. “Risk Factors for Stunting and Wasting at Age Six,
Twelve, and Twenty-Four Months for Squatter Children of Karachi, Pakistan.” Journal of
the Pakistan Medical Association 50 (10): 341–48.

Fishman, S., L. E. Caulfield, M. de Onis, M. Blössner, A. Hyder, L. Mullany, and R. E. Black.
2004. “Childhood and Maternal Underweight.” In Comparative Quantification of Health

REFERENCES  189

Risks: Global and Regional Burden of Disease Attributable to Selected Major Risk Factors,
vol. 1, ed. M. Ezzati A. D. Lopez, A. Rodgers, and C. J. L. Murray, 39–61. Geneva: World
Health Organization. 

Flemming, K., W. van der Hoek, F. P. Amerasinghe, C. Muteroc, and E. Boelee. 2004.
“Engineering and Malaria Control: Learning from the Past 100 Years.” Acta Tropica 89 (2):
99–108.

Frenk, J. 2006. “Bridging the Divide: Global Lessons from Evidence-Based Health Policy in

Mexico.” Lancet 368 (9539): 954–61.

Frias, J., and N. Mukherjee. 2005. Private Sector Sanitation Delivery in Vietnam: Harnessing

Market Power for Rural Sanitation. Jakarta: World Bank.

Galiani, S., P. Gertler, and E. Schargrodsky. 2005. “Water for Life: The Impact of the Privatization

of Water Services on Child Mortality.” Journal of Political Economy 113 (1): 83–120.

Ghana Statistical Service. 2003. The Ghana Demographic and Health Survey 2003. Accra: Ghana
Statistical Service. http://www.measuredhs.com/aboutsurveys/search/metadata.cfm?
surv_id=235&ctry_id=14&SrvyTp=type. 

Glewwe, P., and H. Jacoby. 1995. “An Economic Analysis of Delayed Primary School Enrollment
in a Low-Income Country: The Role of Early Childhood Nutrition.” Review of Economics
and Statistics 77 (1): 156–69.

Glewwe, P., H. Jacoby, and E. King. 2001. “Early Childhood Nutrition and Academic Achievement:

A Longitudinal Analysis.” Journal of Public Economics 81 (3): 345–68.

Gragnolati, M., M. Shekar, M. Das Gupta, C. Bredenkamp, and Y.-K. Lee. 2006. India’s

Malnourished Children: A Call for Reform and Action. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Graham, W., J. Cairns, S. Bhattacharya, C. H. W. Bullough, Z. Quayyum, and K. Rogo. 2006.
“Maternal and Perinatal Conditions.” In Disease Control Priorities in Developing Countries,
2nd ed., ed. D. T. Jamison, J. G. Breman, A. R. Measham, G. Alleyne, M. Claeson, 
D. B. Evans, P. Jha, A. Mills, and P. Musgrove, 499–529. Washington, DC: World Bank;
New York: Oxford University Press.

Grantham-McGregor, S., Y. B. Cheung, S. Cueto, P. Glewwe, L. Richter, and B. Strupp. 2007.
“Child Development in Developing Countries: Developmental Potential in the First 5 Years
for Children in Developing Countries.” Lancet 369 (9555): 60–70.

Griffiths, M., and J. S. McGuire. 2005. “A New Dimension for Health Reform: The Integrated
Community Child Health Program in Honduras.” In Health System Innovations in Central
America: Lessons and Impact of New Approaches, ed. G. La Forgia, 173–96. Washington,
DC: World Bank. 

Guerrant, D. I., S. R. Moore, A. A. M. Lima, P. D. Patrick, J. B. Schorling, and R. L. Guerrant.
1999. “Association of Early Childhood Diarrhea and Cryptosporidiosis with Impaired
Physical Fitness and Cognitive Function Four–Seven Years Later in a Poor Urban Community
in Northeast Brazil.” American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 61 (5): 707–13.

Guerrant, R. L., L. V. Kirchhoff, D. S. Shields, M. K. Nations, J. Leslie, M. A. De Sousa, J. G.
Araujo, L. L. Correia, K. T. Sauer, K. E. McClelland, F. L. Trowbridge, and J. M. Hughes.
1983. “Prospective Study of Diarrheal Illnesses in Northeastern Brazil: Patterns of
Disease, Nutritional Impact, Etiologies, and Risk Factors.” Journal of Infectious Diseases
148 (6): 986–97.

Guerrant, R. L., A. A. M. Lima, and F. Davidson. 2000. “Micronutrients and Infection:
Interactions and Implications with Enteric and Other Infections and Future Priorities.”
Journal of Infectious Diseases 182 (1 Suppl.): S134–38.

190 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

Guerrant, R. L., J. B. Schorling, J. F. McAuliffe, and M. A. D. Souza. 1992. “Diarrhea as a Cause
and Effect of Malnutrition: Diarrhea Prevents Catch-up Growth and Malnutrition Increases
Diarrhea Frequency and Duration.” American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 47
(1): 28–35.

Guyatt, H. L., and R. W. Snow. 2004. “Impact of Malaria during Pregnancy on Low Birth Weight

in Sub-Saharan Africa.” Clinical Microbiology Reviews 17 (4): 760–69.

Ha, D. Q., and T. Q. Huan. 1997. “Dengue Activity in Viet Nam and Its Control Programme,
1997–98.”  Dengue  Bulletin  21  (December):  35–40.  http://www.searo.who.int/en/
Section10/Section332/Section519_2384.htm.

Habicht, J.-P., J. DaVanzo, and W. P. Butz. 1988. “Mother’s Milk and Sewage: Their Interactive

Effects on Infant Mortality.” Pediatrics 81 (3): 456–61.

Hadi, H., M. Dibley, and K. West. 2004. “Complex Interactions with Infection and Diet May
Explain Seasonal Growth Responses to Vitamin A in Preschool Aged Indonesian Children.”
European Journal of Clinical Nutrition 58 (7): 990–99.

Hadi, H., R. Stoltzfus, L. Moulton, M. Dibley, and K. West Jr. 1999. “Respiratory Infections
Reduce the Growth Response to Vitamin A Supplementation in a Randomized Controlled
Trial.” International Journal of Epidemiology 28 (5): 874–81.

Harrison, G., G. Brush, and F. Zumrawi. 1993. “Motherhood and Infant Health in Khartoum.”

Bulletin of the World Health Organization 71 (5): 529–33.

Heaver, R., and Y. Kachondam. 2002. Thailand’s National Nutrition Program: Lessons in

Management and Capacity Development. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Henry, F. 1981. “Environmental Sanitation Infection and Nutritional Status of Infants in Rural
St. Lucia, West Indies.” Transactions of the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene
75 (4): 507–13.

Henry, F., N. Alam, K. Aziz, and M. Rahaman. 1987. “Dysentery, Not Watery Diarrhoea, Is
Associated with Stunting in Bangladeshi Children.” Human Nutrition and Clinical Nutrition
41 (4): 243–49.

Holveck, J., J. Ehrenberg, S. Ault, R. Rojas, J. Vasquez, M. Cerqueira, J. Ippolito-Shepherd, 
M. Genovese, and M. Periago. 2007. “Prevention, Control, and Elimination of Neglected
Diseases in the Americas: Pathways to Integrated, Inter-Programmatic, Inter-Sectoral Action
for Health and Development.” BMC Public Health 7 (1): 6.

Horton, S. 1999. “Opportunities for Investments in Nutrition in Low-Income Asia.” Asian
Development Review, 17 (1–2): 246–73. http://www.adb.org/documents/periodicals/
adr/pdf/ADR-Vol17-Horton.pdf.

Hotez, P. J., D. H. Molyneux, A. Fenwick, E. Ottesen, S. E. Sachs, and J. D. Sachs. 2006.
“Incorporating a Rapid-Impact Package for Neglected Tropical Diseases with Programs
for HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis, and Malaria: A Comprehensive Pro-Poor Health Policy and
Strategy for the Developing World.” PLoS Medicine 3 (5): 576–84.

Howard, G., and J. Bartram. 2003. “Domestic Water Quantity, Service Level, and Health.”
WHO/SDE/WSH/03.02. World Health Organization, Geneva. http://www.who.int/
water_sanitation_health/diseases/WSH0302exsum.pdf.

Hunt, Caroline. 2006. “Sanitation and Human Development.” Occasional Paper 26, Human

Development Report Office, United Nations Development Programme, New York.

Hunter, J. M. 1992. “Elephantiasis: A Disease of Development in North East Ghana.” Social

Science and Medicine 35 (5): 627–49.

———. 2003. “Inherited Burden of Disease: Agricultural Dams and the Persistence of Bloody
Urine (Schistosomiasis hematobium) in the Upper East Region of Ghana, 1959–1997.” Social
Science and Medicine 56 (2): 219–34.

REFERENCES  191

Hutton, G., and L. Haller. 2004. Evaluation of the Cost and Benefits of Water and Sanitation
Improvements at the Global Level. WHO/SDE/WSH/04.04. Geneva: World Health
Organization. http://www.who.int/water_sanitation_health/wsh0404/en/index.html.

Iannotti, L. L., J. M. Tielsch, M. M. Black, and R. E. Black. 2006. “Iron Supplementation in Early
Childhood: Health Benefits and Risks.” American Journal Clinical Nutrition 84 (6):
1261–76.

IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). 2007. “Climate Change 2007: Impacts,
Adaptation, and Vulnerability.” In Contribution of Working Group II to the Fourth Assessment
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, ed. M. L. Parry, O. F. Canziani,
J. P. Palutikof, P. J. van der Linden, and C. E. Hanson, 79–131. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge
University Press.

Jacoby, H., and L. Wang. 2004. “Environmental Determinants of Child Mortality in Rural
China: A Competing Risks Approach.” Policy Research Working Paper 3241, World Bank,
Washington, DC.

Jefferson, T., R. Foxlee, C. Del Mar, L. Dooley, E. Ferroni, B. Hewak, A. Prabhala, S. Nair, and
A. Rivetti. 2007. “Interventions for the Interruption or Reduction of the Spread of Respiratory
Viruses (Review).” Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews (4).

Kay, B., and V. Nam. 2005. “New Strategy for Dengue Control in Vietnam.” Lancet 365 (9459):

613–17.

Keiser, J., B. Singer, and J. Utzinger. 2005. “Reducing the Burden of Malaria in Different Eco-
Epidemiological Settings with Environmental Management: A Systematic Review.” Lancet
Infectious Diseases 5 (11): 695–708.

Keusch, G. 2003. “The History of Nutrition: Malnutrition, Infection and Immunity.” Journal

of Nutrition 133 (1 Suppl.): 336S–40S.

Kimani-Murage, E. W., and A. Ngindu. 2007. “Quality of Water the Slum Dwellers Use: The

Case of a Kenyan Slum.” Journal of Urban Health 84 (6): 829–38.

Kivi, M., and Y. Tindberg. 2006. “Helicobacter pylori Occurrence and Transmission: A Family

Affair?” Scandinavian Journal of Infectious Diseases 38 (6): 407–17.

Knapp, A. 2006. “Mainstreaming Hygiene and Sanitation into the Health Sector: Experience
from Local ‘at-Scale Sanitary Revolutions’ and Recent Sector Developments in Ethiopia.”
Paper presented by W. Gebreselassie, Ethiopia Ministry of Health, at Water Week 2007,
February  27–March  2.  http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTWRD/Resources/
Worku_Gebreselassie_Ethiopia_Mainstreaming_Hygiene_and_Sanitation_Into_Preventive_
Health_Care_Programs.pdf.

Kolsky, P., and U. Blumenthal. 1995. “Environmental Health Indicators and Sanitation-Related
Disease in Developing Countries: Limitations to the Use of Routine Data Sources.” World
Health Statistics Quarterly 48 (2): 132–39.

Kolsky, P., E. Perez, W. Vandersypen, and L. Jensen. 2005. “Sanitation and Hygiene at the World
Bank.” Working Note No. 6, October 6, 2005. http://www-wds.worldbank.org/external/
default/WDSContentServer/WDSP/IB/2005/11/30/000090341_20051130115025/Rendered/
PDF/344690Sanitation0and0hygiene0at0wb.pdf.

Kolsteren, P., J. Kusin, and S. Kardjati. 1997. “Morbidity and Growth Performance of Infants

in Madura, Indonesia.” Annales Tropical Pediatrics 17 (3): 201–8.

Komisar, J. L. 2007. “Malaria Vaccines.” Frontiers in Bioscience 12 (May): 3928–55.

Kosek, M., C. Bern, and R. L. Guerrant. 2003. “The Global Burden of Diarrhoeal Disease, as
Estimated from Studies Published between 1992 and 2000.” Bulletin of the World Health
Organization 81 (3): 197–204.

192 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

Kotchian, S. 1997. “Perspectives on the Place of Environmental Health and Protection in Public

Health and Public Health Agencies.” Annual Review of Public Health 18: 245–59.

Kristensen, P. 2005. “Sub-Saharan Africa Region.” Environment Matters at the World Bank:

Annual Review 2005, 32–35.

Krupnick, A., B. Larsen, and E. Strukova. 2006. “Cost of Environmental Degradation in Pakistan:
An Analysis of Physical and Monetary Losses in Environmental Health and Natural
Resources.” Background paper, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Kumie, A., and A. Ahmed. 2005. “An Overview of Environmental Health Status in Ethiopia
with Particular Emphasis to Its Organization, Drinking Water, and Sanitation: A Literature
Survey.” Ethiopia Journal of Health Development 19 (2): 89–103.

Langhans, W. 2000. “Anorexia of Infection: Current Prospects.” Nutrition Research 16 (10):

996–1005.

Larsen, B. 2006. “Ghana: Cost of Environmental Damage—An Analysis of Environmental

Health.” Background paper, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Laxminarayan, R., J. Chow, and S. Shahid-Salles. 2006. “Intervention Cost-Effectiveness
Overview of Main Messages.” In Disease Control Priorities in Developing Countries, 2nd
ed., ed. D. T. Jamison, J. G. Breman, A. R. Measham, G. Alleyne, M. Claeson, D. B. Evans,
P. Jha, A. Mills, and P. Musgrove, 35–86. Washington, DC: World Bank; New York: Oxford
University Press.

Lim, M. 2001. “A Perspective on Tropical Sprue.” Current Gastroenterology Reports 3 (4): 322–27.
Lima, A., S. Moore, M. Barboza, A. Soares, M. Schleupner, R. Newman, C. Sears, J. Nataro,
D. Fedorko, T. Wuhib, J. Schorling, and R. L. Guerrant. 2000. “Persistent Diarrhea Signals
a Critical Period of Increased Diarrhea Burdens and Nutritional Shortfalls: A Prospective
Cohort Study among Children in Northeastern Brazil.” Journal of Infectious Diseases
181 (5): 1643–51.

Listorti, J., and F. Doumani. 2001. Environmental Health: Bridging the Gaps. Washington, DC:

World Bank.

Lorntz, B., A. M. Soares, S. R. Moore, R. Pinkerton, B. Gansneder, V. E. Bovbjerg, H. Guyatt,
A. M. Lima, and R. L. Guerrant. 2006. “Early Childhood Diarrhea Predicts Impaired School
Performance.” Pediatric Infectious Disease Journal 25 (6): 513–20.

Luby, S., M. Agboatwalla, D. Feikin, J. Painter, W. Billhimer, and R. Hoekstra. 2005. “Effect of
Handwashing on Child Health: A Randomised Controlled Trial.” Lancet 366 (9481): 225–33.
Lucas, R. M., and A. J. McMichael. 2005. “Association or Causation? Evaluating Links between

‘Environment and Disease.’” Bulletin of the World Health Organization 83 (10): 792–95.

Lunn, P., C. Northrop-Clewes, and R. Downes. 1991. “Intestinal Permeability, Mucosal Injury,

and Growth Faltering in Gambian Infants.” Lancet 338 (8772): 907–10.

Lutter, C., J. Mora, J. Habicht, K. Rasmussen, D. S. Robson, S. Sellers, C. Super, and M. Herrera.
1989. “Nutritional Supplementation: Effects on Child Stunting because of Diarrhea.”
American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 50 (1): 1–8.

Lvovsky, K. 2001. Health and Environment. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Mabaso, M. L. H., B. Sharp, and C. Lengeler. 2004. “Historical Review of Malarial Control in
Southern Africa with Emphasis on the Use of Indoor Residual House-Spraying.” Tropical
Medicine and International Health 9 (8): 846–56.

Mahendradhata, Y., and F. Moerman. 2004. “Integration and Disease Control: Notes from the
Prince Leopold Institute of Tropical Medicine Colloquium 2002.” Tropical Medicine and
International Health 9 (6): A5–10.

REFERENCES  193

Majumder, R. 2004. “Total Sanitation Campaign: Changing the Face of Rural Burdwan.” In
India Infrastructure Report 2004: Ensuring Value for Money, ed. S. Morris, 325–26. New
Delhi: Oxford University Press.

Malaviya, V. S., R. Kant, C. S. Pant, H. C. Srivastava, and R. S. Yadav. 2006. “Community Based
Integrated Malaria Control with Reference to Involvement of Social Forestry Activities:
An Experience.” Indian Journal of Community Medicine 31 (4): 234–36.

Maleta, K., S. M. Virtanen, M. Espo, T. Kulmala, and P. Ashorn. 2003. “Childhood Malnutrition
and Its Predictors in Rural Malawi.” Paediatric and Perinatal Epidemiology 17 (4):
384–90.

Maluccio, J., J. Hoddinott, and J. Behrman. 2006. “The Impact of an Experimental Nutrition
Intervention in Childhood on Education among Guatemalan Adults.” IFPRI and Food
Consumption and Nutrition Division Discussion Paper, International Food Policy Research
Institute, Washington, DC.

Marodi, L. 2006. “Innate Cellular Immune Responses in Newborns.” Clinical Immunology 118

(2–3): 137–44.

Martorell, R. 1995. “Results and Implications of the INCAP Follow-up Study.” Journal of

Nutrition 125 (4 Suppl.): 1127S–38S.

Martorell, R., J. P. Habicht, C. Yarbrough, A. Lechtig, R. E. Klein, and K. A. Western. 1975.
“Acute Morbidity and Physical Growth in Rural Guatemalan Children.” American Journal
of Disabled Children 129 (11): 1296–301.

Martorell, R., C. Yarbrough, A. Lechtig, J. Habicht, and R. Klein. 1975. “Diarrheal Diseases and
Growth Retardation in Preschool Guatemalan Children.” American Journal of Physical
Anthropology 43 (3): 341–46.

Mason, J., D. Sanders, P. Musgrove, and R. Galloway. 2006. “Community Health and Nutrition
Programs.” In Disease Control Priorities in Developing Countries, 2nd ed., ed. D. T. Jamison,
J. G. Breman, A. R. Measham, G. Alleyne, M. Claeson, D. B. Evans, P. Jha, A. Mills, and
P. Musgrove, 1053–76. Washington, DC: World Bank; New York: Oxford University Press.
Mata, L. 1992. “Diarrheal Disease as a Cause of Malnutrition.” American Journal of Tropical

Medicine and Hygiene 47 (1 Suppl.): 16–27.

Mathee, A., F. Swanepoel, and A. Swart. 1999. “Environmental Health Services.” In The South
African Health Review, ed. N. Crisp and A. Ntuli, 277–88. Durban, South Africa: Health
Systems Trust. http://www.healthlink.org.za/uploads/files/chapter20_99.pdf.

Mavalankar, D., and S. Manjunath. 2004. “Sanitation and Water Supply: The Forgotten
Infrastructure.” In India Infrastructure Report 2004: Ensuring Value for Money, ed. S. Morris,
314–24. New Delhi: Oxford University Press.

Menendez, C., A. F. Fleming, and P. L. Alonso. 2000. “Malaria-Related Anaemia.” Parasitology

Today 16 (11): 469–76.

Modi, V., S. McDade, D. Lallement, and J. Saghir. 2005. “Energy Services for the Millennium
Development Goals.” Paper prepared for the Millennium Project of the United Nations
Development Programme and World Bank, Washington, DC.

Molbak, K., M. Andersen, P. Aaby, N. Hojlyng, M. Jakobsen, M. Sodeman, and A. P. J. d. Silva.
1997. “Cryptosporidium Infection in Infancy as a Cause of Malnutrition: A Community
Study from Guinea-Bissau, West Africa.” American Journal Clinical Nutrition 65 (1): 149–52.
Moore, S., A. Lima, M. Conaway, J. Schorling, A. Soares, and R. L. Guerrant. 2001. “Early
Childhood Diarrhoea and Helminthiases Associate with Long-Term Linear Growth Faltering.”
International Journal of Epidemiology 30 (6): 1457–64.

194 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

Morley, D., J. Bicknell, and M. Woodland. 1968. “Factors Influencing the Growth and
Nutritional Status of Infants and Young Children in a Nigerian Village.” Transactions of
the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 62 (2): 164–99.

Moser Jones, M. 2005. Protecting Public Health in New York City: 200 Years of Leadership

(1805–2005). New York: New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene.

Moy, R., T. Marshall, R. Choto, A. McNeish, and I. Booth. 1994. “Diarrhoea and Growth

Faltering in Rural Zimbabwe.” European Journal of Clinical Nutrition 48 (11): 810–21.

Mullany, L. C., G. L. Darmstadt, S. K. Khatry, J. Katz, S. C. LeClerg, S. Shrestra, R. Adhikari, and
J. M. Tielsch. 2006. “Topical Applications of Chlorhexidine to the Umbilical Cord for
Prevention of Omphalitis and Neonatal Mortality in Southern Nepal: A Community-
Based, Cluster-Randomized Trial.” Lancet 367 (9514): 910–18.

Murphy, H., B. Stanton, and J. Galbraith. 1997. Prevention: Environmental Health Interventions
to Sustain Child Survival. Washington, DC: U.S. Agency for International Development.
Murray, C., T. Laakso, K. Shibuya, T. Laakso, K. Hill, and A. D. Lopez. 2007. “Can We Achieve
Millennium Development Goal 4? New Analysis of Country Trends and Forecasts of under-5
Mortality to 2015.” Lancet 370 (9592): 1040–54.

Nair, N., H. Gans, L. Lew-Yasukawa, A. C. Long-Wagar, A. Arvin, and D. E. Griffin. 2007. “Age-
Dependent Differences in IgG Isotype and Avidity Induced by Measles Vaccine Received
during the First Year of Life.” Journal of Infectious Diseases 196 (9): 1339–45.

National Center for Infectious Diseases. 2006. “Malaria: Vector Control.” Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, Atlanta. http://www.cdc.gov/malaria/control_prevention/
vector_control.htm.

National Institute of Population Studies. 1992. Pakistan Demographic and Health Survey

1990/91. Islamabad: National Institute of Population Studies.

Nguyen, T. V., P. Le Van, C. Le Huy, K. N. Gia, and A. Weintraub. 2005. “Detection and
Characterization of Diarrheagenic Escherichia coli from Young Children in Hanoi,
Vietnam.” Journal of Clinical Microbiology 43(2): 755–60.

Niehaus, M. D., S. R. Moore, P. D. Patrick, L. L. Derr, B. Lorntz, A. A. Lima, and R. L. Guerrant.
2002. “Early Childhood Diarrhea Is Associated with Diminished Cognitive Function 4 to
7 Years Later in Children in a Northeast Brazilian Shantytown.” American Journal of Tropical
Medicine and Hygiene 65 (5): 590–93.

Parkin, D. M. 2006. “The Global Health Burden of Infection-Associated Cancers in the Year

2002.” International Journal of Cancer 118 (12): 3030–44.

Patrick, P. D., R. B. Oriá, V. Madhavan, R. C. Pinkerton, B. Lorntz, A. A. M. Lima, and R. L.
Guerrant. 2005. “Limitations in Verbal Fluency Following Heavy Burdens of Early Childhood
Diarrhea in Brazilian Shantytown Children.” Child Neuropsychology 11 (3): 233–44.

Pearce, D. W., and D. Ulph. 1999. “A Social Discount Rate for the United Kingdom.” In Environmental
Economics: Essays in Ecological Economics and Sustainable Development, ed. D. W. Pearce,
268–85. Cheltenham, U.K.: Edward Elgar.

Pelletier, D. L. 1994. “The Relationship between Child Anthropometry and Mortality in
Developing Countries: Implications for Policy, Programs, and Future Research.” Journal of
Nutrition 124 (10 Suppl.): 2047S–81S.

Pelletier, D. L., and E. A. Frongillo. 2003. “Changes in Child Survival Are Strongly Associated with
Changes in Malnutrition in Developing Countries.” Journal of Nutrition 133 (1): 107–19.
Pelletier, D. L., E. A. Frongillo, D. G. Schroeder, and J.-P. Habicht. 1994. “A Methodology for
Estimating the Contribution of Malnutrition to Child Mortality in Developing Countries.”
Journal of Nutrition 124 (10 Suppl.): 2106S–22S.

REFERENCES  195

PIDE (Pakistan Institute of Development Economics, Micronutrient Laboratories Aga Khan
University, Medical Centre). 2003. National Nutrition Survey 2001–2002. Islamabad:
Government of Pakistan, Planning Commission.

Poverty Environment Partnership. 2008. “Poverty, Health, and Environment: Placing Environmental
Health on Countries’ Development Agendas.” Joint agency paper, World Bank, Washington,
DC.

Powanda, M. C., and W. R. Beisel. 2003. “Metabolic Effects of Infection on Protein and Energy

Status.” Journal of Nutrition 133 (1 Suppl.): 322S–27S.

Prado, M., S. Cairncross, M. Barreto, A. Oliviera-Assis, and S. Rego. 2005. “Asymptomatic
Giardiasis and Growth in Young Children: A Longitudinal Study in Salvador, Brazil.”
Parasitology 131 (1): 51–56.

Prüss-Üstün, A., and C. Corvalán. 2006. Preventing Disease through Healthy Environments:
Towards an Estimate of the Environmental Burden of Disease. Geneva: World Health
Organization.

Psacharopoulos, G., and H. Patrinos. 2004. “Returns to Investment in Education: A Further

Update.” Education Economics 12 (2): 111–34.

Public-Private Partnership for Handwashing with Soap. 2005. “Peru.” World Bank, Washington,

DC. http://www.globalhandwashing.org/Country%20act/Peru.htm.

Quddus, A., S. Luby, M. Rahbar, and Y. Pervaiz. 2002. “Neonatal Tetanus: Mortality Rate and
Risk Factors in Loralai District, Pakistan.” International Journal of Epidemiology 31 (3):
648–53.

Rabie, T., and V. Curtis. 2006. “Handwashing and Risk of Respiratory Infections: A Quantitative

Systematic Review.” Tropical Medicine and International Health 11 (3): 258–67.

Ramalingaswami, V., U. Jonsson, and J. Rohde. 1996. “Commentary: The Asian Enigma.” In
The Progress of Nations, ed. P. Adamson, 11–17. New York: United Nations Children’s Fund.
RBM (Roll Back Malaria Partnership). 2005. World Malaria Report 2005. Geneva: United
Nations Children’s Fund and World Health Organization. http://www.rbm.who.int/
wmr2005/index.html.

Rehfuess, E., S. Mehta, and A. Prüss-Üstün. 2006. “Assessing Household Solid Fuel Use: Multiple
Implications for the Millennium Development Goals.” Environmental Health Perspectives
114 (3): 373–78.

Remme, J. H. F., P. Feentstra, P. R. Lever, A. Medici, C. Morel, M. Noma, K. D. Ramaiah, 
F. Richards, A. Seketeli, G. Schmunis, W. H. van Brakel, and A. Vassall. 2006. “Tropical
Diseases Targeted for Elimination: Chagas Disease, Lympahtic Filariasis, Onchocerciasis,
and Leprosy.” In Disease Control Priorities in Developing Countries, 2nd ed., ed. D. T.
Jamison, J. G. Breman, A. R. Measham, G. Alleyne, M. Claeson, D. B. Evans, P. Jha, A.
Mills, and P. Musgrove, 433–49. Washington, DC: World Bank; New York: Oxford
University Press.

Rosen, G. 1958. A History of Public Health. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Rowland, M., T. J. Cole, and R. Whitehead. 1977. “A Quantitative Study into the Role of
Infection in Determining Nutritional Status in Gambian Village Children.” Journal of
Nutrition 37 (3): 441–50.

Rowland, M., S. G. Rowland, and T. J. Cole. 1988. “Impact of Infection on the Growth of
Children from 0 to 2 Years in an Urban West African Community.” American Journal of
Clinical Nutrition 47 (1): 134–38.

Sachdev, H. S., C. H. D. Fall, C. Osmond, R. Lakshmy, S. K. D. Biswas, S. D. Leary, K. S. Reddy,
D.  J.  P.  Barker,  and  S.  K.  Bhargava.  2005. “Anthropometric  Indicators  of  Body

196 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

Composition in Young Adults: Relation to Size at Birth and Serial Measurements of Body
Mass Index in Childhood in the New Delhi Birth Cohort.” American Journal of Clinical
Nutrition 82 (2): 456–66.

Sarraf, M., B. Larsen, and M. Owaygen. 2004 “Cost of Environmental Degradation: The Case
of Lebanon and Tunisia.” Environment Department Paper 97, World Bank, Washington,
DC.

Sato, H., P. Albrecht, D. W. Reynolds, S. Stagno, and F. A. Ennis. 1979. “Transfer of Measles,
Mumps, and Rubella Antibodies from Mother to Infant: Its Effect on Measles, Mumps,
and Rubella Immunization.” American Journal of Diseases of Children 133 (12): 1240–43.

Satterthwaite, D. 2007. “In Pursuit of a Healthy Urban Environment in Low- and Middle-
Income Nations.” In Scaling Urban Environmental Challenges: From Local to Global and
Back, ed. P. Marcotullio and G. McGranahan, 69–105. London: Earthscan.

Schorling, J., J. F. Mcauliffe, M. A. De Souza, and R. L. Guerrant. 1990. “Malnutrition Is
Associated with Increased Diarrhoea Incidence and Duration among Children in an Urban
Brazilian Slum.” International Journal of Epidemiology 19 (3): 728–35.

Scrimshaw, N. S. 2003. “Historical Concepts of Interactions, Synergism, and Antagonism

between Nutrition and Infection.” Journal of Nutrition 133 (1 Suppl.): 316S–21S.

Scrimshaw, N. S., C. E. Taylor, and J. E. Gordon. 1959. “Interactions of Nutrition and Infection.”

American Journal of Medical Sciences 237 (3): 367–72.

———. 1968. Interactions of Nutrition and Infection. Geneva: World Health Organization.

Sedgwick, W. T., and S. Macnutt. 1908. “An Examination of the Theorem of Allen Hazen That
for Every Death from Typhoid Fever Avoided by the Purification of Public Water Supplies
Two or Three Deaths Are Avoided from Other Causes.” Science 28 (711): 215–16.

Sepúlveda, J., F. Bustreo, R. Tapia, J. A. Rivera, R. Lozano, G. Oláiz, V. Partida, L. García-García,
and J. L. Valdespino. 2006. “Improvement of Child Survival in Mexico: The Diagonal
Approach.” Lancet 368 (9551): 2017–27.

Shekar, M., R. Heaver, Y.-K. Lee, and World Bank. 2006. Repositioning Nutrition as Central to

Development: A Strategy for Large-Scale Action. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Shrimpton, R., C. Victora, M. de Onis, R. Costa Lima, M. Blössner, and G. Clugston. 2001.
“The Worldwide Timing of Growth Faltering: Implications for Nutritional Interventions.”
Pediatrics 107 (5): e75.

Singleton, R., T. Hennessy, L. Bulkow, L. Hammitt, T. Zulz, D. Hurlburt, J. Butler, K. Rudolph,
and A. Parkinson. 2007. “Invasive Pneumococcal Disease Caused by Nonvaccine
Serotypes among Alaska Native Children with High Levels of 7-Valent Pneumococcal
Conjugate Vaccine Coverage.” Journal of the American Medical Association 297 (16):
1784–92.

Sinton, J., K. Smith, J. Peabody, Y. Liu, X. Zhang, and R. Edwards. 2004. “An Assessment of
Programs to Promote Improved Household Stoves in China.” Energy for Sustainable
Development 8 (3): 33–52.

Smith, K. R., C. F. Corvalán, and T. Kjellström. 1999. “How Much Global Ill Health Is

Attributable to Environmental Factors?” Epidemiology and Infection 10 (5): 573–84.

Smith, K. R., S. Mehta, and M. Maeusezahl-Feuz. 2004. “Indoor Air Pollution from
Household Use of Solid Fuels.” In Comparative Quantification of Health Risks: Global
and Regional Burden of Disease Attributable to Selected Major Risk Factors, vol. 2, ed. M.
Ezzati, A. D. Lopez, A. Rodgers, and C. J. L. Murray, 1435–93. Geneva: World Health
Organization. 

REFERENCES  197

Snow, R., M. Craig, C. Newton, and R. Stekete. 2003. The Public Health Burden of Plasmodium
falciparum Malaria in Africa: Deriving the Numbers. Bethesda, MD: Fogarty International
Center, National Institutes of Health.

Steiner, T., A. Lima, J. Nataro, and R. L. Guerrant. 1998. “Enteroaggregative Escherichia coli
Produce Intestinal Inflammation and Growth Impairment and Cause Interleukin-8 Release
from Intestinal Epithelial Cells.” Journal of Infectious Diseases 177 (1): 88–96.

Steketee, R. W. 2003. “Pregnancy, Nutrition and Parasitic Diseases.” Journal of Nutrition

133 (5): 1661S–67S.

Stephensen, C. B. 1999. “Burden of Infection on Growth Failure.” Journal of Nutrition 129 (2):

534–38.

Sur, D., D. Saha, B. Manna, K. Rajendran, and S. Bhattacharya. 2005. “Periodic Deworming
with Albendazole and Its Impact on Growth Status and Diarrhoeal Incidence among
Children in an Urban Slum of India.” Transactions of the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine
and Hygiene 99 (4): 261–67.

Svedberg, P. 2006. “Child Malnutrition in Shining India: A X-state Empirical Analysis.” Institute
for Economic Studies, Stockholm. http://www.bvsde.paho.org/bvsacd/cd56/svedberg-
070906.pdf. 

Taylor-Robinson, D., A. Jones, and P. Garner. 2007. “Deworming Drugs for Treating Soil-
Transmitted Intestinal Worms in Children: Effects on Growth and School Performance.”
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 17 (4).

Thapar, N., and I. Sanderson. 2004. “Diarrhoea in Children: An Interface between Developing

and Developed Countries.” Lancet 363 (9409): 641–53.

Thomas, E. P., J. R. Seager, and A. Mathee. 2002. “Environmental Health Challenges in South

Africa: Policy Lessons from Case Studies.” Health and Place 8 (4): 251–61.

Touré, Y. 2001. “Malaria Vector Control in Africa: Strategies and Challenges.” Report from a
symposium held at the 2001 American Association for the Advancement of Science Annual
Meeting,  San  Francisco,  February  17.  http://www.aaas.org/international/africa/
malaria/toure.html.

Trades Union Congress. 2004. “Incomes in Ghana: Policy Discussion Paper.” Trades Union

Congress, Accra.

UNICEF (United Nations Children’s Fund). 2005. “Global Database on Low Birthweight.”

UNICEF, New York. http://www.childinfo.org/areas/birthweight/database.php.
———. 2006. “Water.” UNICEF, New York. http://www.childinfo.org/areas/water/.
———. 2008. “Info by Country.” UNICEF, New York. http://www.unicef.org/infobycountry/

ghana_statistics.html.

———. 2008. “Info by Country.” UNICEF, New York. http://www.unicef.org/infobycountry/

pakistan_pakistan_statistics.html#47.

Valentiner-Branth, P., H. Steinsland, G. Santos, M. Perch, K. Begtrup, M. K. Bhan, F. Dias, 
P. Aaby, H. Sommerfelt, and K. Molbak. 2001. “Community-Based Controlled Trial of
Dietary Management of Children with Persistent Diarrhea: Sustained Beneficial Effect on
Ponderal and Linear Growth.” American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 73 (5): 968–74.

VanDerslice, J., B. Popkin, and J. Briscoe. 1994. “Drinking-Water Quality, Sanitation, and Breast-
Feeding: Their Interactive Effects on Infant Health.” Bulletin of the World Health Organization
72 (4): 589–601.

van Geertruyden, J., F. Thomas, A. Erhart, and U. D’Alessandro. 2004. “The Contribution of
Malaria in Pregnancy to Perinatal Mortality.” American Journal of Tropical Medicine and
Hygiene 71 (2 Suppl.): 35–40.

198 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

Vergnano, S., M. Sharland, P. Kazembe, C. Mwansambo, and P. T. Heath. 2005. “Neonatal Sepsis:
An International Perspective.” Archives of Disease in Childhood: Fetal and Neonatal Edition
90 (3): F220–24.

Victora, C. G., F. C. Barros, B. R. Kirkwood, and P. Vaughan. 1990. “Pneumonia, Diarrhea, and
Growth in the First 4 Years of Life: A Longitudinal Study of 5,914 Urban Brazilian Children.”
American Journal Clinical Nutrition 52 (2): 391–96.

Victora, C. G., B. Fenn, J. Bryce, and B. R. Kirkwood. 2005. “Co-coverage of Preventive
Interventions and Implications for Child-Survival Strategies: Evidence from National
Surveys.” Lancet 366 (9495): 1460–66.

Villamor, E., M. Fataki, R. Bosch, R. Mbise, and W. Fawzi. 2004. “Human Immunodeficiency
Virus Infection, Diarrheal Disease, and Sociodemographic Predictors of Child Growth.”
Acta Paediatrica 93 (3): 372–79.

von Schirnding, Y. 2005. “Short Report: The World Summit on Sustainable Development:

Reaffirming the Centrality of Health.” Globalization and Health 1 (8): 1–6.

Vu, S. N., T. Y. Nguyen, T. V. Phong, T. U. Ninh, L. Q. Mai, L. V. Lo, L. T. Nghia, A. Bektas, A.
Briscombe, J. G. Aaskov, P. A. Ryan, and B. H. Kay. 2005. “Elimination of Dengue by
Community Programs Using Mesocyclops (Copepoda) against Aedis Aegypti in Central
Vietnam.” American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 72 (1): 67–73.

Wagstaff, A., and M. Claeson. 2004. The Millennium Development Goals for Health: Rising to

the Challenges. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Walker, S. P., S. M. Chang, C. A. Powell, and S. M. Grantham-McGregor. 2005. “Effects of Early
Childhood Psychosocial Stimulation and Nutritional Supplementation on Cognition and
Education in Growth-Stunted Jamaican Children: Prospective Cohort Study.” Lancet 366
(9499): 1804–7.

Walker, S. P., T. D. Wachs, J. Meeks Garder, B. Lozoff, G. A. Wasserman, E. Pollitt, and J. Carter.
2007. “Child Development: Risk Factors for Adverse Outcomes in Developing Countries.”
Lancet 369 (9556): 145–57.

Watson-Jones, D., H. A. Weiss, J. M. Changalucha, J. Todd, B. Gumodoka, J. Bulmer, R. Balira,
D. Ross, K. Mugeye, R. Hayes, and D. Mabey. 2007. “Adverse Birth Outcomes in United
Republic of Tanzania: Impact and Prevention of Maternal Risk Factors.” Bulletin of the
World Health Organization 85 (1): 9–18.

West, K. P. 2003. “Vitamin A Deficiency Disorders in Children and Women.” Food and Nutrition

Bulletin 24 (4): S78–S90.

WHO (World Health Organization). 2000. Addressing the Links between Indoor Air Pollution,

Household Energy and Human Health. Geneva: WHO.

———. 2002. The World Health Report 2002: Reducing Risks, Promoting Healthy Life. Geneva:

WHO. http://www.who.int/whr/2002/en/index.html.

———. 2003. Insecticide-Treated Mosquito Net Interventions: A Manual for National Control

Programme Managers. Geneva: WHO.

———. 2004. World Health Report 2004. Geneva: WHO. 
———. 2006. Fuel for Life: Household Energy and Health. Geneva: WHO.
———. 2007a. “Burden of Disease Project.” WHO, Geneva. http://www.who.int/healthinfo//

bodproject/en/index.html.

———. 2007b. “Children’s Environmental Health.” WHO, Geneva. http://www.who.int/ceh/en/.
———. 2007c. Combating Waterborne Disease at the Household Level. Geneva: WHO.
———. 2007d. “Malaria.” Fact Sheet 94, WHO, Geneva. http://www.who.int/mediacentre/fact

sheets/fs094/en/index.html.

REFERENCES  199

———. 2007e. World Health Report 2007— A Safer Future: Global Public Health Security in the

21st Century. Geneva: WHO.

———. 2008. “Environmental Health.” WHO, Geneva. http://www.who.int/topics/environ

mental_health/en/.

———. n.d. “Quantification of the Burden of Disease Attributable to Environmental Risk
Factors.” WHO, Geneva. http://www.who.int/quantifying_ehimpacts/summaryEBD.pdf.
WHO (World Health Organization) Regional Office for Africa. 2006. “Country Profiles on
Environmental  Health  Policy.”  WHO  Regional  Office  for  Africa,  Brazzaville.
http://www.afro.who.int/des/phe/ country_profiles/index.html.

WHO and UNICEF (World Health Organization and United Nations Children’s Fund). 2005.
Water for Life: Making It Happen. Geneva: WHO and UNICEF Joint Monitoring
Programme  for  Water  Supply  and  Sanitation.  http://www.wssinfo.org/en/40_
wfl_2005.html.

Wierzba, T., R. Abu El-Yazeed, S. Savarino, A. Mourad, M. Rao, M. Baddour, A. N. El-Deen, 
A. Naficy, and J. Clemens. 2001. “The Interrelationship of Malnutrition and Diarrhea in
a Periurban Area outside Alexandria, Egypt.” Journal of Pediatric Gastroenterology and
Nutrition 32 (2): 189–96.

Wilson, S. 1986. “Immunologic Basis for Increased Susceptibility of the Neonate to Infection.”

Journal of Pediatrics 108 (1): 1–9.

World Bank. 2000. “Eritrea Integrated Early Childhood Development Project.” Report 20373-ER.
Washington, DC, World Bank. http://www-wds.worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContent
Server/WDSP/IB/2000/07/29/000094946_0006020538277/Rendered/PDF/multi_page.pdf.

———. 2002. “Arab Republic of Egypt: Cost Assessment of Environmental Degradation—

Sector Note.” Report 25175-EGT, World Bank, Washington, DC.

———. 2005. “Islamic Republic of Iran: Cost Assessment of Environmental Degradation—

Sector Note.” Report 32043-IR, World Bank, Washington, DC.

———. 2006a. Environmental Priorities and Poverty Reduction: A Country Environmental

Analysis for Colombia. Washington, DC: World Bank.

———. 2006b. Ghana: Country Environmental Analysis. Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2006c. Repositioning Nutrition as Central to Development: A Strategy for Large-Scale

Action. Washington, DC: World Bank.

———. 2007a. Cost of Pollution in China: Economic Estimates of Physical Damages. Washington,

DC: World Bank.

———. 2007b. “Ghana—Nutrition and Malaria Control for Child Survival Project.” Project

appraisal document, World Bank, Washington, DC.

———. 2007c. Health, Nutrition, and Population Sector Strategy Paper. Washington, DC:

World Bank.

———. 2007d. Improving Traditional Hearths: Cleaner Air and Better Health in India.

Washington, DC: World Bank.

———. 2007e. Key Issues in Central America Health Reforms: Diagnosis and Implications. Report

36426-LAC, World Bank, Washington, DC.

———. 2007f. Nutritional Failure in Ecuador: Causes, Consequences, and Solutions. Washington,

DC: World Bank.

———. 2007g. “Republic of Peru Environmental Sustainability: A Key to Poverty Reduction
in Peru: Country Environmental Assessment.” Report 40190-PE, World Bank, Washington,
DC. http://go.worldbank.org/LDDPJN2TU0.

———. 2007h. World Development Indicators. Washington, DC: World Bank.

200 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND CHILD SURVIVAL

———. 2008. Poverty and the Environment: Understanding Linkages at the Household Level.

Washington, DC: World Bank.

World Resources Institute, United Nations Environment Programme, United Nations
Development Programme, and World Bank. 1998. World Resources, 1998–99: A Guide to
the Global Environment: Environmental Change and Human Health. New York: Oxford
University Press.

World Water Forum. 2006. “Water Infrastructures for Sustainable and Equitable Development.”
Framework Theme 1.34, Fourth World Water Forum, Mexico City, March 16–22.
http://www.worldwatercouncil.org/index.php?id=1196.

WSP (Water and Sanitation Program). 2005. Lessons Learned from Bangladesh, India, and

Pakistan: Scaling-Up Rural Sanitation in South Asia. New Delhi: WSP, World Bank.

———. 2006. The Mumbai Slum Sanitation Program: Partnering with Slum Communities for

Sustainable Sanitation in a Megalopolis. New Delhi: WSP, World Bank.

———. 2007. From Burden to Communal Responsibility: A Sanitation Success Story from

Southern Region in Ethiopia. New Delhi: WSP, World Bank.

Yacoob, M., and M. Kelly. 1999. “Secondary Cities in West Africa: The Challenge for
Environmental Health and Prevention.” Comparative Urban Studies Occasional Paper 21,
Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars, Washington, DC.

Zaracostas, J. 2007. “Mortality from Measles Fell by 91% in Africa and by 68% Worldwide

from 2000 to 2006.” British Medical Journal 335: 1173.

Zhang, J., and K. Smith. 2005. “Indoor Air Pollution from Household Fuel Combustion in

China: A Review.” Presentation at Indoor Air 2005, Beijing, September 4–9.

Zumrawi, F., H. Dimond, and J. Waterlow. 1987. “Effects of Infection on Growth in Sudanese

Children.” Human Nutrition and Clinical Nutrition 41 (6): 453–61.

I N D E X

Boxes, figures, notes, and tables are indicated by b, f, n, and t, respectively.

A

acute lower respiratory infection (ALRI)

health systems and, 32, 33t
immunity, 27
indoor air pollution and, 1, 42, 50, 57, 75b,

174–77

malnutrition and, 17, 19, 21t
micronutrient supplementation and, 37–38
multiplier effect on, 56
prevention of, 57, 58

Adair, L.S., 144–45
advocacy, 13, 106, 108, 115
AF. See attributable fractions
Afghanistan, malnutrition in, 6
Africa

See also specific regions and countries
environmental health interventions in, 104
malnutrition in, 27f
trypanosomiasis in, 43n1

AIDS. See HIV/AIDS
air pollution. See indoor air pollution; outdoor

air pollution

Alderman, H., 29, 144, 145
Algeria and budget increases for

environmental protection, 62

Alilio, M.S., 57
ALRI. See acute lower respiratory infection
Alternative Energy Promotion Center 

(Nepal), 100

American Academy of Pediatrics, 122
anemia, 7, 25, 26, 35, 58, 113
antibiotics, 35
Argentina, privatization of public water

companies in, 99

ARI. See acute lower respiratory infection
Asia

See also specific countries
birth weight in, 9
burden of disease in, 51–52, 54, 54b, 59
education in, 77

environmental health interventions in,

11–12

immunization in, 36
infrastructure budgets in, 89
malaria in, 6
malnutrition in, 1, 6, 17, 27f, 30, 111
vector-control programs in, 96

attributable fractions (AF)

burden of disease when multiple risk factors

present and, 75b

of child mortality, 66–67, 67t, 151–59
Cox hazard model and, 170n3
malnutrition-attributable fractions for

different diseases, 69, 70t, 71–72, 74t,
173–76

B

Bangladesh

case-control study in, 118, 124
indoor air pollution, 43
malnutrition in, 6
mortality in, 28
nutritional status and infectious disease in,

128t, 129t, 131t, 136t

oral rehydration therapy in, 35
Total Sanitation Campaign, 90, 94–95, 

95b, 98

vector-control measures in, 91
weight gain retardation in, 50b

Barker hypothesis, 25b, 58

See also fetal programming

bednets. See insecticide-treated nets
Behrman, J., 144
Beisel, W.R., 121
bias (statistical), 170n4, 176–77
biomass, 8, 26, 41–42, 95, 96

See also fuels

birth weight, 9, 25b, 25–26, 31, 54b, 113

See also underweight

Blössner, M., 51

201

202 INDEX

Bolivia, indoor air pollution in, 62
Brazil

growth stunting in, 141
helminth infections in, 21, 120
malnutrition and educational outcomes 

in, 64

nutritional status and infectious disease in,

127–28t, 130t, 131t, 135–37t, 140t

public participation in health programs 

in, 98

school enrollment and performance in, 

29, 145

vector-control measures in, 91

breastfeeding, 22b, 27–28, 31, 36, 120
Breman, J.G., 57
Briend, A., 120, 125n2
burden of disease, 47–59, 115

areas for further research, 58, 59
environmental burdens, 48–51
environmental health burdens, 9, 51–58,

52f, 53f, 59

estimates of, 57–59

country-level environmental health,
computation of, 151–71
methodological aspects of, 173–77
monetary values, 179–81
from water, sanitation, and hygiene,
147–49, 148t–149t

malnutrition-infection link, 51
multiplier effect of interventions, 

55f, 55–56

C

Cairncross, S., 18
Carson, Rachel, 88
Central America

See also specific countries
growth and height indicators in, 121
nutrition programs in, 91, 93

Chatterjee, N., 75b
childbirth, 35–36
child survival strategies, 31–43, 32f,

112–13

environmental management programs, 9,

38–39, 43

health systems, 9, 32–38, 33t–34t, 43

childbirth and infant care programs,
35–36
immunization programs, 36–37
micronutrient supplementation 
programs, 37–38

infrastructure strategies, 9, 39–43

fuel supply, 41–43
sanitation, 40–41
water supply, 39–40

China

cost of environmental health risks in, 

62, 63f

National Improved Stove Program (NISP),

42, 98

nutritional status and infectious disease 

in, 127t

water-related deaths in rural areas of, 56

citizen mobilization, 107
Clean Water Program (Mexico), 92b
climate change

related diseases, 49t, 174t

cognition

See also school performance
childhood growth and, 23
diarrhea and, 29
environmental impacts on, 28–29, 30, 

61, 112

malnutrition and, 28–30, 51, 63–64, 68, 

76, 112

valuations of, 63–64

Colombia

cost-benefit analysis in, 114
cost of environmental health risks in, 63f
nutritional status and infectious disease in,

130t, 140t

Community-Based Poverty Reduction Project

(Ghana), 93

community empowerment, 11, 98–99
Comparative Risk Assessment (WHO), 48–49,

49t, 173, 174t

cookstoves, 42–43, 95, 98, 99, 100

See also fuels

coordination. See intersectoral and interjuris-

dictional coordination
Corvalán, C., 49, 67, 177n2
Costa Rica, targeted environmental health

programs in, 91

cost-benefit analysis, 80–81, 114
Cox hazard model, 155, 156t, 170n3

D

DALYs. See disability-adjusted life years
Dandoy, S., 105
Daniels, M.C., 144–45
Das Gupta, M., 110n1
death rates. See mortality
dehydration, 20

See also oral rehydration therapy

Demographic and Health Surveys (DHSs),

154, 155, 157–58, 162
dengue virus, 43n1, 97b, 99
de Onis, M., 51
Desai, M., 67

INDEX  203

developing countries

Egypt

See also specific countries
environmental health experiences in, 10–13,

cost of environmental health risks in, 62, 63f
nutritional status and infectious disease 

83–110

in, 138t

health agendas in, 89–90, 101–4
infectious disease studies in, 126t–140t
infrastructure programs in, 94–96, 109, 113
integrated child survival programs in,

90–91, 109

El Salvador, indoor air pollution in, 62
empowerment, 11, 98–99, 110, 113
energy and energy supplies. See fuels
environmental health, defined, 2b, 5–6
environmental health approaches, 85–110

nutrition programs in, 91–94, 109, 113
vector-control programs in, 96, 112

devolution of authority, 105–6
deworming, 22b–23b, 92, 118, 122–23

See also helminth infections

DHS. See Demographic and Health Surveys
diarrhea

antibiotics for treating, 35
burden of disease, 51, 156
cognition and, 29
dehydration and, 20
food restriction and, 122
growth faltering and, 120–21, 124
health systems and, 32, 33t
household prevention of, 28
in infancy, 22b, 27, 36, 117
infections and, 17, 21, 123
malnutrition and, 21t, 22b–23b, 68
micronutrient supplementation and, 37, 38
mortality and, 1, 55f, 55–56, 56b, 57, 59
transmission routes, 18–19
underweight and, 50b, 118, 125n4, 158, 158t

disability-adjusted life years (DALYs), 48,

51–52, 53f, 148t–149t, 173

diseases. See specific diseases by name
drug resistance, 35, 37
dysentery, 21, 50b, 120, 124, 125n2

E

early infancy, 26–28, 27f, 30
economic costs, 9–10, 12

cost-benefit analysis, 80–81, 114
country-level costs of environmental health

burden, 51–58

environmental health valuations, 61–82

See also environmental health valuations

Ecuador, nutrition programs in, 91, 94
education

malnutrition and, 76t, 76–77, 81, 141–46,

142t–143t, 160–70

school performance, 29, 160, 162–64
stunting and, 161t
valuation of, 63–64, 76t, 76–77, 81, 112,

141–46, 164–70

critical moments in, 109, 110
decline in agenda for, 10, 88–90, 109, 113
developing country experiences, 10–13,

90–97, 109, 112–13

enabling environment, 97–100
governance and institutional implications,

100–104

history, 86–88
institutional requirements, 104–9, 110, 113

environmental health valuations, 61–82,

179–81

cognition and, 63–64
current practices, 61–62, 63f
education and, 63–64, 76t, 76–77, 81, 112,

141–46, 164–70

malnutrition and, 9–10, 63, 66–78, 68t, 74f,

74t, 76t, 81

new estimates for, 62–64, 77–79, 79t, 80b,

151–71, 154t, 179–81

next steps, 79–81

environmental management programs, 9,

38–39

epidemiology, 8–9, 12, 15–43
Eritrea Integrated Early Childhood

Development Project, 91

Ethiopia

environmental health institutions in, 102,

102b–103b

environmental health policies in, 104
political commitment in, 98
sanitation in, 12, 95, 95b, 102b

Europe

developing countries compared to, 52, 

55f, 180

malaria in, 6

Expanded Program on Immunization, 36

F

fecal pollution, 18, 19f, 28, 39
“fetal-programming,” 25b, 58
See also Barker hypothesis
fetuses, 7, 24–26, 25b, 58, 59

See also pregnancy

Fewtrell, L., 51, 56b, 57, 112, 123
Fishman, S., 69, 176

204 INDEX

food restriction and diarrhea, 122
food security, 25b, 115
fuels

See also biomass; cookstoves
indoor air pollution and, 6, 26, 61, 95–96
infrastructure improvements and, 41–43

G

Gambia

growth retardation in, 119, 120
nutritional status and infectious disease in,

126t, 129t

GDP. See gross domestic product
Ghana

ALRI in, 57, 66–67, 158, 159f
basic indicators for, 64–65, 65b
childhood weight in, 68–69, 70f, 71f, 71–72,

73f, 124, 158, 158t

Community-Based Poverty Reduction

Project, 93

cost of environmental health risks in, 63f
Demographic and Health Survey, 154, 155,

157, 162

diarrhea in, 69, 71f, 71–72, 73f
environmental health valuations in, 9, 61,

64–80, 78f, 81, 112, 168–69t

fuels in, 66–67
GDP in, 9–10, 10t, 74–75, 78, 113, 159
height-for-age rates in, 162, 162t
hygiene in, 100, 106
indoor air pollution in, 66–67, 75b, 154,

155f

malaria in, 65b
malnutrition in, 166–67, 167t, 170
mortality in, 66–67, 67t, 70t, 82nn10–11,

151, 159, 159t, 180–81

nutritional programs in, 91
school enrollment and education in, 145,

146, 161t, 163, 171n13

water in, 103

Ghana Demographic and Health Survey,

68, 82n3
Glewwe, P., 145
Global Burden of Disease Project, 48
Global Public-Private Partnership for

Handwashing with Soap, 100

Gordon, J.E., 19, 22b, 117, 121
Grantham-McGregor, S., 141
gross domestic product (GDP)

burden of disease and, 12, 180
diarrheal infections and, 77
health costs and, 47
malnutrition’s effect on, 81

growth faltering. See linear growth and growth

faltering

See also IUGR

Guatemala

cost of environmental health risks in, 63f
indoor air pollution in, 26, 42, 62
nutritional status and infectious disease 

in, 126t

school performance in, 64, 144, 163–64
strength of association study in, 119

H

handwashing. See hygiene
Hartge, P., 75b
health inspectors, 88
health ministries and departments

advocacy role of, 106
in developing countries, 88–89
environmental health and, 100
health programs and, 11
public health personnel, 108
technical and policy inputs, 106
health systems, 9, 32–38, 33–34t, 43
height and growth of children. See linear

growth and growth faltering

helminth infections

See also hookworms
cognitive functions and, 29
deworming, 118, 122–23

See also deworming
drug resistance and, 35
growth faltering and, 21, 120
health systems and, 32

Hill, Austin Bradford, 50b, 118
HIV/AIDS, 2, 21t, 36
Hoddinott, J., 144
Honduras

Integrated Community-Based Child Care

Program, 91

nutritional status and infectious disease in,

133t

hookworms

See also helminth infections
deworming of, 122
environmental risk factors and, 112
malnutrition and, 21t
during pregnancy, 35
sanitation and, 25, 26
vaccines against, 37

human capital approach, 159, 179, 180, 181n1
hygiene

burden of disease, 49, 147–49, 148t–149t
child delivery and, 35–36

INDEX  205

child survival programs and, 90–91
diarrhea and, 38
environmental risk factors and, 61
infrastructure improvements and, 40, 41
maternal and childhood underweight, 50, 50b
miasma theory and, 86
pathogen transmission and, 28
private sector involvement in, 100
related diseases, 49t, 174t
water quantities and, 39–40

I

IAP. See indoor air pollution
IMCI. See Integrated Management of

Childhood Illness

immunity, 20, 20f
immunizations, 36–37, 106, 112

See also vaccinations

income losses, 68, 77, 165, 165t, 180, 181
India

birth weight in, 54b
environmental health functions in, 101b,

101–2

indoor air pollution in, 42
Integrated Child Development Services, 91,

93

malaria in, 107
malnutrition in, 6
nutritional programs in, 91
oral rehydration therapy in, 35
sanitation in, 95, 99, 107, 110n1

Indonesia, 37, 134t
indoor air pollution (IAP)

ALRI and, 1, 42, 50, 57, 75b, 174–77
burden of disease, 49, 52
clinical studies of, 58
cookstoves and, 42–43, 95–96
environmental risk factors of, 6, 61
malaria and, 39
mortality, 59n7
pregnancy and, 26
related diseases, 49t, 174t

indoor residual spraying, 28, 38, 57, 96, 113
infant care programs, 35–36
infants and young children

See also specific diseases and interventions
breastfeeding. See breastfeeding
burden of disease, 48–49, 53f
cognition and, 28–29
diarrhea and, 22b, 27, 36, 117
environmental health risks and, 1, 2b, 8,

26–28

infections in, 20–21

linear growth in, 23, 25b
malnutrition and, 19, 26–28, 27f, 30, 68t,

68–76

infections

diarrhea and, 17, 21, 123
in early infancy, 26–28, 35–36
growth faltering and, 117, 119–20
malnutrition and, 19–23, 20f, 30, 51, 63,

118, 123–24, 126t–140t

micronutrient supplementation and, 37–38
during pregnancy, 24–26, 25b
primary prevention of, 43

infrastructure

child survival strategies and, 9, 39–43
developing countries’ programs, 94–96, 109,

113

public health agenda and, 89

insecticide-treated nets (ITNs), 38–39, 

96, 113

institutional capacity, 80
Integrated Child Development Services

(India), 91, 93

Integrated Community-Based Child Care

Program (Honduras), 91

Integrated Early Childhood Development

Project (Eritrea), 91

Integrated Management of Childhood Illness

(IMCI), 32, 90–91

intersectoral and interjurisdictional 

coordination, 13, 104–5, 107, 108–9,
114–15
interventions

burdens of disease and, 48
childhood growth and, 23
costs and benefits of, 80
customizing of, 11
by health ministries, 89
in history of environmental health, 86–87
multiplier effect for environmental health,

55–56

intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR), 7
invisible regulator, 87–88
ITNs. See insecticide-treated nets
IUGR (intrauterine growth restriction), 7

J

Jacoby, H., 145
Jamaica

correlation between education deficiency

and stunting, 144

helminth infections in, 29

Jonsson, U., 54b
jurisdictional collaborations. See intersectoral

and interjurisdictional coordination

206 INDEX

K

Kenya

census omissions in, 54b
helminth infections in, 29
malaria and cognitive impairments in, 29

King, E., 145

L

Latin America

See also specific countries
community health approach in, 109
malaria in, 6
malnutrition in, 27f
latrines. See sanitation
lead-related diseases, 49t, 174t
linear growth and growth faltering

diarrhea and, 22b–22b
infections and, 21, 23, 117, 119–21
rates of, 123–24, 162t
retardation factor, 160–62, 162t

local government roles, 106–9
Lorntz, B., 145

M

malabsorption, 37, 117, 118, 119, 120
malaria

burden of disease, 148–49t
cognition and, 29
control strategies, 38–39, 96
drug resistance and, 35
environmental risk factors and, 6, 51, 112
health systems and, 34t
mortality, 1–2, 38, 57–58, 59n5, 96, 159t
pregnancy and, 24–26
treatment and prevention, 28, 37
young children and, 49

Malawi

child survival programs in, 91
nutritional status and infectious disease in,

139t

early infancy and, 26–28, 27f, 30
economic impact of, 81
education and, 76t, 76–77, 81, 141–46,

142t–143t, 160–70

environmental factors, 4, 11, 18–19, 30, 50b,

50–51, 159t

environmental health valuations and, 9–10,

63, 66–78, 68t, 74f, 74t, 76t, 81

environmental role in childhood health,

23–28, 24f

infections and, 8, 19–23, 30, 51, 126t–140t

infections affecting malnutrition, 20–23,
21t, 118, 123–24
malnutrition effecting disease, 19–20, 20f

mortality and, 1, 70t, 75b
pregnancy and, 24–26

Maluccio, J., 144
measles, 21, 21t, 36, 51, 57, 92b, 159t
Mediterranean (region), 17, 30, 86, 111
Mehta, S., 67
Mexico

Clean Water Program, 92b
environmental health programs in, 91
nutritional status and infectious disease 

in, 127t

Universal Vaccination Program, 92b

MDGs. See Millennium Development Goals
miasma theory, 86
micronutrient supplementation, 20, 31, 37–38,

112

Middle East, malaria in, 6
milk, 86, 87b

See also breastfeeding

Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), 

2, 3t, 4, 93, 101, 113

Mills, A., 57
Mills-Reincke phenomenon and ratios, 55f,

56b, 56–57
mobilization, 107
Moore, S., 21
Morocco, costs of environmental degradation

in water sector in, 62

strength of association study in, 119

mortality

Malaysia

infant mortality in, 28
malaria in, 96

malnutrition, 17–43, 111–13, 119

ALRI and, 17, 19
areas for future research, 58
background on, 6–7
burden of disease, 148–49t
cognition and learning impacts, 28–30, 51,

63–64, 68, 112

diarrhea and, 22b–23b, 68

See also attributable fractions (AF)
diarrheal, 1, 55f, 55–56, 56b, 57, 59
indoor air pollution, 59n7
malaria and, 1–2, 38, 57–58, 59n5, 96
malnutrition and, 1, 17, 19, 51, 70t, 75b
multiplier effect and, 55, 112
valuation of, 62–63, 151–59, 152f, 152t
mosquito nets. See insecticide-treated nets
mosquitoes. See vector controls
Moy, R., 120
multiplier effects, 12, 55–56, 112

INDEX  207

multisectoral collaborations. See intersectoral

and interjurisdictional coordination

Multisectoral Constraints Assessment, 

mortality valuation in, 181
nutritional status and infectious disease in,

137t

31–32

N

national government roles, 104–6
National Improved Stove Program (NISP,

China), 42, 98

National Nutrition Survey 2001–2002

(Pakistan), 77

National Slum Dwellers Federation (India), 99
Nepal

Alternative Energy Promotion Center, 100
child survival programs in, 91
hookworm infections in, 26
national hand-washing campaign in, 106
smoke exposure of women in, 42
New York City milk regulation, 87b
Nicaragua

integrated child survival programs in, 

90–91

intestinal parasites in, 29
vector-control measures in, 91

Nigeria

cost of environmental health risks in, 63f
indoor air pollution in, 62
nutritional status and infectious disease in,

126t

strength of association study in, 119
Total Sanitation Campaign in, 95
nutrition programs, 91–94, 109, 113

O

occupational risk factors, 49t, 174t
oral rehydration therapy, 35, 92, 114
outdoor air pollution, 49t, 174t

P

Pakistan

ALRI in, 57, 66–67, 158, 159f
basic indicators for, 65b, 66
childhood weight in, 69, 70f, 71f, 71–72, 73f,

82n4, 124

cost of environmental health risks in, 63f
diarrhea in, 69, 71f, 71–72, 73f
environmental health valuations in, 9, 61,

64–80, 78f, 81, 112, 168t–169t

fuels in, 66–67
GDP in, 9–10, 10t, 78, 113
malaria in, 67
malnutrition in, 6, 70t, 170

sanitation campaigns in, 95
school enrollment in, 143t, 145, 146
United Nations Children’s Fund, 70f

Pakistan Demographic and Health Survey

1990/91, 82n4

Pakistan Social and Living Standards

Measurement Survey 2004-05, 66

Pan-American Health Organization, 109
parasites. See helminth infections
Pasteur, Louis, 86
Patrinos, H., 76–77, 166
Pediatric Nutrition Handbook (American

Academy of Pediatrics), 122

Peru

cost-benefit analysis in, 114
cost of environmental health risks in, 63f
diarrhea in, 21
hygiene in, 81, 100, 106
infrastructure improvements in, 94
Integrated Management of Childhood

Illness in, 90–91

nutritional status and infectious disease in,

134t, 135t, 138t

school performance in, 29

Philippines

infant mortality causes in, 28
Interagency Committee on Environmental

Health, 105

malnutrition and educational outcomes in,

64, 142–43t, 144–45, 163–64, 171n12

nutritional status and infectious disease in,

132t

pneumococcal infections. See pneumonia
pneumonia, 21, 37
political will and consensus, 11, 98
Powanda, M.C., 121
Prado, M., 121
pregnancy

See also fetuses
environmental risk factors during, 58, 59,

112

fetal protection, 24–26
health systems and, 32, 35
malaria and, 6

Preventing Disease through Healthy

Environments (Prüss-Üstün & Corvalán),
49, 50, 50b

prevention. See primary prevention
primary prevention, 31, 35, 43, 89, 90, 112
private sector, 11, 99–100, 110, 113
Prüss-Üstün, A., 49, 67, 177n2

208 INDEX

Psacharopoulos, G., 76–77, 166
public health personnel, 108
public sectors, 11, 99–100, 110, 113
Pubmed, 118

R

Ramalingaswami, V., 54b
regulations

Clean Water Program in Mexico, 92b
colonial history of, 89
health sector, 108–9, 114, 115
interjurisdictional coordination, 105
local government, 106–7, 108
national government framework for, 104
need to develop, 13
New York City milk regulation, 87b
sanitation in Ethiopia, 102b
trend of enacting, 11, 87–88

Report of the Royal Sanitary Commission

(UK), 86

Repositioning Nutrition as Central to
Development (World Bank), 4

residual spraying. See indoor residual spraying
residual transmission. See transmission routes
retardation factor. See linear growth and
growth faltering; weight retardation
factors
Rohde, J., 54b
rotavirus, 37

S

St. Lucia, 120, 127t
sanitation

burden of disease, 49, 147–49, 148t–149t
child delivery and, 36
diarrhea and, 27–28, 38
environmental risk factors and, 5, 61, 112
hookworm infections and, 25, 26
infrastructure improvements to, 40–41,

43n3, 94–95, 95b

maternal and childhood underweight, 

50, 50b

as Millennium Development Goal, 101
related diseases, 49t, 174t
in rural areas, 87, 99
as second generation health intervention,

86–87

vaccines and, 37

Snow, John, 86
soap. See hygiene; handwashing
South Africa, environmental health officials in,

108

spraying. See indoor residual spraying
stoves. See cookstoves
strategies. See child survival strategies
strength of association studies, 118–19
stunting. See birth weight; linear growth and

growth faltering; underweight

Sub-Saharan Africa

See also specific countries
birth weight in, 9, 54b
burden of disease in, 51–52, 54, 54t, 59
education in, 77, 166
environmental health interventions in,

11–12

hookworms in, 113
immunization in, 36
malaria in, 6, 25–26, 27f, 38–39, 49, 57–58,

113

malnutrition in, 1, 6, 17, 30, 111, 119
vector-control programs in, 96
weight of children in, compared to Asian

children, 54b

Sudan

nutritional status and infectious disease in,

129t, 132t, 133t

water and food budgets in, 58
supplements. See micronutrient 

supplementation

T

Taylor, C.E., 19, 22b, 117, 121
Teklemariam, Shiferaw, 98
tetanus, 36
Thailand

community empowerment in, 98–99
nutrition programs in, 91, 93, 93b

Total Sanitation Campaign (Bangladesh), 90,

94–95, 95b, 98

transmission routes, 18t, 18–19, 19f
trypanosomiasis, 43n1
Tunisia

cost of environmental health risks in, 63f
plan to develop unit of environmental

economics and policy, 62

typhoid fever, 56b

school performance. See cognition; education
Scrimshaw, N.S., 19, 22b, 117, 121
Senegal, 100, 106
Silent Spring (Carson), 88
Smith, K., 67

U

underweight

See also birth weight
defined, 7

INDEX  209

diarrhea and, 50b, 118, 125n4, 158, 158t
factors for, 157, 157t

See also weight retardation factors

infections and, 118
rates of, 158, 158t

United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF),

90, 109
United States

correlation between diarrheal disease and

malnutrition in, 57

devolution of authority in, 105
rural sanitation initiatives in, 87

during pregnancy, 25b
privatization of supply, 99
related diseases, 49t, 174t
vaccines and, 37

weight. See birth weight; underweight
weight retardation factors, 157t, 157–58, 

158t, 171n7

WHO. See World Health Organization
whooping cough, 36
willingness to pay (WTP) approach, 180
window of opportunity, 8, 25b, 26–28, 

27f, 30, 111

Universal Vaccination Program (Mexico), 92b

World Bank

V

vaccinations, 31, 36–37, 86–87, 92b

See also immunizations

Valdmanis, V., 18
valuations. See environmental health

valuations

van Geertruyden, J., 59n5
vector control, 91, 96, 97b, 112

See also dengue virus

Vietnam, vector-control programs in, 96, 

97b, 99

vitamins and vitamin deficiencies. See
micronutrient supplementation

W

wage losses. See income losses
Walker, S.P., 144
wastewater treatment, 40, 41
wasting. See birth weight; linear growth and

growth faltering; underweight

water

burden of disease, 49, 53f, 147–49,

148t–149t

child delivery and, 36
Clean Water Program (Mexico), 92b
cost of, 58
diarrhea and, 38, 56b
environmental risk factors of, 5, 61
fecal pollution and, 28
hookworm infections and, 26
improvement of supply, 39–40, 

41, 43n2

infrastructure improvements to, 94
malaria and, 25
maternal and childhood underweight, 

50, 50b

environmental degradation valuation, 61
Health, Nutrition, and Population strategy,

31–32

Health Sector Strategy, 109
nutrition studies, 111
Repositioning Nutrition as Central to

Development, 4

World Health Organization (WHO)

antihelminthics recommended by, 122
burden of disease studies, 48, 51, 

61, 109, 124, 147, 148t–149t

Comparative Risk Assessment, 48–49, 49t,

173, 174t

drug resistance studies, 35
environmental health defined by, 2b
environmental risk factor studies, 4
hygiene assessment, 30n1
infection studies, 117
Integrated Management of Childhood

Illness (IMCI), 90–91

malnutrition studies, 9
underweight assessment, 23b
World Health Report (WHO), 48
worms. See deworming; helminth infections
WSH. See hygiene; sanitation; water
WTP (willingness to pay approach), 180

Y

young children. See infants and young children

Z

Zimbabwe

indoor air pollution in, 26
malnutrition and educational outcomes in,

64, 144, 163–64

nutritional status and infectious disease in,

131–32t

ECO-AUDIT

Environmental Benefits Statement

The  World  Bank  is  committed  to  preserving
endangered  forests  and  natural  resources. The
Office  of  the  Publisher  has  chosen  to  print
Environmental  Health  and  Child  Survival:
Epidemiology,  Economics,  Experiences on
recycled paper with 100 percent postconsumer
fiber  in  accordance  with  the  recommended
standards for paper usage set by the Green Press
Initiative, a nonprofit program supporting pub-
lishers  in  using  fiber  that  is  not  sourced  from
endangered forests. For more information, visit
www.greenpressinitiative.org.

Saved:
(cid:129) 48 trees
(cid:129) 33 million BTUs of

total energy

(cid:129) 4,216 lbs. of CO 2

equivalent of green-
house gases

(cid:129) 20,650 gallons of waste

water

(cid:129) 2,247 pounds of solid

waste

“ This rigorous study is a godsend to anyone involved in advocacy for water 
and sanitation in developing countries. Until now, proving that environmental 
health measures make good sense economically has been a tricky business. 
Now this rigorous and detailed study shows that inadequate environmental 
health has huge costs to the economy (about 9 percent of the GDP of typical 
developing countries) in addition to the pain and suffering they cause. For 
politicians who are unmoved by arguments that failure to invest in water and 
sanitation will make their people poor, this study offers a clincher; it shows 
how lack of investment will also negatively affect their children's educational 
and cognitive performance, because of the effects of malnutrition, 
exacerbated by frequent episodes of illness.”

Sandy Cairncross
Professor of Environmental Health
London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine

“ Recent research has highlighted once more that improved environmental 
services and conditions can play an essential role in reducing child mortality. 
Additional insights in the economic evaluation at country level therefore 
provide timely information for the design of policy action.”

Maria Neira 
Director, Department of Public Health and Environment
The World Health Organization

“ Child survival is probably the most important and the most elusive 
development goal, particularly in Sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia. 
One reason is that it has traditionally been treated only as a health issue, 
whereas—as this book clearly shows—the determinants often lie outside 
health, in water, sanitation, and other environmental factors. To treat this 
multi-sectoral problem, we need a multi-sectoral effort. This book provides 
guidance and inspiration for that effort.”

Shantayanan Devarajan
Chief Economist, Africa Region (former Chief Economist, South Asia Region)
The World Bank

ISBN 978-0-8213-7236-4

SKU  17236

